MEMOIRS OF EMERIC Count Teckely.

In Four BOOKS.

Wherein are related all the most considerable Transactions in Hungary and the
Ottoman Empire, from his Birth, Anno 1656, till after the Battle of
Salankement, in the Year 1691.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Maidenhead against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street, 1693.

To the Right Honorable RICHARD Earl of Bellomont, Treasurer to Her Majesty.
My Lord,
IT seems not unseasonable or improper to publish these Memoires under your
Lordship's Protection, (though Truth needs no Hero to defend her:) the Beauty
of Virtue, and generous Spirit of Liberty influenced Your glorious Ancestors,
and runs still in the Veins and Blood of your Self, and Noble Family. It Is this
sublime Character that shines so bright in most of the Greek and Latin Writers;
this Purity and Majesty of Thought, Style and Action, elevated the Ancients far
above our Level, and rendered them such noble Monuments to Posterity, that at
this Day they carry the highest Value, and the greatest Reputation. Whereas, in
the late Ages, we have so far degenerated from the Candor and Sincerity of
those Learned Authors, that either Sects in Religion, Factions in the State, or
other private Interests or Rewards, have made Men deviate so far from the old
Rules of History, that the greatest part of the Modern is more like Romance,
designed to please some sorts of Readers, more than to profit or teach Mankind.
Polybius, Lucian and others, foresaw the many Corruptions that were like to
overspread the Writers of History; therefore they thought fit to leave behind
them some Rules and Methods for preserving its Native Purity.

My Lord,

These Memoires of Count Teckely, seem free from the aforementioned Deseases of
History. Methinks there appears in them something of the ancient Air of
Thucydides and Livy: The Author casts no Mists to mislead his Readers, puts on
no Mask to deceive the common Eye; all here is naked Matter of Fact, without
any superficial Gloss or Artifice, to corrupt the plain simple Truth; and
therefore the most fit to be dedicated to your Lordship, by,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most humble Servant.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
WHEN I first began to read this Book, I took up a strong Conceit that it was
written by the Order of the French Court, of purpose to make the Protestant
Princes of Germany jealous of the Emperor, and of the Court at Vienna, by
showing them how their Brethren had been treated in Hungary, both as to their
Religion and their Civil Liberties, which I believe were the true foundation of
this long and dangerous War, which brought the Imperial House within an Hair's
breadth of Ruin: for had the Prime-Visier, in 1683, taken Vienna, and the
French King been called in (as in appearance he must) to save the rest of the
Germans from the Ottoman Yoke, the consequence would have been the utter ruin
of this Branch of the Austrian Family, of the Liberties of Germany, and
consequently, of the Liberty of all Europe, and of the Protestant Religion. But
by considering the Sincerity and Plainness of these Memoires, one may conclude
there can be no other Design in the Author, than to transmit to Posterity pure
Matter of Fact.

If any thing in this World were capable of making a zealous Roman Catholic
Prince reflect on the Dangers the Jesuits expose them to, for their own
Interest, this were enough to make all the crowned Heads, that shall live
hereafter, suspect and avoid the precipitate, foolish, unjust Counsels of this
sort of Men. It is true, what so much threatened the ruin of the Emperor, by a
wonderful Turn of the Divine Providence, in the event, became an Occasion of
wresting Hungary entirely out of the Hands of the Turks; and the Imperial
Forces pursuing their Advantages, in the end, brought the Ottoman House into
the same Danger the Austrian had so happily escaped: but then this is owing
entirely to the Goodness of God; and the Counsels that brought the Emperor into
that Danger, are as much to be detested, as if they had succeeded.

It is much to be observed, that the same Methods that were used in Hungary, to
ruin the Protestant Religion, and the Civil Liberties of that Nation, were
also employed after that in France for the same End; and began in England,
Scotland and Ireland, in the last Reign; and carried as far as they had Time
and Means to carry them, and by the same Men. So that it seems to be a formed
Design, intended to be acted in one Place after another, throughout Europe. It
is hard, otherwise, to conceive how the same Maxims, and the same Politics,
should be put in execution in such distant Places.

The first natural Inference that will arise from hence, is, That we can never
enough admire the Goodness of God in Delivering us so timely and so wonderfully
out of a Danger which would have certainly prepared England for Ruin, if it
had been effected.

But the best Use of this is to be made by the Non-swearers: Let them consider
seriously what Treatment the Hungarians have all met with; as well those that
stuck to the Emperor, as those that joined with the Malcontents: Let them
consider how little the Loyalty of the Protestants of France, was considered by
the Present French King, who had been deposed in his Minority but for them: How
little the Loyalty of those that had twice saved the late King, was regarded
either in England or Ireland, when they found these Men would not abandon the
Protestant Religion, and the Civil Liberties of England to them.

I am morally certain, there is no Man in England, of any Prudence, does expect
any better Treatment from the late King, if he should return, than they met
with before; but rather much worse: and therefore, I am amazed to see so many
reputed wise Men stand out against the Present Government, and seem to desire
nothing more than to put themselves and the Nation into such a Condition as
must inevitably end in the Destruction of the late King, and the whole Royal
Family, or the Ruin of the Protestant Religion, and the Civil Liberties of
England. They every Day pester us with Libels against Their Majesty's Persons
and Government, and incurable Scruples of their own; but when they come to show
how the Nation should be secured, in case they had what they desire, never did
Men, in their right Wits, talk more childlishly and impertinently.

Leaving them as incurable, I wish the rest of the Nation would read this
little Book, and compare exactly in their Minds, what was done in Hungary,
according to the Report of this Author, with what was done, or apparently
intended to be done in England; and then I believe the Consequence of it will
be a fixed Resolution to spend the last Drop of their Bloods, and the last
Penny of their Money, in the Defense of the Present Government.

Memoirs on the Life Of EMERIC Count of TEKELI.
The First Book.
Containing the History of what has passed in Hungary from the Year 1656, to
the Year 1671.

IF those that have any share in the Management of the States whereof Europe is
composed, were mindful to leave to Posterity, Memoirs of what comes within
their Knowledge, it would not at all be necessary to make such haste in
publishing the Actions of Living Persons. Those who should come after us might
inform themselves by by these Memoirs, after the Death of the Authors, and of
those whose History would be comprehended therein. But Ministers of State
minding nothing less, than to write what has passed under their Administration.
Private Men ought not to be blamed, who carefully observing what falls out in
Europe, and forgetting nothing as much as in them lies to distinguish the Truth
from Falsehood, publish what passed in the view of all the World, without
expecting the Death of those whose History they compose. Besides that they
preserve the Memory of a great many Matters of Fact, which would otherwise be
forgot, they thereby put themselves in a state of reaping Advantage from the
Advice of those who have been concerned in the things they speak of, and to
deliver nothing for certain but what is unquestionable. A very great number of
Events and Circumstances that are useful to be known, are like Summer Fruits,
which we must quickly gather, or resolve to eat them corrupted; if we don't
publish some things in the Times wherein they happen, Posterity learns them
only by a confused Tradition, which mixes Falsehood with Truth, and often
suppresses the most Essential parts.

This has made me take up a resolution of giving the Public what I could
remark on the Life of Emeric Count of Tekeli, on whose person the Eyes of all
Europe have been fixed for several Years; without expecting his death to publish
what I could know of him. I am far from flattering my self with the thoughts of
my having collected what may make a complete History, but at least I can say
that having no particular Interest, either to praise or dispraise him, I omit
nothing with a design to conceal the Truth, as I add nothing herein to the
advantage or disadvantage of any person. Besides, we must not believe that all
the Life of Men that make a great figure in the World, should be always full of
remarkable Intrigues. The greatest Men, as well as others, employ the half of
their Life to satisfy the Necessities of Nature, and it is very much, that the
other half is spent in a manner worthy of being known to Posterity.

A long time before the Birth of Count Tekely, A lively representation of the
Miseries of a Divided Country,
whose Life we undertake to write, the Emperors of the House of Austria, being
only Kings of Hungary by Election, The Hungarians distrust for their Civil
Privileges.
began to be distrustful of the Loyalty of the Hungarians and complained that
that People did not show all that submission to their Orders, which they owed
them. On the other side, the Nobility of Hungary saw with sorrow an Elective
Kingdom, to which their Merit might have formerly exalted them, become, in a
sort, Hereditary to the House of Austria, whose Party was always the strongest
in the Elections. They feared that in time it would become so powerful, that
the Hungarians, stripped of all their Privileges, would have no more Liberty
left them, than the Subjects of Hereditary Princes have at this day in the rest
of Europe. A considerable part of the Hungarians, that followed Luther or
Calvin, and who had a free exercise of their Religion, And Religion.
feared further the loss of the Liberty of Conscience which they enjoyed with
great comfort. These Fears were sensibly encreast, because the Kings of
Hungary, who were not in the least ignorant of the disposition of that People,
endeavored to take measures to prevent this Distrust from producing any
Disturbance hereafter. The Nobility and People on their part, looked upon these
Precautions, as Chains prepared to fetter them with, when they least thought of
it. They could not without a great deal of grief see them introduce as many
Germans into Public Places as was possible, which were formerly bestowed only
upon the Hungarian Nobility; and that under pretense of defending the Kingdom
against the Turk, they increased and multiplied German Garrisons in every
place, without being at the pains of considering whether they were a Charge to
the Natives of the Country. These Troops lived in no better Discipline than
they used to do in Germany; and the provoked People did not fail to revenge
themselves on all occasions. The Lutherans and Calvinists were also sensible,
that they strengthened the Roman Catholic Party by all means; and that they
filled their Countries with Missionaries, or Seminary Priests, as we call them,
and New Churches. As they knew that they could not hope to be tolerated, if the
House of Austria should become absolute Mistress of the Kingdom; 'twas feared
lest they should make use of the first occasion that they could meet with to
gratify themselves in this. When the Laws and the Ancient Usages of the
Country met with any opposition by the Precautions which the Emperors
endeavored to take against the ill humor of the Hungarians, they always
interpreted these Laws and Usages in favor of what they designed to do. The
Hungarians opposed all this in the Diets of the Kingdom, to the utmost of their
power; but as they had always the worst on it, their Efforts became every day
more feeble. This was the reason that in the Year 1673. under the Reign of
Leopold Ignatius, who mounted the Throne in 1655. the Roman Catholic and
Imperial Party openly declared and testified by their Discourses, and by their
Conduct, that for the Catholic Religion to be the sole Religion in all
Hungary, and Absolute and Hereditary Authority were according to them two
things which they were in the wrong to controvert with the Emperor.

Besides these mutual Discontents a part of the Hungarian Nobility was accused
of serving themselves cunningly of this Disposition of Minds, to advance their
particular Interests. Those among them that were in favor with the Emperor,
made use of his Authority to accomplish their Designs; and the other whom
standing by the Laws and Privileges of their Country had rendered agreeable to
the People, made advantage of the kindness that their Countrymen had for them,
without giving themselves the trouble of considering whether their Conduct was
conformable to Equity, and to the Obedience which they owed to their Kings. It
is even said, that to procure themselves a Sanctuary, in case of need, they had
Intelligence with the Port; and that sometimes to embroil the Emperor with the
Grand-Signior, they made Incursions upon the Turks Lands; the blame whereof
they laid on the German Garrisons, who were no ways concerned in it, if we may
believe the Imperialists.

In this state were the Spirits and Affairs in Hungary, as far as can be
learned from those who have given the History of them, about the time that
Emeric Count of Tekely came into the World; which was in 1656. a year after
Leopold Ignatius was Crowned King of Hungary.

His Father Stephan Tekely Count of Kersmark, Hereditary Great Bailiff of Arwa,
and Baron of Shafnits, was one of the Richest Lords of Upper Hungary, where we
are assured he had 300000 Livres Revenue, a Sum considerable any where else for
a private Man, but especially in a Country where Money is scarce, and where
every thing that is necessary for Life is very cheap. This Lord professed the
Lutheran Religion, and took care to bring up his Son therein. He gave him the
best Education that he could, in a place where Ingenious Men are rare, and
where all the Employment of the Nobility consists in going a Hunting, and
making merry one with another. That which might be of greatest advantage for
him was the custom of riding, which is used there by Persons of Qualty from
their Infancy. Being of a robust complexion he easily accommodated himself to
this exercise, which was of great use to him, in the great Marcheswhch he has
since been frequently obliged to make, to surprise his Enemies, or to escape
from their hands.

Whilst the first years of the Life of Emeric passed in the amusements of
Infancy, or the Recreations of most tender Youth, the affairs of Hungary were
every day more and more embroiled. George Ragotski Vaivode of Transylvania, in
the Year 1656 gave occasion to Troubles which are not yet ended. He without the
knowledge of the Port entered Poland with 30000 Men, which Charles Gustavus,
King of Sweden, had almost quite subdued, a little before; but that he was not
in case to keep it, and would rather leave it to Ragotski, than to John Casimir
King of Poland, whom he came to drive out of it, but Ragotski was defeated by
the Polanders, with whom he was constrained to make a dishonorable Peace; the
Tartarians also cut off 2000 of the Residue of his Army, and took a great many
Prisoners, as they were going home. But that which was more troublesome to him
was, that the Port, exasperated against this Prince, who was their Vassal, and
engaged to undertake no War without his permission, sent an Army into
Transylvania, to punish him for his Disobedience. Ragotski hazarding a Battle
with him, lost his life with it.

He had in vain implored the Emperors succor, who would have him first to
deliver up to him the Counties of Zathmar and Zambolich, on the Frontiers of
Hungary. The Vaivodes of Transylvania held them of the Kings his Predecessors,
on condition that they should never deliver them to the Turks. The Emperor
feared lest these last should seize upon them, and that afterward it would not
be so easy to recover them out of their hands; and the States of Hungary
pressed him on their part to keep some Troops on the Frontiers of the Kingdom
for the safety of their Country, and to endeavor for the same reason to
retake these Countries whatever it should cost. But as the Deliberations of the
House of Austria are ordinarily very slow, and the Executions ill regulated,
Ragotski perished, as has been said, before the Motion of the Imperial Troops
could give any Diversion in favor of the unhappy Vaivode. Besides this, the
Hungarians, who had so strongly pressed the Emperor to send a Body of an Army
to the Frontiers, thought they should be Hungarians, whom they should levy on
the place: and were surprised to see the Count of Souches arrive with 10000
Germans, as if those of the Country had not been capable to defend themselves,
or they were distrustful of them. In the beginning of the Year 1660. the Baron
of Meierperg, who had been sent Envoy to the Vaivode to oblige him to restore
the Counties of Zathmar, and Zambolich to the Emperor, heard of his defeat and
death, but he did not cease to continue his March to acquit himself of his
Commission, by addressing himself to Francis Ragotski Son to the deceased, and
to his Widow, who were retired into these Counties. They not being in case to
undervalue the Emperors Indignation after that they had drawn that of the Turks
upon them, consented to whatever he pleased. In the mean while the Count of
Souches had made his Army to advance, and the Hungarians furnished him
Provisions on free cost; but as the young Ragotski nor his Mother had not
agreed on the manner how they should put the Emperor in possession of these two
Provinces, there was great difficulty in it at first. He would introduce the
Germans into all Places, and Ragotski maintained that it was sufficient that
the Hungarian Garrisons that were there, had taken an Oath of Fidelity to the
Emperor, but he was forced to yield to receive German Troops in Tockay, Kalo
and Zathmar, because they threatened to enter by force, and those Towns were not
in case to resist them. In the mean while Erschot and Onod, two other places of
these Counties, which were stronger, refused obstinately to receive them, and
Souches could not undertake to force them. From this time the Hungarians began
to fear more than ever, that they should be subjected to an Absolute or
Arbitrary Government, without respect to any Law but the Will of its Sovereign.
Some Princes and their Ministers have discovered strong Inclinations to assume
a boundless Authority, when they have been suffered to do it, and it then
seemed that the Imperial Council took great steps toward it, notwithstanding
its natural slowness so that they no longer doubted of it. In the mean while
they treated those as Seditious, and Enemies to the State, who durst speak of
the Laws and Privileges Which is the usual Method the Jesuits, the great
Managers of the Imperial Affairs use on all such occasions.
; though they protested at the same time that they had no design to meddle with
them. But the Hungarians, whose Liberty was not yet wholly destroyed, did not
cease to resist to the utmost, all that made any attempt upon them. Paul
Wesselini was then Palatine of the Kingdom, a Dignity which he held for Life,
and which clothed those to whom it was given with almost a Sovereign Authority,
in Peace and War. This man who perfectly knew the designs of the Imperial
Court, and that it was not safe to resist them openly, feigned, as is said, a
willingness to contribute to induce the Princess and Prince Ragotski to receive
German Troops in every place; but he cunningly made them understand, that if
they granted this Article, they would infallibly lose these Lands, and draw
upon themselves the Hatred of all Hungary. Souches in vain proposed to give
them assurances, that they would surrender all those Places, when there was no
more occasion to fear the Turk on that side. They would not even give ear to
another Expedient, which was, that they would put into Erschet and Onod,
Hungarian Garrisons, but who should be paid by the Emperor, and should take an
Oath of Fidelity unto him. Nothing could satisfy them, unless the Emperor did
suffer the States of Hungary to raise Troops in their Country, and to employ
the Revenues of the Kingdom to maintain them.

The Imperial General who had reason to distrust the Hungarians as they
distrusted him; Lodged the residue of his Troops in good intrenchments, Having
received advice that the Turks beseiged Great Waradin in the County of Zathmar,
on the Frontiers of Transylvania, he would, according to some Historians, make
the best of this occasion, by putting German Troops into it. But the
Inhabitants, who believed they were strong enough to defend themselves, refused
to receive them. They believed that the Germans by assisting them against the
Turks, would subdue them afterward themselves on the first opportunity. The
Protestants in the mean time were so ill treated in the Places where the
Catholics were the strongest; that several of them would rather venture to
fall under the Protection or Dominion of the Turk, who does not force the
Transylvanians to take up the Turban, than be exposed to the Caprices of a
Prince absolutely governed by the Jesuits, a more Barbarous sort of People,
said the Hungarians, than the Dervices. They accused a Calvinist Minister of
Waradin, of having declared this dangerous Truth to the People. Other
Historians assure us, that the Hungarians did their utmost in this occasion,
but that the Emperors Ministers, whom they advised of the Importance of that
Place, and the danger it was in, neglected to send succors thither. The Prince
de Portia Prime Minister, naturally timorous and incapable of a ready
resolution, thought upon the affairs of the War as slowly as could be. Being
desirous to show the Provinces wherein he had Lands, the Post that he held next
to the Emperor, and to draw presents from all hands, he was induced to go to
see Stiria, Carinthia, and the Neighboring Provinces. During this Royal
Progress the Hungarians demanded succor in vain; and though the Hungarians
pressed at the Imperial Court to take Orders about Waradin, they were little
moved with their Prayers: They at last ordained Count de Souches to succor it,
but as he had not wherewith to do it, their Orders were to no purpose. This
small City, flanked with five good Bastions, and an advantageous Situation, was
taken forty seven days after the Trenches were opened; the Inhabitants having
forgotten nothing that was necessary to defend themselves, except their
refusal, according to some, of the German succors, which were not strong
enough to fight the Ottoman Army: The Turks afterward put this City into the
hands of a Sangiack, and made it a Magazine, and a Fronteer Garrison against
the Emperor, But then they made no attempt to make themselves masters of the
rest of the Lands depending on Transylvania, that the Germans had seized;
either because they would not entirely break with the Emperor, or because the
good Orders which the Count de Souches kept there, had rendered this Conquest
very difficult for them.

This General seeing that the Season was advanced, and that the Turks made no
Motion, thought of putting his Troops into Winter Quarters. He obtained in fine
of the Princess Ragotski, that Onod should receive a German Garrison; and the
Hungarians that the General Quarters should be at Cassovia, a City of Upper
Hungary, which was always very averse from Lodging German Soldiers. The rest
of the Troops were posted in diverse Places of the County of Zathmar. The
Count, as is said, had agreed to enter Cassovia with only a Company of his
Guards, and seventy Musketeers. The Burgers should guard the Gates of the City,
with two hundred Heyduques, or Foot-Souldiers, kept at the Emperors Charge, but
who were to receive their Orders from the Magistrates. As Souches was upon his
March for Cassovia, whether for that he came with too many Men, and with a
Train of Artillery, which there was no occasion for in Winter Quarters; or
whether the Palatine was sensible of his fault that he had committed in
promising the Germans Entry into a City of that importance as Cassovia was; or
for some other reasons, the People took the fright, and saw by the consequence
that it was not without reason. When then the Count appeared they shut the
Gates, and the Burgers put themselves in Arms; which forced him to go and lodge
near by it at Sassaw in a Country House of the Bishop of Agria's. He lodged
the Cannon in sive adjacent Villages, where he distributed, the Soldiers. On
the Complaints that the Count made of the manner how he had been received,
'twas answered him in the name of the States, that had been called at Cassovia
before his arrival, that they never had received even their Kings, till they
had first made them swear to preserve their Privileges, one of the principal
whereof was that they should never be forced to receive strange Troops into
their Cities, and they could not part with a point of that importance.

The Germans not only pretended to be lodged, but they would be maintained on
free Quarters; as if the Revenues which the Emperor had from Hungary, had not
been sufficient to sustain a small Body of an Army, without oppressing the
People. Wherever the Troops were, they took away all they could finger
without paying for it; and (as it is the custom of Soldiers, who do not
observe Discipline but when they receive Pay,) they made more waste than was
needful for their maintenance. The Hungarians on their part did not pardon any
of these Violences, but killed them when they could take them at an advantage.
They complained also to the Emperor of the Quartering of these Troops, but no
regard was had to their complaints; either because they did not believe they
were true, as they were, or because they had a design to push them on to a
Revolt Which is another of the Jesuits Methods which they employ on such
occasions
, that they might thereby have occasion to treat them as a Conquest, and so
seize the great Estates of the Hungarian Nobility. For in Hungary they believed
that the Emperors Court was full of Princes and poor Gentlemen, who thirsted
after other Men's Estates as much as any where in the World. The Hungarians in
the mean time were no less apprehensive of the Army than of the Turks; and
indeed we are no less poor when we are ruined by good Christians, than when by
the most wicked Mahometans.

Thereupon was published for the Hungarians a Writing which contained a Breviate
of the subjects of Complaint which they had, the principal Heads where of are
these. 1. That the Privileges of Hungary were entirely violated, by sending of
Foreign Troops into a Country which its Inhabitants could easily defend, would
they make use of their strength: 2 That these Troops committed 1000. Violences
and Cruelties: 3. That the Hungarians that possessed some Offices, durst not do
all their duty for fear of displeasing the Emperor: 4. That they had thwarted
all the Resolutions which the Diet had endeavored to take, for the good of the
Kingdom, by Intrigues and Menaces: 5. That far from leaving the Protestants a
free exercise of their Religion, which several Diets had granted them; they had
driven them violently from their Churches, and had abused and banished their
Ministers, for no other reason but because they were not of their Princes
Religion, which was not done even in Turkey: That whereas one of the greatest
Privileges of the Hungarian Nobility bears, that whatever Crime they were
Guilty of, it should not be tried but by a Judge of the Country, it had often
been removed before German Judges. Note this as the 3d. Method of enslaving
free Countries.
7. That for Crimes, which they accused some private men of, they had endeato
punish the whole Kingdom without distinguishing the Innocent from the Guilty:
8. That the Revenues which the Emperor received whether of the Mines, Excise or
other Rights were more than sufficient to maintain the Troops that were sent
thither from time to time, yet they were not at all paid, which obliged them to
commit great extorsions on the Hungarians, or make Inroads on the Grand
Signiors Lands, whose subjects revenge themselves afterward by treating those
of the Emperor in the same sort.

The Year 1661 which followed these first troubles, did further verify all the
Complaints. The Transylvanians after the Death of George Rogotski, and the
flight of Francis his Son, were divided into several Parties, about choosing a
Successor to him; but the two strongest were that of Chimin Janos, upheld by
the Emperor; and that of Folon Gabor, Son to Bethlem Gabor, who had been
Vaivode before Ragotski. The second put himself under the Protection of the
Port, and with the help of the Grand Vizier had the better of his Competitor;
the Vizier having promised to quit in his favors all sorts of Tributes of
Transylvania for three Years. The former had at first sent to demand succor at
Vienna, which was promised him so much the more easily, as the Emperors
Interest engaged him to it. The Governor of Waradin, where was a strong
Turkish Garrison, had put all the County of Za^hmar under contribution and
threatened with Fire and Sword those that refused to pay what they demanded. The
Ottoman Army was already in Transylvania, to assist Gabor. These Proceedings of
the Turks gave Ground to fear that they had a design upon the Hungarians, the
Council at Vienna concluded to send an Army into Transylvania, to hinder the
Turks from making progress there. But they first demanded of Chimin Janos, two
Places, as Pledges of his Fidelity, and to serve as Places of Arms for the
Imperial Troops. And he gave Zekelheid and Kovar, where they put two strong
German Garrisons, and the Count of Montecuculi was sent into Hungary to command
an Army of twenty thousand Men there. From thence he passed into Transylvania
where he preserved the Castle of Hust, and forced the Turks to raise the Seige
of Forgarats. It Is even said that he proffered them battle, but that they would
not accept of it. In the mean while the Grand Signior, not approving of the
Election of Gabor conferred the Principality of Transylvania on Michael Abaffi,
who promised, as is said, a more considerable Tribute. The Transylvanans would
rather acknowledge this last, than engage themselves in a very long War. They
complied with the Port, and Abaffi remained sole Vaivode of Transylvania.

A little time after the Turks having acquainted the Emperor, that if he would
not molest Abaffi, they would attempt nothing upon Hungary. The Imperial
Council thought fit to withdraw their Troops from Transylvania, but that was
not done so soon, in the mean while Hungary not being concerned in these
troubles we will insist no longer upon them.

1662. The German Army being returned into Hungary, began to give the
Hungarians the same apprehensions as formerly. As they hoped that the Emperor
would renew a Truce with the Port, and that they would have no need of Foreign
Troops in Hungary; they feared lest this Army would endeavor to seize all the
Places of strength, and subject the Kingdom to an absolute Authority. They
already had treated the Protestants so ill, that 'twas easy to judge that they
had resolved on their ruin. The Roman Catholics, tho zealous, and satisfied
otherwise to see the Protestant Religion go down, were jealous that under
pretense of extirpating Heresy they began entirely to enslave the Hungarian
Nation. 'Twas commonly said, that 'twas thus that the House of Austria had
reduced the Bohemians. All the Privileges of Bohemia were involved in the
ruin of the Protestants, and the same Armies that they had employed to destroy
them, had served to oppress the Public Liberty for ever. Philip II. King of
Spain and his Children would have done the same thing in the Low Countries; but
seven of those Provinces, who had the Courage to resist them, had in fine shook
off the Yoke their Tyranny, and their Inhabitants were at this day the most
free and most happy People of Europe. One day the Palatine and the Archbishop
of Strigonia, passing in the great Market of Presbourg, the People surrounded
them; and some of the most stirring praid them to write to the Emperor, that
the Privileges of their Country did not permit that they should leave Foreign
Troops there so long. These Lords endeavored to sweeten them, by the Promise
that they made, that they would getrepresented to the Emperor what they
desired. It Is not known whether they did it, but the Council at Vienna gave no
Orders for the Army to return into Germany; and the Hungarians refused
absolutely to furnish them Provisions, unless they paid for them, and shut the
Gates of their Cities when they thought to come thither to take up their Winter
Quarters. When they returned from Transylvania Raimond Count of Montecuculi,
who commanded them, made them encamp near Tokai, expecting that the Emperor
should mark out the places, where he meant they should be lodged In the mean
while a great many Soldiers died of Fatigue and Hunger, because there was
nothing prepared for their subsistence, either for want of Money, or ill
administration of it, or that they had groundlesly depended on the Liberality
of the Hungarians.

The Emperor being informed of the ill condition of his Army, and how they were
treated by the People of Hungary, ordered some of the principal Lords of the
Country to come instantly to Vienna. Among those were the Archbishop of
Strigonia, and Francis Nadasti President of the Sovereign Council, who by the
Emperors Order, jointly with those others who were made come to Vienna, sought
out means of Subsistence for the Imperial Troops. After they had concluded what
they were to do, they returned into Hungary and Nadasti prevailed with them to
receive the sick Soldiers into Hospitals, and to furnish the rest Provisions
and Lodging for some time. But the Hungarians grew quickly weary of these
troublesome Guests, and returned to their first refusal, founded upon the same
reasons as before. The German Troops, among several other Insolences had
demolisht some Protestant Churches, and plundered their Houses. The Protestants
not being of humor to suffer these evil treatments, got together, and put all
the German Soldiers to the sword who had removed never so little from their
Quarters. The Emperor thereupon caused all those people to be attainted of High
Treason. There needed no more to persuade them, that the Design was as much
against their Possessions and Religion as their Persons, as a Roman Catholic
Historian Hist. des troubles, de Hung. l. 1. p. 26.
has well judged, That this reasoning was not far from Truth. The Emperor, adds
he, who pretends to so great Piety, receives blindly all the Counsels that are
given him for the Glory of God, and the extirpation of Heresy; without
considering that those that inspire these sentiments into him, [laudable in
appearance, but dangerous in execution,] are moved thereto rather by humane
considerations than for the Interest of Heaven; and that they seek less to
establish the Worship of the true Religion, than to preserve the Heretics
goods for themselves, which they had obtained the Confiscation of.

The Hungarians, who did not look upon things with the same Eye, were so
exasperated with this Conduct, that the States themselves Assembled at
Cassovia, resolved to refuse the Imperial Troops Victuals and Lodging unless
they paid for them, and got their Reasons represented to the Emperor.

At last in the month of July, the Imperial States having entered into
Negotiation with the Turks, 'twas resolved at Vienna to withdraw out of Hungary
9000 Men of the German Troops that were there at the end of the Campaign.

Baron John of Goes was gone to Themiswar on the Emperors side to treat with
Ali Bassa, and the Accommodation was reckoned easy, because the Turks only
demanded two things. They only required that a Fort should be demolisht which
Count Nicholas de Serin had caused to be built upon the Mure, which discharges
its self into the Save, that they might bring in thither the Booties which
Rovers took from the Turks. They demanded further that the Emperor should call
home his Troops that were in Transylvania and the Neighboring Counties. Yet in
the mean while all the Year was spent in sending and receiving Courriers,
without concluding any thing.

That same Year the Emperor made a severe Regulation, for the Marching and
Quartering of Soldiers, which might have prevented many of the Disorders had
it been observed, For this end they should have paid the Army well, and treated
the Soldiers with the same severity that they punished the Disobediences of the
Hungarians, when they fell into the hands of the Imperial Comissaries. But
whether they had neglected the second thing, or that they had some secret Order
contrary to the Proclamation, the Troops which should lodge in the Cities of
the Mountains about the end of the Year 1662. to stay till they saw where they
should be employed the following Year, going along plundered several Country
Houses, and committed the same Insolences there that they had done in conquered
Lands. The Cities of the Hill Country having advice of this conduct, believed
that they had made the Regulation, that was spoke of, only to amuse them, and
refused absolutely to receive eight hundred Men that should have taken up their
Winter Quarters there. They offered in vain to pay all their charge, they would
by no means trust people, that never kept their word but when they found it for
their purpose. Besides tho they had agreed to furnish Forage for nothing to
the Cavalry, it made so great desolation, that they were forced to pay for it.
Five hundred Men, to whom they had designed for their Winter Quarters,
Nagibamia a City of Upper Hungary, on the Frontiers of Transylvania, took so
little notice of the Regulation during their March, that when they came before
this place, the Inhabitants shut their Gates upon them, believing that they
were more safe on the Turks side than on those that were come to defend them.
The Germans who could not give any reason of their conduct, endeavored to
maintain it by violence. They endeavored to break open the Gates on the eighth
of December; but the Inhabitants, who had called some of the Neighboring
Trained Bands to their assistance, charged them very roughly, and a great many
were left dead on the place on both sides. The like Quarrels happened in other
places in Hungary, where the Germans committed the like Insolences, which
constrained the Emperor to withdraw the greatest part in the middle of Winter,
for fear lest the desperate Hungarians should put these Ill-disciplin'd
Soldiers to the sword in every place.

Chimin Janos having been defeated and killed by the Treachery of some of his
Officers, in the beginning of the Campaign 1662. tho his Son and some others,
attempted to oppose Michael Abffia, as is already said, the Party of this last
was infine the strongest. The Emperor opposing his advancement, he joined
himself wholly to the Turks.

The Negotiation of Themisware continued all the Winter, the Turks making them
still hope that it would be easily accommodated. Yet they made a Bridge over
the Morass of Essek, which might have been awatch-word to the Germans that they
had some design upon Hungary. But as the Commissaries met at Themiswar, to
conclude the Truce, provided the Imperialists called home their Troops that
were at Zekelheid, a place in Transylvania; and demolisht the Fortifications
thereof, as the Turks for their part should that of St. Job, it could not be
thought at Vienna, that there was any difficulty remaining to hinder the
conclusion of the Treaty. Yet the Grand Signior would not ratify what had been
done, unless the Emperor would renounce in due form, all claims that he could
make to Transylvania, and all its dependences; that he should demolish the Fort
of Serin, that he should pay the charges of the War, and that he should fend an
Ambassador to the Port with great Presents. The Court of Vienna not being able
to digest these Propositions, they began to commit acts of Hostility on both
sides.

The Hungarians, who had beheld this Negotiation with grief, because it was not
all communicated to them, were not at all sorry that it came to nothing. It
seemed hard to to them, that in a thing that concerned the Kingdom of Hungary
only, two German Envoys were employed, who by the Orders of the Emperor, and
without imparting it to the States, made Treaties whereupon the Repose or Ruin
of the Hungarians depended. A little time after the Turks began to march with
as great Numbers as they could into Hungary. The long Siege of Candy, which
continued seven Years, had exercised a great part of their Armies. The Emperor
and his Ministers who had lulled themselves asleep with hopes of a Peace, began
too late to give notice to the States of Hungary, of the danger their Country
was in, if they did not take speedy measures to oppose the Enemy. They answered
the Emperor on May 6th, by the mouth of the Archbishop of Strigonia, who went
to Vienna, that they would call together the Ban and the Arriere ban, and put
all the Kingdom in Arms, if he would have it done; but that they might be in
case to maintain their Troops, they must needs be raised before those of
Germany arrived; because otherwise these last would want so much Forage that
the Hungarian Cavalry after that could not make a Campaign. It was not thought
fit at Vienna, that the Hungarians should put themselves in a posture of
defense alone, without the succors of the Germans and the Hungarians being
unwilling to receive these last before they were in case to act themselves, a
considerable time was spent, which gave occasion to the Turks to take a Place
of Importance.

Achmet Coprogli, the Grand Vizier, had advanced at first to Belgrade, where
was the Rendezvous of his Army. As soon as it was come together he marched
straight for the Bridge of Essex, wherein they had been at Work all the Winter,
and from thence continuing their March to Buda, he afterward, after a great
deal of fatigue, by reason of excessive Rains, New-haussel.
came before Newhaussel, on Aug. 14. After having summoned the place, which
refused to surrender, he laid Siege to it, and carried it by capitulation on
the 27th of September. It is situated on a Plain, near the River Nitrie, about
two Leagues from Comorra and Ten from Presbourgh. They had begun to fortify
it, and had designed to flank it with six Bastions in form of a Star; but that
was but half done, and they had not yet any Counterscarp. The Garrison
consisted but of 3000 Foot and 500 Horse, which was not at all able to defend a
Place half-fortified, against an Army of above 70000 Men having no hopes of
being relieved. Count Adam de Forgats, and the Marquess-Gibert Pie, of Savoy
commanded this Garrison. Whilst the Grand Vizier was marching, or busied at the
Siege of Newhuassell, it happened that the Emperor fell sick of the small Pox;
which retarded, for some days, all deliberations, the Emperors Ministers not
daring to resolve on any thing while this Prince was in danger. Besides this,
Prince Portia his Prime Minister, was accused of having been of a Humor so far
from undertaking a War; that the desire he had to enjoy Peace, made him believe
that the Turks desired it as sincerely on their part. As soon as the Emperor
found himself better, he called a Diet at Presbourg, to hasten the Levying of
the Arrier-ban, but it was very flow, and there were but few Deputies there.
Those that did not come excused themselves on the fear they were possessed with
of being carried away by the Turks Scouts, or that they could not return home.
As they had unseasonably refused the proffers they had made, in time; they too
late required what they were no more in case to do, when it was necessary.

Montecuculi was encampt on the Danube near Presbourg with the few Troops the
Emperor had on foot, to cover that place, and durst not stir during the Siege
of Newhaussel. The Hungarians contenting themselves to act on the defensive,
were bare Spectators of the Turks Actions; and these last took without
resistance, in upper Hungary, Nitrie, Lewents and Novigrade. A little after the
Imperial Garrisons that were in Transylvania, in Zekelheid and Clausembourg,
surrended the Places to Abaffi, for want of Provisions and Ammunition. The
Grand Vizier contented himself with these Conquests, and designed no more for
that year than to keep what he had got.

During the Siege of Newhaussel, a Body of Tartarians had almost overrun all
Moravia, and would have entered Stiria, had not Nicholas Count of Serin opposed
them at the Passage of the Mure, and cut off 2000 of them that were already
gone over. His Brother Peter de Serin assisted by Francis Marquess de
Frangipani, and some of the Hungarian Nobility, obtained likewise a
considerable advantage over the Basha of Bosnia, whose Brother he took
Prisoner, and routed the Army, as it was entering Croatia. He obtained this
Victory on October. 16. a little after his Brother had beat the Tartars. These
two Victories, very necessary to raise the Courage of the Imperialists, showed
what the Hungarians would have done, had the others had a design to make use of
their strength rather than their money.

About the end of October, Achmet, after having taken care for the preservation
of his Conquests, returned to Adrianople, where the Grand Signior was, and put
his Troops into Winter Quarters, Montecuculi did the same with his, and there
was no more action this year but some Inroads on both sides.

Ratisbonne in the beginning of 1664. to demand of all the Princes of the
Empire succor against the Common Enemy. He obtained 30000 Men maintained, as
well Cavalry as Infantry, on condition that he should furnish the Ordnance, and
Artillery, and Horses to draw it, besides, at his own charge, 16000 Horse and
18000 Foot. The Diet also would have the Troops of the Empire to form a
separate Body, and that their Commanders should be Independent on those of the
Emperors. The Bishop of Munster and the Marquess of Baden Dourlach were named
to command them. It was no hard matter to see that the Princes of the Empire
feared lest their Troops alone should be exposed, to spare those of the
Emperor. It Is even said that they would have been glad that the House of
Austria should lose nothing, but that they would have been This is inserted
here to make the German Princes Jealous of the Emperor at this time.
sorry to see it too potent, lest she should make use of that Power against the
Members of the Accomplices, whom it would be more advantageous for her to assail
than to drive the Turks beyond the Bosphorus. The Emperor sent likewise to
demand succor in France, by Count Strozzi his Ambassador; and King Lewis XIV.
out of Generosity, or with design to gain the affections of the German Princes,
or to inform himself better of the state of Hungary, granted to the Emperor
4000 Foot and 2000 Horse, as one of the Princes of the League on the Rhine.
It Is thought strange, that the Emperor should give occasion to the French King
to be concerned in the affairs of Germany, which good Policy would have
required that he should always be kept at a distance from. He might have
shunned this by making use of the Hungarians, to defend their own Country; but
this is looked upon as a dangerous extremity, to which he could not come, unless
he exposed himself to the inviolably keeping their Privileges; which some A
true remark on those Princes that design against the Religion or Civil
Liberties of their People.
Potentates judge the worst evil that can befall them.

The French Infantry under the Conduct of Count de Cologni, took the shortest
way to embarque on the Danube, where Boats were prepared to carry them to
Vienna, where they disembarqued. As for the Cavalry, it went over from Italy,
where there was no more need of them since the Treaty of Pisa, into Carinthia,
through the Estates of the Republic of Venice.

Whilst they were busied in these preparations Count Nicholas de Serin formed a
design upon Canisa. To open his way to the taking of this place, he overrun
all the Country round about it, even to the Save, burning and plundering all
before him. He burnt even the City of the five Churches, yet without taking the
Citadel, which was very well fortified. He beat all the Parties of Turks that
he encountered, and having marched even to the Bridge of Essek, a part of which
he cut off, he returned with a great deal of Booty and Prisoners. He believed
that he had cut thus off the Communication of the Turks of Canisa with those of
Sclavonia and Bosnia; but they being sensible of his design, labored
continually in repairing the Bridge of Essek, and prepared themselves to open
the Campagn in good time. Yet the Count was for blocking up this Place, while
the Frost facilitated the approach of the Imperial Troops; thinking that the
Turks could not come to its relief before the Spring time, seeing their March
would be slow and difficult, by reason of the Morasses through which they must
pass.

He had certain advice, that since that the Fire had consumed by accident the
Magazines of Canisa, they had not sent any Provisions thither, so much as they
must have to endure a Blockade, accompanied with a Siege. The Magistrates and
Governor of Grats, the Capital of Stiria which the Garrison of Canisa kept in
continual Alarms, mightily approved of this design, and engaged to favor it
with all their Forces. Montecuculi a great Temporiser, and very unfit for ready
or bold Enterprises, whether he followed his Natural Inclination, or through
Jealousy, wholly disapproved this design; under pretense that the Troops would
be ruined if they encamped in the Morasses so early, and that they would be
rendered incapable of acting in the time when they should be most necessary. But
this design having been proposed in the Emperors Council of War was approved
there, because they believed that by the Conquest of Canisa they might
facilitate a Peace; either because they came to keep what they had got on both
sides, during this War, or that they made an exchange. Canisa described.
Canisa is a small place, flanked with four Bastions, but much stronger by
Nature than by Art, being environed on all sides with a Morass, which cannot be
past but on a Bridge or Boat, in places where the Water is deep enough. When
they should have assembled their Troops necessary first to Block up this place,
and afterward to attack it, before the Turks could succor it, there was almost
nothing found in a readiness, and the Germans, who were accustomed to go as
late out of their Winter Quarters as they could, did it with so much slowness,
that they could not profit by the advantage that the Ice would have afforded
them, had they been more early. They could not march till about the latter end
of April, and the Turks who had time to discover the Enterprise, put out all
useless persons out of it. When they approacht the Place, the Generals, who had
represented this Enterprise as very easy, in the Execution found difficulties
which they did not at all foresee, or which they were not in case to surmount,
after they had undervalued them in a Council of War. They could indeed diminish
the Water of the Morass, by cutting some Banks, but it was not possible for
them to dry it wholly. But they must seek Bavines and Earth from a far, and the
Soldiers could scarce endure this fatigue. The Generals were, the Count of
Strozzi for the Emperors Troops; that of Serin for the Hungarians and Croats;
and that of Hollac for the Auxiliary Troops; and by ill luck they were almost
never of one Opinion. The first was brave in his person; even to rashness, but
highspirited, and unfit to command in chief. The second fearless in fight in
the open Field, but did not understand the way of Befieging and Attacking
Places. The third void of experience in Arms, gave no mark of Judgment but in
contradicting others. There needed not so much to frustrate this Enterprise,
even though the Garrison should not have defended its self with that vigor with
which it did. About the end of March, the Siege being not yet much advanced,
the Besiegers were informed that the Vizier advanced in great Marches, to come
to the relief of the place; and on reiterated advices that they had received,
they raised the Siege and retreated with so great precipitation, that they left
a considerable quantity of Provisions and Ammunition in their Lines.

Achmet did not content himself with having made them raise the Siege of
Canisa, he would further take the Fort of Serin, * on the other side of the
River Mure. Fort Sereni described.
This Fort was situated on the steep side of a Hill over against the Ford of
the Mure, environed with some Palisadoes, and some Works of Earth, with design,
as has been said, to shelter the Prises which the Croats had taken from the
Turks. The Free-booters having been often stopped at the Passage of the River,
made Nicholas Count of Serin think of building this Fort on the other side, as
a shelter for them,

The Grand Vizier employed all his Forcesto carry so uncousiderable a Post, and
the Imperial Army which had beseiged Canisa, being advanced on the other side
of the River, were firmly resolved to defend it, to hinder the Turks from
passing the Mure in this place. Count Peter Serin, with some Croats came at
that time to succor his Brother, having left the Count de Strasoldo Governor
of Carlestadt. The two Armies were encamped one over against the other, and
as soon as the Grand Vizier endeavored to maintain the Attacques, by new
Troops, the Imperialists took care to relieve the Garrison. A Body of Turks
having one day passed the River, Count Strozzi went against them, and charged
them with so much Vigor, that he constrained them to repass with loss; but in
this action he was wounded with a Musket Shot, whereof he died. In fine after a
Months obstinate defense, (without Montecuculi's, who commanded the Body of the
Imperial Troops, having any regard to them, tho Count Nicholas of Serin had
sent to him several times to demand succors,) the Turks took the Fort by
assault, and were disposed afterward to pass the River; because having gained
the Fort, they could safely run over all the Peninsula that lies between the
Mure and the Drove, and which was then under the Government of Nicholas de
Serin: They could go straight to Grats and alarm all Italy. The Imperial Army
having foreseen their design, entrenched, and had made Redoubts from place to
place, to dispute the passage with the Turks, who despairing of gaining it,
marched another way. Count Nicholas de Serin complained much of Montecuculi,
who had refused him succor, but had no satisfaction. He likewise in vain
demanded to command in Chief a Body of a separate Army, they would not hear him
speak of it, which made him quit the service shortly after. 'Twas good luck for
the Christians, that the Vizier was not resolute to pass the River in that
place; because the Imperalists began to want Powder, and Provisions became so
scarce in their Camp, that several Soldiers died of Hunger. The Venetians soon
after sent a great Quantity of Powder; and decamping from thence, the Army was
in a fairer way to have Provisions.

In the mean while Count de Souches got some advantage over the Turks on the
other side of the Danube, of whom he beat several Parties, and retook Nitrice
and Lewents, with the same easiness as they had lost it. He also defeated the
Basha of Buda, and ran all over even to the Gates of Strigonia. But these
advantages were of small consequence, if they had not hindered the Grand Vizier
from executing his designs. He endeavored to enter the Hereditary Countries,
and particuarly Austria, where there being almost no places of strength, he
hoped to lay it all waste.

All the Imperial Army, commanded by Monticuculi, observed his Motions, and
followed him every day, yet not daring to offer a Battle. The Turks being
encamped on the Brink of the River Raab, near a Ford, over against a little
Village named St. Godard, the Imperialists entrenched on the other side. On the
last of July or the first of August in the Night, the Vizier caused three
Batteries to be planted on the Brink of the River, and at break of day they
began to Cannon the Imperialists; he made six thousand chosen Men of his Troops
pass over under the shelter of the Cannon, and sent others after them instantly
to cover them. Monticuculi had draw up his Army in Battalia, upon a Height,
with the greatest part of his Army, and had sent but a few Troops to oppose the
Turks passage. These last attacqued them so furiously, that in a very little
time they put them entirely to flight, so that some of them that fled carried
the news of the Defeat of the Imperial Army, as far as Grats. In the mean while
Monticuculi, if we believe the French Relations, did not move from the place,
for fear of losing the advantageous ground he stood upon, and all the Turkish
Army had passed, without any hindrance from him, if the Count de Coligni and
the Marquess, de la Feuillade, without expecting his Orders, had not marched
right upon the Janissaries that had passed first, and charged them with that
briskness, that they put them into disorder at the first brunt, and made them
retreat toward the River. Some German Regiments, being ashamed to see strangers
defend their Country more couragionsly than themselves, followed the Example
of the French, and forced the Turks to repass the Raab in disorder, and with
great loss. The Vizier durst not pass over himself to relieve his men, but
appearing on Horseback on the other side of the River, he encouraged them with
Hand and Voice. Yet do what he could, he could not make them rally, and he lost
sixteen thousand Men, because the brink of the River on his side was of
difficult access, and steep almost every where, After this loss, he was so
frightened that he decamped the following night, without carrying off his
Cannon, fearing lest the Imperialists, should entirely defeat his Army, if they
should attacque them in the fright they were in. Yet Monticuculi, maugre the
advice of the French and of several others, contented himself with this
advantage, without daring to follow them, tho the loss of the Imperialists was
very unconsiderable. The Vizier retreated under the Cannon of Strigonia, and
continued there some time, to hinder the Imperial Army from attempting the
Seige of Newhaussel. Montecuculi, who acted always to the surest, durst not
indeed attempt any thing, and his Conduct was so well approved at Vienna, that
the Emperor declared him General Lieutenant of his Armies Count Peter de Serin
is accused of having committed two great faults this Year. The first of
separating from Count Strasoldo Commandant of Carlest adt, in the absence of
the Count de Aversperg, in stead of entering Bosnia with him after the defeat of
the Basha: Which uncapacitated Scrasoldo to do any thing. The other is that he
had in vain attempted to hinder the Turks from going a foraging with his
Croats, and two thousand German Horse, which Montecuculi had given him for that
purpose. After the death of his Brother, which happened in hunting, without
being well known how, a little after the taking of his Fort; he did not fail to
succeed him in the Dignity of Ban, or Viceroy of Dalmatia, Croatia, and
Sclavonia; tho the report runs that the Court of Vienna, which would have it
believed that a Boar had destroyed him, had caused him to be assassinated. He
had also desired the Government of Carlestadt, but it was refused him. It Is
said that the death of his Brother and this refusal made him disgust the
Emperors service, and from that time he began to lay other foundations for a
new Grandeur. As the evil that is spoken of him is founded on what his Enemies
have published, before and after he was put to death, it is not safe to believe
all that is spread in the World, tho we cannot disprove it.

We are assured that from that time, he joined with the Hungarians, in whom he
saw great signs of discontent, as to the Imperial Court. About the end of
Summer, he went to the Bath of Trenschin, with all his Family, at the same time
when the Widow of George Ragotski arrived there with the Prince her Son,
Wesselini was there also, and Negotiated a Marriage betweeen Francis Ragotski
and the Daughter of Count Serin. Some Historians say, that 'twas thus that they
formed the first project of a Conspiracy, whereof we shall speak afterward.

However it be these Lords began to gain the Favor of the Hungarian
Protestants of the Counties of Zathmar and Zambolich. The Princess of Ragotski
after she with her Children had embraced the Roman Catholic Religion, at the
Instigation of the Emperor, had taken away their Churches, and had seized the
fonds whereupon the Pension of their Ministers was assigned, and had
distributed the revenue to those whom her promises or evil treatment had
engaged to make profession of the Roman Catholic Religion. It was whispered to
the Protestant Ministers, that if they required what had been taken away from
them, it should be granted them, provided they employed the Count de Serin to
interceed for them. They did not fail to make use of this advice, and Ragotski,
in consideration of his Father-in-Law restored them their Churches, and caused
the Ministers to be paid the Arrears of their Pension, with a promise that they
should thenceforth be punctually paid. The Protestants, who thought they were
very happy in Roman Catholic States, when they were promised the exercise of
their Religion, and that their Pastors should have whereupon to subsist,
received what Rogotski granted them as a signal favor, and testified that they
were ready to serve him with their Goods and Lives.

After the Victory of St. Godard, the Emperor, who had an extraordinary
Inclination to make Peace, reapt no other advantage by it but that he thereby
engaged the Turks to enter into new Negotiations with him. Those that had been
begun at Themiswar were only interrupted by the War. The Emperors Agents
remained all that time near the Grand Vizer, who had retained them to renew it
when he should find it for his purpose. Having told them that it would be no
hard matter at that time to enter upon some accommodation, he permitted them to
give advice of it to the Emperor. This Prince presently embraced this occasion,
and sent orders to Montecuculi to commit no acts of Hostility. The Vizier did
the same on his part, and the Treaty was concluded ten days after the Battle of
Raab. Besides the secret Articles it was agreed that the Emperor should
withdraw all his Troops from Transylvania, whereof Abaffi should remain Master
unmolested, and that the Estates thereof, in case he should die, should make an
Election of a new Vaivode, without any molestation, according to the ordinary
manner; that the Turks should keep what they had taken, demolishing Zekelheid,
on condition that they would not repair the Fort of Serin: That the Emperor, to
whom the Sovereignty of the Lands, of the two Counties of Zathmar and
Zambolich, which Ragotski enjoyed, had been given up, might notwithstanding
build a Fort on the Tibisque to cover them: That this Truce should be for 20
years, and that in order to ratify it, the Emperor should send to the Port an
Ambassador, with a Present of 200000 Florens.

When these Articles were published very different judgments were made of it*
some blamed the Emperor for this, that he was so far from reaping any fruit
from a glorious victory, that he abandoned to the Turks, Transylvania,
Newhaussel and a considerable part of Hungary. They were astonished that an Army
of 40000 chosen Men, paid in a great partby others, had been made use of to no
other end than to preserve to the Infidels the Conquests they had made. The
Imperial Ministers excused themselves with necessity, and they said that they
chose rather to make a Peace that was not very honorable than a War that would
be destructive to the Emperor. Yet some have believed that the principal
reasons of this Peace were, on one hand, the Fear the Emperor was possessed
with, that he should not be long succored by the Troops of the Empire, who did
not look upon his advancement with a good Eye: and on the other side the humor
of the Prince of Porcia, prime Minister to the Emperor, strongly inclined to a
Peace, because he was not capable to maintain himself in the credit he was in
during the War. Add to this, that Leopold himself thought on nothing else than
to receive Margaret of Austria his Spouse, and feared that if Philip IV. should
die while the Empire was embroiled in the Hungarian War, the French King would
invade his Estates.

None were so troubled at so shameful a Treaty as the Hungarians. They saw
themselves thereby abandoned to the Turks, who in the midst of the Peace would
not fail to work them 1000 mischiess by means of the new Garrison of
Newhaussel. The two Counts of Serin and the Croats, who were in their
Interests, disapproved it extremely, because having been the first to advice
the War, and the Fort of Serin having been partly a cause of it, they saw well
that they should be despised during the Peace, or even hated as the Authors of
a War destructive to the Emperor.

Some Hungarians were so bold as to rob the Secretary to the Emperors Resident,
near the Grand Vizier, and to take away from him the Treaty of Peace, which he
carried to Vienna. This action and the complaints of the Hungarians, who said
openly, that they had shamefully abandoned almost all Lower Hungary to the
Turks, and a part of the Upper to the Insolences of the Garrison of Newbaussel,
obliged the Emperor to cause some of the Principal Lords of Hungary to come to
Vienna, to appease them. The Prince of Lobkovits Prime Minister, after the
death of Porcia, spoke to them in name of the Emperor, and endeavored to make
them comprehend that this Peace was absolutely necessary. He added, that the
Emperor was ready to withdraw the German Troops from the rest of Hungary,
provided the Hungarians repaired the Fortifications of several little places
near were put therein. These Lords could answer nothing to this, but that they
would communicate what they had said to the first Diet, who should not fail
afterward to send Deputies to Vienna.

In the mean while Count Gautier Lesle was dispatched to the Port, who went to
Adrianople with the Grand Vizier, who led him as in Triumph, to ratify the
Treaty of Peace there. The Grand Signior sent on his part to Vienna, Cara
Mahomet Bassa, for the same design, and brought the Count de Lesle to
Constantinople to receive him there with more State.

Lobkovits Propositions were answered by writing in the beginning of the Year
1665. The Hungarians represented, that the Kingdom had reason to complain that
they had concluded a Peace with the Turk, without the consent of the States,
that the Kings of Hungary had no Right to do it: That it was not an easy thing
to hinder the Inroads of the Turks, that the German Soldiers, whom they would
send against them, would do little less mischief than they: That in fine they
could not be resolved to ratify a Peace so disadvantageous to their Country,
nor suffer themselves to be robbed by strangers.

Prince Lobkovits remonstrated to them anew, the necessity they were under to
make Peace with the Turks, and told them, that they could not complain that the
Negotiation of Peace had been unknown to the States of Hungary, since the
Emperors Agents had communicated their Instructions to them at Presbourgh; he
added that it was true that they had concluded a Peace with great haste, but
that that was done to take advantage of the good Disposition of the Vizier,
which might change: That as to the rest, the Hungarians saw themselves
delivered thereby from all the horrors, that so deadly a War would draw after
it, which should be more cause of joy to them than the loss of Newhaussel was
of sorrow: That in fine the Emperor would build Forts near Newhaussel, and put
Troops therein, to oppose the Inroads of the Garrison.

The Hungarians seeming better satisfied than at first, did not fail to reply
to Lobkovits, that the Officers that commanded the Troops, should be of their
own Nation then: That he needed take no other Expedient to curb the Garrison of
Newhaussel, than to reassemble under some Colors, a great number of Hungarian
Soldiers, who were spread throughout the Kingdom, and without Employs, That
they might put those people in places of Hungary exposed to the Turks, instead
of the Germans, who did not much less mischief than the Infidels, through want
of Discipline and of being paid. The Emperor having at last agreed to these
Articles from the Mouth, they subscribed the Peace, and carried back the Crown
of the Kingdom of Hungary to Presbourg, which had been carried to Vienna during
the War. The Emperor dismissed the greatest part of his Troops, and the Bishop of
Munster, and the Marquess de Baden Dourlach, Generals of the Troops of the
Empire, with confiderable presents; after which they departed, and delivered
their Troops to those that had given them.

One would have thought after this, that Hungary should enjoy a long Peace, but
the Promise that was mutually given on one side, not to meddle with the
Privileges of the Kingdom, and on the other to observe the Treaty of Peace,
was not kept on either side. The Count de Rothal Commissary General to the
Emperor having withdrawn some Imperial Troops from Transylvania, that remained
there, instead of leading them the way to the Hereditary Countries, placed them
anew in the Upper Hungary at Zathmar, Tokai, Kalo and Onod, never minding the
Complaints of the Hungarians. There were also German Garrisons put into Nitrie
and Lewents, which Souches, as has been said, retook from the Turks. The
Hungarians seeing that they had not kept their promise which they had given
them, made Inroads up on the Turks, as if the War had sticontinued; they made
complaints of it Vienna, and revenged themselves cruelly on all the Frontiers
of Christian Hungary One of the first Hungarians that mounted his Horse, to
violate the Treaty of Peace, was Count Palaffi Imbre, with design to make the
fault be charged upon Wesselini the Palatine, his particular Enemy, as if he
had done nothing but by his Order. Palaffi not being believed, or the Council
of Vienna not judging it fit to act against Wesselini, he was so far
transported, that he attempted to plunder and burn the Palatines Lands; but
Ragotski and Abaffi taking this lasts part hindered Palaffi from executing any
thing, though he had demanded assistance from, the Turks, and had offered them
his Son, and the Fort of Debin which belonged to him, as Pledges of his
Fidelity. The disturbances of the Hungarians among themselves, which should
have been determined by the Laws of the Country, gave occasion to their
Enemies, to represent them as common disturbers at the Imperial Court, who
seeking but a plausible pretense, to leave the German Garrisons that were there
among them, did not fail to make advantage by what presented it self.

The Hungarians were further accused of having made several attempts on the
person of their King. According to the Laws of Hungary, the King should call a
general Diet of the Kingdom every third year, and be present himself at it, to
regulate the Affairs of State. The Diet then having been called in form at
Presbourg Sept. 27. 1665. the Hungarians earnestly prayed that the Emperor
would be there, but he absolutely refused it. 'Twas said since that there was a
Conspiracy among them to seize his Person. Whether this was true, or that the
Emperor not designing to agree to the calling back of the German Troops, which
he knew well they would demand of him, would not for this reason put himself
into their hands, he gave them new matter of complaint by this refusal.

Hungary, solicited by the complaints of the Inhabitants of Zathmar, sent some
Deputies to Vienna, to complain that Colonel Spaar, who commanded the Troops
that were put into that place, had constrained the Inhabitants to give him a of
Money, as if it were to pay off the Garrison, but that he converted it to his
own use. The same Deputies had order to represent the Extorsions and Violences
of all the German Troops, and to demand that he would call them home according
to the promise that he had made to them.

Besides the reasons of not calling them back, that have been already related,
there, came pat for the Emperors purpose, advice that the Hungarian Protestants
had chosen Heads, to oppose the progress of the Roman Religion in Upper
Hungary, by the Example and Authority of the Family of Ragotski. Whether this
advice were true or not, there needed no more to stop the mouths of the
Deputies, who durst not take the Protestants part.

Those that are of humor to make Conspiracies, or what men would make to be
such, do not stop at the first, unless they have a mind to prevent them.
Fearing to be punished for their Projects that have not succeeded, if they
should come to be discovered, they endeavor all anew to put those, against
whom they have conspired, in a state incapable to do them any hurt. The Counts
Nadasti and Serin formed once more a design of seizing the Emperors person, who
must pass by near Puttendorf, going to meet his Empress. Count Serin who
brought his Daughter to Ragotski, to consummate the Marriage, was under this
pretense come into Hungary with a numerous Train. They had likewise published
that the Turks would make sure of a considerable Pass, to send Troops into
Dalmatia against the Venetians, with whom they were still at Wars, and that the
Emperor favored it underhand. To oppose this design of the Infidels, they had
almost raised 500 Men, for whom they had assigned Puttendorf as the place of
Randezvouse. The Emperor must ride Post near by that with the Prince of
Lobkovits, Master of his House, and twelve Horsemen; and it would have been
easy for those Troops to invest him, if the Emperor had not passed sooner than
the Conspirators believed he would, and before their Troops were arrived. The
Emperor met happily with his new Spouse, and led her to Vienna, where the
Marriage was consummated on December. 5. 1666.

Hungary, and the States of the Kingdom were called together for this purpose
at Presbourg. The Counts of Upper Hungary refused to send their Deputies
thither, unless they called home the German Troops, which they refused so much
the more obstinately as they demanded it eagerly. The Emperor was not ignorant
they would not have given so many fresh on-sets on this Article, but to recover
their Liberties and Privileges; which perhaps they might make use of in a
manner disadvantageous to his House, if he should happen to die; and the
Hungarians could not endure, that the House of Austria should from thenceforth
look upon Hungary as her Hereditary Countries, where it should have an
Authority little different from that which the Grand Signior has over his
Subjects. In the mean while they protested on the one hand, that they would no
ways infringe the Privileges of the Hungarian Nation; and on the other, that
they had nothing so much in their Hearts, as the Glory and Advancement of the
Imperial House. So true it is, that we must keep at least in appearance the
Laws of a Society, if we would not quite lose it.

About this time Francis Wesselini, who has since been charged by some with
slowness and softness, because he did not execute the Emperors Orders readily,
and by others with Infidelity for the same reason. Perhaps being very subject
to the Gout, and to other Infirmities, he did not act with a readiness
necessary in great Affairs; and that refusing to violate the Laws of his
Country as they would have had him, his Fidelity became suspected. These two
depend the one upon the other. It is rare that a great People complains of the
Violation of their Privileges without any reason; and it is common with
Princes to treat Magistrates and People that refuse to pay them blind Obedience
as seditious and troublesome. Count Nadasti, President of the Sovereign
Council, and one of the best Qualified Gentlemen of Hungary, stood up for the
Dignity of Palatin, but the Emperor mistrusting him, refused it, and judged it
better for his purpose not to fill it in the state he found the Kingdom in
then; fearing lest he whom he should confer it upon, should make use of the
Authority of his Office to maintain the Privileges that the Court of Vienna
had for a long time cast an ill Eye upon.

Nadasti, disgusted that he was refused a Dignity, which he thought was his
due, attempted a third time to kill the Emperor, or to seize his person. The
Expedient was to set the Imperial Palace on fire, and to stop the Emperor, who
would not fail to depart Vienna in great haste to flee from the Fire. It Is
added that Nadasti corrupted a Carpenter, who wrought in the new Apartment that
the Emperor had caused to be made, and which was set on fire Feb. 23. It is at
least very certain, that the Fire seized on the Imperial Palace that day, that
it was not known at first how it happened, and that no effect of this
Conspiracy was seen. It has been said since, that the Truth of all was
discovered by Papers and the Confessions of Nadasti, who had no body to take
his part after his Death. He was likewise accused of designing to Poison the
Emperor at a Feast, to which he had invited all the Imperial Court; and it is
said that his Wife hindered it, by causing to serve to the Emperor another Pasty
instead of that which was poisoned. He had a mind another time, if we may
believe some Historians, to poison the Water which that Prince drank, by
casting a dead Dog into it that had died of poison. The boldness of these
Enterprises, and many other Circumstances, made them to be but little believed;
it is difficult to judge surely of it, on what is said. The Interests that Men
often have to destroy persons either rich or considerable for their Offices,
and the great care that has been taken to make them unjustly pass for Traitors,
have hindered a great many people from being credulous in these matters; that
they look upon almost all Conspiracies that are spoken of as fabulous; unless
those against whom they have been made, have been either killed or wounded.

The death of Count d' Aversperg, Governor of Carlestadt, bred in the Count de
Serin a desire to have his Post, by means whereof he would be Master of
Croatia. The Countess his Spouse parted for Vienna with this design; but though
she forgot nothing, to obtain this Government for her Husband, she could not
compass her design. It was resolved at Vienna, by little and little, to put the
Nobility of Hungary and Croatia out of case to come and importune the Emperor,
about the observation of the Usages and Laws of their Country. For this
effect, far from gaining by Graces those whom they suspected to be too much
wedded to them, they refused them every thing that was in their power to keep
from them. The Government of Carlestadt was given to Joseph Count of
Haberstein, Knight of Malta; and the Countess of Serin returned into Upper
Hungary, to her Son-in-law Ragotski in the greatest discontent.

They still continued their complaints against the German Garrisons in that
Country. Yet they obtained no recalling of them, nor Justice for the Injuries
they had committed on the Inhabitants, for that it was resolved upon at Vienna,
to mortify them as much as was possible; to suppress, as they commonly spoke,
the Seditious Discourse of the Laws and Privileges which those people had
continually in their Mouths. All this and the not very pliable humor of the
Hungarians, made them put several of the German Soldiers to the Sword, as they
had done more than once. The Princess Ragotski, who was grown a Zealous
Roman Catholic, did not suffer the Protestants to be well used long in her
Sons Lands; so that People believing that the Emperor, perhaps not being well
affected toward Ragotski, upon the account of his Father-in-law the Count de
Serin, would do them some Justice, they made their Application to Vienna, to
obtain their being supported as at first. And they at the same time complained
of the Disorders of the German Soldiers.

1669. The Hungarians were treated harshlier than ever on this last complaint,
and were upbraided with all the losses that were sustained in Hungary for
several Years, as if they had been the causes of them. As to what concerned the
Protestants Father Emeric, Confessor to the Emperor had so exasperated that
Prince against Heresy, that he spoke of nothing but their abjuring it, without
which they would not hear them more; as if they must change their sentiments or
pretend to have others, on things of so great importance, by Menaces and harsh
usage.

When the Deputies which had carried these complaints were returned home, and
had informed the People of their ill success, one might have seen all their
minds alarmed, and vainly seeeking for remedies for so great evils. To let the
Germans alone, said they, who treat the Hungarians worse than the Turks. were
to resolve to live in misery and contempt, to oppose them by force would stir
up a Civil War, whereof they could not foresee the end, and whereof the
Infidels might reap terrible advantages.

The Protestants in particular knew not wither to turn themselves, not daring
to trust themselves to the Roman Catholics, among whom there were few persons
so moderate to bemoan them, if the violences of the Germans had not been
extended on the Roman Catholics too. The Lutherans and Calvinists, according
to their wont, scarcely agreed among themselves in these extremities, and if
one of these Parties of Protestants were ill treated the other would be little
concerned for it.

The mischiefs that were common to all the Hungarians of what Religion soever
they were, unless they were ready for every thing that should be commanded
them, without making any use of the Judgment that God has given all men; these
misfortunes, I say, formed a kind of Union among them. Perhaps also the Humor
of the Nation equally impatient and peevish contributed to make a kind of
Harmony among their complaints, and engaged them in common to seek Remedies for
their evils. The example of the Transylvanians among whom there is far greater
diversity of Religions, since there are Socinians publicly tolerated, and who
live in quiet under the Protection of the Turk, was a Temptation to them. They
resolved to demand the same Protection of the Port by a Deputation shameful to
Christianity: For, in fine, suppose that a Christian Prince give to People of
the same Religigion, just reason to believe that they shall be better under the
Empire of Infidels, than under his; or that Christian Subjects should make such
a Judgment without reason, which yet is very difficult; however it is a thing
that the Mahume tans themselves have never done with respect to the Christians.
Behold the Fruits of Efforts, that were made to shake off a Despotick Empire
over Souls and Bodies.

It Is said that the Counts Nadasti, Serin, Frangipani, and Taptembach, entered
into this Conspiracy, with almost all the richest Nobility of Hungary; some
through Ambition or Interest; others through hatred to the German Nation, which
they could not endure in their Lands, some few for the sole Love of the Liberty
of the Hungarian Nation; the greatest part for these different Motives that
were at the same time presented to their Mind.

They durst not send Deputies of their Nation, for fear the Emperors Resident
at the Port should smell out their design too soon. They employed
Transylvanians, who being under the Protection of the Port could go and come
without suspicion. The Deputies were received very well of the Grand Signior at
first, but as he did nothing but by the Interposition of his Prime Vizier, he
referred them to this Minister, who was then in Candia. As he was
extraordinarily busied in the Siege of this place, he referred them to his
Interpreter Pangiotti; to whom they were forbidden to say any thing, because it
was believed that he favored the Imperialists. This retarded the Negotiation,
but in fine they proposed to the Vizier to make the Kingdom of Hungary
Tributary to the Port, and to put it under its Protection, on condition that as
to the rest, the Grand Signior would leave them all their Privileges. They
represented that it would be easy to withdraw them from the Obedience to the
Emperor, if the Port sent into Hungary an Army of an hundred thousand Men, to
take the places where there were German Garrisons; during which time the
Hungarians for their part, would enter the Hereditary Countries, or oppose with
a considerable Army the Troops that should come from Germany. They offered to
the Turks to leave them the Places they had conquered; which should serve as a
Pledge to assure them of the Fidelity of the Hungarians. The Infidels after
they had heard these Propositions did not think they had offered them enough;
they would have them to put several Cities into their hands, before they broke
entirely with the Emperor, to assure them that they would not break, and these
were the most important places of the Kingdom. The Deputies could not yield to
this Article, and when they had given advice of it in Hungary, they answered
only, that the Places which the Turkish Army should take should continue the
Grand Signiors. They could not resolve to give Pledges before they had received
some succors. The Turks continuing firm in their demands, the Deputies took
leave of the Vizier without having done any thing, and without obtaining any
thing in writing to show in Hungary. Yet they promised them in General Terms to
Assist them as much as they could.

It Is not known whether the Grand Vizier, being still puzzled with the Siege of
Candy, would not engage himself in a new Enterprise, or if the Losses which he
had sustained in this Island, or in Hungary, discouraged him from embracing
what they proposed to him; but we are assured that Pangiotti gave notice of
what passed to the Emperors Resident.

Vienna having received this Advice, caused exact search to be made every where
to find out the Heads of the Conspiracy, and gave necessary Orders to raise
Recruits in every place, and to have an Army on foot instantly. About that time
the Count Tattembach was betrayed, as is said, by one of his Grooms, who had
the Copy of a Project that his Master had concerted since the Year 1667. with
the Count de Serin, to make themselves Masters of Croatia and Stiria. An
Officer named Bukouashi, was also gone to the Port for the Count of Serin, to
offer her a yearly Tribute for Croatia and Stiria, if she would assist him to
put himself in Possession of it. Whether that they would amuse the Count, or
that Bukouaski cheated him, he vainly believed that a small Body of an Army
would come to him from Canisa, to assist him to surprise Grats, which he would
give up to be plundered at the beginning of the Campaign. He had already drawn
together what Troops he could, and had writ to his Friends several Letters that
were intercepted. He had thought he could easily surprise Copranits a City of
Croatia, which he had promised to deliver up to the Turks, but he could not
compass his end. He received no Money of Ragotski, who should lend him a
considerable sum, to pay his Troops, and others which he had caused to be
raised in Valachia, who refused to march without Money; so that he could keep
none with him but a few Morlaques. Frangipani on the other side endeavored in
vain to Master Zagabria, and several other Cities of Croatia, and discovered at
the same time a design, which he was not then in case to execute. They
surprised also some of his Letters to Officers, in whom he confided, and to
whom he told all. The want of Secrecy, and the precipitation and imprudence of
the Heads, if what is reported be true, made their design miscarry in Croatia.
The Count of Tattembach was arrested at Grats on March 22. 1670. which
apparently made the Count of Serin, without expecting the Succor that he hoped
from the Turks, and without having taken any certain measure, take the Field,
and commit some Acts of Hostility, which not being able to weaken the Emperor,
did only render the Advice that was given him indubitable, and confirmed the
Depositions of some of his Accomplices that were gone to Vienna. The Troops
which the Emperor had got together from every place being partly on foot,
General Spankaw was sent into Croatia with 6000 Men, besides those that were
ordered to enter; to suppress, if it was possible, the Conspiracy, which was
not yet supported by any considerable Force. The Count of Serin surprised
before he was in a state of Defense, and not knowing that the Emperor was very
well informed of his Designs, thought it his best to feign, and sent straight
an Express for Vienna, to assure him of his Fidelity, and to excuse his Conduct
as much as is possible. He owned that he had had correspondence with the Turks,
but that it was only to penetrate the better into their Designs, which the
Emperor had permitted him before; that it is further true, that they had made
great proffers to him, but he added that he had refused them all.

The Court of Vienna did not suffer it self to be amused with such gross
services; it ordered Spankan to lay Siege to Shacketorn, whither the Count was
retreated, with Frangipani his Brotherin law. Not being in case to resist, he
sent P. Marc Forstal Augustine to Vienna, to endeavor to find out some way of
accommodation. They required of him to send his Son for an Hostage, and that he
should entirely surrender himself at the Emperors discretion, after which they
promised to grant him an Amnesty. The Count brave in fight, but not verst in
Politics, did not know that they did not ordinarily send an Amnesty but to
those whom they could not undertake to onnish without running a great risque,
he fell into the Snare which was laid for him, and staid at Shacketorn, whither
Spankan went to besiege him. In vain he sent to this General to tell him that
he had made his Peace at the Imperial Court, Spankan executed his Orders, which
had not as yet been recalled. The Place not being in a state of Defense, was
taken in a little time, Serin and Erangipani having abandoned it. In the mean
while they took the formers Wife Prisoner there, and plundered their best
effects. They were gone out with thirty Horse, with a design to cast themselves
at the Emperors feet, by the advice of the Count of Keri who betrayed them, and
received them in his Castle, whence they were carried Prisoners to Vienna.
After they were taken, it was not hard matter to reduce the small number that
sided with them in Croatia into Obedience.

The Lords of Hungary that were entered into the same Conspiracy with Serin and
Frangipani, and who had got more Men than they, took the Field too late. Their
pretense at first was the fear they were in that the Turks had some design upon
Hungary, because they had ordered to find out the Fords of several Rivers,
which were very low that Summer. They held, notwithstanding the Emperors
Prohibition, who had had advice of it, an Assembly at Cassovia, where a great
number of Nobility and Deputies from several Counties of Hungary met, they
resolved in this Assembly to form a Body of an Army of twelve thousand Men,
eight thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse; to oppose, as they said, the
Incursions of the Turks. The Emperor thereupon cited those that had been at
this kind of Diet, and adjourned them to meet at Newsol, promising to satisfy
their Lawful Complaints. But those that were engaged in this affair, saw very
well, that the Council of Vienna fought only to gain time, and being already
resolved to defend their Privileges by Arms, were but little frightened with
this Citation. It Is said that Nadasti whom the Emperor did not yet suspect,
hindered them secretly from obeying his Orders, tho he pretended to make them
execute them. The Malcontents made haste to levy as many Men as they could, to
put them under Ragotski's command, who had promised to maintain two thousand
Men for himself. The thirteen Counties made for this end an Act of Union with
their Deputies signed.

Ragotski endeavored to surprise Tokai, and Mongats, his Mothers Residence,
and where his Fathers Treasures were. His Mother would not yield up that place
to him, either because of the Money which she kept there, or because she had
not been of the Party. In the mean while those that continued faithful to the
Emperor met at Newsol, but to no purpose, because the Demands which the
Malcontents made were rejected with disdain. They desired that the Protestant
Churches might be restored to them, as having possessed them peaceably for
several Years? That they would recall all the Germans, and that they should put
Hungarian Soldiers in their place; that the Troops they had raised should
continue on foot, to make War on the Turks by their particular Authority. We
are assured that there was joy at Vienna, especially when they had taken the
Count of Serin, and knew that the Turks continued neuter, that they had found
out a sure way to forfeit the Estates of the Nobility of Hungary; for they d^d
nor doubt but they could easily compass their end on the Malcontents, if the
Turks did not concern themselves, as indeed they thought they would take no
share in these troubles* The Emperor who at first had demanded succors of the
Diet at Rattisbonne, and had obtained it, thanked those who had engaged to
furnish him in it, having enough of his own Troops to reduce the Malcontents.
The event showed that he was not mistaken, and he might sufficiently judge of
it, by the little skill the Chiefs had, which appeared in all their conduct. It
was as easy to conjecture, that the People would not acquit themselves of
their duty as they ought; because that in a Society, where no body has a right
to command, and cannot get himself feared, it is rare that Obedience is exact,
especially in the beginnings.

Ragotski not being expeditious enough, or not understanding the Office he had
taken upon him, had no success in any thing; the Imperial Troops on the
contrary advanced without losing time, and began to force the Passes in Upper
Hungary, that the Malcontents had seized. The Turks would not break with the
Emperor, as they had flattered themselves, and some Troops of Valachia which
Ragotski was to have did not come. All this joined with the solicitation of
his Mother and Father in-law, who writ Letters to him from Prison, wherein he
advised him to surrender himself to the Emperor; all this, I say, was more than
enough to make his Sword drop out of his hand. He disbanded his Troops the
greatest part whereof retired into Transylvania; and his Mother went to Vienna
to beg his Pardon. She obtained it on condition that he would receive an
Imperial Garrison into all Places that belonged to him, which he should
maintain on his own Charges.

The Principal the Head of Malcontents having abandoned them, it was no hard
matter for General Spork, who commanded an Army of above fifteen thousand Men,
to reduce all the rest. No place of the Malcontents was strong enough nor
provided as it ought, to maintain a Siege against him. Even the Hungarians that
were no ways concerned in the Conspiracy were treated as Rebels, as to what
concerns the quartering of Soldiers, and the other Inconveniences, which an
Army without Money and Provisions use to produce in Places through which they
pass. They durst not so much as complain, for fear of being punished as Rebels.

In the mean while the Count de Serin who at first was made to hope he should
obtain the Emperors Pardon, grew every day more Guilty, and his Brother-in-law
Frangipani is charged with having betrayed him in Prison, that he might the
more easily obtain a Pardon for himself, and to succeed to his Offices. We are
assured further, that there were found at Muran, the City of the Residence of
Palatine Wesselini, wherein several Assemblies of the Malcontents had been
held, a vast number of Papers, in the hands of one Nagiferents, Secretary to
the League. By these Papers they learned all the Circumstances, and Accomplices
of the Conspiracy, which were very pat for the purpose, of the Ministers
thirsting after the Estates of others, especially the richest of Hungary. It is
surprising that this Nagiferents, who was forced to deliver those Papers to the
Prince of Lorrain, did not burn those dangerous evidences of a Plot that had
proved abortive, when he saw the Place beseiged. If this be true, as well as
many other Circumstances of the Ruin of this Party which are reported, we must
acknowledge that the Hungarian Nobility was scarce capable to succeed in an
Enterprise of this importance.

It Is said that they discovered by these Papers, that Count Adasti was an
Accomplice of the Conspiracy; which being, it is hard to comprehend how he staid
at Puttendorf, when they came to seize him. It Is true we are informed that he
rendezvouzed, for the next day, five hundred Men, that should have attended him
even to the Lands of Venice. The expedient was dangerous, and it had been more
safe for him to have made his escape with a small company, and on the first
advice he had received of the taking of Muran. But this Conduct suits very well
with designs equally enormous and extravagant that are attributed to him.
However it be he was too rich to escape, and eight Millions of Livers which he
was worth in Estate, served much to aggravate his Crime.

Hungary that was assembled at Lentch the Hungarians, besides their ancient
Complaints, that the German Soldiers made them renew, with a great deal of
Grief, demanded according to their uncontrovertible Privileges, to be Judges
of the Prisoners. This was absolutely refused them under pretense that some of
them were the Emperors Officers. They feared that the Hungarian Judges, tho
Innocent as to the Conspiracy would either find the accusation ill grounded, or
that counterbalancing the Duties of Princes with those of Subjects, they would
Judge those Counts as innonocent, at least, as those who would deprive Hungary
of all its Privileges. It was nothing at Vienna, to violate the most equitable
Laws; and thereby to reduce an Infinite Number of Innocent Families to Misery;
on the contrary it was a crime but to complain of it, and an attempt deserving
the utmost Punishment, but to defend their Laws, by the same way by which they
would ruin them. They were not of the same Judgment in Hungary, and these
different Judgments, did not suit the Imperial Court. The four Prisoners were
condemned to be beheaded for High Treason, by Judges of the Emperors
appointment: Count Nadasti was executed at Vienna on Aug. 30. 1671. And the
Counts of Serin and Frangipani the same day at Newstadt. Count Tattembach
suffered the same Punishment at Grats, December. 1. 1671. His Death having been
delayed by reason of some controversy that there was about the Confiscation of
his Estate.

In making their Process, we find, as is said, that almost all the best
qualified Nobility of Hungary had some hand in the Conspiracy; some for
effectually tampering in it, others for not discovering it, others again for
not opposing it as they ought. It Is thus that Vargas * the Spanish Minister in
the Low Countries maintained that the Heretics having robbed the Churches,
Ever. Reidani Annal. Lib. 1. p. 5.
and the Orthodox having done nothing to hinder them, they ought all to be
hanged. The Hungarian Nobility understood thereby that there was no means of
escape left them but by flight or by ransoming themselves with great sums, or
in fine by defending themselves. Every one took one of these three ways,
according to the State of his Affairs, and the Disposition he found himself in.
The Emperor having notice that some had fortified themselves in their Castles,
with a design to defend themselves by force, against the search that might be
made for them, sent General Heister with thousand Horse to seize those People.
He made himself master of all the places pertaining to the Counts of
Osterchits, Petrozzi, and Baragozzi, where it is said he found a great deal of
Provisions and Ammunitions. From thence he marched against Stephan Count of
Tekeli, who protested that he had always been faithful to the Emperor, and
offered to justify himself acccording to the Forms established by the Laws of
Hungary; but who was ready to have recourse to Force for his defense, if they
pretended to have no respect to these Laws, and to judge him after the Turkish
way, as he saw they had done as to others. He did not at all believe that
Princes could by Divine Right violate all the Laws, and the People who had
chosen them for their good, and not for their destruction, should have no right
to oppose some other thing than sole Patience. He distinguished by an ill timed
notion the Subjects of Christian Princes, and engaged by their Oath and
Religion to observe certain Laws; from those who obey the Turk, and who are
under a kind of Slavery. To extirpate so gross Errors, and to put Tekeli and
others that were there out of a condition of relapsing into them again, General
Heister advanced with his Troops, with design to fight him, if he durst stand
in his way. Tekeli had caused all the Avenues of his Castle to be secured,
which being amongst Mountains, was easy to keep. This obliged Heister to
demand Cannon and Foot, with whom he lay down before the Castle of Kus^ where
Tekely was shut up. During the first days of the Siege this Prince died of
sickness, and left his Son in the bands of some of his Friends, who endeavored
to defend themselves vigorously, till after some days the Trenches being
opened, the Garrison spoke of capitulating and surrendered the place. Before
they came to that, as the Siege was not at all regular, no more than the
Fortifications of the Place; Young Tekeli, aged fifteen years, saved himself in
the Night time, with Barrigozzi, Petrozzi, and some others. They retired into
the Castle of Licowa where Heister immediately besieged them. A Bomb setting
their Powder on fire they demanded a capitulation. Count Paul Esterhasi, Genral
of the Kingdom, advanced to speak to them, but there was some treachery on one
side or other, in this capitulation, since some shot with a Musket upon
Esterhasi, and that he took Baragozzi Prisoner and sent him to Vienna. The
others saved themselves once more in the Night, and without hindrance got into
the Castle of Hust in Transylvania. That of Licowa surrendered it self the next
day, and by its surrendry le^^ the Imperialists absolute Masters of Upper
Hungary. 'Twas thus that Count Tekeli, made his first Apprentiship at his own
cost in the matter of War. All his movables were seized, and all his Plate,
and that of all the other Malcontents. They carried it to Vienna, as in
Triumph, and this was not unseasonable for paying the German Troops, one part
of what was due to them, without speaking of what might continue in the hands
of those who were commissioned to go and seize the most considerable Riches of
Hungary.

The End of the First Book.
Memoirs on the Life Of EMERIC Count of TEKELI. The Second Book.
Containing the most Remarkable Occurrences from the Year 1671. to the Year
168^.

COUNT TEKELI being arrived at Transylvania, if we may believe the common
report, immediately puts himself under the Protection of the Turks, and pays
them the Tribute which they call the Carche, after which the Emperor could not
pursue him, without running the hazard of breaking with the Part.

Abaffi received the Malcontents very kindly, because he had cause to complain
of the Imperial Troops which were upon the Frontiers of Transylvania, and often
made very great ravages upon his Lands. In the mean while he takes a journey to
the Port, which joined with some movements of the Turkish Army from Thrace,
gave ground of fear that the Grand Signior would take part with the
Malcontents, who, as was said, solicited him to send an Army into Hungary:
But soon after it was known that the Turks had no design so hastily to engage
in a War, which they could not make without great expense.

Imperial Council being delivered from this fear, and seeing that all who could
resist the design which it had to treat Hungary as a conquered Country, were
dead, or banished, or intimidated by the ill success of their Efforts, thought
that now at last the time was come to execute this project. The first
remarkable attempt, which was made for this, was the vacating the important
charge of Palatine, which investing them who had it with a very great
Authority, put them into a condition when they would to frustrate the designs
which the Ministers at Vienna had upon the Liberty of the Hungarians.

If any one were disobliged by them, he could hardly fail of taking his
revenge, at least of convicting them before Judges of the Country, of having
violated the Laws of their Country, which it was not easy to do. As this
dignity was for Life, the Death of him who was invested with it was peaceably
to be expected; or else it was to be forced from him; an expedient dangerous,
and likely to make the Kingdom revolt. Instead of the Palatine, the Emperor
resolved to send a Governor whom he might recall when he pleased, and to whom
he might give no authority but what he found fitting. he also formed a new
Sovereign Chamber, composed of eight Counselors, and of two Secretaries,
besides the President who was to be the Governor of the Realm. John Gasper
Ampringhen, Great Master of the Teutonick Order, was chosen to fill this last
place; whether it were that he was judged the most likely to acquit himself
well of this employment, or that being born in Hungary the People might not
look on him as a Forreigner. This was conceived within the Year 1672.

February, in the Year following, the Emperor Signed a Declaration, by which he
gave his Subjects of Hungary to understand 1. That he had established in their
Country a Sovereign Court which should regulate Public and Private Affairs in
the last resort. 2. That he had chosen for President of this Chamber, John
Gasper Ampringhen, Prince of the Empire and Great Master of the Teutonick
Order; and would have them render him an entire Obedience as to his own Person,
and also to the orders of the new Court.
The Great Master made his entry on the twenty second of March, and immediately
after, the Chamber applied it self to remedy the disorders of the Realm, which
were very great. Ill meaning Persons on both sides having taken occasion from
the troubles to commit all sorts of outrages. Two things gave the Chamber the
most troubles, and in the end caused new broils. The first was the Regulation
of the Troops which they were obliged to maintain in Hungary, rather against
the Malcontents, than against the Turks. They found no way more proper to
prevent the Insolence of the Soldiers, than to appoint Commissaries in every
County who should furnish the Troops with all things necessary, and keep them
within their Duty. The second was the Protestant Religion which they were
resolved to extirpate whatever it cost them. Besides that the Catholick-Zeal
was satisfied with that, the Ecclesiastics and Laics found no burden of the
Protestants goods which were Confiscated for very slight faults, that they
might be obliged to change their Religion. Many Calvinist and Lutherian
Ministers, says an honest Priest, who writes the History of these Troubles in
Italian; since they would not moderate their Seditious Ardour to Preach new
Doctrines, were sent to the Galleys of Naples, to learn Modesty and Obedience
in Chains, etc. The Rigor which they used to re-establish the Catholic
Religion and in searching out them who adhear'd to Protestancy, gave many
companions to them who had fled to Transylvania. The Protestants had in diverse
Languages published the Persecution, which they said had been in Hungary
against them of their Religion. And the Ministers whom they had sent to the
Galleys of Naples were not delivered till the Year 1676. By the mediation of
Michael de Ruyter, Admiral to the United Provinces. The Zealous Catholics who
were offended at this, have seen by the consequences, what People so treated
are capable of doing, and have repented a little too late.

Prince Ragotski died soon after his reconciliation with the Inperial Court,
and the Transylvanians pushed on by the Malcontents who were retired among
them, redemanded of the Emperor the Counties Zathmar and Zambolich. At the same
time many Hungarian Gentlemen assembled their Friends together to oppose the
Violences of the new Sovereign Chamber. They form a Body of 12000 Men, and
surprise Kalo and Little Waradin, through the default of General Spankau and some
other Imperial Commanders more fit to ruin and evil entreat the Peasants and
disarmed Burghers, than to fight an Enemy, or take good measures against them.

The Emperor was obliged to send into Hungary 10000 Men under General Kops,
whom the Malcontents failed not to resist in many Rencounters. As this was
not a War of Quarter, they defended themselves desperately, and treated the
Germans with the last Rigor, as they had been treated before. We will not
enter into the detail of what passed on both sides, this belongs rather to a
general History of Hungary, than to the Life of Teckely, who was then very
young as to the Fatigues of the War. It is enough to have described in general
the condition which Hungary was then in, ruined by its Friends as well as by
its Enemies, and brought in vain to wish under the best Catholics in Europe
the repose which the Subjects and Vassals of Infidels enjoyed in their fight.

Turks, who had been but spectators of these Troubles, or who since the Peace,
had fomented them only underhand, began more openly to side with the
Malcontents. During the whole year there were diverse Rencounters between the.
Troops of Neighboring Bassaes mingled with Hungarian Fugitives, and the
Imperial Garrisons; wherein sometimes one side had the better, sometimes the
other. It is not known whether the Imperial Ministers did not make these
Confusions last the longer with design that they might the more easily profit
themselves of the miseries of Hungary. At least they accuse Prince Lobkovits
the Emperors Chief Minister of holding Intelligence with the Malcontents, and
Count Souches was in disgrace for a like suspicion.

Imperial Court thought fit to endeavor to bring the Malcontents to their
duty by way of Treaty. Abaffi being offered for a Mediator, gave hope of
bringing the matter to a conclusion, but it was presently perceived that there
was no likelihood of pacifying Hungary so soon. In some Assemblies which were
held for this end within that Realm and Transylvania, the Malcontents
demanded a general Act of Indemnity with the re-establishment of their
Privileges, and of their Churches, and the reparation of their Losses, which
was far from casting themselves upon the Emperors Clemency, and expecting what
he would vouchsafe them of his bounty, as it had been expected from them. As
they demanded possibly too much, they were offered too little, and it was so
visible, that nothing was sought but to destroy them when they had laid down
their Arms, and were returned to their duty, that they rejected that proposal
with scorn. Nevertheless the Emperor soon after published an Amnesty for all
them who should lay down their Arms, but few persons did so, and Declarations
of this nature had been so frequently violated, when it could be with impunity,
that to the misfortune of those who used them, no body believed them but when
they were not in a condition to violate them. It was also in vain that the
Viceroy promised the Malcontents to re-establish them in the possession of
their goods, and to grant them the free exercise of their Religion, upon taking
a new Oath of Allegiance, and dismissing all their Troops. This promise could
not move any body, because the Viceroy did not speak of re-establishing also
the Privileges of the Realm, and without that no body could submit without
laying himself again at the discretion of the Imperialists; so both Parties
continued to ravage Hungary.

Soon after Abaffi openly demanded the Counties of Zathmar and Zambolich, which
he said had been yielded to him by Ragotski; and the Emperor having rejected
this demand, the Vaivode took the Field with 12000 Men, beat Spankan, and laid
Siege to Zathmar, yet he could not take this place, and all was at last reduced
to bare Incursions where the young Tekely began to make his Courage and Conduct
appear. He was greatly beloved by Abaffi, who trusted him in an infinite number
of things concerning both the Government of Transylvania and his other Designs.
Thence it was not difficult to see that unless things extremely changed their
face, he would soon be the most considerable Head of the Party. At the same
time the Garrison of Newhausel, and those of the Frontier Towns belonging to
the Turks, began to make Incursions very far into the Lands of the Emperor, and
demanded Contributions throughout the whole Neighborhood. The Imperial Council
sent to make Complaints to the Bassaes, but as it feared, lest it should
irritate them, these Complaints not being supported with any vigor, nor with
any disposition to revenge, if they should be slighted, the Turks had no regard
to them. They had not been used to show equity to them who evidenced a dread of
them, and yet less to People from whom they pretended that they had received
Injuries, as they complained that they had from the Emperor.

Count Strasoldo surprises Debrezen a Town Tributary to the Turks, and but a
few Leagues distant from Great Waradin. The Malcontents often retired thither
as to a place of security, and where they thought the Imperialists durst not
touch them. And indeed though they were not displeased at Vienna with the
Action of Straesoldo, they failed not to disavow it, through fear of entering
into a new War with the Turks, who threatened to break with them for that. The
Transylvanians being farther exasperated and the Turks always having the
disadvantage in all their Parties which they sent out to fight, they seemed
disposed to join together, and vigorously to support the Male-contentents.

To appease them on the Emperors side, Incursions upon the Lands of the Turks
were prohibited; but the last did not discontinue their Incursions, although the
Emperor had sent an Express to Constantinople, to know the intention of the
Grand Signior, who gave him no very clear answer.

The Malcontents did not act with less vigor, nor made war worse, by great
Parties which they sent on all sides, and which often beat the Germans, although
they had a considerable Army in a Body. It often not being known where they
were, or what place they came to attack, it was equally difficult to prevent
them, or to make defense against their enterprises.

Imperial Court than the precedent, although it began with the Count Baragozzies
offers to the Malcontents to forget what was past, to restore them to the
possession of their goods, to give them in every County one Calvinist and one
Lutherian Church, and to receive them into all Offices within the Realm,
without having regard to their Religon. Fifteen hundred persons accepted these
terms, but the rest would not hear speak of them; because there always was in
these offers essential defects which was remediless, which was that sufficient
assurances were not given the Malcontents, that they should not be broken.
The Emperor increases the number of his Troops, and sends several Generals
under the command of Kops: But the Malcontents succored by the
Transylvanians form a Body of more than twenty thousand men, commanded by
Vladislaus Wesselini, Son of the Deceased Palatine.

It happened also that the Poles having made a Peace with the Turks, good part
of their disbanded Troops came to join the banished Hungarians led by Count
Boham. This General at the same time gained a Signal Victory over General
Smith, whom he entirely defeated, although he was stronger than himself.

When all the Forces were joined they were in a condition to make Head against
the Imperialists and to incommode them by seizing the better part of their
Convoys. Understanding also that the Impertalists were not paid they found
means of debauching a considerable number of the Hungarians who were in the
Emperors service, by promising them more pay than they had in the Imperial
Army. Kops incensed at this desertion, and unadvisedly imagining by that means
to discourage the Hungarian Rebels, caused all the Prisoners which he had taken
in diverse Rencou^^^rs to be slain. He contented not himself (...) them
strangled, but caused (...). Wesselini did not fail to (...) ^^^ers which he
had in the same manner among whom there were several Officers of note. This
Brutal manner of making War having lasted some time, the Council at Vienna
censured Kops for beginning it, and forbad the doing so any more, for sear of
driving the Hungarians to despair, instead of making them lay down their Arms;
and of wanting Officers and Soldiers to serve in so cruel a War. These Orders
were extremely necessary for the Imperial General, who having more cruelty than
conduct, made continual Losses, and saw his Army daily diminish for want of
provisions. At that time Count Tekely came from Transylvania to the Camp of the
Malcontents at the Head of 2000 Men, and in his way took the Town of
Nagibania, abandoned by the Imperialists. But the Imperial Army having retaken
it, after his departure Wesselini retook it, and put in it a Garrison of 1500
Men, this place deserving to be taken care of by reason of the Mines of Gold
which are there.

Council at Vienna offered the Hungarians three Churches in the Upper Hungary,
and some other things, endeavoring to appease them: But these offers were
received as the former. The Turks no more regarded the Complaints made them of
their suffering the Malcontents to retire on to their Lands. The Bassaes
answered very roughly, and Hoffman the Emperors Secretary being come to
Constantinople, was not more favorably received by the Grand Vizier. In the
mean while the Malcontents supported by Abaffi, whom they had profitably
assisted against an unquiet Person called Pedipold, who endeavored to make
himself Master of Transylvania, took the Field, and instead of General Kops,
they were opposed by Count Wormb, whose disposition being more mild, was fitter
to sweeten spirits exasperated by the Cruelties of his Predecessor.

Seeing that however the Malcontents did not return to their duty, they
debated in the Assembly of States held at Bedemburg, about restoring to the
Protestants all the Churches which had been taken from them throughout Hungary.
The Catholic Hungarians believed also, as well as the Protestants, that the
change which had been made in the form of the Government, was so great an
obstacle to the tranquillity of the Kingdom, that if the Ancient Usages were
not re-established, there would never be Peace. Some Hungarian Lords went to
represent to the Emperor the result of what had been treated of among the
States, and which were reduced in substance to what I have been saying. But the
Imperial Ministers made so great difficulties upon each of the two Articles,
that it was well seen that nothing but force could oblige them to put matters
upon the same foot on which they formerly stood.

The Malcontents were not yet in a condition to force them, being divided
among themselves about a Chief Commander. The Count Wesselini, the Palatine's
Brother, who till then had had the command of the Principal Troops, which his
Nephew commanded but under him, being dead, the greater part of the
Malcontents would put Count Tekely in his place, and in the end he carried it
against the young Wesselini. He had commanded the Body of Transylvanian Troops
which Abaffi had sent the Malcontents, and besides had acquired much
reputation. As soon as he was chosen Generalissimo, he took a review of his
Troops, and found that they were 12000 Men, besides some others which Tekely
his kinsman brought out of Transylvania. He had also some Artillery, and found
himself indifferently furnished with the most necessary provisions. In this
condition he entered Upper Hungary, and drew near to Mongats, with intent to
enter into some conference with Ragotski's Widow Daughter of Count Serini. But
this was in vain, because her Mother-in-law hindered it, and sent some Troops
to beat up the Quarters of Teckely, which were entirely defeated. A Son of
Count Serini, Brother to Prince Ragotski, who commanded a Party, was made
Prisoner in this Action, and after served Teckely to settle that Commerce which
he desired. These beginnings, and a considerable succor of Tartars, which this
General received at that time, gave the Emperor fear. This Prince immediately
renewed the offers which he had made the Malcontents, and Teckely on his side
pretended to enter into a Treaty, and in the mean while pillaged some Towns
upon the Mountains, and among others Missakuesca. About the same time he
surprises a Courier, who went to the Port with Instructions for Hoffman, who
had been commanded to endeavor the re-establishment of Pedipold which he could
not effect. These Papers helped them to take better measures than they had
done, for many matters of importance, and Hoffman returning to Vienna soon
after confirmed the Imperial Court in the suspicion it had, that the Turks
sought an occasion to break with it.

The Imperial Army commanded by Count Wormb, and after his being recalled,
(which they say was for his ill Conduct) by Count Leslie, finding it self much
weaker than that of the Malcontents, contented it self to keep advantagiously
entrenched, to traverse their designs, without daring to come to a Battle, to
which Teckely endeavored to draw them. It was not only inferior in number to
the Counts, but also in no condition to do any thing vigorously, because it was
not paid, and it was difficult to make it subsist at the charge of the
Hungarians. Count Saros then came in to Teckely. Torna an head Town, having
another depending on it, also yielded to him, and several other small places
did the like. The Citadel of Torna, which a party of Germans made themselves
Masters of in the absence of Teckely, was retaken a second time, by the help of
Hungarians who had staid there, and who drove out the German Garrison. The
Imperial Army encamped under Eperies upon the River Tareza, made no movement,
and but weakly incommoded the March of the Malcontents, although they had
been reinforced with some Regiments which had much ado to join them. Tekely
profiting of this occasion, caused it to be published throughout Hungary, that
he had no design but to re-establish the Kingdom in its Ancient Privileges,
and by a Manifesto exhorted all true Hungarians to join and help him to deliver
their Country from the Miseries which it suffered by the attempts of the
Germans, who sought only to enslave them. He threatened to treat as Enemies, not
only those who favored the Foreigners, but also those who pretended to stand
neuter. These Threats joined to Truths disadvantageous to the Germans, and of
which Hungary was but too much convinced, had considerable Effect, and much
increased his Army, which was twenty thousand strong in the month of August.
Then it was that he attacqued Eperies, while Count Wormb was gone to receive
some Troops from Silesia. He carried it in three days, though it was one of the
most important places of Upper Hungary, and went on toward the end of
September, to seize all that is near Mount Crapach. He took the Town of
Rosemberg by Assault, and set fire to the Castle, where 200 Soldiers of
Strasoldo's Regiment perished. From thence he sent about 2000 Tartars, who took
and pillaged Newstadt, passed the Waag at Trentschin in spite of the
Imperialists, and made great Ravages in Moravia.

After that the Malcontents returned on the sides of Transylvania, that they
might not leave it open to the Imperialist's, Tekely staid at Nagibania and at
the Castle of Kivar, with the Infantry and Cannon, expecting some Transylvanian
Troops who were to join him. Tekely with the Hungarian Cavalry, and Boham at
the head of the Polish parted from thence to go find out the Imperiali Army,
with a design to come upon them on-awares but found that Count Losly advertised
of their march had divided his Forces into three Bodies.

One of these Bodies went a great way from the others to avoid fighting, but
Tekely made them be followed by some Squadrons who overtook them near Leutsch,
and entirely defeated them, while Boham cut in pieces the second, and himself
defeated the third, so that the whole Imperial Army was put to the rout. One
Party was saved in the Castle of Rosemberg, which had been abandoned, but they
were soon taken and put to the Sword. From thence a Detatchment was sent to
support the Tartars, who ravaged Moravia, and on the other side Colonel Josuah
a Monk, who had forsaken his Habit, and turned Protestant, enters Austria with
Troops, which he had gathered together in Hungary full of ruined Families, who
not knowing how to subsist, followed the first, who presented himself to them,
to make a little War. Although these Incursions much incommoded the Hereditary
Countries, they not retaining any place, and contenting themselves with only
pillaging, did nothing diversive, which might put the Malcontents into a
condition to be settled Masters of Hungary, or hinder the Emperor from entering
it. The Hungarians wanted the Art of fortifying Towns, and the means of
providing them with what was necessary for a long resistance, so that it was
more easy to take them, than to keep them. Nor were they more in a condition
always to keep on foot an Army equally strong, which might cover the Frontiers
of the places they conquered, and they as well wanted Discipline as Money; so
that the War was more like a tumultuous Robbing than a War managed with
prudence, or sustained by the Forces of a well-ordered State, and by a
disciplined Army. The Imperialists acted with better order, and were provided
with better means for keeping what they had, but yet they often wanted Money,
and Hungary ruined by both sides, could not longer alone make their Armies
subsist. This was the reason that matters went on very slowly, and that they
were not in the Field early enough, and late enough to oppose the Incursions of
the Malcontents.

In the mean while the Towns on the Mountains openly favored Tekely, and had
almost all been his, if he had known how to keep them. Alsol, which had
submitted to him, was no sooner abandoned, but the Imperialists put in a
Garrison which he was obliged to attacque. He carried it in few days by scaling
the Walls, and soon after Newsole, which passes for the Capital of the
Mountains, Chemnitz, Bolsenaw, and Libnia fell into his hands through the
weakness of the Imperial Garrisons which were in them. The Emperors Army
commanded by Count Wormb, not being in a condition to give Battle to Tekely,
and the progress of the Malcontents frightning the Council at Vienna, they
came again to a Treaty, which had no success. Tekely and his Party were
solicited to name what they desired of the Emperor, with promise that whatever
was equitable should be granted them. Thereupon they answered very warmly, that
they did not believe that any thing which they should demand would be refused,
and if it should be, they would give up to the Turks all the Towns which they
had taken. They would have the Emperor expel from Hungary all the Churchmen
whom they should name; that he should grant them in due form an Amnesty for all
that was passed, that he should give the Protestants the free exercise of their
Religion, that he should restore to the possession of their goods all them who
had been dispossessed, that he should permit the Diet to choose a Palatine of
their Nation, and to set on foot again the first form of Government. In fine,
that he should give the Malcontents security for the observation of the
Articles. No other answer was made by the Emperor to these Propositions, than
that they should be communicated to the Diet of Hungary, and hanging this
Treaty, so good a number of Troops was sent to Count Wormb, that he resolved to
go to attacque Tekely and Boham. He found them near Alsol, and on their side
prepared to fight. They fell to blows at break of day, and the Fight lasted
till three hours after Noon. At that time the Imperialists having received a
Reinforcement, and the Malcontents beginning to give ground, Teckely and
Boham caused a Retreat to be sounded, and retired without disorder under the
Cannon of Alsol. The Imperialists endeavored to intercept them by taking a
shorter way cross the Mountain, but that Pass was so vigorously defended by a
Regiment of Cavalry which the Malcontents had placed there, that the
Imperialists retired with much loss.

The next day Teckely having received a recruit of 1000 Men, marched again to
oppose the Imperial Army, and took the Corn almost in the view of the Town of
Bustroc, the Garrison of which had made some discharges of Cannon upon his
Avaunt Guard. After that, the season being far advanced, he made a Truce for
some months with the Imperial General, who was upon withdrawing within few
days, and putting the Army again under Count Leslie. Who came to it about the
end of November, and having had some difference with Count Woarmb, he declared
that he would not observe the Truce which that General had concluded with the
Malcontents, but the precise Orders which came to him from Vienna, obliged
him to keep it. The Imperial Court also thought it self obliged to give Teckely
leave to lodge his Troops in Upper Hungary, possibly because it was not in a
condition to hinder him, or, as others held, that it might make some
accommodation with him. Teckely, Palassi, Imbre, and Boham took their Quarters
at Debrezen, Wesselini at Nagibania, Filek and Harak. Teckely took a Journey to
Transylvania to preserve Abaffi in the good sentiments which he had toward the
Malcontents, and to come to a closer Treaty with the Port, which had given
him hopes of Succors. A little before the Princess Ragotski had endeavored to
corrupt Teckely, by offering him one of her Daughters in Marriage, and making
him other considerable promises if he would quit the party of the
Malcontents. He did not reject these Proposals, which being discovered to
some persons, he became suspected by the other Leaders. The very Troops which
he commanded refused to obey him any longer, and put themselves under
Wesselini, who quartered them in the County of Zathmar and its Neighborhood.

Emperor who had been engaged in a War with France ever since the year 1673.
and obliged to employ good part of his Troops for the defense of the Empire,
being near concluding a Peace with France, found himself in a condition to
speak more haughtily to the Malcontents; believing that he had put a division
among the Leaders, by rendering Teckely suspected, and being able to dispose of
a greater number of Troops, he demanded of the Malcontents, that before
entering into a Treaty they would send home all the Auxiliary Forces which they
had, and promised to have regard to their Complaints, but they took care not to
fall into so gross a snare. It soon after appeared that he would not grant them
any thing, for that he ever pretended to govern the Kingdom by a Viceroy, and
not to give the Protestants any Churches but in Villages.

The Truce being ended there was no speaking of either side of renewing it, and
action began in the middle of Winter. Tekeli who had spoken of an accommodation
and who would have his Estate restored, found himself but abused in these
hopes. These very goods which were worth more than two Millions, being in the
hands of some persons who were in credit at the Court of Vienna hindered him
from forsaking the party in which he had been engaged. This is not the first
time that they have rendered those suspected, whom they would have destroyed, by
pretending that they would restore what they had taken away. They had no design
but to ruin for ever the Nobility of Hungary, who were concerned in the
Revolt, and by no means to let them have wherewith to live in Peace. Tekeli did
not fail to be revenged of this policy, and the Malcontents understanding how
he was used confided in him more than ever. He seized on Chemnitz a Town on the
Mountains which the Malcontents had had, and which they knew not how to keep:
and made Incursions which much incommoded the Imperialists. The same was done
on all sides, and the Army of the Malcontents although deprived of the Polish
succors was Master of the Field, by reason of the sickness of Count Lesly and
the weakness of the Imperial Army. The Plague which was in Hungary and in
Austria abated the Efforts of both parties, and at the same time broke off some
Treaties which had been begun; where the Emperor appeared disposed at last to
yield to the Malcontents the greatest part of their demands. This misfortune
was herein advantageous; that the Imperialists were in no condition to profit
of their divisions. Wesselini the Palatines Son had commanded the Army while
Tekeli had been in Transylvania, and pretended to command it till the end of
the Campaign after the arrival of the other, who came at the beginning of
October, with a recruit of four thousand men. Tekeli maintained that having
been chosen Chief in his absence which had been for the good of the Party, he
ought not to deprive him of the command. Wesfelini said that he being in
possession no body ought to dispute the rank which he held. This difference so
heated their Spirits, that the Army being divided between them came to blows;
Tekeli had the advantage, and having taken his Competitor Prisoner, contented
himself to send him to Clausembourg in Transylvania. The Campaign ended without
any thing considerable done, only that they agreed on a suspension of Arms
which was to continue till the end of April, in the ensuing Year.

Count Lesly being troubled with the Gout, went to Prague, where the Emperor
was by reason of the Plague which ravaged Austria. The frequent illness of the
General did not permit him to command the Army any longer, Count Caprara was
sent in his place* He arrived at the very time of great disorders in the Army
which not being paid was daily diminished by desertions. Two Regiments
mutinied, and since there was nothing but words to give them instead of money
they went over to the Enemy, which occasioned money to be speedily sent, lest
the rest of the Army should follow their example. The Male contents might have
profited themselves of this conjuncture if they had had a little more money, and
if they had been as able in matters of State as they were for making Incursions.

Teckely was accused of having intended quite another thing than the
advancement of the common good of this Party. It was said that heaskt leave of
the Emperor to marry the Widow of Prince Ragotski, and that he offered to turn
Catholic, and to enter into the Emperors Party if he would restore him his
Estate. The Emperor who feared that he should make him too powerful by this
Marriage, especially if at the same time he should restore him his Estate in
the same condition it had been in before the Troubles; or else being resolved
never to restore his Estate to him; haughtily rejected his proposals.
Thereupon, however it had been at other times, in the Diet which was held at
Tirnaw, to break all measures which might be taken to bring in the generality
of the Male contents, incapable of distinguishing the snares laid for them from
an honest Treaty or Stratagem of War, Teckely declared that he would make no
Treaty without leave of the Port. This put the Emperor into a fright, wherefore
he sent to Constantinople to know whether the Turks were so engaged with the
Malcontents as these would have it believed. In the mean while the Truce
ends, and notwithstanding the apparent Negotiations for an Accommodation,
Hostilities began again by diverse Incursions, where the Malcontents, much
better Party. Men than the Imperialists, carried several advantages over them.

Teckely soon after invested Zathmar, but after having blocked it up for some
time, he was obliged to leave it, and to divide his Army into three Bodies, one
of which he commanded, and the other two had for Heads Petrozzi and Palassi
Imbre. They endeavored to enter upon the Emperors Territories by different
ways, and were repulsed in some Rencounters, as they had the better in others,
without coming to any decision. It is said, that in some Standards of the
Malcontents, which the Imperialists gained, Comes Tekeli qui pro Deo and
Patria pugnat.
there were these words, Count Tekeli, who fights for God and his Country.

In the Month of September this Count entered into Kersmark, a Town dependant
upon his Family, and obliged the Inhabitants to take an Oath of Fidelity to
him. He also took Leitschaw, which the Imperialists in vain endeavored to
relieve; the Detachement which they had sent, being beaten. After that, he put
his Troops into Winter Quarters; and the Imperialists did the same. The
Negotiations which had been begun, and so often broken off, were again set on
foot, but the Plague which spread very much in Hungary, interrupted the
Progress, and suffered not the Diet to be assembled, in which alone an
Accommodation could be treated of with any Effect. This obliged them to make a
Truce for some Months, which however tended to no purpose.

Protestants demanded, that their Churches should be re-established, and that
their Schools should be restored, with all their Foundations, in the Condition
in which they had been left. The Wishes of all the Hungarian Nation, concurred
for having a Palatine as before, and who was of their Nation. It demanded also,
as it had always done, that the German Garrisons should be withdrawn, or that
they might have Hungarian Chiefs given them, who might hinder those Disorders
which they daily committed with Impunity. The Malcontents sent to the Emperor
some Deputies, who were to confer with his Ministers at Presburgh, while they
expected the Assembly of the Diet at Pedemburg, which was to be on the Fourth
of February. In the mean while, there was an attempt to seize Tekeli at a
Country House where he was with a small Company, a long time before the Truce
expired. But he being advertised of it, went to expect them who had laid this
Design, in a place through which they were to pass, and cut them in pieces.
Although he pretended after that Accident to be always disposed for an
Accommodation, it was too easy for him to see that they only sought to
surprise him, for him to give Credit to the Proposals which were made him. The
Emperor, who would have his Son a recognized King of Hungary, to facilitate
this Design, began in appearance much to abate of his rigor, and to yield to
the greatest part of the Articles, but at the same time he would have the bare
Declaration that he would place the Crown of Hungary on his Son to be
sufficient, without the Interposition of the States. It was replied, That the
Kingdom having ever to that time been Elective, it was fit that the Aroh-Duke
should go through the ancient Formalities, and this was likely to break off all
the Negotiations. The Diet being put off to the Month of April, the Emperor
advanced as far as Neustad, that he might be the nearer, and might more readily
end the differences which might arise. The Malcontents had notice to send
their Deputies, but they made Difficulties of coming presently, because the
Emperor had brought some Regiments with him for the Security of his Person. At
the same time, Tekeli received a Chiaous from the Grand Seignior; by whom it
was said, That the Port assured him of its Protection, provided he would not
enter into any Accommodation. It was said also, That he showed one of the
Emperor's Agents a Letter, wherein Abaffi by Order of the Port, promised him
very great Advantages, if he would continue the War; and that the Count told
the Agent, that not being able to agree with the Emperor, without running the
risque of losing the Lands which he had in Transylvania if he should come to a
Conclusion, in that case it would be but just that they should make up his
loss. This the Emperor's Agent thought a notable difficulty, and his Estate
being considerable, there was no probability that there was any intention of
rendering Tekeli the Value of it. On the other side, the Clergy of Hungary,
being appris'd that the Emperor was disposed to restore to the Protestants
their Churches and Schools, sent Deputies to him, to represent what Injury he
would do the Catholic Religion, if he should thus serve it. As some thought,
these Remonstrances hindered the Emperor from Executing the Design which he had
formed in the end, to grant the Protestants a Demand they had so long since
made: But according to others, the appearance of a disposition to grant them
being but a Feint, the Emperor himself caused this Deputation from the Clergy
of Hungary, to lay upon them the hatred which a too obstinate refusal, might
draw upon the Court at Vienna; and that the Protestants might believe, that of
it self it was not ill-dispos'd toward them, since the Emperor did nothing of
this, without first communicating it to his Confessor, Father Emerics, soon
after Archbishop of Vienna; many people found it difficult to believe that this
new Dignity had made him give his consent to the treating the Protestants
better.

The Diet being opened, the Emperor came to Bedembourg; and at last, after many
difficulties, they were to come to the Election of a Palatine, and to restore
the Government to its ancient Form. The Great Master of the Teutonick Order,
who had been Viceroy, had done nothing but exasperated their Spirits, and
spoiled all the Affairs; being neither a Man of the Cabinet, nor of the War.
The Diet named some Lords and presented them to the Emperor, who chose Count
Paul Esterhasi; after which, he returned to Newstadt, when the new Palatine had
taken the Oath of Allegiance to him.

The next day a Courier brought a Letter signed by Tekeli and Six of the most
considerable of the Malcontents; in which they declared, That they were ready
to accept the Amnesty, Provided some Articles might be granted them; the
greatest part of which were the same which they had demanded before. There was
One new one which was the Cause that this Letter had no Effect, which is, that
they demanded a Sum of Money to be Paid the Turks which they had promised. This
Letter being sent the Emperor, he wholly rejected the last Article, and from
that time Hostilities began again in the usual manner by Incursions.
Nevertheless, the Diet proposed to Tekeli a countinuance of the Suspension of
Arms, which he promised to observe, provided, that Count Caprara observed it on
his side, and that care were taken as soon as possibly to cover the Protestants
from the vexatious Wars they had been exposed to that time, by giving them the
free exercise of their Religion. The Diet sent Deputies to the Emperor, to
represent to him the Necessity he was under to yield this Article; and farther,
to pray him to turn out of Employment all them who had labored to have the
Form of the Government of Hungary changed, and caused the Troubles by violating
the Laws of the Realm. As these had done nothing but by Order of the Court at
Vienna, and with its Approbation, this Demand appeared too hardy: The Emperor
took time to answer it, nor would then consent to grant freedom of Religion,
although he before seemed sufficiently inclined to satisfy the Protestants
therein.

It is said, that the Grand Seignior being advertised of the disposition Tekeli
was in to agree with the Emperor, sent him a Bassa, who promised him the
Principality of Transylvania after the Death of Abaffi, and other Advantages to
the Malcontents, if they would put what they held in Hungary, and what they
should take, under the Protection of the Port; and that they consented and
promised to Pay a Tribute of Eighty thousand Crowns, provided it assisted them
with a Speedy and Powerful Supply

The Diet, who feared as much as the Emperor, lest the Turks who had newly made
a Truce for Twenty Years with the Moscovites, should enter Hungary with all
their Forces; hastened to conclude something which might satisfy the
Malcontents.

Endeavors at the same time were used to draw Tekeli to come to the Diet, by
offering him the Sons of the Palatine as Hostages; but he absolutely refused to
go, fearing Treachery. In fine it was concluded, with the consent of the
Emperor, that the Protestants should have those Churches restored which they
had built at their own Charges, but not the Churches which they had taken from
the Catholics; with liberty to build Three more new ones, and to have
Preaching as before. They also engaged to Pay once for all a certain Sum to the
Turks, in lieu of a yearly Tribute, upon condition that they lengthned out the
Truce of the Year 1664. for Twenty Years. In July, these Conclusions were
communicated to Tekely, who kept firm to what he had demanded. He would have
all places whatever where the Protestants had had Preachings, to be absolutely
restored; and that the promised Tribute should be Paid which the Malcontents
could not deny, because the Turks had their Wives and Children in Hostage.
Although this was no bad Reason, there was another not mentioned, which was yet
more forcible. The Inconvenience of breaking Faith.
Which is that after what had passed, it was no more possible for the
Malcontents to trust to any Treaty, being strongly persuaded that the
destroying them would never be scrupled when it could be done with security.
Where Sovereign Princes think they have right to violate all sorts of Treaties
with their Subjects, nothing but a Foreign Protection, and that interested in
their Preservation, can assure those who have once taken Arms against them.
Therefore the Malcontents could not hope to be restored to their Country
under the Government of the House of Austria, but by rendering the Kingdom of
Hungary Tributary to the Turks, who would find themselves engaged to support
those who had rendered them this important Service.

And from that time, the Turks began to make great Preparations, and the report
ran, that they would go Succor Tekeli with 20000 Men, who joined to the
Hungarians and Transylvanians, might put them into a condition to Conquer all
Hungary. This obliged Count Caprara to draw nearer to Tekeli, to observe his
March, and hinder him from joining the Turks. This report appeared false, at
least for that Year, and all was reduced to Incursions and Pillages, like to
those of former Years. Tekeli took Besermin, Little Waradin and Kalo; but
rather to Sack, than keep them.

Soon after Abaffi, who always had Pretensions upon the County of Zathmar,
joined Tekeli with an Army of Transylvanians, and with him undertook the Siege
of Zathmar. Their Army being 30000 strong, Count Caprara was in no Condition to
attack them with his much Inferior in Number. All that he could do was to seize
the Passes, to hinder the Enemies from proceeding to attack the Towns on the
Mountains, or to cast themselves on any other side upon the Emperor's Lands.
However Tekeli nimbly passed the Tibisque with a Detachment of 5000 Men, while
Abaffi continued the Siege. With this Body Tekeli exacted very great
Contributions from diverse places, for permitting the Hungarians to gather their
Vintages. Abaffi in a little time makes himself Master of the Town; but having
found more resistance from the Citadel than he expected, he at last raised the
Siege, and contented himself with Pillaging several Villages about Samos; some
believed that he had raised this Siege, because the Grand Seignior had sent him
word that he intended that place as soon as they were Masters of it should be
put into the hand of a Bassa who assisted Abaffi. Others said, that it
proceeded from a misunderstanding between the Transylvanians and Hungarians;
and that this was the cause of raising the Siege. The worst which happened to
them was, that some German Troops coming up to Abaffi's Army, which expected no
such thing, put it into disorder, and took all their Booty. After which, they
pursued it even into Transylvania, and made more waste than that had done in
Hungary.

The Campaign ended as the precedeing Years, with a Suspension of Arms for some
Months, and Tekeli was permitted to put his Troops into Winter Quarters within
Four Counties on the other side of the Tibisque At last the Diet settled the
Article concerning Religion, which contained these following Heads:

1. That the Free-Towns and all Estates depending immediately on the Crown,
should enjoy Liberty of Conscience. 2. That they should have a Free Exercise of
their Religion, yet without injuring the Rights of particular Lords. 3. That
the Hungarian Soldiers, which should be in Garrison upon the Frontiers, should
enjoy the same Liberty. 4. That the Priests and Ministers should keep
Possessions of the places of which they were seized without the one sorts
driving out the other. 5. That it shall be permitted the Lutherans and
Calvinists to build two Churches; one for one Communion, and the other for the
other, in the Counties which had none. 6. Lords and Gentlemen should be
permitted to build Chapels in their Castles, and to have the Exercise of their
Religion. 7. That the Catholics should have the free Exercise of their
Religion throughout the Realm. 8. That the Lutherans of Presbourg should be
permitted to build a Church in a place which should be appointed them. 9. That
the Differences which might arise concerning Religion, should be judged by the
King. 10. That it should be forbidden upon pain of the King's displeasure to
all Persons whatsoever, to speak ill of the Religions tolerated, and to injure
those who professed them.
The Protestants were not entirely satisfied with that Article, but it must
pass for that time; and the Emperor to sweeten the People, restored the
Confiscated Goods which had not been disposed of to those who could pretend to
them, by the Death or Absence of the Possessors. He also gave Gratifications to
diverse Hungarian Lords, and outed from their Charges some Persons who were not
acceptable to the Hungarian Nation. All this was made known to Tekeli, who
would abate nothing of what he had demanded manifestly.

Turks were disposed for great Enterprise, and there was no doubt but it was
for Hungary; though they did not yet say so. The Emperor resolved to send Count
Albert Caprara the General's Brother to Constantinople, to endeavor to divert
this Tempest, by offering the Port the Counties of Zathmar and Ziptpow. He
departed the 7th of February, and arrived at Constantinople the 11th of April;
But he might as he went perceive that his Journey would be to no purpose; for
beyond Belgrade he met an Agent for Tekeli, who told some of the Envoy's
Followers, that they went to Constantinople too late; and that his Master had
already taken all his Measures. In truth, all the Negotiations of Count Caprara
came to nothing; and some have said, that the Port had declared before, that it
intended to put Hungary upon the same foot with Transylvania, and to make a
Vaivode of Count Teckely, who should pay a yearly Tribute.

In the mean while the Truce being ready to expire, it was agreed on both sides
that it should be prolonged till the first of July, yet they ceased not to make
incursions on both sides. And the Malcontents seized the Corn which the
Emperor had caused to be bought in Poland for the subsistence of the Army in
Hungary. The Emperor having received advice from Constantinople that the Turks
gathered Troops together from all parts of their Empire, and that they were
well disposed in favor of Tekeli, who might be of great use to them for the
conquest of Hungary; resolved at last to offer him all his Estate, and to
suffer him to marry the Widow of Prince Ragotski: But Tekely made a mock at
this forced offer, believing himself in a condition to do what he desired in a
manner much more sure by the help of the Turks.

He soon after came to Buda with a Body of Cavalry of three thousand men, and
had a conferrence with the Bassa who received him magnificently, by the Grand
Signiors order. They took measures together for the Campaign which was upon the
beginning, and effects of their interview were soon seen. But before the
opening of the Campaign, he understood that the Princess Ragotski whom he had
long sought was ready to receive him at Mongats, and to marry him when he
would. Besides she could entirely dispose of that place, and of her own Person,
because her Mother-in Law being dead she remained Guardian to a Daughter which
she had by Prince Ragotski. It was said that this Lady could never pardon the
Emperor the death of her Father and Mother, and that this reason was none of
the least which engaged her to give her hand to a Lord that appeared an
irreconcilable enemy to the Court at Vienna. The marriage being celebrated
Tekely put Garrisons into all places which depended on the house of Ragotski.
New Efforts were made to gain him: They feigned as if at the very first they
had consented to his marriage, and sent him his Brother-in-Law the Young Count
Serini whom they had permitted to take the Title of his House, and to whom they
made great promises if he could bring Tekeli to some accommodation. But Count
Serini who had no more forgotten the death of his Father and Mother let himself
be gained and promised his Brother-in-Law to favor him in all he could.

As soon as the Truce was expired a Body of Tartars whom the Turks had caused
to come, made Incursion as far as Trenschin, and carried away a great number of
People, which they carried into the Lands of the Turks to sell. Tekeli on his
side with an Army made up of Malcontents and Turks feigned as if he would
march to Cassovie, but coming on a sudden before: Zathmar he surprised the
Citadel, and turned out the Garrison, which consisted of but fourscore men.
From thence having begun to Cannonade the Town he obliged it to surrender in
few days. Count Strasoldo with all possible speed drew together some Troops to
relieve it as soon he had advice that the Citadel had been surprised, but he
could not come in time. The Court at Vienna affrighted at the loss of a place
which had more than once resisted Armies of the Transylvanians and
Malcontents, sent new Troops into Hungary with Ammunition and Provisions, and
Count Staremberg, to take the command of the whole Army instead of Caprara who
was indisposed. Zathmar fell again the same year into the hands of the
Imperialists, through the neglect of the Malcontents Tekeli marched also to
Cassovie, which he thought to surprise through an intelligence which he had
within the Castle. But this blow failing, because he with whom he had the
intelligence, was discovered, he resolved to attacque the place in form, and
presently invested it with 12000 Men, who were soon reinforced with a supply,
which made his Army more than twice as strong. He took it the 14th of August,
after the Trenches had been opened three days, and constrained the Garrison,
which at first had answered fiercely enough, to surrender at discretion.
Teckely gave it liberty to retire without Arms wither it would. About 400 chose
to go out, the rest put themselves under the service of the Count, but a Mine
having sprung after that, and killed some of Teckeley's Soldiers, of which no
notice had been given by Colonel Lamb, who commanded in the place, the 400 who
would have gone out, were put to the Sword, and the Governor was detained
Prisoner. Teckely for fifty thousand Crowns preserved the Town from being
pillaged.

After having put in a Garrison, the Malcontents joined with a considerable
Body of Turkish Troops commanded by the Bassa of Buda, marched together to
Eperies, which yielded without resistance, and was soon after demolished that
it might not be garrisoned. This Army takes also Leutch, the Fort of Zipt and
Zendre, and enters into the County of Sapuse, where it pillages and burns some
other places. Soon after it divides, and Teckely, though sick with a Tertian
Ague, goes to ravage Silesia while the Turks take Tokai. Although the Turks made
open War with the Emperor under pretense that the Port had not declared, and
had not sent all their Forces into Hungary, the neighboring Bassaes, to whom
complaint was made of the Infractions, maintain stoutly that they had not in
the least broken the Truce in pursuing, as they said, some Fugitives who daily
pillaged their Lands, and in destroying the places to which they retired. At
the same time the Bassa of Waradin takes Filek, which surrenders on the 16th of
September, after three assaults. The Garrison which was made up of Hungarians
and Germans, are all made Prisoners, unless they that would take part with the
Turks; which the greatest part of the Hungarians did, but the Germans who had
not consented to the surrender of the place, remained Prisoners. In the mean
while Teckely bought the Governor in paying his Ransom. The news of the Siege
of Filek being carried to the Imperial Commanders, Count Strasoldo marched on
one side with 7000 Men, of which 3000 were Horse, and 4000 Foot; Count Caprara
on another side with 6000 Men, and the Palatine Esterhasi with a Body of
Hungarian Militia; but being come too late, they durst not attacque the Turks,
though inferior in number. In the mean while Teckely made himself Master of
diverse places among the Mountains. These so nimble successes caused the
Imperial Court to suspect that the Commanders held correspondence with the
Malcontents. and Lamb was arrested, being accused of having ill defended
Cassovie, and Strasoldo, for making a false report of the condition in which he
had found the Towns in Hungary. This is the custom of Pritces whose Arms are
unfortunate for want of their making the preparations necessary to carry on the
War, to accuse the Commanders of neglect of their duty, or else of Treachery.
Lamb died in Prison before he had time to justify himself, but Strasoldo
easily made it appear that the account which he had given of the Towns of
Hungary was very true, but that they had not sent either the Troops or
Provisions which he had judged necessary to keep them, though he had made many
instances to have them. Then it was that the Grand Signior thought it time to
recompense Teckely for the services he had daily rendered the Port, by declaring
him Prince of Upper Hungary. To that end he sent him a Vest, a Cymeter and a
Standard, according to the custom of the Port, with the Grand Signiors Patent.
From that time Teckely coined Money which was stamped on one side with these
words, Partium Regni.
Emeric Earl Teckely Prince and Lord of the Confederates of the Kingdom of
Hungary, and this on the reverse; For God, his Country, and Liberty.

About that time the Campaign ended, excepting some few Incursions by the
Malcontents. Soon after a suspension of Arms was agreed on, and during that
time Teckely offered the Emperor the Towns of the Mountains, if he would pay
him a certain sum monthly, and at the same time threatened to burn them all if
this offer were not accepted. The Emperor answered him, that to treat with his
Sovereign he ought before all things to lay down his Arms; a condition too hard
for the Head of a Party who had all sorts of reasons not in the least to trust
them against whom he had made War. Besides, Teckely, who knew the design of the
Turks, which was manifest soon after, made these offers only to amuse the
Council at Vienna, and to make it believe that he would not make War otherwise
than he had done the former years; that is to say, that he would abandon what
he had taken, without putting himself to pain in keeping when an Army should
appear. Therefore he was very little astonished at the haughty answer which had
been made him, having on the other side reason to rejoice that the Emperor
seemed to fall into the snare.

But soon after it was understood at the Court of Vienna, that the Grand
Signior came to Adrianople, and that the Grand Vizier was upon coming to
Belgrade, which made the Emperor send Envoys to demand Assistance of the
Princes of the Empire, and to make an Alliance with Poland. Care was taken at
the same time to exaggerate among the Hungarians who had submitted to the
Emperor the perfidy and impiety of the Malcontents, who would draw upon
Christendom all the Forces of the Ottoman Empire. They on their side accused
the Imperial Council of an inexcusable obstinacy, since it would never do them
justice, when it well knew that they would in the end be obliged to go ask it
at Constantinople, and that the Turks once moved would not content themselves
to do what was desired of them, but would pretend to be recompensed with new
Conquests. In the mean while they made powerful preparations in Europe and in
Asia, and all the World presaged that the following year they would enter into
a cruel War. Teckely continued a long while sick of a Tertian Ague at Mongats,
where he had diverse Conferences with one sent Express from the Emperor to
endeavor to gain him, but as he had no greater security given him of the
Execution of the Promises made him than before, and nothing else was demanded
of him but to break entirely with the Port to destroy him in the end the more
easily, nothing could be advanced on that side.

Turks and the Imperialists marched their Troops toward their Frontiers as
speedily as was possible, but as on one side one saw the whole Ottoman Empire
in motion, and that the German Princes were not yet resolved upon the Succors
which they should send into Hungary, there was reason to fear, not only for the
rest of the Realm, but also for the Hereditary Provinces. The Emperors Treasury
which was not less drained in Peace than in War, was less than ever in a
condition to make an extraordinary Effort, and the Subjects of the House of
Austria, who for a long time had contributed more than they could afford in
hope of seeing the exactions lessened, would rather have furnished Men than
Money. Besides, there was not seen in the preparations either the order or
activity which had been necessary by reason of the multitude of Commissaries
equal in Authority, and of their desire to gain at the expense of their Master,
to which desire it was said they were Subjects, because they hoped for no other
recompense.

In the month of January Teckely opened a Diet which he had summoned to
Cassovia about the end of the preceding year. There came the Deputies not only
of the Towns of Hungary, which had submitted to him, but also of the
Neighboring Counties which he threatened to pillage if they did not send. The
Emperor himself sent Hoffman, Auditor of the Counsel of War, if it were
possible to discover and break the designs of the Malcontents. Teckely said
in the Assembly, that there was no means to preserve any Liberty to Hungary,
but to stick to the Interest of the Turks, who would reduce it to the same foot
with Transylvania. He represented their Forces, and the design they had to
carry on their Conquests so far, that Upper Hungary should be shut up between
their Lands and Poland, so that it was time to declare for them, that by that
means they might be the better used; that for himself he had done what he could
to retard their Enterprise, but that he could not possibly. Nevertheless there
were none but Malcontents who concluded openly to embrace the Party of the
Port, others demanded time to consider, and failed not to advertise the Emperor
of what passed. His Envoy also returned without doing any thing, and it was in
vain that it was proposed at Vienna to a man whom Teckely had sent to give his
Master the Sovereignty of all the Lands which he had possessed in Upper Hungary
and some others. This man could not conclude on so great an affair, and the
Turks were advanced too far to be likely to consent to an accommodation of this
nature. In the mean while Teckely, to show that it was not through a spirit of
revenge that he was engaged in the War, sent home without Ransom a considerable
number of German Prisoners which he had taken the last Campaign. At the same
time he guarded all the Passes of the Upper Hungary, to hinder the Imperialists
from furnishing the places they yet had with Victuals and Ammunition.

On the other side the Grand Signior having come to Adrianople, about the end
of the foregoing year, the Standard of the Horses Tail was set up from the
second of January, and the Army began to draw to the side of Belgrade, where
its Rendezvous was. The ways from Adrianople to that place were seen covered
with Troops which marched day and night. They who saw this March assure us,
that to lose no time, they caused a quantity of necessary provisions to march
by night by the light of an infinite number of large Lanthorns of white Linen
placed at convenient distances, and tied to the tops of Pikes. Although great
preparations were opportunely made, both the Army and the Places through which it
passed suffered much from the Season. The Peasants were constrained to furnish
what they had of Forage and Victuals, if it could be found in their houses, and
if there was no body in them they were burnt. The Peasants losing less by these
firings than if they had staid in their houses, abandoned a great many Villages
to retire with what they could carry to the Woods and Mountains. Although what
was possible was done in Austria, to put it into a Condition to resist the
Turks, the Finances were either so ill administered or so wasted, that the
Soldiers not being paid, deserted in great numbers, and often took part with
the Army of the Malcontents. One party was placed in the Isle of Schut, and
the Inhabitants were so ill treated, that they were obliged to abandon their
Houses, and to retire where they could within the Neighborhood. These
disorders so incensed those very Hungarians who had kept within obedience, that
if they had served themselves of this occasion with readiness and vigor,
possibly they might have made all Hungary rebel. But in the course of these
Wars, it has been a Thousand times observed, that neither the Imperialists have
known how to Profit of the Faults of the Malcontents, nor the Malcontents of
those of the Imperialists. More Order, a little more Discipline, and a little
Skill in the Art Military, might have mutually served and hurt both sides: and
if the one did not profit by the Advantages which they gained from time to
time, the others had no better Conduct when they had the better.

In the Month of February, the Turks had a design upon the Isle of Schut,
whether they hoped to go over the Ice; but there being a Thaw the Enterprise
failed and some Soldiers were drowned. Tekeli endeavored also in vain some
Weeks after to surprise Tirnaw, that he might hinder the Communication of
Leopolstadt, with Trentshin. The Count Summoned another Diet to Casseire, and
threatened as he had before, to Pillage those Hungarians who would not be there.
He did not fail to execute his Menaces against them who refused to meet him,
although the Emperor had forbidden them. While he was employed in these
Military Executions, he received the News of having a Daughter born at Mongats,
and he prayed the Vaivode of Transylvania to be Godfather; who sent a Gentleman
of the best Quality to stand for him.

At the beginning of May, the Grand Vizier arrived at Belgrade; and soon after
about the same time, the Emperor had a Review of his Army near Presburg. It
consisted of near 40000 Men, of which more than 12000 were Cavalry. But as he
came not to Command, he soon after returned to Vienna, and left the Command to
the Duke of Lorrain. That Prince after having long weighed whether he should
attack Gran or Newhausel, determined upon the last, and went to form the Siege
at the beginning of June, when the Ottoman Army marched back again. Upon the
advice which he had, he drew into the Isle of Schut, to observe the Enemy from
thence with greater Security, and to be in a condition to act on either side
the Danube, as should seem fitting. He went not far from thence, because they
could not yet judge with certainty of the design of the Turks.

After having passed the Save, they encamped near Esseck, and there it was that
Tekeli came up to the Vizier, having crossed the Danube at Valkowar. There were
sent to meet him 3 Leagues off before his coming up, the Chiaous Bassa,
accompanied with the Spahilar Aga, and diverse other Aga's, to whom Mauro
Cordato the Grand Seignior's Chief Interpreter served for Trucheman. Sixscore
of the Viziers Dellies came to offer him their Services, and told him, That
they came to obey his Orders. They put themselves at the Head the rest of the
March toward the Camp of the Turks* After them marched 150 Hussars well
mounted, with Trumpets and Kettle-Drums. One of them carried a Standard of a
Blew Color, where one might see in Gold an Arm with a naked Sword in the hand,
and the Name of Tekeli about it. There was also a Red Standard with his Arms,
and some others with Six led Horses. Fifty Hungarian Gentlemen, Protestants and
Catholics; and among others Count Humanai followed. One might see after that a
Cornet who was followed with diverse Hungarians mingled among Turks. Seven other
Saddle-Horses were led by Grooms clothed in the Hungarian fashion. One might
see after them Tekeli himself upon an Horse proudly harnass'd, which the Vizier
had sent him. There were about six Persons with Tigers Skins upon their Backs,
clothed in the Hungarian fashion, with a gray Cloth lined with white Wolves
Skin, with edges of Silver upon the Hems, and long white Feathers in their
Caps. There was also another Coach and two Calashes followed, with a Green
Standard at the Head of a Company of Heydukes well appointed and armed. At last
came a Troop of Cavaliers, who with the former made the number of 400. In this
order Tekeli arrived at the Tent of the Vizier, who treated him and all his
Followers with Sweetmeats. Caftans.


The Vizier also presented him with a Vest lined with Ermine, and covered with
a Stuff with small Flowers of Silver upon a red Ground; after which, he was
Conducted to a Tent which had been prepared for him, and which was encompassed
with diverse others for the Nobility which he had with him. Tekeli had this
Reception in the sight of the Emperor's Envoy, that he might see the esteem
which they had at the Port for this Head of the Malcontents.

Tekeli had several Conferences with the Grand Vizier upon the Designs which
they might form in concert, and upon those which each might execute by himself;
after which he returned for Cassovia. As soon as he was arrived, he published a
Manifesto, by which he exhorted all the Hungarians who had any love for their
Country to range themselves under his Standards, and assured them, if they
did, of the Protection of the Grand Seignior, who had obliged himself to
maintain them in their Estates, their Religion, and their Privileges. On the
other side, he threatened those who should obstinately adhere to the Emperor to
Pillage their Lands, and give them no Quarter. As soon as this Manifesto came
into Lower Hungary, Papa, Thata, Westprin and Lewentz received those that
Tekeli sent, these Towns being too much exposed to the Turks, whose Army was
too near for them to take long time to consider what they had to do. The
Emperor fearing lest all the Towns which he had in Hungary should do the like,
and turn out his Garrisons, gave Orders to the Governors to send out all the
Ammunition, and to abandon them, that they might render themselves at the Camp,
which General Schultz had formed near the Waag. This Order was executed with
much precipitation, and the Ecclesiastic Catholics withdrew at the same time,
lest the Protestants should revenge themselves upon them, for the ills they had
suffered at their solicitation. At the same time almost all the abandoned
places received Tekeli, and if he, or the Turks had been content with that
Advantage that Campaign, and had only applied themselves to fortify the places
as they might have been, and once for all to make themselves Masters of the
Passes, possibly they might to this day have possessed all Hungary. But we have
often already remarked, that the Malcontents were fit only to make Incursions.

In the mean while, the Turkish Army, as some said 200000 strong, and according
to others 120000 advanced toward Austria, without staying to attack either
Raab or Comorra, as it was thought it would have done. So that the Duke of
Lorrain, who had weakened his Army, that he might leave in those places
Garrisons able to employ the Turks, at least some time, took care for no more
than to place himself in some advantageous Post, to observe the Enemy. Forty
thousand Men which he had, were not able to dispute the Field with so numerous
an Army as that of the Turks. Therefore he posted himself about the end of
June, between Rabuits and Raab, and there expected the Enemies Army. On the
First of July, it appeared on the other side of Raab, and the Imperialists,
that they might dispute the Pass, raised Batteries upon the River, which in
some places incommoded the Turks. But they at the same time raised others, and
detached a considerable Body of Cavalry to go search an other Ford which was
higher, and which Count Budiani defended with some Hungarians. Some
Malcontents who led the Turkish Cavalry, no sooner appeared to Budiani, but he
turned to their side, and suffered the Enemies Troops to pass. They marchd
directly to Rabuits, which they went through without opposition, and instead of
applying themselves to enclose the Duke of Lorrain, or to attack him on one
side, while the Body of the Army came upon him on the other; they employed
themselves in Pillaging and making Slaves. The Passage over the River being
thus gained, the Duke of Lorrain caused the Infantry in the Isle of Schut to
march, and kept the Cavalry with him, to observe the Enemy. A few days after,
there was a Skirmish near Petronel, between that Cavalry and the Enemie's;
which at first was without any great Advantage on either side; although the
Imperial Cavalry soon gave ground. In the mean while, since there was no
probability of stopping the march of the Enemies, and that it was seen they
intended for Vienna; the Duke of Lorrain himself gave Order to Pillage all
about, that the Turks might not find wherewith to subsist, and this Order was
punctually executed, the German Troops being excellent at making waste in a
Country belonging to Friends as well as Enemies. The Emperor who staid at
Vienna till then, took no longer time to consider on which side the Danube he
should retire, and a few days after he passed over the Bridges of Vienna to get
to Lintz by great Journeys, for fear of being Surrounded by the Tartars, who
ran on all parts. We are assured that there went out of Vienna more than 60000
Souls, who imitated the Prudence of the Court, and who did not think fit to be
Buried under the Ruins of that Town. On the 12th of July, they began to Burn
the Suburbs, and to dispose all things for a vigorous defense. It having not
been imagined that the Turks would leave behind them Comorra and Raab
unattack'd, it was thought there was time enough to fortify the place, if they
should carry the two others. So that there were only the old Fortifications,
which were not in a condition long to resist so Puissant an Army; if the Turks
had known what belonged to attacking a place. Before they had invested it, the
Duke of Lorrain put in all the Foot which he could get together, which made
about 17000, with a great Number of Gentry, who had thrown themselves into the
place, besides the Burghers who were fit to bear Arms, Ernest Roger Count
Staremberg, Great Master of the Ordonance, was declared Governor, and had given
him several Generals who were to Command under him. The Duke of Lorrain having
provided for all things, as much as the shortness of time would permit, retired
beyond the Bridges with the Horse, having given Order to break them; so that it
was suspected that he was not sure of undertaking the Defense as he did
afterward. On the 14th of July, the Turks encampt before the Town, and began
to work on their Lines. The Town of Vienna being situated on the Southern Mouth
of the Danube, which in that place makes two Isles, cross which Men pass the
River over three Bridges; The Vizier little skilled in War, and incapable of
good Counsel, did not at the first make any effort for rendering himself Master
of these Bridges, which he might have done; but placed all his Army on the
middle of the Town. He afterward when it was too late repented of this Fault,
when he had continued a sufficiently long time before the place. The Works were
not carried on with more Skill, the Turks having only some Runagades for
Engineers, who seemed able among People who understood nothing at all; but they
are not comparable to the Christian Engineers. Therefore they employed much
time, and lost abundance of People to gain the Works, which Christian Troops
could have gained easily, and without great loss. On the other side, the
Imperialists had a number of Engineers, who if they were not well exercised, at
least were more than those of the Turks, and their Commanders Brave and Able,
perfectly well-employed their Men; who for the most part rather want Heads than
Courage. I will not stay here to recount the Circumstances of the Siege, of
which many Relations have been made; because Tekeli had no part in it.

While the Turks pressed Vienna, which they did at first with Vigor enough; he
formed a design of Besieging with 20000 Hungarians and 8000 Turks, the Castle
of Presburg, which held out against him, although the Town had been
Surrendered. The Duke of Lorrain having Intelligence of it, sent on that side
200 Foot, convoyed with 300 Horse, to endeavor to enter the Castle; but the
Convoy was beaten, and the 200 Men obliged to return. Upon this News, he with
speed marched his Cavalry, which consisted of 8000 Germans and 2000 Poles,
Commanded by Lubomirski, and put 200 into the Castle. The Burghers surpised to
see an Imperial Army, surrendered almost as soon as they were Summoned, and
hardly gave the Malcontents time to retire to their Camp; which was not far
from the Town. Tekeli incensed at this Affront, which they had now done, sent a
Detachment of his Army to fall upon the Enemy, which at first made no movement,
because it was not yet ranged in Battle. But as they soon as it was, who
apparently had imagined that they should find no more than a Party of Imperial
Horse, believing them sufficiently employed in opposing the Incursions of the
Tartars, were surpised to see the whole Army march toward them, and since
theirs was inferior in number, they soon after thought of retiring. They did
it in very good order; but being warmly charged by the Imperialists, they began
to fly as fast as they could, some to Tirnaw, and others to a River two Miles
distant, on the other side of which they made a stand and stopped the Enemy, who
did not think it worth their while to pursue them farther.

This Action was toward Evening, and in the Night Tekeli, who was encamped at
some distance from thence, thought that he ought to dislodge against the
opinion of the Turks, who were encamped by themselves near him; the Reason
which he gave was, That it was of Importance to rally them who had newly been
defeated, and dangerous to expose affrighted Troops to a Victorious Army.
Thereupon the Turks divided from him, and would not rejoyn him but by express
Order from the Grand Vizier. This mixture of Christian and Mahumetan Troops
commanded by different Heads, produces no good. The Heads would often be of
different Sentiments, (...) ^^uld one yield to the other, and the Turks would
have the Christians undergo all the hazard when there was any, as the
Christians sought for nothing but advantaging themselves at the expense of the
Turks. Their Design had been to seize the Castle of Presburg, that they might
have a Passage there over the Danube, that they might easily maintain a
Communication with one another. For that end, the Turkish Cavalry which was not
employed at the Siege, ought to have searched out that of the Imperialists, and
have constrained them to withdraw into Germany; which had not been difficult
for any other People besides the Turks to have done.

The Duke of Lorrain, being drawn nearer to Vienna, that he might incommode the
Besiegers as much as he could possibly, the Malcontents provided for the Turks
diverse Boats, by means of which, they might have some Communication with them,
and at the same time might enter into Moravia, from whence they might draw
considerable Contributions and part of which they might ravage; nor could the
Imperialists be able to hinder them. These last, in truth, marched against the
Malcontents, to take from them what they had gotten, and having come up to
them, Charged them with vigor enough; but 300 Horse who came to their
Assistance, saved the Booty which they had taken.

The Imperialists took the way of Tuln and Krembs, to receive the Auxiliary
Troops who came from all Parts of Germany and Poland as fast as they could
possibly. But having received advice that the Tartars and Turks followed by
Tekeli were entered into Moravia, they were obliged to turn on that side. In
the end, the Grand Vizier having known that the Succors advanced, and that the
Imperial Horse marched to join them, gave Orders to the Tartars and
Malcontents to make waste in the Hereditary Country as far as they could,
either to oblige the Duke of Lorrain to return that way, or to take from the
Succors all means of subsisting when they should arrive. From the 23d of
August the Tartars had entered Moravia, and had begun to make the Country in
such a manner desolate, that it could not recover in a long time; for the
Malcontents they were contented to keep encamped near Mark, and to promise
the Tartars to follow them. In the mean while they did not advance at all, and
it seemed as if Tekeli as much feared the Success of the Siege of Vienna, and
the Consequences which the taking of that Place might have, as he had before
feared the Victories of the Emperor.

In truth, were it supposed that the Turks had made themselves Masters of all
Hungary, and of part of the Hereditary Countries of the House of Austria, they
would have had no more need of Teckely, and perhaps might treat him with as
much contempt as they had lately paid him honors while he was necessary to
them. On the other side, if the Turks should fail in the Siege of Vienna, the
Emperor would be more formidable than ever, because ordinarily the Turks who
are insupportable with good Fortune, have little courage under bad. Teckely
made these reflections, or had some other reason for acting less vigorously
than ordinarily, and did not manage his Forces without cause.

The Duke of Lorrain having made Detatchment to discover the condiion of the
Enemy, followed immediately after with all his Horse. The Tartars and Turks
seeing the Imperialists come up, put themselves into a posture to receive them,
and fell upon them so briskly, that at the first they routed some Squadrons,
and some pierced even to the Body of Reserve, but not being sufficiently
sustained, the greatest part of them who had advanced so far perished. After
that the Tartars having in vain attempted to gain the Flank of the
Imperialists, their Army divided into two parts, and one part retired toward
Teckely's Camp, the other toward the Bridges of Vienna, where a great many
perished who cast themselves into the Danube, in hopes of swimming over.

The Infidels were inferior in number to the Imperialists, who had then above
30000 Horse. There perished in that action between 1000 and 1200 Men of the
Turks and Tartars, who had apparently been Conquerors if Teckely had assisted
them to purpose. The Turkish Troops, and those of the Malcontents having been
repulsed and beaten more than once on the other side the Danube, the Vizier
could hardly have any communication with them, nor give them assistance, that
there was one of the greatest faults which he made in the Enterprise of the
Siege of Vienna, whereas he ought before all things to be Master of the two
Mouths of the Danube, and to pursue the Imperial Army, which could not have
made head against a much greater number of Troops; so that while one part of
the Army had carried on the Siege, the other might have covered it, and have
foraged all about which the Vizier having understood too late, ordered the
Walachians and Moldavians to labor to rebuild the Bridges of Vienna which the
Imperialists had broken, and they began to do so, but the imperial Horse being
posted on the other side with some Foot and Cannon, they could not bring it to
pass. In the mean while the King of Poland being-arrived with his Army by the
way of Moravia, he left a Detachment with some Imperial Troops to oppose the
designs of the Malcontents while he passed the Danube to join other Auxiliary
Forces, and to attacque the Turks in concert with them. During the Siege
Teckely having passed the Danube at Gran, went to salute the Vizier and having
conferred with him, was sent back again, leaving in the Camp only 1000
commanded by the Counts Nadasti and Budiani.

The Place was pressed with vigor enough till the 11th of September, and had
been reduced to extremity, when the Relief began to appear. We are assured that
notwithstanding the resistance and bravery of the besieged, the Vizier had
carried the Place before the Relief could be ready, if he had been loved by his
Soldiers; but being greedy, and having undertook to furnish the provisions, he
had done it with such husbandry, that he drew upon him the hatred of all men;
besides that he was also hated by diverse Bassaes. Being but ittle skilled in
the Art Military, not only he knew not how to press on the Siege, but he also
committed two capital faults, besides those which we have taken notice of. He
caused all about Vienna to be wasted by the Tartars, instead of making all that
he could find about it serve for the use of his Army, a fault which made his
Army suffer much at the end of the Siege. And yet farther, instead of securing
the Field on the side by which succors might come, and when he had notice of
their first approach, and he had not the precaution to seize the hollow ways
and defiles through which they must needs come to him. After this ill Conduct he
went out of his Lines to endeavor to beat back the Succors, the force of
which he did not know, but having seen a formidable Army which amounted to more
than 60000 Men composed of the best Troops of Germany and Poland, he thought of
nothing but retreating, and abandoning his Baggage with all that was in his
Camp; so that having on the 12th of September stopped the Christian Army for
seven or eight hours by disputing the ground, and by a Skirmish of one part of
his Troops who retreated insensibly, as soon as night was come he marched with
diligence toward the Passes of Rabuits and Raab, which he had caused to be
guarded by Abaffi, that he might retreat on that side if he could not take
Vienna. The day following he repassed the Raab without being pursued by the
Christian Army, which being wearied with the great Marches it had made, was
obliged to rest some days. Thus it was that Vienna was delivered after a Siege
of near two months, chiefly by the bravery of the King of Poland and the Duke
of Lorrain, who gave the chief Orders, and had the greatest share in the defeat
of the Enemy. The second being engaged to serve the Emperor to the utmost, was
praised by all Europe for having done it so well, both during the whole Siege,
and the day it was raised. The King of Poland, to whom the grandeur of the
House of Austria might have given more umbrage than the Conquest of some Towns;
for the Ottoman Empire, acquired eternal Glory in despising the suggestions of
a base Policy, and in leaving his Country to relieve a Town abandoned by its
proper Sovereign, when there was danger of arriving too late. If the
Malcontents of Hungary had done as much for the Port, or rather for
themselves, their Affairs had not been in the declension as they have since
been. But they seem born to have great occasions and to lose them; as their
Enemies from that time seemed in possession of braving the Ottoman Empire with
Forces which it despised a few years before, and which in truth they could not
have equaled if it had known how to serve it self of them.

The King of Poland and the Duke of Lorrain resolving to follow the Turks while
they were under their fright, although the Saxon Troops had refused to go any
farther, parted the eighteenth of the Month, and marched toward the Isle of
Schut, where they passed the Danube seven or eight days after to go toward
Lewentz and Buda, whither the Armies of the Malcontents and Turks were
retreated, after having reinforced the Garrisons of Newhausel and Gran. There
the Vizier desirous to cast upon others the faults which he had committed, and
vexed at the defeat of his Enterprise, put to death the Bassa of Buda and some
others, besides several subaltern Officers, as not having well acquitted
themselves at the Siege, and in the March to Vienna. The Season being far
advanced, and the Troops of Franconia and the Bavarian Foot being withdrawn
some time after those of Saxony, they were not in a condition to attempt any
thing considerable. The Garrisons of the Places belonging to the Turks, being,
as has been said, reinforced, the Armies of the Turks and Malcontents were
not far from thence, and for all their loss, much more strong, being together,
than the Christian Army. In the mean while, that they might not have advanced
in vain, the King of Poland and the Duke of Lorrain resolved to march toward
Barkan, which is a Fort upon the Northern side of the Danube at the head of the
Bridge of Gran. It was judged that if they could render themselves Masters of
that Post, they should be in a condition to undertake the Siege of Gran, if
they thought fit, and might hinder the communication of Newhausel with Buda. On
the seventh of October the King of Poland having had false Advice that the
Detachment of Turks which was at Barkan, was not considerable advanced with his
Horse without expecting the coming up of the Foot contrary to the Opinion of
the Duke of Lorrain, who failed not also to march immediately after him with
the Imperial Horse. The Poles at first drove back some Squadrons of Turks who
appeared, bur thinking to give them the Chase, a great Body of Horse came from
behind an Hill, and charged them with so much impetuosity, that it made them to
fly in their turn. The King sustained his Men by other Squadrons, and himself
advanced at their Head; but those that fled, and the Shock of the Turks put
them into disorder, and they gave ground when the Imperial Horse who had passed
a Defile on the left hand to come into the Plain where the Fight was, begun to
put themselves in order of Battle and to advance, so that it was ranged for
falling upon the Turks in the Flank. The Infidels seeing new Troops come to
them, and fearing to engage again, after making an halt, retreated insensibly
and in good order, nor did the Imperial Cavalry pursue them.

The affrighted Poles had all the difficulty in the World to be put again into
order, and talked of nothing but going into Winter Quarters, without attempting
any thing farther. The King, to diminish their fright, entreated the Duke of
Lorrain to take the right hand, which was nearest the Enemy, and marched his
Troops to the left. They encamped in this order while they expected the Foot,
to which Orders had been sent to make haste. They arrived the next day, and a
resolution was taken to attacque the Turks the day following, being the 9th of
October. The Christian Army was about Thirty thousand, two thirds of which was
Cavalry, and the rest Infantry. For the Turks they were but Fourteen thousand
Spahies, and Twelve hundred Janissaries.

The Christian Army advanced in the morning after having formed three Lines,
the two first of which were of Imperial Troops, and the last of those of
Poland, one part of which nevertheless was in the first Lines on the right and
left, one commanded by the King, the other by General Jablanowski. The Turks
appeared about Nine a Clock, ranged in Battle as if they had been in a
condition to resist an Army twice as strong as theirs, possibly not knowing the
number of the Enemies, or puffed up with the advantage they had gained over the
Poles two days before. Immediately they charged Jablanowski, who was on the
left Wing, thinking to rout the Poles in the first Engagement: But they being
supported by the Imperialists, the Turks turned all their Forces to that side,
without minding the right, and the main Body which flanked them, and with which
they were within half an hour enclosed and put to the rout. This is the nature
of the Turks to act at first with an extreme impetuosity, without regarding
danger, but when their Shock is over, and that they begin to be terrified, they
run into disorder, and nothing is able to put new Courage into them. As soon as
they were once broken, they ran with all speed to Barkan, and the first that
came passed the Bridge over the Danube with speed, and broke it after them
without staving for the rest of their Army. Soon after the Fort was attacqued
on all sides, and was entered with Sword in hand, the Turks who had not passed
over the Bridge madly threw themselves into the Danube, endeavoring to gain
the other side either on Horseback or by swiming, instead of defending
themselves. As soon as it was understood that they might lodge all night at
Barkan, both Poles and Germans were desirous of it, and for fear they should
Quarrel Count Staremberg caused the Cermans to go out. The Poles having
observed the Heads of some of their Companions, which the Turks had set upon
the Palisadoes, set fire to the Fort and burnt it down. We are assured that
Tekely during the action was not far from thence, and that he drew near to join
the Turks by the Viziers order; but having seen what had passed from the
Neighboring Mountains, he went back as fast as he could. If this be true we
must avow that this Count ill ferv'd them who had given him the Title of Prince
of Hungary. In the mean while, if before he acted weakly for them for fear he
should make them too powerful, it was time to assist them with all his Forces,
lest he with them should be driven out of Hungary. However it were whether
through weakness or ill politics the Malcontents did not do what they should
have done, on this and other occasions.

After the taking the Fort of Barkan it was found that this Post being
commanded by the Castle of Gran was of no use toward the Seige of that Town,
and that there wanted time to put it into a condition of defense, the
Palisadoes having been burnt. Therefore they abandoned it, and the Duke of
Lorrain judged that it would not be difficult to pass the Danube a little
higher over against the two Isles, which he designed to do an hours march above
Gran. Order was given to the Governor of Comorra to send the Bridge of Boats
which was before that place, to serve on this occasion. The King of Poland had
been of a contray Opinion, but the Duke of Lorrain so strongly represented to
him, both the facility of the Enterprise, and the dishonor it would be for the
Christians to end the Campaign, without having drawn any advantage from the
consternation which they had cast among the Enemies by the Victories which they
had newly gained, that the King at last consented to stay and cover the Siege
continuing encamped on the side of Barkan.

While they were at these terms Count Humanai comes with some Commanders of the
Malcontents into the Camp of the King of Poland to entreat Audience of him. He
grants it them, and after some Complements they tell him, they were very sorry
to see Humgary covered with Trops of Turks and Tartars as it had been, and the
Neighboring Countries exposed to the danger of falling under the Turkish
Domination, but that they were not the cause, that all these misfortunes with
all their Consequences, ought to be attributed to them who had advised the
Emperor to violate all the Laws and all the Privileges of Hungary; to have
occasion to pillage it without his knowledge, and the goods of those who should
oppose them; while none were able to demand justice against them, that it ought
not to be thought strange that the Nobility and People of Hungary had desired
the Conservation of their Privileges with as much Ardour as strangers had
labored to take them away. That it were unjust to exact from them, that they
should see all their Laws overturned, and their Goods and Families become a
prey and sport to the Germans without stirring. That they had a thousand times
carried their Complaints to His Imperial Majesty, that they always found him
prejudiced against them, by the great credit which they had who look on Hungary
as an assured Pillage, if they could introduce an Arbitrary Government. That if
not obtaining any satisfaction from his Majesty's Council, some of the Nobility
had taken unlawful ways to prevent the ruin of their Country, this fault
would be at least as pardonable as the Pillages and Violences of strangers:
That also the greatest part did not at the beginning enter into any Conspiracy,
but that the Enemies of the Realm had with joy taken advantage of the faults of
some few, that they might treat as Rebels all who had any thing to lose, and
seize on their goods; this strange co^nduct has obliged a great number to
d^part part from them. That as to be accused and have an Estate, was the same
thing as to be Condemned to Death, or at least to lose all that one had:
Despair had put in Arms the People who demanded nothing but to live in Peace,
obeying the Emperor and the Laws, that in pursuance thereof the Emperors evil
Counselors had carried him to change the whole form of the Government without
having any regard to Privileges, of which they who remained within Obedience
ought not to have been despoiled by reason of Malcontents. That in truth he
had reastablished the Ancient Government but as to the rest the Laws had no
more Authority than before, and the Realm was daily a prey to strangers. That
the Malcontents had not ceased to offer his Imperial Majesty to lay down Arms,
if he would re-establish the Laws, and would give any security that they should
not be used as formerly. That they came still with the same intention, and that
they prayed his Majesty of Poland to interceed for them, not doubting but he
was touched with the miseries of Hungary; and for so many years to see
blood-spilt which might be better employed The King of Poland testified to them
a sensible concernment at what had passed and expressed a great desire of
seeing their miseries at an end. He believed at the same time that he was bound
to procure them Audience of the Duke of Lorrain who refused to hear them
without the Emperors leave, but at last thought fit to comply with the King of
Poland. The Deputies of the Malcontents, after having protested that whatever
opinion might be conceived of their conduct, against which they would have it
that an infinite number of People were prejudiced without having well examined
it, they had always been for Peace and did not yet demand any thing else: They
represented that they were ready to enter into a Treaty with Commissioners;
that his Imperial Majesty should give them that, for that end it was necessary
as it had been at the end of former Campaigns to make a suspension of Arms, and
to mark the Counties of Hungary where it should be found fit for the Troops of
the Malcontents to take their Winter Quarters. The Duke of Lorrain, who had no
Orders, thereupon represented to them the wrong which they had done in
continuing in Rebellion, and exhorted them to renounce all manner of Alliance
with the Turks to lay down their Arms and implore the Emperor's Clemency; after
which, he doubted not but they would have cause to praise his Bounty. The
Deputies replied, That if they had taken Arms, and had entered into any
Engagement with the Turks, it was but by force, after having seen that their
Enemies hindered the Emperor from having any regard to their just Complaints;
and that there was no appearance that he would do them Justice. Thereupon they
went back to the King of Poland, where they stayed some time; and by that it
was perceived, that they were not in such a terror as was thought.

Soon after Lewentz opened its Gates to the Imperialists, and the Counties of
Tirnaw, Trenshin, and Nitrie, who had taken part with the Malcontents, at the
arrival of the Turkish Army, declared against them after the Battle at Barkan.
As soon as the Bridge which the Duke of Lorrain caused to be made was finished,
and that his Troops had passed to the other side, the County of Wesprin
followed the example of the others. On the 23d of October, the Duke of Lorrain
encamped at Gran, upon the Avenues of Buda, to hinder them from relieving the
place on that side. He had been reinforced with the Elector of Bavaria's Foot,
which he sent the Emperor; from which Men were assured that this was to close
the Campaign with an Enterprise which might bring Honor to the Imperial Arms.
He also came himself to the Camp with what Horse he had on the 26th in the
Morning, and saw the Reduction of the Place the day after. The Garrison near
4000 Strong, went out the 28th with Arms and Baggage according to the
Capitulation, and was Conducted to Buda. Although the Fortifications of Gran
were not considerable; yet a Garrison so numerous might easily have defended it
a long while, if the Losses which the Turks had this Campaign had not
intimidated them. Besides the Castle which is upon a Rock, and which has a
Spring of Running Water, which alone might supply them some Weeks, if a
disorder had not been among the Infidels. The Vizier, who according to the
Rules of War, ought to have Covered Gran, and who had nothing to fear, being
still much more strong than the Imperialists, retired not only to Buda, but
also to Esseck, and from thence to Belgrade; where he was Strangled for his Ill
Conduct, the 25th of December the same Year, by Order of the Grand Seignior.

The Duke of Lorrain gave the Government of Gran to Carlowits, Major of the
Regiment of Count Marc Staremberg, with a Garrison of a Thousand Men, and
repassed the Danube to the Army on the 30th, after having given the Necessary
Orders for repairing the Breaches of the Place. They spoke of nothing after
that but Winter Quarters, and there were assigned to the King of Poland, the
Counties of Eperies, Cassovia, and Tokai, which the Malcontents had the
preceding Winter with the Frontiers of Transylvania. As to the last Article,
the King agreed with the Vaivoide for Money, that he might not be burdensome
to the Transylvanians and obtained of the Emperor a larger extent, for his
Quarters in Hungary.

Before his parting to go thither, the King gave the Duke of Lorrain to
understand, that he would oblige him in hearing once more the Proposals of the
Malcontents. The Duke excused himself at first, for that he had not yet
received from the Emperor any Power to treat of this Affair; but the King
representing to him, that without engaging himself to any thing, he might hear
what they asked, and take such Measures thereupon as he should judge fitting,
he consented. For that end, a Meeting was had in the King's Tent the Fifth of
November. The Vice Chancellor of Hungary, who had been instructed by the
Deputies of the Malcontents, was their Spokesman. He in few words made appear
the Advantage the Emperor might draw from Hungary, by granting what they asked,
in the War against the Turks, in which, being joined with his Army, they might
easily resist the Infidels without necessity of seeking help elsewhere. He
showed that His Imperial Majesty, who values himself upon his Clemency more
than any other Virtue, would do a good thing in giving Peace to an infinite
number of Innocents, who would suffer more than could be imagined in a Civil
and Foreign War. After that, he proposed Six Articles on the part of the
Malcontents, which he desired to be granted:

1. The Censervation of their Privileges. 2. Liberty of Conscience. 3. The
Restitution of Confiscated Estates. 4. The Summoning a Free Diet, and wherein
they could to contribute toward it. 5. Winter Quarters and a Suspension of
Arms while they were upon a Treaty. 6. The Sovereignty of some Counties which
had the Year before been offered to Tekeli.
The Vicechancellor of Polund added to this, That although they had had great
Advantages against the Turks, they must not imagine that they had entirely
quelled them; That by making the Malcontents desperate, they would join them
with the Turks for ever; and that it was impossible to be assor'd that this
Conjuncture would not sometime yet produce great Evils.

The Duke of Lorrain answered, That they might expect all from the Clemency of
His Imperial Majesty, if they would immediately break with the Turks and submit
themselves to the discretion of their Sovereign. That this was all the Counsel
that he could give, and that he had no other Answer to make to their
Propositions. Thereupon they separated, and the Deputies returned to the place
from whence they came.

The Duke of Lorrain applied himself to put the Imperial Troops into the
Quarters which had been assigned them, and left the Counts Rabata and Caraffa,
with Baron Merci, to Command them. All the Necessary Orders being given, he
took the way of Lintz, where the Emperor still was. The King of Poland, who had
parted some time before for Cassovia, took in his way the Small Town of Schim,
where was a Turkish Garrison. He continued on his March, and sent to Summon
Cassovia; which having a strong Garrison of Malcontents, refused to Surrender.
The King not knowing how to force them in the middle of the Winter, and not
liking to leave his Troops exposed to the Incursions of the Malcontents in a
Country of which they had no knowledge; made but little stay in Upper Hungary.
He gave Order to his Army, excepting some Foot to enter into Poland, and took
the Passes to return to Cracovia. His Army followed him soon after, and left
the Germans the liberty to take the Quarters which had been assigned them.

Cara Mustapha had presented himself before the Grand Seignior the first time
at Belgrade; and to excuse himself, had laid the blame upon several others, and
particularly upon Tekeli, by whom he said he had been betrayed. The Grand
Seignior at first appeared satisfied with his Reasons; but whether it were that
as soon as he came to Adrianople, whither he went soon after, some had taken
Care in his Presence to aggravate the Faults of the Vizier, or upon any other
occasion, he, as has been said, sent to have him Strangled. In the mean while
Tekeli having notice of the ill Impressions the Vizier had given of him to his
Highness, and not being able to subsist without Aid of the Port, took a Bold
Resolution, which succeeded well. He rendered himself at Adrianople, and having
obtained Audience of the Grand Seignior, he told him, That being informed that
his Conduct had been misrepresented to his Highness, he came to justify
himself before him, or to offer him his Head, if he were culpable. The Grand
Seignior was touched at his Submission, and the Confidence which he appeared to
have in the Justice of the Musulmans. He gave him Commissioners, to whom Tekeli
related the particulars of the Vizier's Faults, of which he had been already
informed in part. Among these Faults, he particularly enlarged upon one of
them, on which we have remarked above; which is, That the Vizier not having
given him Troops enough to act on the other side the Danube, the Imperial
Horse, which were the best Horse in the World, had been in a condition to
traverse his Designs; and that it had been strong enough to be Master of the
greater part of Hungary, almost in the View of so formidable a Body. Besides,
not being able to have Communication ready and easy enough with the Vizier,
who was not Master of the Danube, he could not be relieved when he needed it,
nor could give the Necessary Advices; That if the Vizier had had the Precaution
to render himself Master of some Pass upon the Danube, though he had not
succeeded before Vienna, he might have preserved to the Grand Seignior all the
Upper Hungary, which held with the Malcontents, by retreating on that side;
That his Army joined to that of the Malcontents was yet stronger than was
necessary to beat the Army of the Emperor and the King of Poland, in case they
durst have pursued the Vizier; and that it had been easy to take Quarters in
those Parts of Hungary, where the Imperialists had never been, but because they
had abandoned them.

These Reasons supported by the Vizier's Enemies, and conformable to the
Prejudices they had given the Grand Seignior against the Conduct of that
Minister, appeared to him so plausible, that he promised Tekeli his Protection,
and gave him his word, that he would never forsake him. The Count for his part
failed not to give hope, that with the Assistance of the Port, he would restore
Matters into so good a Condition, that he should give the Emperor more trouble
than ever. The Grand Seignior, after having caused Cara Mustapha to be put to
Death, named in his Place Ibrahim, who before had been Caimacan. This new
Vizier after he had a long time consulted with the other Ministers of the Port,
was of Opinion to make Peace with the Emperor; but the Grand Seignior, as they
assure us, was so opposite to this, whether because of his word passed to
Tekeli, or for any other Reason, that he followed the contrary Opinion, which
was for his continuing the War.

The End of the Second Book.
MEMOIRES FOR THE LIFE OF Emeric, Count Teckely. BOOK III.
Containing the History of what arrived to him from the Year 1684, to the Year
1687.

TEckely being returned into Hungary, immediately saw the Effects of the
Grand-Signor's Promises, in that the Bassa's of the Neighboring Cities sent to
offer him what Assistance he should have occasion for. The Emperor, on his
side, set out an Act of Oblivion, in the beginning of the Year 1684, wherein he
gave an Assurance, 1st. To re-establish all those who had born Arms against his
Service, in their Honors, and in their Estates, which should not be forfeited.
2d. That they who formerly possessed Employments, should be indempnified for
the Loss of their Posts, which had been conferred upon others. 3d. That Orders
should be exhibited for maintaining Officers and Soldiers, by dispersing them
into the Garrisons of Hungary. The Declaration also purported, That from the
15th of February, those Malcontents that would return to their Duty, should
find the Emperor's Commissioners at Presbourg, ready to accept their Oaths, and
to hear their Remonstrances, in order to give an Account thereof to the
Imperial Council, which would not forget to afford them Satisfaction. At last
it threatened those, who would not enjoy the benefit of this General Pardon,
with the severest Rigours that have been accustomed to be practiced against
obstinate Rebels.

This Declaration, which would have been laughed at before the Turks had been
defeated, produced some effect amongst People fatigued with so long a War, and
from which they did not see how they could disengage themselves with Honor.
The Barons Baragozzi were of the first, who thought upon deserting the Party of
the Malcontents; and the eldest of this Family withdrew himself into the
Castle of Zakwar, which belonged to him, with three hundred Hussars. The Count
Humanai, who had been deputed to the King of Poland, and the Duke of Lorrain,
did the same, and fixed himself in his Castle of Vngwar, where he thought
himself secure. They were suddenly to be followed by the two young Barons
Baragozzi, by Andrew Schemiski, Francis Cl^bai, and Stephen Maskai; but Teckely
having been advised of their Design, made them to be apprehended, and the
Council of War condemned them to lose their Heads. This was the first rigorous
Example that was made of those who abandoned the Party. The Necessity of
preventing the dangerous Consequence of those Desertions, which would have been
too frequent, obliged the Heads of the Malcontents to use severely those who
committed this Fault, of what Quality soever. In effect, the Design was not
then so much to make War against the Emperor, as it was to obtain of him the
Observation of the Laws, and afterward to restore themselves to his Obedience:
It was high-time to act evenly, and to exercise a severe Discipline in the
Army, in order to frame a Body, whereof all the Members were to conquer or
perish together. Teckely had a mind, in consequence of this Resolution, to go
and force Baragozzi in his Castle; but the Count of Rabata being come to his
Assistance, he turned his Arms against Vngwar, which surrendered at Discretion,
after three days Resistance. Humanai, who was within it, was brought to
Cassovia, where he lost his Head.

These Severities stopped the Course of the Desertions, as well as two
considerable Omissions in the General Pardon; whereof one was Liberty of
Conscience, and the other, the Security of Privileges. These two Articles being
the only Cause of the War, those who loved the Freedom of their Country, more
than their Ease, could not induce themselves to lay down their Arms, without
obtaining what they demanded thereupon.

Teckely being unable to procure a Truce for this Winter, made the Imperialists
repent of it, by the perpetual Incursions and Undertakings he made against
them. He attacked Michelsdorf, where the King of Poland had left three hundred
Lithuanians in Winter Quarters. He made himself Master of it, killed part of
these Lithuanians, and made the rest Prisoners of War. The Troops of Poland,
who had made great Marches to come into Hungary, seeing that instead of
reposing themselves during Winter, it was necessary to be engaging with the
Malcontents at all moments, and to be satisfied with a very small matter, by
reason of the Indigence which reigned in the Places where they were; these
Troops, I say, deserted every day, which obliged the King of Poland to recall
them. Besides, this Prince had no Interest in exterminating entirely the
Malcontents, to render the Emperor absolute Master in Hungary, without any
one's, but the House of Austria, receiving any Advantage by it. These Troops
were no sooner withdrawn, but Teckely seized upon their Quarters, and fixed
there a Party of his own.

The Turks, on their side, acted with more Vigor than was imagined, and for all
they had been repulsed in several places, they did not fail to besiege and
take, in the Month of March, Leutsch, wherein was the Regiment of Grana, and a
hundred Horse of Caraffa's. This General, having been too remiss in hastening to
the Succor of this Place, received Advice of its being carried, as he was
marching on that side with some Troops. Debrezen, which the Turks had vainly
attempted to win some time before, now underwent the same destiny. Teckely, in
the mean time, got all that is about the Cities of the Mountains, and made
Contributions be paid to him in all Places that he could not conveniently hold.
In these Movements, the Imperialists, commanded by Colonel Heuster, defeated
also a Detachment of five hundred of his Men, whom he had appointed as a
Conduct of Petrozzi; although the Advantage was generally on the side of the
Malcontents.

Judging themselves now to be in a Condition of obtaining something with the
Emperor, they sent to entreat the King of Poland again to intervene in this
Affair, and consented, if he thought fit, to acknowledge him for Mediator. The
King of Poland having received them favorably enough, offered his Mediation to
the Emperor to reconcile, if it was possible, his Subjects with him: But the
Court of Vienna, which thought to be soon prepared to expel for-ever the
Malcontents from Hungary, and to establish a Despotick Power there, would
hearken to no sort of Composition. There-upon the King declared, That for the
future he would not permit his Troops to be employed against the Malcontents,
although he offered them still to serve against the Turks. This Declaration did
not displease the Polanders, who looked upon it as a thing of ill Presage to
them, that Hungary should become Hereditory, and that it should be no longer
permitted to talk of Laws and Privileges there. It is known that the Grandees
of this Kingdom are very jealous of their Liberties, and particularly of the
Right they have to choose their Kings; and in this Disposition perhaps they had
done better to join themselves entirely to the Malcontents, in order to oblige
the Emperor to grant them Peace, and to render themselves Promoters of the
Treaty, than to assist the Emperor to make himself absolute.

About this time an Artifice was employed more than ever in Hungary, which has
succeeded many times to destroy Parties composed of Persons of different
Religions. To disingage the Catholics from the Protestants, the Imperialists
said every where, that it was nothing but a War of Religion that was made; and
that if the Catholics, who had no occasion to demand Liberty of Conscience,
submitted themselves to the Emperor, they would obtain whatsoever they desired.
Under a Pretext that Teckely had put to death the Count Humanai, and some
Catholic Lords, they endeavored to persuade those of this Religion, that the
Head of the Malcontents did labor insensibly to destroy it, and that if he
was ever the Master, he would not endure it. These Discourses, wherein was
observed something of appearance, were capable of seducing a world of Persons,
if so be they had not been opposed by some Declaration of Luster, and which was
generally dispersed. It Is this engaged Teckely to write a Letter to his
Holiness, dated the 12th of April, whose Contents are as follow.

He said that in the Year 1683, he had declared to Saponara, Envoy to his
Imperial Majesty, that he was ready to put an end, as far as his Power
extended, to the Civil War of Hungary, if he might obtain certain Conditions
which he demanded, provided that the King and States of Poland were Guarantees
of the Treaty; That finding himself absolutely denied, he had been obliged to
tie himself more strongly than before to the Interests of the Port; That he had
entered into this Engagement, not that he had not as much Zeal as any one for
the Christian Religion, but because he saw most clearly, that the Emperonr
excluding the Hungarians from the Defense of their Country, he could not
possibly be in a State of opposing the Ottoman Puissance: That he could not
reasonably be treated as a Rebel, since he had not taken up Arms to deprive the
King of Hungary of his due, but only to preserve to his Country those
Privileges which had been allowed it before the House of Austria had a foot
therein. That his Holiness might consult thereupon the Letters of King Andrew
II, which were in the Records of the Vatican: That before he came to take up
Arms he had seen his Estate confiscated and pillaged, as well as an infinite
number of Catholic Gentlemen, to whom was appointed incompetent Judges to
condemn them to Death or Banishment, without having any regard to the usual
Formalities of Justice: That George Leppaz, Archbishop of Strigonium, had used
the same Instances with them, for the Observation of those Privileges which the
Emperor had solemnly sworn to keep firm at his coming to the Crown. That all
these Complaints had been unsuccessful, and were rejected with Disdain by the
German Counselors of his Imperial Majesty: But as for him he had never
inclined toward the Destruction of the Catholic Religion in Hungary, nor
would. In a word, that he aimed at nothing else, in respect of Religion, but to
preserve the Freedom granted by the Laws and Diets before the Reign of Leopold
to the Protestants of Hungary, without designing to touch upon the Rights of
the Catholics.

The Turks advanced in the beginning of June new Troops toward Buda, under the
Command of Kara Hussan Oglon, who had been made Grand Vizier, but having
marched too slowly, the duke of Lorrain prevented him. About the 16th of the
Month he went to attack Vicegrad, which is below the Gran, to hinder the Turks
from relieving Neuhauzel by removing farther off their Frontiers on this side.
He won the City the very Evening of the Day he arrived there, and the Castle
surrendered the next day after, having made an appearance of a Defensive
Resolution. In the mean time a Detachment of Turks fell upon the Baggage which
had been left near Strigonium, in order to march with more Expedition, but they
were repulsed, and the Imperial Army, which was before Vicegrad, had nothing
but the fear of having lost it. The Castle was found to be absolutely
unprovided of Ammunition and Provision, which had proceeded from the Confusion
which the Death of the Vizier had introduced into Affairs. There was also a
Battle near Weitzen about the end of the Month, between the Imperial Army,
which had repassed to the other side of the Danube, and a considerable Body of
Turks, who were defeated, and constrained to retire to Buda in Confusion after
a loss of five or six hundred Men. After that Weitzen, a small Place which is
upon the Northern Arm of the Danube, in that place where it forms the Isle of
St. Andrew, was attacked so unexpectedly, that five hundred Turks who were
therein surrended at Discretion. From thence they marched straight on to Pest,
which the Garrison abandoned after having set fire to it, and ruined the
Fortifications. The Garrison retired to Buda, and as soon as the Army appeared,
some Janissaries that were left to guard the Bridge of Boats which were there,
broke it down before they could obstruct them. They endeavored to extinguish
the Conflagration of Pest, and left some Troops there to repair the
Fortifications that remained, because this Post might be of advantage in case
there was any thought of undertaking the Siege of Buda. But those who had been
left there were so incommoded some days following by the Cannon of Buda, that
it was necessary to withdraw them from thence. After that they made a Bridge of
Boats over against the Isle of St. Andrew, over which the Army having passed
upon the 10th of July, it gained a considerable Advantage upon some Turkish
Troops who came to engage it without knowing the whole Imperial Army was there.

Four days after it marched-to Buda, a famous City, in that it has been the
Residence of the ancient Kings of Hungary, and for two or three Sieges it had
sustained against the Christians without being taken, since Solomon became
Master of it in 1541. It was notwithstanding but ill fortified, being flanked
with none but old Towers without any Bastions, in so much that nothing but a
powerful Garrison could render the taking difficult to a General provided with
Conveniences, and dexterous in the Art of besieging Towns. It was at that time
filled with all sorts of Ammunition, and defended by a Garrison of eight
thousand Men commanded by five Bassas. Nevertheless they did not think it
proper to persevere in holding the lower Town, which they set on fire as soon
as they were besieged, in order to retire into the upper one, which is
supported by a good Castle, and is much more easy to defend. During the first
days of this Siege, the Imperialists got three considerable Advantages upon the
Turks. The Croats defeated fifteen hundred Men near Wirowitza, and four hundred
as they returned from this Defeat; and the greatest part of the Imperial Army
being gone out of its Lines, beat, a few days after, a Turkish Army of twenty
thousand Men, who were encamped some Leagues from Buda in order to relieve the
Place if it was possible, or to incommode the Imperialists during the Siege,
and to cover the rest of Hungary. The Turks at the same time sustained great
Losses in Croatia, and the Malcontents were disadvantag'd in diverse places.

But as the Imperialists could not conquer in so many parts, nor besiege
several places long without losing a world of Men, the Army which besieged Buda
could receive no considerable Succor from the rest, and without Succor it
durst not attempt a general Assault, although it was possessed of almost all the
Outworks of the Place. This Army had already lost in the beginning of August
near eight thousand Men, either in Battles, or in the Siege, or else by
Sickness. It had not Ammunition enough, nor Provision, nor Fodder. Kara Mehemet
Bassa of Buda, was one of the best Officers of the Turkish Empire, and made all
possible Resistance. The whole Garrison was likewise fixed upon defending the
Place to extremity, and fatigued the Imperial Army by vigorous Sallies. Although
there were considerable Breaches made, the Turks were entrenched and
pallisado'd behind, because the Imperialists were not in a condition to take
the advantage of it quick enough. Notwithstanding Kara Mehemet was killed with
a Cannon Bullet, which took off his Thigh, the rest did not lose their Courage
thereupon, in hopes of being speedily relieved by the Serasquier, who marched
in the place of the Vizier. The Besiegers lost every moment Persons of note,
and several of the chief Officers were sick or wounded. The Duke of Lorrain
himself was taken with a Fever, and the Count of Rabata was commanded to come
and assist him in the Functions of General, which he could not discharge with
sufficient Exactness, by reason of his Indisposition.

The Imperial Army being in this Condition, the Elector of Bavaria arrived with
his Troops the ninth of September; and his Arrival was extremely necessary to
revive the Hearts of the Soldiers. He gave Directions for the raising of new
Batteries, and disposed all things for vigorous Assaults: but it is said, that
they employed not in this Siege all the Art that is necessary in these
Encounters, and which is of more Service than the number of Soldiers, and all
imaginable Vigor. The Bombs and Careasses were not in sufficient quantity, nor
the Artillery well enough prepared. The Ingineers in too small number, and
perhaps as little experienced, as they were rarely paid, were but a moderate
Assistance. They were almost constrained to win the Place, if one may say so,
by force of Arms, in which the Turks are not inferior to the Germans. In the
mean time Zouglan Serasquier, had an Opportunity of throwing Succors into the
Place three times, in spite of the German Army; whose Lines were either not
well made, or not well enough guarded. It is also said, That the Duke of
Lorrain having attempted to engage him more than once to a Battle, he had the
address to get away, without engaging, after he had accomplished his Will. At
length the Christian Army, after having lost a world of Men, not only by the
Fights it had sustained, but also by Want and ill Weather, was obliged to raise
the Siege about the middle of November. It was feared that the Serasquier would
have attacked it in its Retreat; but it had time to make one, without being
pursued, and without leaving any thing except some dismounted Cannon, which
they took care to bury least the Turks should make use of them. The Serasquier
had Troops enough, as it is reported; and committed a considerable Fault by hot
setting upon this Army in its Retreat; which being so fatigued as it was, could
not have held out before him, according to all appearance. He contented himself
with sending the Tartars into the Isle of St. Andrew, where they killed some
distempered Soldiers; and chose rather to follow the Maxim of those, who say,
that one should make a Bridge of Gold for his Enemies, rather than hazard his
Army against Men, who perhaps would fight like desperate Persons.

Whilst the Duke of Lorrain was employed in the Siege of Buda, General Schultz
made War upon the Malcontents in Vpper-Hungary, with a small Body of an Army,
and much more Success. He took in the Month of September, Seben, a little City
at two Leagues distance from Eperies, where he made the Garrison, which Teckely
had thrown in a day before, Prisoners of War; the Inhabitants having
surrendered in spite of it, by reason of the Inconvenience which the Bombs had
caused them. The Hungarians of this Garrison were cut in pieces by Baragozzi,
who accused Teckely of having impaled some Officers of his Regiment; and who
was incensed against all the party, upon the account of the Death of his two
Brothers. Zeban, which Teckely thought would have resisted longer, being taken;
Schultz ordered every one of his Horsemen to take a Foot-Souldier behind him,
and marched upon the 17th of September, in the night, directly to the Camp of
Teckely; where being arrived by break of day, he set upon him with so much
Expedition, that he had not time to call his Troops to Arms, nor to put himself
in a Condition of defense, as he might easily have done, if he had been
advertised. Teckely thought that the surest way, in this occasion, was to
abandon his Baggage and his Ammunition to the Germans, who would amuze
themselves by pillaging, instead of following him. And it happened so; the
Germans, who had marched in the night, being glad to find where-withal to
refesh themselves in the Camp of the Malcontents. General Schultz advanced,
notwithstanding, the same day, the ^^nnon which he had found in the Camp of
Teckely, against Eperies, whose Fortifications were as yet unfinished: but
Teckely having rallied his Men some Leagues from thence, sent back forthwith
two thousand Men, who entered in the Place. The General was constrained to turn
upon another side; and took, without much resistance, Barsfeld, and the Castles
of Stropho, Makowitz, and Donawitz. The Army which Teckely had then, was too
small to keep the field, and the greatest part of his Troops were in Garrison in
diverse important Places. The Burgesses of Cities not being very well affected
to the Party, or wanting Courage, did not oppose the Imperial Troops, when they
had left them the Care of their defense; and they held not Men enough to
furnish all the Cities they had a mind to hold; and to form, at the same time,
a Body of an Army able to undertake something.

The Turks, after the Imperial Army was gone, made several Incursions toward
Vicegrad and Grana; nevertheless, without attempting any thing considerable:
but upon the other Bank of the Danube, they took Weitzen, whose Garrison was for
the most part out in pieces, notwithstanding they had cap^tulated. As the
Garrison of Newhausel extremely and that it had been vainly attempted to take
Buda, at the end of the Campaign the Imperialists formed the Blockade of
Newhausel, to obstruct all entrance of Succors and Provisions, with a Design
to besiege this Place in the beginning of the following Campaign.

The Imperial Troops took their Winter Quarters in Hungary, and upon the
Frontiers of Austria; Lands that had been but little cultivated since the Turks
and Christians had made a havoc therein, in emulation of one another. So that
amongst the various Hardships they endured there, Famine was the greatest. The
Soldiers dispossessed the Country People of the small Provisions which they
had left, and many of these unhappy Wretches were obliged to go to Buda, and to
other Places of the Turks, to endeavor to get Bread. The Governor of Buda
received a good number of them, whom he put to repair the Fortifications of the
Place.

The Troops of General Schultz suffered, like the rest, in Vpper-Hungary, which
was not less havock'd than the Lower; insomuch, that he was obliged to retire
near Eperies, where he posted himself in order to attempt the obtaining of the
City, by incommoding the Garrison. Teckely being advised of his Retreat, pursued
him in haste, and entirely defeated his Rear. Schultz had Orders after that, to
support the Blockade of Newhausel, and had some Horse appointed to him, to
prevent any entrance therein. But Teckely having a Charge from the Grand-Signor
to victual the Place, he attended the Convoy, with three thousand Horse, and
threw therein, in spite of Schultz, three hundred Chariots of Provisions, and
three hundred Horsemen, who carried each a Sack of Meal behind him. Some days
after there entered a second Convoy, which brought above two thousand Sacks of
Meal. In the beginning of February the Turks attempted to put other Necessaries
in the Town for its Defense; but they were twice repulsed with loss, by the
Imperialists. A few days after, Teckely having, unawares, assaulted General
Schultz, who had beat the Turks, he killed 900 of his Men, and took all his
Baggage, which he brought off with 400 Prisoners. Thus he revenged the Affront,
which the other had given him near Eperies, and also routed a Bayarian Regiment,
which was in Quarters at Neudorf; after which, he introduced, in safety, a
Convoy within Newhausel. In vain did Schultz pretend to become Master of the
Castle of Vngwar; he was obliged to retire after he had sustained some loss.
But Colonel Heusler beat several Parties of the Turks, retook Weitzen, and put
the Garrison to the Sword; but being unable to undertake to keep the Place, nor
to carry off the Ammunition which he found therein, he set fire to it.

In the beginning of May, Schultz returned before Vngwar to endeavor to obtain
his Revenge. He took in five days the lower Town, made a vigorous Attack upon
the Castle, and rendered himself Master of some Works, but not without loss. A
Party of the Troops of the Malcontents being advanced to succor the Place, he
went to meet them, and gave them a Defeat; but as he returned, and made no
question of winning this Castle in few days, he had Advice that Teckely came
forward with a considerable Body: He did not think himself in a Condition to
attend him, and rather chose to leave his Cannon, than to be surprised.

The Duke of Lorrain at length took the Field with the Forces of the Emperor,
which amounted to 24 or 25000 Men, and with the Troops of the Empire, ought to
make an Army of 60000. After having considered some time whether he should
besiege Novigrad, and after that, march to Buda, as it had been projected
before the Campaign, he determined upon the Siege of Newhausel, and went to
encamp before the Place upon the 16th of July. He pressed it with as much
Vigor, as the German Armies are accustomed to attack any place; but the Turks
did not defend themselves ill, and there passed above a Month before they had
hopes of reducing the Garrison to capitulate. This gave the Serasquier an
Opportunity of advancing with an Army of 60000 Men, on the other side of the
Danube, to take Vicegrad, and form the Siege of Gran. The Duke of Lorrain
having notice of it, and fearing lest the Serasquier should obtain it in few
days, and then come upon him with all his Troops, resolved, after some
Consultations, to go and assault him before the Imperial Army was more
fatigued, than it was by the Siege of Newhausel. He left before the Place a
sufficient number of Troops to repulse the Efforts of the Garrison, whilst the
rest of the Army was absent, and to advance the Works as much as possible.

Upon the 8th of August he passed the Danube at Comora, upon two Bridges, and
his Army advanced toward Gran in order of Battle. The next day he met the
Commander of Vicegrad, with 70 Soldiers, who had surrendered after 12 days
Resistance. The 11th he arrived in sight of Gran, and the Turks, informed of
his March, after having raised the Siege upon the 10th, and sent their great
Baggage to Buda, went to meet him, under the Conduct of the Serasquier. The
Duke of Lorrain, being advised of the raising of the Siege, did not cease to
send Relief to Gran, in case the Turks should recommence the Siege anew. In
the mean time, having learned that the Serasquier had an Army of above 60000
Men, and approached with a Design to fight the Christian Army, who were not
above 40000; he resolved to withdraw to a place, where the two Wings being
covered on one side by the Danube, and on the other by the Mountains, he might
engage without apprehension of being involved. The Imperialists arrived there
the 16th, and put themselves in order of Battle, in expectation of the Turks,
who had not failed to pursue them as soon as they found they had dislodged.
Having ranked themselves in battle Array at their leisure, by reason of a Mist
that arose at Daybreak, and which entirely kept them from the sight of the
Turks, they received these last, who pursued them as if they had fled, with so
much Firmness and Order, that they could never discompose them, although they came
several times to the Charge. The Christian Army having thus escaped their first
Fury, began to charge them in its turn, in advancing a little, and thundering
much more violent upon them than before. The Turks were soon after in disorder,
notwithstanding the Serasquier, (who was wounded in performing excellently his
Duty) did all that was possible to prevent it. At length they fled toward
their Camp, beyond a Marsh, which covered them upon one side. They stopped a
little in this Post, but not imagining themselves secure there, because they
had filled up part of the Marsh, in order to pursue the Christian Army, they
marched on further, after they had taken away all they could in their Camp as
they passed. The Christians, who marched in order, for fear the Turks rallying
should suddenly come and fall upon on them, advanced to the Marsh, and
afterward entered the Camp of the Turks, where they found their Artillery, and
a good quantity of Ammunition.

Whilst the Army of the Duke of Lorrain was beating the Turks, the Count
Caprara pressed Newhausel more and more. The Garrison being reduced from 3000 to
1700 Men, the Commander dead of his Wounds, and diverse other Officers likewise
killed or wounded, the Place was taken by Assault the 19th of August.

The Forces of the Turks being all employed on the other side of the Danube, in
the Lower-Hungary, or in Croatia, where Count Lesle got several Advantages over
them, which we don't intend to recite; Teckely, in vain, demanded Succor of
the Serasquier. That was the cause of the taking of Eperies, whose
Fortifications were as yet unfinished. General Schultz took it by Composition
upon the 11th of August, 22 days after the Trenches were opened. The
Capitulation was, That the Commander, who was a German, and had served in the
Quality of Colonel in the Troops of Brandenburgh, should be received in those
of the Emperor: That the German Soldiers should have the same Advantage: That
the Hungarians might likewise enter into the same Troops, or retire where they
pleased, after having received a Month's Pay from the Magistrates of Eperies:
That the Citizens should enjoy the same Liberty of Conscience, which the
Emperor had allowed to other Cities that had returned to their Obedience: That
the Nobility should remain unmolested in their Estates, after having sworn a
new Oath of Fidelity to the Emperor: That the Magistrates should retain their
Offices, and that a general Pardon should be given for all that is past. This
Capitulation, wherein every Body was equally included, declared enough that
there was a Weariness of holding for a Party, which every day became more weak.
Peterhasi, one of the chief Malcontents, came some Weeks after to the Camp of
Schultz to surrender himself, with six hundred Men, in order to enjoy the
Benefit of the Act of Oblivion; to which he was immediately received. After
that, the Serasquier thought only upon separating his Troops, and to six them
in those places which he judged to be most exposed. He sent some to Agria and
Esseck, which the Imperialists had begun to attack. The Baron de Merci, began
also with some Regiments the Blockade of Agria, although he had much ado to
subsist about this Place; the Bassa having cut off or spoiled all the Forage,
in the apprehension of a Siege. The Turks being in pain for themselves, did not
consider Teckely, who, in the weak Circumstances he was in, suffered Tokai to
be taken with some other Places of small note.

About the end of September, the Count Caprara was dispatched with new Recruits
to command the Army of Upper Hungary in the place of Schultz. He marched
directly to Cassovia, and invested it the second of October, without being able
notwithstanding to prevent the Counts of Astrowitz and some others from
throwing themselves in it with Troops. They made a very vigorous Resistance
immediately, and found themselves in a condition of holding out a good while;
but Teckely who had a Body of 7 or 8000 Men only, was not in a state of
relieving it, and feared with reason that it would be taken, if not supported.
He had a long time demanded Succors of the Bassa of Great Waradin, to maintain
himself against the Imperial Army, without receiving any; and he redoubled his
Instances as soon as Cassovia was besieged. The Bassa replied, that he could
undertake nothing without the express Orders of the Grand Signior, which he
expected every day. A little while after he sent to inform Teckely, that he had
received Orders with positive Commands to discover them to none but him, and
that he prayed him to repair to Waradin, in order to confer together. Thereupon
Teckely accompanied with his Army, advanced that way with Petrozzi and his
chief Officers. The Bassa came to meet them, and invited them into the City,
which they entered at the Discharge of all the Artillery. The Army encamped
about the Place, whilst the Officers were regaled by the Bassa who was
extremely civil to them. But at the conclusion of the Feast, when Teckely
expected to enter into a private Conference, certain Janissaries came into the
Room with Chains, wherewith they bound him by the Direction of the Bassa, who
said he had received this Order from the Port. As for the other Officers, he
civilly sent them back to their Troops, and told Petrozzi that he might put
himself at the Head of them, and conduct Affairs till new Orders. In all
appearance the Serasquier, or some other Turkish Officer had accused Teckely,
to justify himself in the sense of the Grand Signior, whom the ill Fortune of
the War had incensed against his Generals, as if it had been by their fault
that the Imperialists had obtained so many Advantages, and taken so many
Places. It seemed that if Teckely had discharged his Duty as he should, he must
have made a greater Diversion of the Imperial Troops, and they have gained
considerably less.

The unseasonableness of the ill Policy of the Turks had like to have ruined
entirely the Malcontents Party, and really brought it a Prejudice which it
could never since repair. Petrozzi, either frighted at the Imprisonment of
Teckely, or else weary of the Fatigues of War, disposed the Officers and Troops
which he commanded, to accept the general Pardon which the Emperor offered to
those who would embrace his Party. This Body being without a Head, and not
knowing what course to take without the Assistance of the Turks, was easily
persuaded; and Deputies were sent in his Name to Caprara, to know if he would
receive him. Caprara joyfully received them all, and engaged himself to let
them enjoy the general Pardon, after which they all repaired to his Camp. They
took a new Oath of Fidelity, and those who had a mind to be concerned in the
Emperor's Troops, remained there. The Garrison of Cassovia understanding how
things were carried, judged Count Teckely to be absolutely lost, and followed
their Example. The Conditions of its Surrender were almost the same with those
of Eperies. They likewise seized upon other Places of Hungary, whereof the
Malcontents were possessed, and they found in Zolnock's considerable quantity
of Provisions.

About the same time the Imperialists sent Petrozzi with a Convoy to Mongatz to
let the Princess, the Wife of Teckely, know what had befallen her Husband, and
to dispose her to resign this Fortress to the Emperor, and also that of Patack,
which she still maintained, since at least there was no possibility of saving
her Husband, nor re-establishing the Party. She answered, that she could not
believe her Husband had been seized on; and that if so be he was advanced into
the Turkish Territories, it was only to consult of Measures with the Grand
Signior for the ensuing Campaign. Upon this Reply Patack was assaulted, which
was taken in a few days, and they began the Blockade of Mongatz.

Belgrade by her Husband, wherein he observed to her that his Innocence had
been acknowledged at the Port, and that a Bassa, who had accused him, and
arrested him without Order, was condemned to give him Reparation of Honor. He
added, that he only waited for the new Serasquier, in order to take the Field
with him, and that he would soon raise the Blockade of Mongatz, exhorting his
Wife to hearken to no Proposals of Peace. Whether these Letters were real or
no, it is certain that the Turks were soon convinced of the fault they had
committed, in arresting the Head of the Malcontents at so dangerous a
Conjuncture; and instead of misusing him, he was set at Liberty, to see whether
they could act with Success, under his means against the Imperialists.

Caprara about this time wrote a Letter to the Princess, and represented to
her, that in the Extremity to which the Affairs of the Party were reduced, the
Count her Husband being arrested by the Turks, and the greatest part of the
Malcontents returned to their Duty, it was time for her likewise to indemnify
her self with her Family, in having recourse to the Mercy of the Emperor. She
answered, that she was not of opinion, that she had offered this Prince any
occasion of making War against her; and that being Guardian to those Children
she had had by the Prince Ragotski, she was obliged to preserve to them, as
much as possibly she could, the Places which had appertained to their Father:
That it was no occasion of surprise to find a Mother defending the Rights of
her Children, or a Wife not declaring against her Husband. That what was
affirmed of his Imprisonment, was nothing but a Fiction, since he would appear
the following Campaign: In short, that there was no Reputation for those who
used their Endeavors to dispossess Orphans, and to force a Castle defended by
a Woman. Caprara thereupon disposed himself to the Siege of Mongatz which
required much time, this Place being seated upon a very high Rock, steep on all
sides, and hardly to be reduced but by Famine. It is upon the River Torza,
between Vngwar and Zathmar, and has above three hundred Towns in its
Jurisdiction.

The Turks continuing to make little Progress in their Affairs, soon after had
a sense of the Disadvantage they had given themselves by the apprehension of
Teckely, not only by the weakening of the whole Party of Malcontents, but also
by the taking of Lippa, a City between the River Maros, the Teys and the
Danube, where they had great Magazines. This City being secured by a River and
Great Waradin, appeared to be out of danger; but the Imperial Horse, being
accompanied with Hungarians, to whom this Country was perfectly known, and
having nothing to fear elsewhere, advanced so far, and gained all the
Ammunition and Provisions that were found therein. The neighboring Bassa's
were sensible then more than ever, that Teckely was much more necessary to them
than they had imagined, and made haste to put him in a condition of commencing
the Campaign as soon as possible, and to recollect once again the Friends he
still retained in Hungary. In the mean time he composed a Discourse directed to
the Hungarians, which he sent by one of his Domestics, who had continued with
him; and coming from Belgrade to Temiswaer, dispersed from thence a great
number of its Copies in Hungary. This Piece being important, and containing all
the Subjects of Complaints which the Hungarians had against the Emperor, and
what they replied to the Accusations of the Imperialists, better than any other
extant, it shall be inferted here entire*

The Discourse of Count Teckely, containing the Reasons which the Hungarians
have to take up Arms against the Emperor.
YE People of Hungary, you are suddenly to see me in the Field, in order to
defend your oppressed Liberty: Unite all your Minds, and join your Arms, to
concur with me in so laudable a Design. The French King should have done well
to reflect on his own Actions at home, and those of another Prince, before he
had thus exposed the Emperor's Proceedings in Hungary; however he may expect we
will consider them.
The Emperor offers to you an Act of Oblivion, but be careful how you are
seduced by this imposing Charm. To accept a Pardon, is to acknowledge a Guilt
where there is none.

You may have recourse to Force, to defend your Privileges, without being
accused, with Justice, of Rebellion. It Is what Andrew the Second has observed by
his Declaration, whose Terms inform you, that it is for the Palatine to support
your Freedom. But what Assistance can you expect from thence, if he is
Stranger, as have been under the precedent Reigns the Suoudis, the Mansfields,
the Bastes, the Tranhausers, and the Buquois? And what Protection can you hope
for from Bishops, if Prelacies are only conferred upon the Germans? How should
the Nobles dare to undertake, if the Governments of the most important Places
of the Kingdom are in the Hands of Persons devoted to the House of Austria, and
Strangers to your Nation? Have not your Ancestors seen those of Waradin and
Javarin committed to Pucchain Lesle, and Montecuculi, and that of Cassovia to
Teuffembach, and Beljoycuse? Have not you your selves still fresh in Memory the
Barbarities which have been exercised in their Governments by Sporks, the
Spaniards, and the K^ps?

It is true, that we have seen under this Reign Count Wesselini invested with
the Charge of Palatin of the Kingdom: but how long was it left vacant after his
Death, because it was observed this generous Count had concerted the Design of
defending your Liberty? It is true; that this Dignity has been since conferred
upon a Hungarian, but it proceeded from an Observation of my being armed to
maintain your Privileges. They have been seen to be re-established, when
Stephen Boskai, Gabriel Betlem, and George Ragotski, demanded at the Head of an
Army, the performance of the Declarations granted by your first Kings, and
whereof their Successors had swonn the Observation at their coming to the
Crown. But how long have these Regulations endured? As long as they who had
obtained them, have been in a condition to preserve you in those Liberties
which they had procured you.

Why should Vienna delivered, Gran and Newhausel re-taken, make you suspect the
Circumstances of the Turks? The Vigor with which they defended Buda last
Campaign, ought to convince you of their Forces. What the Emperor can oppose
against them, cannot be supposed very considerable; and one may say that his
Funds for the Payment of his Army are but ill assured. If the present*Pope
should shut up his Purse, or after him another should succeed of less Zeal for
Religion, should you not see this great Body disperse it self for want of
Maintenance? Can you embark your selves upon so weak a Vessel, which is in
danger of being split against the least Rock it encounters? Let the Venetians
cease to divert a part of the Ottoman Forces in the Morea, let the Poles be
weary of disputing a Passage with the Tartars; Let the Pope withdraw his
Succors, can you expect not to be the Victims of your own Credulity, and the
first crushed in pieces by the formidable Power of an Enemy, who reigns in
three parts of the World?

You cannot fix any Confidence in the word of a Prince, who is incessantly
besieged by certain Persons, who referring all things to their Passions, and
not knowing what it is to govern People, concern themselves in what they do not
understand. They endeavor to persuade the King, that one may without breach of
Duty, infringe all the Engagements taken with Rebels. If they had well perused
St. Austin, they would have seen, that this Father of the Church is of a
contrary Opinion, when he says to Boniface, in the 105th. Epistle; Fides
supr^mum rerum humanarum vinculum est, sacra laus fides inter hosts; Faith is
the supreme Bond of humane Societies; and its greatest Commendation is, that it
ought to be inviolably observed even amongst Enemies. To which agrees, the
Disposition of the Roman Law, in the 5th. Law in the Digest. de Pactis; where
it is said, that Pactum pacis ligat; All Covenants of Peace oblige. Take care
of experiencing the Misfortune of the Bohemians, who laying down their Arms in
1621, upon the Faith of a general Pardon, saw themselves dispossessed of their
Estates, and the chief of them brought to punishment, like infamous Offenders.

But why should I seek Examples amongst our Neighbors, when you have a fresh
one amongst your selves? That innocent Blood, which the Hangmen have spilled,
still reaks and calls to you for Vengeance. Is it not upon the Faith of these
fallacious Treaties, and those deluding Pardons, that the Protectors of your
Liberties have brought their Heads upon a Scaffold? But who are these Heroes,
that have been treated like vile Criminals? Why Francis Nadasti, Count of
Forgarats, who by his transcendent Qualities, had been esteemed worthy of
entering into the Senate, before the Age appointed by the Laws; who had
exercised the Charge of Judge of the Court-Royal, those of Governor of the
Counties of Castle-ferra^, Kalo and Chemnitz, Commander of the Garrisons of
Alts^l, Lindaw and Nemfr; who had been made Counselor of the Courtick Council,
and Substitute of the Palatin of the Kingdom, after the Death of Count
Wesselini, during the Vacancy of the Charge. It Is Peter de Serini, Ban of
Dalmatia, Slavenia and Croatia; who in his most tender Youth, jointly with his
Brother Nicholas, Count de Serini, had repulsed the Turks in so glorious a
manner, that his Valor had procured him the Esteem of all Neighboring
Nations. It Is, in a word, Francis of Tersats, Count of Frangipani, equally
illustrious for the Antiquity of his Nobility, and his personal Qualities. All
these have perished by relying on their Faith.

What Formalities have been observed in their Trials? Were they condemned by
their natural Judges, pursuant to the Rights of the Hungarians? By no means;
They had Commissioners allowed them that were all Strangers, ignorant in our
Laws, and devoted to those who were fixed upon their Destruction. Who was
chosen to be President of this Commission? John Count of Rothal, whose inhuman
Temper is but too well known, not only in this Kingdom, but also in the
Hereditary Lands of the Emperor. These Commissioners, Did they observe the
accustomed Rules? Did they hearken to the Accused in their Defenses? Did they
confront their Witnesses? Nothing of the matter; notwithstanding they
pronounced their Sentences upon Nadasti, in Vienna, and upon the other two
Counts at Neustad, upon the 30th of April 1671, before they were convinced of
the Reality of what was alleged against them.

The Cruelty of the Emperor's Ministers did not stop there: You have seen a
Chamber established at Presburgh, which has put into the hands of the
Executioners, all those whose Estates excited their Avarice, or whose Zeal for
the Preservation of your Liberty, gave them any Suspicion. Amongst all these
unhappy Persons, you ought in particular to regret Francis Bouis; who had been
the first Assessor of the County of Zemlin, whom you have often seen to
support, with an unshaken Constancy, the Freedom of his Country, and the
Reformed Religion.

When King Leopold, who reigns at present, would abolish your Privileges, and
make you Slaves, he does but pursue therein the Footsteps of his Ancestors, who
have forgot nothing to render the Crown of Hungary hereditary to their House.
You know that the States of this Kingdom have always enjoyed the Privilege of
electing your Kings. One reads in your Histories, that all those who have
preceded Ferdinand the First, came to the Crown by this means alone; but this
Prince, who was the first Hungarian King of the Austrian Family, took a Method
extremely different. He transacted with John Sepusa, without the Participation
of the States, as if one or the other had the Propriety thereof, and it had been
an Inheritance, of which they enjoyed the free and absolute Disposal. In the
mean time, you know that your Kings are but the Usufructuaries of their
Dominions. You have taken them to defend you against your Adversaries, and to
preserve your Rights. At the moment they contradict them, they have actually
and legally forfeited the Sovereignty, and you are dispensed from the Oath of
Fidelity and Obedience that you have taken to them.

Notwithstanding, Ferdinand was not contented with the Division he had made
with Sepusa. He compelled this dispossessed Prince to have recourse to
Sigismond King of Poland, and after that to Solomon, when he found that he
could not support himself by the Assistance of the first. It Is this Treaty
which has afforded a Pretense to Ferdinand and his Successors, to impose upon
you that Yoke, under which you have groaned since that time. Their Partisans
declared, That you had sought the Protection of the Turks against your
Sovereign, and that S^pus^ had a mind to become Tributary to the Port. Was ever
any thing so repugnant to Truth? 'Twas Ferdinand himself, who had a mind to pay
Tribute to the Turks.

Solomon having taken Buda, and almost all the other Places of Hungary,
restored them to John Sepusa, without exacting any thing of him; but after the
Death of this Prince, when Ferdinand would have deprived his Widow Isabella,
and his Son John the 2d, this unfortunate Widow was constrained to have
recourse once more to the Protection of Solomon; who for the Expenses of the
War, retained Buda, Quinque-Ecclesiae, Alba Regalis, and Gran. The Austrians
cannot deny that Ferdinand offered to pay Solomon for each Hungarian a Crown
tribute, if he would refuse his Protection to Sepusa. It is true, that this
Prince disowned the Ambassador that he had dispatched to the Port, when he
received Advice that he had been stopped by Sigismond as he crossed over Poland,
although his Instructions directed it in express Terms. Behold how the Princes of
the Austrian Family are become Masters of Hungary. Let us see now what Methods
they have practiced to render this Crown hereditary in their House.

The first thing they attempted, was to divide you, under pretense of a
differing Religion: They persuaded the Roman Catholics, that the Protestants
had drawn the Turks into Hungary, to the end of incensing the First against the
Protestants: Notwithstanding, it is easy enough to know the contrary by the
Letter which John Sepusa wrote to Clement the 7th; by which he makes it appear,
that the Threats which Ferdinand made to Solomon, by his Ambassadors, disposed
him to turn his Arms against this desolate Kingdom.

Although, by several Treaties, the Kings of the House of Austria, had promised
to leave the Protestants the free Exercise of their Religion, they have not
ceased to deprive them of their Churches and their Schools. This is what is
expressly born by the Treaty of Vienna, made with Boscai, and confirmed after
that by a Declaration of the Archduke Matthias; who has been since Emperor,
and King of Hungary. In 1608, this Liberty of Religion was extended to the very
Peasants of Villages. Ferdinand the 2d, confirmed the Declarations of his
Predecessors at his Coronation. Ferdinand the 3d, did the same thing in 1647.
And there was a Declaration of the like nature in 1655. Nevertheless, in spite
of so many Assurances, so often repeated, the Germans have not failed to seize
upon the great Church of Cassovia, after having broke open the Doors, and have
dispossessed the Protestants of the use thereof. Next they surpised that of
Newfol, a City of the Mountains, in the nightime, whilst the People slept;
and as Newsol was fortified, they entered it by scaling. I cannot relate, without
Horror, what Cruelties they exercised in the Church of Thalia, a little
Village, when they became Masters of it. They committed Rapes therein, and
disposed themselves to all sorts of Excess. Judge if these Extremities are the
Ways to bring back, into the bosom the Church, those whom they call seduced.
Nevertheless, they engaged the Catholics of the Kingdom to take Arms with
them, in order to chase the Protestants from their Churches and their Schools.

The Ministers of the Emperor, after having sowed amongst you the Spirit of
Division, to weaken you, deprived the Hungarians of all the Charges, and all
the Governments, against your Rights, to become Masters of Places. Then they
supplied them with German Garrisons, under pretense of defending them against
the Turks, whose Assaults, in reference to those Places, they said they
suddenly expected. To know by what Motive the Emperor introduced these foreign
Troops into Hungary, one must examine two things: 1st. If the Kingdom, before
it was subject to the House of Austria, defended it self ill against the
Infidels: And 2dly, If those Troops, which are pretended to have been sent to
your assistance have treated you with Civility, and applied themselves to your
Interests.

As for what relates to the first Point, let us ascend to the time of the
Huniades and the Corvins, and we shall find that Hungary has been the Bulwark
of Christendom. Since that time, if so be this Kingdom has lost any thing
because the Successors of Ferdinand have drawn out its Forces. Notwithstanding,
they send you Germans, under a pretense of supporting you, and these Germans
treat you with more Inhumanity than ever did the Turks and Tartars. They
destroy your Harvests, they take away your Goods, they dishonor your Wives and
your Daughters; and set fire to your Houses, after having filled them with
Slaughter. What could your most cruel Enemies do to you worse? At the same
time, if you dare complain, they accuse you of Ingratitude, and tell you that
you misufe those who are sent to your assistance.

They interpret that revenge, a Crime, which you took of 300 Musketeers, in
the Town of Ker: and they report, as an extraordinary Effect of the Emperor's
Clemency, the Goodness he made appear by leaving their Deaths unpunished; as if
these Soldiers had not deferved it, having before massacre'd a Gentleman of
the Ancient Nobility, who had exercised the Charge of sworn Assessor in the
County of Abanvivar, although they could accuse him of nothing more than an
Unwillingness to satisfy their insatiable Avarice. It is not permitted, by all
Laws, Divine and Humane, to repulse Force with Force, when there is no other way
to obtain Justice? They say, that you pursued the German Soldiers, with Forks
and Clubs; but since the Peasants have no other Arms, they might well use them
to defend their Goods against these Robbers.

They propose to you, for an Example, the Emperor's Humanity toward the Prince
Ragotski, whom he re-established in his Possession, although his Grandfather,
after having disunited Transylvania from Hungary, made it tributary to the
Port, and notwithstanding he had himself been one of the heads of the last
Rebellion. Can a thing of so little Truth be advanced; and dares any one
affirm, that this Prince was favorably dealt with, when all his Movables were
taken away, and he deprived of the Places of Erschot, Patak, Onod, Tokai, Saros
and Trentschin; and that his Widow is held close blocked up in Mongatz, which
is the only Place remaining to her?

They accuse the Protestants of having suffered Waradin to be lost, and of
saying, That they had rather hear the Allah of the Turks, than the Allelujah of
the Papists. Was there ever Malice so inveterate? Martin Bredoay, and Francis
Belemersi, who are still living, can testify, that they were sent to Souches,
General of the Imperial Army, to press him to dispatch Succors to the
Besieged; and that he would never quit his Post, nor make one Detachment march
that way. When the Place was taken by the Turks, Prince Porcia, to excuse this
Negligence, after having considered upon the Map the Situation of Waradin, told
the Emperor, that it was no great loss, that it was no better than a Hog-sty:
Those are his very Terms.

They would also persuade you, that they distinguish the Loyal Hungarians from
the Rebels; and that those, who have not taken up Arms against their Sovereign,
are for that reason exempted from the Taxes, which are imposed on them, for the
support of the foreign Garrisons. Is not this attempting against your Liberty,
and infringing your Privileges, when they lay Taxes upon you? Is it not
directed, by the Constitutions of the Kingdom, that the King can impose nothing
without the consent of the States, and an urgent Necessity? Notwithstanding,
the present King will be Master of them, and pretends that they depend upon his
single Will and Pleasure.

In order to have a Pretense of depriving you of your Rights, it is alleged,
that the Revolt has been universal, and that no Person is exempt; but after
having justified, by the Declaration of Andrew the 2d, that you might legally
take up Arms for the defense of your Liberty, I will also give you an Example
to demonstrate, that you have a Right to depose your Kings, when they
contravene those Conditions, under which they have received the Crown. Petrus
Germanicus was, as King Leopold does now, for giving the Charges of the Kingdom
to Strangers, for putting into places German Garrisons, and for making
Impositions, of his own motion, without the Approbation of the States. These
very States, incensed at so many Infractions, deposed him, and elected Abas to
reign in his stead.

They would give a false Interpretation to the Ordinance of Andrew the 2d; and
make Men believe that the Intention of this Prince was only to commit to the
Palatine the care of maintaining in this Kingdom the Catholic Religion, and of
preventing the Alteration of its Purity; but if one well considers the Terms,
one must be convinced that it concerns Privileges and not Religion.

The Austrians pretend to justify the Execution of the three Counts, by two
ways. The first is drawn from the Examples of Count Lambert de Maylath and his
Accomplices, whom Bela put to Death for having taken up Arms against him; from
John Ban of Croatia, from Konnez, Herdivara, and 30 other Lords, whom Sigismond
Emperor, and King of Hungary, sent to punishment for a like Occasion; and from
Stephen Vaivod of Moldavia, who lost his Head by order of the same Prince. The
second is founded upon the Moderation which the present King showed, in
relation to the Sentence of the three Counts, when he remitted that part of it
which referred to the Hand's being cut off.

As for the Examples, they have no consistence with the unjust Decree against
the Defenders of your Liberty. The Count Lambert having cast himself at the
King's feet, his own Brother pulled him away, and broke his Head with a
Joint-stool, which he had seized on. This very Brother dragged Nicholas the Son
of the Count, even to the King's Throne, and made his Head to be cut off in his
Presence. The other Lords were massacred in the Hall of the Assembly. The
Rebellion of Kennez and Herdivara, was also sufficiently proved; and Stephen
the Vaivod had been duly cited, before he was arrested. Can the same thing be
asserted of the Counts Nadasti, Serini, and Frangipani? Was there any Formality
observed in their Trial? There was no Accuser, no Information, the Judges were
Foreigners, and the Laws of the Kingdom were not pursued. If Nadasti was a
Criminal, his Crime was annulled by the Emperor's Pardon; and the other two
came of themselves to Vienna, upon the assurance which had been given them of a
favorable Usage. After so much Injustice, can one call this a favorable
Sentence, which was pronounced by incompetent Judges, and contrary to all the
Rules of Law and Clemency?

We are accused of having begged the Protection of the Turks, Has not the
French King reason to blush at this Passage?
but we have done no more than has been practiced in all Ages. One finds in the
sacred History, that the People of God have joined their Arms to those of
idolatrous Princes. The Austrians and the Kings of Spain of this very Family,
who affect the Name of Catholics, have often treated Alliances with these very
Infidels. In these latter Times the Poles have made no scruple of entering into
a League with the Tartars, to make War upon the Swedes and Muscovites.

When we complain that the Protestants are chased from their Temples, it is
replied, that the Catholics have only restored themselves to the Possession of
those Churches which had been taken from them. In the mean time, all the World
knows that those of our Communion have taken none but those that were
abandoned, which one may easily be satisfied in by the Description that George
Dracowits, Bishop of Quinque Ecclesiae, has made of the unhappy State wherein
the Church and Clergy of Hungary were at that time. But admit the Catholics
had some right in those Churches whereof the Protestants were in Possession,
the same was extinguished by the Transaction of Vienna, which adjudged them to
those of our Communion.

After having explained to you, Generous Hungarians, the Artifices which your
Enemies make use of, to cry down your Conduct, and to make you fall into their
Snares; I hope you will not be so imprudent, as to go and throw your selves
into the Arms of those People, who seek only to destroy you; and that you will
take some Confidence in the words of a Man, who has no other Interest than the
Good of his Country; and who having a pretty considerable Establishment in
Poland, might be happy there removed from War, if he was not influenced by the
Tears of an infinite number of miserable People, who expect the end of their
Pains from Perseverance and the good fortune of his Arms.

This Manifesto, which might have produced great Effects in the beginning of a
Rebellion, when People full of hopes have not as yet seen any ill Consequence
of their Attempts, was not capable of engaging afresh Persons disgusted with so
tedious and unsuccessful a War; if one did not excite their languishing Courage
by an Assistance capable of supporting them, and give them a prospect of
obtaining what they had vainly expected hitherto. Therefore Teckely soon after
marched at the head of a Body of Troops, mixed with Hungarians, Transylvanians
and Turks, who composed an Army of 9 or 10000 Men. He came to encamp near Great
Waradin, where he had a Reception extremely different from the other, and from
whence he sent to advise those of Mongatz of his March, and to solicit every
where his ancient Friends to rejoin him.

The Garrison of Mongatz, enlivened by this News, made a Sally of 600 Men,
wherein they shocked the Imperialists with so much Courage, that they killed
above 300 of them, seized upon a Redoubt, which they had raised, and so
delivered the lower Town from an Inconvenience, which began to render the Abode
there dangerous.

In the mean time Count Caprara seized upon another Post, by which means he
hindered the Inhabitants of the Town from going to fetch Water at the River,
from whence he hoped in a little time to draw a great Advantage against them.
But the Town being full of Cisterns, which had been filled by the great Rains
which had newly fallen, that did not much incommode the Inhabitants.

In the mean time Count Teckely, instead of taking to the right toward
Mongatz, as it was supposed he would, marched to the left toward Transylvania,
at some Leagues from Clausembourg, in order to attempt, to suprize, or debauch
some Hungarian Troops, which were not far from thence, and whereof the greatest
part had formerly followed his Standards. But these Troops being advised of his
coming, retired toward other German Troops, and Teckely would not undertake to
follow them, nor to force them. He was in hopes still, that by little and
little he might win them back, by the means of Correspondence he had amongst
them; but his Approach was fatal to some of his Friends, or those who were
suspected to be so. Several were ordered to be seized on, whether they were
really culpable, or that it was feigned to be believed, in order to put those
Men who were not confided in, out of a condition to do hurt, in case they had a
design. Those who have long born Arms against their Sovereign, tho they return
to their Duty, they are never loved, and the first occasion that is had to
quarrel with them, always suffices to destroy them.

Count Caraffa who commanded a Body of an Army of 7000 Men to oppose the
Designs of Teckely, followed him some few days, without being able to overtake
him, in hopes of defeating the new Troops he conducted. But Teckely being fixed
upon hazarding nothing, and not being well enough assured of his new Army, kept
near Waradin, without attempting any thing. In the mean time Caraffa came
before St. Job, a Town three Leagues from Waradin, and supported by a Castle,
flanked with four Bastions of Freestone, and encompassed with a double Ditch.
He summoned the Place upon the 9th of February, and the Garrison replied to him
with some Vollies of Cannon: he attempted to force it. Happily for him a Bomb,
which fell upon the Magazine of Powder, set it on Fire, killed several Persons,
and reduced the Garrison to capitulate, for want of Powder, the 12th of the same
Month. It went out the next day, and carried to Waradin the News of the taking
of a Place which was supposed capable of resisting above a Month. There was
found within it eight pieces of Cannon, Provisions, and a great number of
Christian Prisoners. The Castle, although little considerable of it self, did not
cease to put all the Neighborhood under Contribution, and to annoy the
Imperialists. They made the same use of it against the Turks; and Debrezen,
which had been taxed to a certain Sum, as a means to exempt it from
Winter Quarters, and had refused to pay it, when Teckely was near it, was
constrained to submit to the Conditions of the Imperialists. The Turks acted
but weakly by reason of the Disorders which had been at Adrianople, where the
Grand-Signor had put the Serasquier to Death, and after that deposed the
Grand-Visier. Solomon who commanded the Army which had opposed the Poles, was
made Vizier, and could not immediately re-establish Order in the Armies of the
Grand-Signor.

The Affairs of the Port, and the Malcontents being in this condition, it
seems that a small Effort would absolutely have quelled the Party. It had but
the single Town of Mongatz left, which had been blocked up a long time. This*
Blockade was turned into a formal Siege in the beginning of March, and several
Batteries were prepared to ruin the Castle below, and that above. They also
threw a great quantity of Bombs and Carcasses, and left nothing unattempted
that might terrify the Inhabitants. But as the Garrison was composed of 4000
Men, and the Inhabitants affected to the Party, nothing could shake them.
Besides, the Situation of the was Place found in the Attacks stronger than had
been imagined. The lower Town and Castle were encompassed with a Ditch very
broad and deep, which was full of Water. The Imperialists in vain undertook to
drain it, and those of the Place found means to introduce Water, which came
from several parts of the Mountains, because the Snows began to melt. In vain
therefore did they endeavor to form an Attack against the upper Castle: Being
seated upon an inaccessible Rock uncommanded, and encompassed with a double
Ditch cut into the Rock, a few Men might be able to defend it against a great
Army. Besides it happened that the Springtime was extremely rainy in Hungary,
insomuch that all the Works of the Besiegers were full of Water. Moreover, the
Army that was there, having consumed all the Provisions and Forage thereabouts,
had much ado to subsist. Caprara, who had the Conduct of this Siege, sent
Advice to Vienna of the condition of his Troops, and of the Siege, which he
declared himself unabled to continue, unless he was assisted with Provisions
and Men; but the Imperial Council having other Designs, found it more
seasonable to abandon this Enterprise. So the Siege was raised about the end of
April, after a continuance of two Months, without reckoning the Blockade, which
had been formed two Months before. Teckely, fearing lest the Place should at
length be won, used his utmost Endeavors to get a sufficient Force to go and
fall upon Caprara; but the Troops which he attempted to recollect in the
Neighborhood in order to this Design, having been routed by some of the
Officers of the Emperor, the Turks were disgusted at the Enterprise; and the
ill Weather joined to the Scarcity of the Imperial Army* besides the
advantageous Situation of the Place, and the Resistance of the Garrison* saved
without them the only place of Refuge which the Malcontents possessed in
Hungary.

On another side, the Imperial. Commanders having no further Concern with the
People of the Country, gained several Advantages over the Turks. The Serasquier
with some Bassa's, and Teckely being advanced toward Seged, with a Body of
4000 Men, were routed without fighting, surprised by the Baron of Merci,
inferior in number, but who arrived so unexpectedly, that they could not know
what his Forces were, nor put themselves in a posture of Defense.

The Imperial Army which was to act against the Turks, rendevouz'd between
Barcan and Gran, where it was to be complete by the 15th of May. It was to be
composed of above 50000 Men, and commanded, as in the preceding Campagnes, by
the Duke of Lorrain. It had been disputed in the Emperor's Council, whether the
Siege of Buda should be formed, or that of some other place less important, as
Agria, or Belgrade. The Fortifications of Buda having been repaired, and the
Place provided with all things to support a Siege, with a Garrison of 10000 Men
commanded by a Renegade; some were of opinion, that it hazarded the loss of a
world of Men, and the raising of the Siege, as before. But others on the
contrary, represented that it would prove better than before, because the Place
was more known, and that those Faults might be avoided which they had made in
the first Siege; and if this Design succeeded, the Emperor might depend upon
being soon Master of all the lower Hungary. The chief Officers being of this
Advice, all things were disposed for the Execution of it; but the Duke of
Lorrain could not arrive at the Camp before the 8th of June.

In order to send more Troops over the Danube, it was resolved to raze the
Fortifications of several Towns of upper Hungary, to the end of not being
obliged to hold Garrisons therein, and to hinder Teckely from making an
Advantage of them. This was done at Eperies, and some other Places; they also
thought themselves in a condition of obliging Abaffi, and the Transylvanians to
declare for the Emperor; and if it succeeded, they might be able to make a
considerable Diversion on that side. Since the Detention of Teckely, Abaffi had
refused the Malcontents all sorts of Relief, without attempting nevertheless
any thing against them, to manage himself at the same time with the Emperor and
the Grand-Signor, under the uncertainty he was in concerning the end of the
War. But to oblige him to determine himself, the Count of Soherffemberg was
sent into Transylvania with 8000 Germans and Hungarians near Clausemberg. The
Vizier, who was at Belgrade, being advised of it, directed some Valachian
Troops to march on that side, in order to act jointly with Teckely, and to
drive the Imperialists out of Transylvania. Scherffemberg went to meet them,
and put them to the rout before they could come near Waradin. He seized at the
same time, upon the Passage of Hermanstadt; and at length, after having given
the Transylvanians some Respite to consider, upon condition that they should
provide for his Army in the mean time, he compelled them to declare themselves,
and to join their Troops with his, which rendered Teckely and the Turks
incapable of attempting any thing on that side. The Count, in not having
prevented this Blow, must either have ill Spies, or else the Turks did not make
a speedy use enough of his Advice. When those who see alone what is to be done
in order to prevent a Misfortune, cannot act themselves to oppose it in good
time, but are reduced to importune those who see it not, it seldom happens that
things are carried on with a necessary Expedition.

In the mean time the Imperial Army was mustered upon the 10th of June: It
consisted of 30000 Foot, and 20000 Horse, without computing the Hungarians, and
the Troops of the Elector of Brandenburg, which were expected still. It had 16
great Pieces of Cannon, 40 Mortars, and all other Provisions in proportion. It
was divided in two parts, and marched on each side of the Danube, by little
Journies, upon account of the bad Ways. The 18th the Duke of Lorrain invested
the Place, and ordered the making of a Bridge for the other part of the Army to
pass over that was on the other side of the Danube, and commanded by the
Elector of Bavaria. The Turks who had not conjectured that they would return to
the Siege of Buda, did not at all oppose the March of the Army, and did not so
much as send to observe it, till it appeared before the Place. I will not
insist upon the Circumstances of this Siege, whose History no further relates
to the Life of Count Teckely, than as the taking of this Place had an Influence
in the Affairs of all Hungary, and to which the Circumstances are of no effect.

It shall suffice to say, that if the Place was well assaulted, according to
the method of the Germans, it was as well defended, the Besieged being resolved
to hold out to Extremity. There was no Obstruction to the Siege without, till
the 12th of August, when the Serasquier appeared upon the Hills near the
Danube. After he had encamped there, he put himself in order of Battle the next
day, without engaging still with the Imperialists, who had exceeded their
Lines. It is said that the Turks were 50000 Men, and the Christians not above
40000, the rest having continued in the Lines. The next day the Turks advanced
on farther, and some of them crept along a Mountain, which was at the right of
the Imperialists, with a design to get into the Place through the Camp, whilst
the rest of their Army diverted that of the Christians. But the first were
assaulted, and the others vigorously repulsed at the same time, who retired to
their Camp after having lost near 2000 Men. Instead of returning to the Charge,
they decamped in the Night, and went to post themselves three Leagues from
thence, where resided the Grand Vizier. It is said, that this last would
absolutely have the Serasquier return against the Christians, and heard not the
Excuses. Indeed, unless the Turkish Army was severely frightened at the loss it
had received, in returning diverse times; the Imperial Army, which was extremely
fatigued with the Siege, and had been under Arms three days, could hardly have
resisted long. The 20th, 2000 Janisaries came again to attack the Lines, and
performed it with so much Vigor, that they broke through immediately, and had
all unquestionably entered the Place, if they had been supported as they ought;
but there could enter not above 300, whereof the greatest part were wounded. It
is said, that the Vizier gave 30 Crowns to each of the Janisaries, who in this
occasion had perfectly well discharged their Duties; but who were not assisted
by the Spahies, who complained of having been in other Encounters abandoned by
the Janisaries. Thus the Jealousy there is between those two kinds of Turkish
Soldiers, and the small Experience of their Officers, preserved the Christian
Army at this time. They were contented to appear often in order of Battle in
view of the Imperialists, who went out of their Lines to receive them, but
advanced not up to them when they saw them fixed. The Turks attempted once
again to break through the Trenches of the Imperialists, the 29th of August;
but being entered into the Camp on one side, whilst the Vizier made an
appearance of going to assault it on another, they lost 7 or 800 Men, without
being able to pierce as far as the Place. The loss was small for an Army as
considerable as that; and which ought to save the Place upon any Conditions. In
the mean time the Turks not returning to attack the Lines, the Imperialists won
Buda the 2d of September, by a general Assault, wherein they broke through the
last Trenches of the Enemy on three sides.

The Turkish Army, which might have prevented the taking of the Place, by
continual Skirmishes with the Imperialists, did not appear the day whereon the
Town was won, and was preparing to march toward Alba-Regalis. Having increased
the Garrison of this City, it turned toward Esseck, and remained some time
encamped three Leagues from thence, to observe the march of the Imperial Army.
The Duke of Lorrain, after having made the Christian Army rest three days near
Buda, resolved to follow that of the Turks, and went to encamp the 19th of
September at Tolna upon the Danube; but the Turks being unwilling to engage
themselves in a Battle, he divided his Army, half of which passed the Danube to
go and form the Siege of Seged; and the other took to the right, with a design
to invest Quinque Ecclesiae. The Vizier retired to Esseck, and put his Troops
in Winter Quarters, whilst the Imperialists obtained these two Places, at the
end of the Month, besides several others of less note. Count Veterani also beat
a cosiderable Relief that was marching to raise the Siege of Seged; so that it
seems the Affairs of the Ottoman Empire were generally in a declining state,
without a Man found capable to re-instate them.

In the two Sieges of Buda they had lost their best Troops, and their bravest
Officers, who had put themselves in a state of perishing, or were effectually
dead with their Arms in their Hands, rather than to abandon this Place to the
Christians. After that, one saw amongst the Turks none but such Officers as
were equally unable to defend and attack with Honor.

The hopes of Teckely, and those who had remained fixed to his Interests,
diminished at the same time; and having no Troops in his Dependence, nor being
able to obtain any of the Turks, he found himself reduced to make use of some
Intrigues, the success of which was not advantageous to him. It is said that
the Princess Ragotski sent the Countess Nadasti, and another Hungarian Lady to
Cassovia, with a design to gain some Persons there, under pretense of being
willing to submit to the Emperor. But their Intention was discovered, and they
were apprehended, whether what was asserted of them was true, or that they were
used so out of Suspicion, or Revenge. A Turkish Party that was to surprise
Cassovia, was defeated by the Generals Caraffa and Heusler.

It is also assured, that the Princess Ragotski sent two Persons to Caraffa, in
order to let him know that she was absolutely disposed to enter into some
Accommodation with the Emperor, and demanded for that end a Truce for three
Months. Caraffa referred her to the Emperor's Ministers of State, lest if it
proved a Feint, they should tax him with Imprudence in suffering himself to be
imposed on. As the Affairs of the Turks every day grew worse, they nearly
observed the Person of Teckely, lest by a Disgust of them he would no longer
serve them, and should apply himself to make a serious Composition with the
Emperor. It was for this reason they denied him the Liberty of throwing himself
into Mongatz, notwithstanding he promised to disturb the Imperial Troops from
thence.

Whilst the Imperialists and Turks made great Preparations for the following
Campaign, the Garrison of Mongatz, seeing the Emperor disposed to treat the
Remainders of the Malcontents with Severity, did all the Waste they could in
the Neighborhood, to deprive the Imperialists of the means of Subsistence; and
took away as much as they could carry off, and as they judged convenient to
support a Siege. The Princess Ragotski is even accused of having directed the
Hands of two Prisoners of War to be cut off, and sent them back in this
Condition, bidding them hereafter go and serve the Emperor. Being in so weak a
State as she was, if she used them thus, she must have particular Reasons for
it; otherwise she ought to have feared, lest the Imperialists should entertain
those Prisoners so, whom they should have taken upon her.

Teckely being in the Neighborhood, without having wherewithal to attempt any
thing by force, the Imperialists were persuaded that it was impossible for him
to remain in Peace. It was imagined, that he sought Opportunities again of
causing an Insurrection in Vpper-Hungary, and that he held great Intelligences
there. As the German Troops misused the Hungarians more than they had ever
done, regarding Hungary hereafter, as a Land of Conquest; the Commanders might
easily conjecture, that the Hungarians were not less incensed against them than
before, although they did not show it, for fear of drawing upon themselves some
Disturbance. Possibly this Conduct of the Germans, which reduced to despair
several Hungarian Families, who were no easier under the Emperor, than when
they bore Arms against him, engaged some of them to a secret Correspondence
with their ancient Captain. Perhaps also, that as those are never absolutely
pardoned, who have made some figure in a rebellious Party, notwithstanding
their submission, especially if they have Estates; so an Occasion was looked
after to destroy the ancient Friends of Teckely, and to seize upon what they
had, by accusing them of Treason. In the Month of February, were arrested all
those who were suspected to have any Intelligence with this Count; and no
Hungarian was permitted to leave any Towns, where it was conjectured he had any
Correspondence, without Security. A little while after it was found, that the
Conspiracy had been almost universal; and that several of the chief
Inhabitants, not only of Cassovia and Eperies, but also of Tirnaw, Altsol,
Newsol, Leutsch, Oedemburgh and Presburgh, were concerned therein. The Prisons
were filled with an infinite number of Persons, and the most considerable in
Hungary. They put to Death the greatest Offenders, or the most Unfortunate; and
the rest were discharged upon the Payment of Fines, which absolutely ruined
them. The ancient Formalities were no more observed, than Persons dared to
demand them, for fear of passing for Rebels. Count Caraffa, and a Chamber
composed of Strangers, and established at Cassovia, put a great number to the
Rack, upon slender Proofs, which so severely handled them, that some died
thereof. These extorted Confessions, which were given out as they would
themselves; gave the Judges an Opportunity of seizing upon what remained to the
Hungarians, after the first Conspiracy. If the Hungarians repented of having so
soon submitted to the Emperor, and had renewed their ancient Practices; it must
be confessed, that either the Yoke, which was imposed on them, was very severe,
since they chose rather to embrace a desperate Party, than to see themselves
eternally subjected thereto: or that they were extremely inconstant, since they
were uneasy in all Conditions.

The Turks could not get together Money and Troops sufficient to give them a
prospect of re-establishing soon their Affairs in Hungary, as it appeared
enough by the Campaign of the following Summer. The Imperialists even
published, that the Vizier had wrote a Letter to Prince Herman of Baden,
President of the Council of War, to demand a Peace of the Emperor. He made him
apprehend, 'twas said, that the Sultan his Master being inclined to make a
Peace, if the Emperor was in the same Disposition, as it was supposed he would,
considering the ruin of the People, that a Place be agreed upon, where Persons
should be sent on each side to form the Articles: and to make the Sincerity of
the Port appear, as soon as the Council of Vienna should give its Parole to
enter into a Treaty, the Count of Teckely should be given up to the Emperor.
The Turks deputed likewise an Aga to Debrezen, who was conducted to Eperies,
where he demanded a Passport for an Ambassador; but the Emperor made Answer to
him by Caraffa, that he would make a Peace if the Grand Signor would oblige
himself to pay him six Millions of Gold for the Expenses of the War, and for
the Destructions that had been made, and if he would restore him all the Places
he possessed in Hungary, and would also satisfy Poland and the Republic of
Venice. As for what relates to the Offer, which the Turks made of delivering up
Teckely, it was answered that he was esteemed too little formidable to give
Disturbance to the Emperor, and that a Motive of that nature was not capable of
advancing the Peace. If it be true, that the Turks made this Offer, Teckely had
an occasion to fear; and if such an Answer was given them, as was declared,
certainly it was not proper to angment that Esteem which the Turks had for him.
He was at this time in Lippa, and he escaped an eminent Danger; for the Garrison
of Chenod having surprised the City of Lippa, he had much ado to secure himself
in the Castle. During all this Winter the Imperialists made great Incursions;
and if they did not all succeed, they had notwithstanding generally the upper
hand.

The Vizier made a Review of his Army about the end of April, in the Plain of
Salankemen, near Belgrade; it was near 50000 strong. Teckely had orders to go
to him; and as he was upon his way with 2 or 300 Horse, he was attacked near
Giula, by 500 Hussars, who killed him above 100 Men; but as for him, he retired
to Kerek during the Fight. In the beginning of June, the Duke of Lorrain
likewise took the Field with part of the Imperial Army, which was to consist of
above 50000 Men, and took his March by the Drove toward the Bridge of Esseck,
which the Turks had not as yet absolutely repaired, since some Imperial
Detatchments had burnt down a part of it. The 26th of June he set upon them,
and constrained them to repass the Drove upon a Bridge of Boats, which they had,
although they had made a Fort at the Head of their Bridge, which the overflowing
of the River broke at the same time. This very overflowing hindered the
Imperialists from attempting to pass it during some days; but they found means
to surmount all Difficulties, and the Army passed near the Fort of Siclos the
11th and 12th of July, and was joined four days after by the Elector of
Bavaria, who commanded the rest of the Troops, and had crossed the Danube at
Mohats. They continued to march toward the Enemy, and arrived at their
Trenches the 19th. The Imperial Army was obliged to break through some Defiles
which the Enemy guarded, but not without loss; and the Turks were found after
that so well posted, that there was a necessity of enduring all their
Artillery, in order to approach their. Trenches. They lost in this occasion 7
or 800 Men; and after having attempted to draw the Turks out of so advantageous
a Post, the Generals of the Emperor judged it most convenient to retire; which
they did in good order. The Turks sent some Horse to charge the Rear, but they
were repulsed so well, that the Christian Army repassed the Drove without loss.
The Vizier also passed it, and posted himself between Esseck and Darda, in the
Isles which the Marshes and Arms of this River compose there, where it was not
possible to force him. The Christian Army was near Mohats, and made several
unsuccessful Motions, to draw the Enemies to a Fight, but there were only some
inconsiderable Skirmishes for a long time. C. Teckely was then in the Camp of
the Turks, and part of their Conduct is imputed to his good Advice. The 12th of
August, the Christian Army, in marching from Mohats toward Siclos, was charged
at last by the whole Turkish Army; but the Elector of Bavaria, who was the
first attacked, sustained their Shock with so much Resolution, that the whole
Christian Army being come back, repulsed them every where; insomuch that,
Terror being introduced amongst them, they fled toward Esseck. The Bridge of
the Drove being broke down by those who fled first, many of them were drowned
who undertook to swim over it; and the Turks lost 6000 Men in this Engagement
for want of knowing how to make an orderly Retreat to their Camp, which it was
easy to defend. But when they have once the lower-hand, their Minds are, for
the most part, so strongly possessed with Fear, that they no longer distinguish
what they do. Otherwise they had gained the Advantage in the first Skirmishes,
and even in the beginning of the Fight the Ground was favorable to them; and
they were superior to the Christians in number, their Army having been
considerably angmented, since it had been said they were above 50000 Men. The
Christians plundered the Camp, which they had deserted, and found therein a
very considerable booty.

After that, the D. of Lorrain judging that the Grand-Visier was not in a
condition of undertaking any thing during the rest of the Campaign, left the C.
of Dunewald, with 4000 Horse and 6000 Foot, to cover Siclos and
Quinque-Ecclesia; and passed the Danube, with the remainder of the Army, near
Mohats. From thence he marched toward Zolnick, where having taken to the
right, he turned toward Transylvania, to put his Army there in
Winter Quarters. The War had so entirely ruined Hungary, that the Towns were
almost become Deserts, and the Lands, by consequence, untilled for the most
part; which made the Germans, who had been formerly so ambitious of
Winterquarters in this Country, no longer covetous in that respect. On the
other-side, it was to be feared lest, if Transylvania were left to the
Discretion of the Turks, they should take Quarters in it themselves, and compel
Abaffi to do for them what he had lately done for the Emperor. At the same
time, C. Dunewald took in the Lower-Hungary, Butzin, Walpo, Esseck, which the
Turks abandoned in disorder, and Peter-Waradin, which completed a Confusion in
all the Affairs of the Turks, and filled the Imeprialists with Courage; who
observing that to succeed, they had nothing more to do than to undertake,
performed things every day, which formerly they durst not so much as think on.

It was then the Emperor, who had a mind to Crown the Archduke Joseph, King of
Hungary, sent for the chief Lords of this Kingdom to Vienna. He restored to
them the Crown, which he had transferred from Presburgh to Vienna, and which he
had always with him during the War. This Prince made them a Discourse in Latin,
wherein he told them, amongst other things, that he deposited the Crown with
them, in order to see it suddenly upon the Head of his Son, whom it was time to
declare hereditary K. of Hungary. The Hungarians returned Thanks to the Emperor
in the same Language, and sent the Crown to Presburgh; but it was not set upon
the Head of the Archduke, till about the end of the Year, as shall be seen in
the Consequence.

The evil Conduct of the Grand-Visier, followed with the ill Successes of this
Campaign, excited great Murmurings in the Army, which besides wanted the Pay of
several Months. The Tumult went so far, that the Army, refusing to obey him,
advanced to Constantinople, where it went to demand his Head, and those of
several Officers, -- of the Grand-Signor. The Vizier of his own Accord
surrendered his Commission, which was given to Siaous, according to the Wishes
of part of the Army; but this Resignation could not save his Life. The
Caimacan, with some others, were also put to Death. Methinks the Army should
have been contented with this Sacrifice; but the excessive Expenses of Mahomet
the 4th, and his slothful, effeminate Life, ruined even himself. The
troublesome Fellows deposed him also in the Month of November, and placed upon
the Throne his Brother Solomon, the Third of the Name, who is not more expert,
or more courageous, than his eldest Brother. But as when one is not satisfied
with the Condition one is in, it always seems to be likely to improve with
change; they did not cease to persuade themselves that all would go better
under his Government, than under that of the deposed Sultan; who was
imprisoned, as his Successor had been for several Years.

To return to what passed in Hungary; the D. of Lorrain sent word into
Transylvania, that to protect this Country from the Undertakings of the
Infidels, the Emperor had found it necessary to put Garrisons into the chief
Places, and to give Winter Quarters to his Army there; which the Transilvanians
would doubtless approve of, since it concerned their Deliverance from the Yoke
of the Infidels. The Transilvanians, who had at least as much Liberty under the
Protection of the Turks, as they could expect under the Emperor, were afraid of
changing their Master; for it was of no less import. Abaffi in particular, who
had assisted the Malcontents, and the Turks, by whom he had been made Vaivod,
as it has been elsewhere said, See Book 1. Page ^^.
trembled at the Apprehension of falling into the Emperor's hands, who had
opposed his Establishment as much as possibly he could. He repented that he had
been a Spectator only, for the last years, of the Differences betwixt the
Emperor and the Malcontents, whom he should, according to good Policy, have
continued to assist with all his Force, since he could but perish, or save
himself with them. But these Reflections were unseasonable now; whereupon, the
Imperial Army was advised from the part of the Transilvanians, that they would
furnish it with as much Provisions as they possibly could; but as for
surrendering their Places, or giving Quarters, they could not do it, without
exposing themselves to the Revenge of the Turks and Tartars; who entering into
such an open Country as theirs, would lead off, without any hopes of
Prevention, the greatest part of its Inhabitants into Slavery, and carry
Desolation everywhere.

The D. of Lorrain having answered to that in general Terms, assuring them of
the Protection of the Emperor, did not cease to continue his Advancing into the
Country; and fixed a Garrison at Sabelona, upon the 11th of October, when he
arrived there. The Transilvanians might repeat their Offers long enough; he
marched directly to Clausemburgh, where he entered the 20th, upon condition that
he should leave all things in the state he found them; that he should exact no
Contributions; that the Magistrates should be exempted from entertaining
Soldiers; that the Citizens should be obliged only to furnish the Imperial
Garrison with Necessaries, without being obliged to convert them into Money; and
that the Troops should be kept under a severe Discipline. He did the same in
respect of Tuttemburgh, Alba-Julia, Hermanstad, and others of the most
important Places. There was also a particular Treaty with Abaffi and the
States; wherein they also covenanted, that there should be no Revolution
amongst them, and that the Troops should depart the following Spring, and they
would be obliged to furnish them with a certain quantity of Provisions. Abaffi
and his Family, who were at Hermanstad, retired to Fogarats; a Place that
properly belonged to him; notwithstanding with an absolute Liberty of passing
to and fro through Transylvania. The Imperialists obliged themselves also to
defend them, against all Powers whatsoever, and to make no enquiry after past
Affairs. Which done, the Duke of Lorrain took his way to Presburgh, in order to
be present at the Coronation of the Archduke.

If any thing had been capable of reviting Teckely, and if one could rejoice at
the Misfortunes of old Friends, he would have felt some Consolation at the
Reception of this News; because in vainly importuning the Transilvanians to
afford him some Relief, he had foretold them more than once, that what at this
time happened to them, would not fail to make them remember him, when it would
be too late. He had likewise given the same Admonitions to those Hungarians,
whom his Confinement induced to accept the General Pardon; and he then saw them
become the Prey of Strangers, without being in a condition ever to shake off
that Yoke, which they had apprehended so many years.

The Emperor and the Archduke being arrived, with all their Court, at
Presburgh, upon the 30th of October, where the States were assembled, the
Emperor told them in Latin what he desired of them, and also gave it them in
Writing. It directed, that his Son might not only be crowned King of Hungary,
but also that the Kingdom be declared hereditary in his Family. The States
examined this Proposition in several Sittings; wherein they renewed the
greatest part of those Complaints, which the Hungarians had used to make; after
which some Articles were drawn up, which were presented to the Emperor by the
Deputies of the Diet. Although they did not refuse to elect the Archduke Joseph,
they demanded the Enjoyment of their ancient Liberty, without speaking of an
hereditary Succession: That after a Peace should be contracted with the Port,
all the German Garrisons might be recalled, and Hungarians put in their room, to
guard Places. In a word, that all their Grievances, which they had not yet
drawn up, might be examined and rectified before the Coronation.

The States had 14 days allowed them to prepare and bring in these Grievances;
and in the mean time, it was declared to them, that the Expenses, which the
Emperor had made in order to defend Hungary against the Turks, which amounted
to much more than the Value of the Kingdom, gave him a Right to look upon it as
his other hereditary Dominions.

It was much contested thereupon in the Assembly; and some Historians say,
Greg. Leti. Hist. dell. Imper. p. 370.
that the Count Nic. Drascowits, Great Arbitrator of the Kingdom, having
strongly represented the Consequences of surrendering a Right of this nature,
they prayed the Emperor to make no Alteration in their Customs; but that the
Emperor sent them word again, that his Predecessors and Himself having
purchased Hungary at so dear a rate, it was but reasonable for the Crown to
become hereditary in their House. Some days after, as this matter still took up
the States, Drascowits being dead suddenly at night in his Bed, without any
one's knowing well the Cause; those, who had been of the same Opinion with him,
were in such a Consternation at his Death, possibly natural at the same time,
that no body any longer openly opposed the Emperor's Will. Some pretended only,
to preserve a part of their ancient Rights, that if there were several Princes
of the House of Austria in Germany, the States ought to have the Liberty of
electing which they pleased. But this Overture having been also rejected, the
States were at length reduced to declare, that for the future the Kingdom of
Hungary should be hereditary in the Austrian Family of the Imperial Branch;
that in default of Heirs Males, it should pass to the Females; and in default
of both, it should first belong to the Princes, and then the Princesses of the
Branch of Spain.

After that; there remained nothing more but the Ceremony of the Coronation,
which was expected to be performed before the end of November; but it was
deferred to the 9th of the following Month; for that all the Preparations were
not made, and besides it was necessary to determine certain Matters in the
Assembly of the States; of which the two principal are these: The first is,
that pursuant to an Article of the Declaration of King Andrew, each of the
three States had a Right to oppose the King, when he contravened the Laws of
the Kingdom, without being reputed Offenders for not submitting to his Orders.
The Emperor apprehended that his Son and his Successors were not obliged to
swear to this Article, because it had always been, said he, a Bottom for
Seditions, which the Rebels had even made use of within some few Years. But on
the other side, the States in relaxing thereupon, not only rendered the King
absolute Master of the Goods and Lives of the Hungarians, but also submitted,
by a public Act, to all his Caprices, or rather to those of his Ministers and
Favorites. For it is certain, that those People are no less absolute than
Kings; and it is this, that makes them dispose Princes to seek so greedily after
a Despotick Power, wherein they are so much concerned. The most part of the
Grandees were inclined to agree to what the Emperor thought fit; because they
hoped to enjoy a part of the Regal Power, in exercising the Charges, according
to his Intentions; but the Clergy and the Cities, who had no such Bottoms, and
who saw themselves thereby subjected to all sorts of Inconveniences, without
the least Remedy, insisted much upon it, and demanded Satisfaction upon their
Grievances. They had presented a loose Sheet to the Emperor; in which they made
a Particular of the Cruelties which had been practiced against several Persons
of Note, and a great number of others of less Quality, under pretense of
searching the Accomplices of a Conspiracy, wherein they were not at all
concerned. He did not refuse to give them Justice thereupon, nor to put their
Reasons under Examination; but they must suffer it to be deferred till the
Coronation was over, because too great a time was requisite for that purpose.

The second Affair related to the Evangelicks, or Protestants. To make their
Court, they had labored to get the Crown of Hungary declared hereditary, and
imagined that the Occasion was favorable to petition the Emperor in
particular, that he would maintain them in their ancient Privileges; That their
Temples and Estates might be restored to them, which they had been dispossessed
of since the Year 1667; That there might be no Assembly for the Affairs of the
Kingdom, without-some Deputies on their part; That the Jesuits might be
prohibited from meddling with State Affairs, or concerning the Protestant
Religion; That they might not be permitted to establish themselves in any other
Places than where they were; That Caraffa might be suddenly recalled, who was
accused of having put to Death an infinite number of People, who had no share
in the Conspiracy. It was considered in the States, whether the Protestants
might be permitted to ask these Favors of the Emperor, but it was found that
the Season could hardly favor their Purpose. So that was also referred till
the Coronation was over; which imported, that the Imperial Council did what it
judged convenient, without the King of Hungary's holding himself obliged to any
thing. The Ceremony of the Coronation then was performed the 9th, as it had
Seen resolved; but the Particulars are not to be insisted*

Whilst great Rejoycings were made at Presburgh, there arrived a Courier with a
new Subject of Joy; to wit, the News of the Reduction of Agria, which for want
of Provisions, surrendered upon Capitulation the 28th of November; so that there
remained nothing but Mongats unsubjected to the Emperor in Vpper-Hungary. Then
to give some Satisfaction to the Hungarians, he abolished the Criminal-Chamber
of Eperies, set up to search after those who had been concerned in the late
Conspiracy; and which had put to Death a world of People, without observing the
usual Proceedings. As to what regards the quartering of Troops, and their
Entertainment; whereas the German Officers had disposed of it as they thought
fit, without consulting the Hungarians; Commissioners were nominated of this
Nation, who were to regulate those kind of things jointly with the Germans. The
Examination of the rest was referred to another Assembly.

The Protestants did also beg of the Emperor, and the King, by a Request, that
Hungary might be restored, in respect of Religion, to the State it was in when
his Imperial Majesty came to the Crown. It was replied to them, that there
required time to consider of a thing of that consequence; and that in the mean
time, they might assure themselves of the Favor of the Emperor and King,
provided they continued in their Fidelity to them. All they could obtain, was,
that things should be established as they were in 1681.

Thus the Kingdom of Hungary from elective, became hereditary; and instead of a
moderate Authority by the Laws, the States have suffered Joseph the 1st, to
take one almost without Bounds. All the Projects which the Hungarians had so
often made for the Preservation of their Liberty, all the Preparations in
Hungary, during so many years, for that Design, yielded at last to the good
Fortune of the House of Austria; for whom Poland and Germany reunited,
conquered Kingdoms, without the Assistance of one Prince of its ^^ood, and for
whom Fortune, if it is permitted to say so, took Cities, whilst those Princes
were asleep.

On another side; almost all that Teckely undertook, was baffled. He had formed
a Design upon Seged, which the taking of Agria ruined entirely. He might write
long enough to all those, whom he knew in Hungary, in order to inspire them
with a new Courage; no Body was moved, and Liberty was nothing but a fine Name,
fit to draw Sighs from the best-intention'd, but incapable of raising them to
Arms. The Turks, imbroil'd amongst themselves, did not distinguish what they
did, nor granted him that Relief which they had promised him. All that he could
do with 5 or 6000 Men, was to make Incursions upon those Hungarians, who had
submitted to the Emperor. He attempted several times to get near Mongats, or to
throw himself therein, and to put some Relief in it, or to bring out his Wife;
but they had lately blocked up the Place with more Application than ever,
insomuch that all his Efforts were unseasonable. The Princess, being summoned
to surrender, did not refuse to enter into a Negotiation; but no conclusion
could be made, because she insisted upon having her Husband and his Companions,
included in it, which the Emperor absolutely refused her. Notwithstanding, he
had the Address about this time, to detach from the Garrison of Seged 400
Hungarians, and 400 others, who went in a Party about Lippa. The Hungarian
Troops, mortified by the great Advantages which the Germans had obtained
without them, had much ado to live with them; and some of the most impatient,
rather chose to undergo once more the hazard of perishing with their ancient.
Captain, than to see themselves misused by Strangers in their own Country.

The End of the Third Book.
MEMOIRES OF THE LIFE OF Emeric, Count Teckely. BOOK IV.
Which comprehends what has happened from the Year 1688, until the Year 1691.

THe Affairs of the Ottoman Empire being in a very great disorder, and the new
Sultan, no more than his Vizier, not knowing how to betake himself to hinder
the Germans from making new Conquests in Hungary, the Divan thought it was
necessary to know the opinion of the Bassa's, who were not able to come to
Constantinople, and to send, in the same time, for all the Officers of
experience that were in the extend of that Empire. Orders were sent to Teckely
too, to repair thither, that they might hear of him, what he thought the most
effectual Method to carry on the War in Hungary. Although there was a great deal
of danger for him to obey that Order, because it might happen that the Turks
being irritated against them that had engaged them in that War, would revenge
themselves upon him for the losses they had made; nevertheless he took the
resolution to go, to represent to his Highness more strongly than he could do
by Letters, what it behoved them to do in a conjuncture of such a consequence.

Before he set forth for his journey, he wrote to his Spouse to take patience
still for a while, seeing that as soon as he would come back he would not fail
to go to her Succor.

In the mean while, whatever the Princess could do, she was not able to
persuade the Garrison to hold any longer; because a Month before that time it
was reduced to such a want, as was capable to put the the most Constant out of
Patience. Having heard, besides, that Teckely was gone to Constantinople, she
thought him to be absolutely lost. And indeed the least fit of Inconstancy,
whether in the Grand Seignior, or in the Vizier, was enough to Restroy him.
Those Reasons brought the Princess and the Garrison of Mongatz to capitulate
the 17th of January.

Here are the chiefest Articles, which she agreed upon with Caraffa, authorized
by the Emperor: 1. That a general Pardon should be granted to the Garrison, as
well as to the Inhabitants, for all that was past; and that she should carry
along with her all that she had in the Place. 2. That the Princess Ragotski,
and the Children she had by the Prince Ragotski, should be brought to Vienna at
the Emperor's charge, who should keep them, according to their Quality, and
that he should let them enjoy all sort of Liberty, excepted that they could not
go out of it without his leave. 3. 'That all the Goods, moveable, and
immovable, that could be found belonging to them in Mongatz, and elsewhere,
should be restored to them; but that that place and what belongs to it, should
remain in the Emperor's hands, till they had made it appear that it had not
been usurped upon the Crown of Hungary. 4. 'That the Princess should enjoy all
the Benefits she had received of Prince Ragotski, when he espoused her, unless
the Emperor thought convenient to give her an equal Value, and that she could
take all that belonged to her in particular in Mongatz; but that all the States
of her Children, and their Dignities should be left to the Emperor, and that
he should be their Guardian. 5. That she should be bound to restore upon Oath
all that belonged to Count Teckely, and them who were still with him. 6. That
the Emperor should take care to have her Children brought up as he would think
the most convenient. 7. That the Princess should not acquaint Teckely of the
surrender of the place, nor of the Reasons why she had done it. 8. That leave
should be granted her to tarry in it, till she had settled her Affairs, and the
Equipage that was to carry her to Vienna should be ready. Two days after the
conclusion of this Treaty the place was surrendered into the hands of the
Imperialists, although the Princess did not go out of it presently after, for the
reasons we have said already. They say she boreher ill Fortune with great
Constancy, and that she has never expressed any sign of Weakness.

In the mean while, it happened a thing that might have served mightily to
re-establish the Affairs of the Turks, and of the Malcontents, if the Turks
had served themselves of the occasion, as they should have done: It was, that
the Troops the Duke of Lorrain had left in Transylvania, instead of observing
the Treaty that had been made, committed infinite Disorders, and lived as they
pleased upon free Quarters, by reason they were not paid, according to their
ancient Custom. It may be too that the Imperial Court was not sorry that its
Troops would revenge it self, because Abaffi had assisted the Malcontents
during many years; and indeed he deserved as much, for having done too little
since he sided with that Party, and too much to be regarded as a Friend by the
Emperor. The Transilvanians sent to Vienna to complain of the Ravages the
Imperial Troops committed in their Country, and to represent, that if the
Treaty was not kept by the Emperor's Party; it would not be observed neither
by themselves. Upon those Complaints, Caraffa received order to go into
Transylvania, where instead of satisfying the Transilvanians by a good
Discipline, he complained by turns, as if they had failed to execute several
Articles of the Treaty. Thus the Transilvanians found themselves more grieved
by that General's coming than they were before. And yet to show that he was
willing to give them some Satisfaction, he offered to ease them in removing
those Soldiers Quarters, provided they would pay some certain Sum of Money to
the Emperor; but that Sum was so excessive that it was impossible it could be
found in Transylvania.

A little while after the Grand Seignour sent a Chioux to Abaffi, to solicit
him to brake the Treaty he had made with the Emperor, upon the Word he gave
him to succor him the next Campaign. But because all these were but words, and
that the ill Success of the Campaigns that were past, gave little hopes to see
the Effects of it, Abafti had rather carry himself discreetly, and keep fair
with the Court of Vienna, who was able to punish him for his Inconstancy.
Nevertheless, the carriage of the German Army was such that it hindered the
Hospodar of Walaenia, solicited by the Emperor to side with him openly, from
falling into that Snare.

Teckely, who was in his way for Constantinople, did not go very far, thinking
that his Remoteness would cast all them that remained still his Friends into a
Despair, and that after the taking of Mongatz his Presence was absolutely
necessary: When therefore he had joined his Troops, it wanted very little but
he had been surprised hard by Waradin by General Heusler, who set upon him
unprepared: but having retired himself suddenly to Giula with his Horse, he
avoided the Danger, and his Foot was wholly defeated. Some of his Enemies that
were then at the Port, made their Endeavors, at that time, to ruin him by
reason of his Absence; going about to persuade, That in betraying the Interest
of the Grand Seignour, he durst not come up to Constantinople, after having
given his word that he would come. But those Accusations appeared so ill
grounded, and those who were acquainted with the condition Hungary was then in,
knew so evidently the contrary, that they had no effect at all. On the
contrary, the Sultan sent to him to assure him of his Protection, and to
confirm upon him the Title of Prince of Hungary, which Mahomet the Fourth had
given him: he presented him in the same time with a Semiter enriched with
precious Stones, and exhorted him to make use of it against his Enemies, with
the same Faithfulness he had done till then. Notwithstanding there was a Report
that he had been strangled by the order of the Port; and to undeceive them who
befriended him still, he caused this Manifesto to be published:

Count Teckely's Declaration published in March 1688.
YE People of Hungary, it is long ago since your Enemies and mine have
published my Death; and nevertheless I am alive still, God be thanked, to
defend your oppressed Liberty. I know it is to your sorrow, that you follow for
the present the Standards of the House of Austria; it is too long ago since you
know it, to trust yourselves to it: And what has lately happened in the pretended
Election of a King of Hungary, makes you know plainly how much both your Lives
and your Fortunes would be in a Danger, if you were compelled to obey him: Ye
are forced to dissemble, because the conjuncture ye are in will have it so; but
I know your hearts as I know mine, I know ye have an horror for all that ye
do, and that they hate them that are a preparing their Chains, although they be
bound to bear them, by reason of the Charges they enjoy in the Kingdom.

Is it not a shameful thing, for Count Esterhasi, to have made a private suit
for the Dignity of Count of the Empire, as if that of Palatine of Hungary was
not without comparison much above it? Is that the Reward of all the base
Treasons he has been guilty of against you? And is it possible that a Man who
has the Honor to be in my Alliance His Brother has married Count Teckely's
Sister.
, would disgrace me and all the Nation? I had rather see my State and my Goods
in the hands of my Enemies, than to enjoy them at that rate: What Proffers have
they not made me to forsake you? Do they not do the same still every day, if I
were willing to accept them? But if God has resolved that I should be
Unfortunate, it is not possible I should be Guilty; and rather than betray you,
I would expose myself: I drew the Sword for you, as soon as I was able to weild
it; and I have undergone a thousand Dangers in your Service: I have contemned
Swords and Poison, and I am still exposed every day to both by my Constancy to
you. But I prefer a glorious Death to shameful Life, being persuaded that ye
will always confess that I deserve a better Fortune.

But it is not time yet to be out of Hopes, ye know that I am under the
Protection of a powerful Empire, and that it is ready still to receive you
under its Protection: If it has met with some Crosses of Fortune, it is not in
a danger for all that to be overthrown; if it had lost all that it holds in
Europe, which it is very far off, yet of it remains still two Parts of the
World wherein it commands. It had not so much of Strenght when it Overthrew the
Empire of the East, and that of the West does not come near to its Power. It is
not time then yet to say, as they do every day, That there is wanting but a
little Strength to run it quite down. Your Enemies and mine are persuaded of it
in the bottom of their Hearts: That is the only reason why they moderate still
the Passion they are in, to spill to the very last drop of our Blood. Do you
not remember that they have shed, without having been provoked, in so many
Rencounters, and how they have put the Arms in the Executioners hands when
theirs were weary of using them? Is there any one amongst you, that may boast
himself, that he has not lost a Brother, or a Nephew, or a Kinsman, or a Friend
in that great Effusion of Blood that has been newly made by General Caraffa?
What is, has been the Success of your Complaints, although ye have clearly
proved, that he did nothing else than to rob the Fatherless, and Motherless,
and Widow. They have made as if they had sent some Orders that the strict Forms
of Proceedings in Law should be observed: but ye have seen whether they have
been performed. Since he had received them, we may reckon, you and I, above two
hundred Persons he has condemned by his own Authority; and to whom he has
answered uncivilly, when they have begged leave to justify themselves, That
their Trials would be performed after they had been executed.

How long will ye bear, ye brave Hungarians, their Triumph over your Innocence?
If you be designed to perish, is it not better to do it having your Arms in
your hands, than to be put to death by an infamous Hangman? Make some
Endeavors to get out of the shameful Slavery wherein you are, seeing you want
nothing else but the Will to do it: The Power of your Enemies is not so great
as you think. How can it be, since I scorn it? And if you had helped me with
all your Forces, what condition should we have been in? Do not tarry till ye be
weaker than ye are now. They do not endeavor to weaken you, but to render you
absolutely incapable of shaking off the tyrannical Yoke which they are a
preparing for you so many Years since.

Soliman, now Emperor of the Turks, offers you his Hand to draw you out of
Oppression. A Prince of his Name has been formerly the Terror of those you are
dreading nowadays; and although we must not give credit to Prophesies which
come from thence, I cannot forbear from telling you, that the Turks are a
divulging, they have one, according to which their Empire almost overthrown, is
to become more flourishing than ever, under a Prince of that Name. Do but join
with me, that it might be found true, since your Safety as well as mine depends
for ever upon our Union with those People: They have supported us during many
Years, as we have supported them by turns. We have always acted unanimously:
Why should we give over a Conduct which has turned so much to our good?

What can you expect from your Enemies Promises? Do but look upon the Prince of
Transylvania, and you will see how they have abused his Credulity: What good
does he got for having made a Treaty with a People that will not observe a
single Article of it? But there is no need to fetch Instances from abroad: How
many times have they broken their Word they had given you? Or to speak more
proper, Is there any one amongst you, who can remember that they have kept it
to him? They seek for no other thing but to engage you into a Treaty, to
deceive you the better; and your Faithfulness has not been rewarded but by the
blackest Treachery. They endeavor to make you fall into the Snare, under the
specious names of Amnisty and of Peace. I require no more from you, but that
you would make some Reflections upon it; and I am confident that afterward you
will become wiser.

That, if all that I have said be not capable to stir your Minds, do but
consider at least, nothing moves me to speak as I have done, but your own
Interest. I can, when I please, make mine Agreement upon such Conditions, which
could appear advantageous enough to a Man that would have forgotten the Care he
ought to have for the Liberty of his Country: But seeing, thanks to God, I
never lost the memory of it, since I came to the Age of Knowledge, I will
remember it the better now I am to revenge so many of my brave Countrymen: Ye
should, as well as I, hear their Voices which entreat us, not to bear without
Revenge the wrongful shedding of their Blood. Believe me, do not deffer a thing
so necessary for the Security of yourselves, seeing this Impunity increases the
Presumption of your Enemies, their Punishment on the contrary will render them
more cautions in undertaking any thing against you.

Those Reasons had very little success, they not being backed by any Army
capable to give a Shelter to the Hungarians, who had declared themselves for
Teckely. Those that favored him privately, were informed by this Declaration
that the Turks had not put him to death; but they were not in a capacity to
help him otherways than with their Wishes and Prayers. Thus he tarried a long
while about Giula without undertaking any thing. It is reported, that the Turks
fearing that he being weary at last of so many Crosses of Fortune, he would
reconcile himself to the Emperor, got him to be watched so near, that he could
do nothing but they were acquainted with it. Some great Disorders happened a
little while after at the Port, where the Chiaoux made a new Vizier, who had
brought up Soliman upon the Throne, was treacherously murdered by the
Seditious, and the Grand Seignior himself was in a eminent danger of being
Deposed. He could not get off but by appeasing the mutiny'd Troops with a great
deal of Money, and causing some of the hottest to be strangled: He created
Vizier Ismal Bacha in the room of the Chiaoux, and published everywhere, that
he would go into Hungary at the head of the Armies, or at least to Adrianople,
to be nearer to them, and readier to send them the necessary Orders. It was
ordered in the mean while, that all the Preparations should be got ready
against the next Campaigne.

The first thing they did to the Princess Ragotski, after her arrival at
Vienna, was to take away her Children from her, and to get them to be brought
up in the Romish Religion, instead of the Lutheran, wherein they had been
instructed, since their Mother was married to Count Teckely. This last having
had notice they had carried his Wife to Vienna, petitioned for to have leave to
write to her; which was denied him by the Emperor's Officers. Notwithstanding,
because it was a hard matter to surprise him, what measures soever they could
take; they thought to have found out the means to make him away in corrupting
two of his Troops Officers, who engaged some Soldiers in their Conspiracy, and
who had executed it, had it not been discovered: But they having been betrayed
by some amongst them, they were all hanged, with a Bill wherein one could read
these words, Traitor to his Prince, to his Religion, and Country. The Army
expressed a great Joy that that Plot had been discovered; and abused the very
dead Bodies of those unfortunate Men. A little while after the Hungarians of
St. Job's Garrison, and many of those that had been at Mongatz, came to
surrender themselves to him, because, notwithstanding the Amnisty, they were
used very ill at all times, and that the least Fault in them was punished by
Death; they perceived there was no trusting upon the Imperialists Promises,
after having been in Arms against them; and that they had forgiven them what
was past, only till they could find an opportunity to destroy them. That
Conduct of the Imperialists is the cause that Teckely has not been seen yet
without a little Body of Hungarians, become irreconcilable to the Germans. He
was then upon the Frontiers of Transylvania with eight thousand Men, and raised
some considerable Contributions out of the Neighborhood in spite of the
Imperialists: These last would leave wholly Transylvania, where Count Caraffa
left four thousand Men to hinder Abafti from making a new Treaty with the Port,
that solicited him to it a long while. In the mean time he drew toward
Esseck, and a little while after the Garrison of Alba-Regalis, destitute of
Provisions and Succors, and without hope of getting any, persuaded the Bassa
to surrender himself to some German Troops that intercepted the Victuals coming
to them many Months, Teckely received this news with Sorrow; and the Turks
fearing lest he should retire into Poland, obliged him to take a new Oath of
Fidelity, and gave him new Assurances that they would not forsake him. In the
Month of June he attempted to surprise Chonod, without any success.

On the contrary, every thing seemed to favor the Imperialists, and the
Elector of Bavaria being the only Commander of the Army, during the Sickness of
the Duke of Lorrain, passed the Save in August, and took Belgrade the seventh
of the next Month, although they had got some Succors into it in the beginning
of the Siege. True it is, that that place was not very strong, but there were
in it almost all that remained of the good Troops the Turks had in Hungary, and
the Port was very much concerned in the keeping of it. The Imperialists, having
got that Town, were in a condition of plundering every where to the very Gates
of Adrianople, and to render themselves Masters of Servia, Bosnia, and
Bulgaria; because there is no other considerable place in those Provinces. The
Bassa of Bosnia who was a marching with some Troops to come to the Relief of
Belgrade, not only began his march too late, but besides he was defeated by
Prince Lewis of Baden who went to encounter him. The Grand Seignior, whom the
Seditions had detained at Constantinople, and who was not able to send a
considerable Army into the Field, had sent, before he had the News of the Siege
of Belgrade, some Envoys to speak of Peace with the Emperor. They arrived
immediately after the taking of that place, and understood by that it was still
more necessary to come to some Agreement, which they did not think at
Constantinople. It is very probable it had been soon concluded, if the Emperor
had not made excessive Demands of the Turks, and if these last had not been so
much the more encouraged as soon as they knew that Lewis the 14th, King of
France, was at the end of September entered into the Territories of the Empire,
and had declared a War against the Emperor. That made the next Year a great
Diversion, but because that is a thing that belongs to the general History of
the Empire we shall not stick to it. We shall say nothing neither of the
Enterprise which William Henry of Nassan, Prince of Orange, performed at the
end of that Year in England, where after he had re-established the Laws, he was
made King of Great Britain. Yet we must own that made not a little to hinder
the Diversion, the King of France would have made in favor of the Turks and
the Malcontents of Hungary, from being so considerable. So that though the King
of France had designed to make an happy Use of the Pretexts which the Rules of
good Politics suggested to him, Terms taken out of the Declaration of War of
France, dated the 24th of September, 1688.
to prevent the excessive Greatness of the Emperor; yet he was obliged to turn
the best part of his Troops against England, and Holland, which hindered him
from acting along while against the Emperor, with the Forces necessary to make
him abandon Hungary.

Count Teckely having had notice betimes, that the French Army had attacked the
Empire, did not fail to make it known everywhere, and let the People
understand how the King of France was a going to put the Emperor and the
Empress into such a Confusion, that the Turks should soon have the upper-hand
in Hungary, which must be quitted by the Germans, who would now be forced to
defend their own Country. And he made it his endeavor to persuade the
Hungarians to take hold of that opportunity, to rid themselves again of the
Despotical Government of the House of Austria. But the same Reasons which
hindered his Declaration from having any Success, prevented also the Effects of
this Admonition. The Diversion France was capable of making, was too far off to
compel the Imperialists suddenly to meet it, for they suffered Philipsbourgh,
Spire, Worms, and the Palatinate to be taken, before they sent any Troops that
way. They acted the rest of that Year, according to the same manner, as if
Germany had enjoyed a perfect Peace. And yet they will have us assured, that
the little Army of Count Teckely was in a better case, and better paid than
before, although the Turks did not then supply them, as 'twas reported, with any
Money, which caused the People to have some suspicion, that the same Power that
attacked the Empire upon the Rhine, did furnish them with what they wanted, by
sending their Leader secretly Bills of Exchange.

Whether it was true, or no, Teckely was a making endeavors to encourage the
Hungarians, and to persuade the Transilvanians and Walaquians to join with the
Turks, and deliver themselves from the Yoke of the Germans. The Emperor had
already concluded a Treaty with the Hospodar of Walaquia, but that Treaty
became fruitless by the death of this last; which gave Count Teckely some hopes
to have good success on that side. It was thought the Son of the Hospodar
should succeed his Father, but the States elected their Chancellor, by reason
of the necessity of the present juncture of Affairs, which required an able Man
for the Management of their Affairs. The Emperor having had notice of it,
thought it necessary to lay hold of the wavering condition People are always in
at the beginning of a Principality; and made as if he had been willing to
support the Son of the Deceased, unless the new Hospodar would declare himself
for him: That Prince, lest he should incur the Hatred of the Turks, in
forsaking them openly, and to carry himself discreetly, and keep fair with the
Emperor, gave out, He was ready to enter into a. Negotiation with him; and
declared he would send an Ambassador to Vienna to that purpose.

In the beginning of the Year 1689, Teckely sent his Secretary to the Hospodar,
to congratulate his new Dignity, and to assure him, the Count would always have
a great Consideration for him: He told him, at the same time, i^ was not true
the Turks had given their word to his Master to make him Hospodar, and that to
give him an Evidenc^ of it, he did promise him, in the name o^ the Grand
Signior, sufficient Succors if he would declare himself for the Port against
the Emperor. The Hospoda^ used Teckely's Envoy very well, but h^ would do
nothing, which could mak^ the Imperialists to turn their Arms against him.
About the same time the Count wrote a Letter to the Gran^ Vizier at
Constantinople, which, they thought convenient to publish throughout the Town,
whereof they sent Copies into several parts of the Ottoman Empire; because it
was very sit to raise the Peoples courage, that after the taking of Belgrade,
presently expected to see the Imperialists before Constantinople. That Letter
gave notice that if his Highness was willing to do what he could in Hungary,
the People being as dissatisfied with the Germans, as they ever were, they
would not fail to rebel again: That the Hospodar of Walaquia would fall out
with the Emperor, and would remain faithful to the Port: That Abaffi was in the
same disposition, and would for certain declare himself openly, as soon, as he
could do it with Security; that the King of France having passed the Rhine,
with prodigious Forces, much better commanded and provided of all things than
those of the Germans; he had taken there already several Places, and whole
Provinces, and that neither the Emperor, nor the Empire were in a capacity to
act in Hungary with the same Vigor as before: That it was at last the best
opportunity the Turks could find to retreive their Affairs in that Kingdom.
That the latter had such success in the Army, which could scarce dispose itself
to march into Hungary, thinking it no less then certain death, by reason of the
losses the Turk sustained since the beginning of the War.

In the mean while Mauro Cordato, first Interpreter and Effendi, whom the Port
had sent to the Emperor, and who had not been willing to open themselves to any
Body but himself, offered to leave him the Conquests he had made in Hungary, if
he would conclude a Peace. But they laughed at that Proposal, because the Turks
offered only what they must lose; they pretended they should quit to the
Emperor all that they kept still in Hungary, and they should go out of Bosnia,
Servia and Slavonia, demanding besides some great Sums of Money, those
Provinces being not capable, said they, to make amends for the charges of the
War. All the Offers of the Turks seemed too small matter to the Victorious
Imperialists, the Demands of the Imperialists were looked upon by the Port to
be excessive, so that that Embassy was quite in vain; the Envoys having had no
other order than to propose the yielding up of what the Emperor had gotten, nor
having received any since, so that after having kept some Years, strictly
enough, they have been forced to let them go.

The Grand Vizier not perceiving any Success of the Embassy, went about to
prepare himself for the War, and got the most, he could, of the Troops out of
Asia. The Grand Seignior was much straightened for want of Money, and they did
not know how to raise some speedily, because they durst not gather the Taxes
with too much violence, least new Seditions should arise, which they had been
too much used to, since the Elevation of Soliman upon the Throne. That is the
fate of the Despotical Empire, they are not to lay heavy Burdens upon their
Subjects, though for the necessary Succors they want, after having charged them
without Necessity: As there is no other Justice, than the Will of the
Sovereign, which is as unconstant as his Passions, there is no Obedience
neither amongst the Subjects, but as much as they can be brought to it by
Force, which cannot be always equal.

In the mean while the Greatness of the Ottoman Empire afforded them
nevertheless many Helps, and the Vizier was soon in a readiness to send fifty
thousand Men into Hungary; whereof he sent some part toward Adrianople in the
Spring. The Imperialists on their side had begun, in the middle of the Winter,
to block up Themiswear, which they intended to besiege the next Campaign.
Teckely acquainted the Turks with it, and let them understand, that if they
would send him some Succors, he would not only throw it into Themiswear, but
also seize upon one part of Transylvania, which was weary of the Imperialists,
and who would be glad to lay hold on that Opportunity to declare themselves
against them. He kept always some Correspondency in Hungary, and Letters with
Ciphers were intercepted, written to some of his Friends; which made the People
have a suspicion that there was a Design under hand, but it could not be
discovered. It happened in the same time, that is to say, in April, that some
Houses were set on fire at Onod, and some other Towns of Hungary and
Transylvania, which was laid upon the Emissaries of the Malcontents, although
they could not prove it.

The Turks sent some Succors to Teckely, who endeavored to lead them to
Themiswear; but having been wounded as he was forcing a Passage, he was forced
to go back toward Walaquia, exspecting the Turkish Army, which was meeting
together at Sophia in Bulgaria, That caused the Imperialists to apply
themselves about fortifying Belgrade, as well as it could possibly, seeing the
Confusion and the Charges occasioned by the War the Emperor had upon the
Rhine, did put him in; because the Turks are very bad Inginiers, they thought
indifferent Fortifications, or rather some Reparations in the old ones would
serve to defend the Place; which has been the cause it has been lost since.
They blocking up Cavis a long while since, which being very remote from the
Frontiers of the subdued Countries, suffered much for Want, without being
willing to surrender. They betook themselves too to block up Great Waradin, and
they began by plundering and spoiling the Country round about the place, to
hinder the Garrison from having any means to subsist. They expected to attaque,
by that means, three Places at once, the two Towns we have already spoken of,
and that of Themiswear, because the Turks, being a great way off, could not
carry Victuals thither, but with great difficulty, chiefly to Canisa, which was
the remotest of all; but they could not hinder some Convoys from getting at
several times into Themiswear and Waradin.

Prince Lewis of Baden went to Belgrade to command a little Body of an Army
which was there, with an intent to observe the Turks March, and to watch the
opportunities to do them some Damage. The Imperial Troops being so divided,
those that were about Waradin did not find themselves strong enough to keep the
Garrison within the Place; for after having repelled it back twice with great
difficulty, they were wholly defeated at the third Sally, and their Commander
made a Prisoner; five or six hundred of them remained dead upon the Spot, the
rest betook themselves to their Heels. Teckely did the best he could, on his
side, to raise the Blockade of Themiswear, which felt already great
Incommodities, for not having been provided with Victuals. But because he had
been necessitated to pass the Danube, and to retire into Servia, lest he should
be surrounded with the Imperial Troops which were on the other side of the
Danube, it was a hard matter to come over it again: The Imperialists had
garrisoned all the little Places which are along the River, to hinder the
Communication the Turks of Hungary had with those of Servia. Teckely set upon
one of those Towns called Novigrad, upon the Frontiers of Bulgaria, and made
the Garrison of it Prisoners of War. After the taking of that place, three
thousand Walaquians came to him, in spite of General Heuster, who lay upon the
Frontiers of Walaquia with a Body of Troops to oppose to the Designs of the
Count. The Walaquians feared extremely, least the Imperialists should enter
into their Territories, as they had done into those of the Transilvanians, and
use them as they pleased; but they committed the same fault as the last had
done, that is, that instead of acting openly for the Turks, and making all
their Endeavors to support that wavering Party, they did but help them
underhand; a Conduct that did but irritate the Emperor, but not hinder him
from quartering his Troops amongst them. The Moldavians did also the same, and
found themselves at last exposed to the same Troubles, although a little less by
reason of their being afar off.

In the mean while Prince Lewis of Baden was advanced, in July, as far as the
River Morave, to observe the Turkish Army's March; having had notice, that that
Army was stronger than his, which consisted not of full thirty thousand Men,
that the Turks was fifty thousand, he returned the same way; and to increase
his Army, he got the Fortifications of many little Towns to be levelled to the
Ground, along the Danube, and took out of them the Troops that were in Garrison
therein. The Turks having seen the Christian Army return toward Belgrade,
passed the River Morave to follow it; but having had notice they had received
some Reinforcement from Transylvania, went back again over the River, and
retired themselves toward Nissa, where they entrenched themselves. Prince
Lewis of Baden falled not to follow them, but there fell such a quaintity of
Rain, that it was impossible to overcome the difficulty of the Ways; and the
Provisions having begun to grow scarce, they were forced to return back toward
the Bridges they had laid over the Morave, hard by Passarowis: The Army arrived
there at the end of August, and was soon followed by that of the Turks, who
believed the Christians did fly from them a second time: The Infidels made a
great Detachment of their Cavalry, supported by some Janisaries, to disturb the
March of the Christian Army, and endeavor to intercept the Convoys, which
would come from Semandria, where the Magazines of the Christians were. But that
Detachment was defeated the 29 of August, and betook it self to flight, after
having lost five or six hundred Men. The next day the Christian Army advanced
to that of the Turks, who expected them, being regularly drawn in Battalia
beyond a Wood.

The Christians had crossed the Wood, and their Infantry was drawn up in
Battel-array in the Plain beyond it, under the favor of a Mist, when the
Weather clearing up, made the Turks perceive the Fault they had committed, in
letting almost all the Enemy's Army to pass without having made any Opposition:
Upon which they came forward to charge it with much Fury, but having been
received with great Valor, they gave back; and the Christian Army having
advanced accordingly, the Horse had room enough to enlarge their Wings, and to
assault the Infidels: Presently they gave way everywhere, and they had been
cut into pieces, if the Ground had not been incumbered with Woods and
Entrenchments, beyond which the Turks did rally, and which were to be forced
one after another. Having been repelled thus, they retired into their Camp,
where it was thought they would hold out; but they were so much affrighted,
that as soon as they perceived some Imperial Regiments appear, they left it,
with all their Cannon and Ammunition, and also the best part of their Baggage.
The Christian Army went to encamp itself in it, and found therein almost a
hundred Pieces of Cannon, and much Ammunitions for War, of which they were in
great want. Those of the Turks were commanded by a Serasquier, a Title which
signifies a General in the Turkish Language, and which does not belong to any
Dignity of the Court; it was composed of some disciplined Soldiers of Europe
and Asia, but chiefly of new raised Troops, incapable to stand against Veteran
Soldiers, as were the Imperialists: however, the Turks sustained not
altogether so great Losses, because their Troops did not persist obstinately to
defend the Posts committed to their Guard, but did fly before they were
pursued too close.

During the Christians and the Turks were seeking one another for fighting,
Count Teckely seized upon Otsowa upon the Danube, toward Transylvania,
abandoned by the Imperialists, to try whether he could throw some Succors into
Themiswear: But having had order from the Vizier to march toward Nissa, to
reinforce the Turkish Army, he gave over that Design. He was not for all that
in the Defeat, the Orders he received coming too late, or not having made have
enough. Whether it was through Prudence or Chance, he had not been yet in any
great Army of the Turks, when they had been resolved to fight: however, such
were his Circumstances as rendered it his best Policy to avoid it, as every
ways dangerous for him, because being engaged to venture himself upon such an
occasion, to encourage the Turks by his Example, and to get their Esteem; it
might have unluckily happened that he had been taken by the Imperialists, for
want of not being constantly and sufficiently sustained and supported by the
Turks. On the contrary, if he had managed himself, the Turk would have
believed, that he did not rely upon them; therefore they had accused him of
Cowardice or Treachery, according to the Success of the Fight. Thus it was more
safe for him to shun the Occasions, where there was every way so great Danger.

The Imperial Army having tarried some days in the Turkish Camp, to rest
themselves, they thought it convenient to send back one part of it, for fear
lest they should want Victuals, and to march with the other toward Nissa; in
hopes to prevail there if possible, through the Consternation the Turks were in,
before they had time to recollect themselves. The Prince of Baden marched at
the head of sixteen thousand Men toward Nissa, as speedily as he could: He came
thither the 23d of September, and found the Enemy well entrenched before the
Place. He disposed the Army in order to fight, although the Enemy was stronger
by half, but they never went out of their Lines. The next day the Imperial Army
marched to look for some weak side, and to assault the Enemy that way: it went
along their Camp, during some hours, without discovering any place whereby they
could set upon them; but at last they found one side covered by a Hill, which
was not entrenched, and it was resolved to attack them that way. The Turks
perceiving the Resolution of the Christians, posted upon the top of it a body
of Janisaries, and began to entrench themselves. The Christian Army commanded
some Regiments to advance, to remove the Janisaries; and the Turks sent some
Spahees to attack the Christians in the Flanck, during that Encounter; but the
Christian Horses presently advanced to receive the Spahees, and repelled them
easily enough. The Janisaries made a greater Resistance, but at last the
Imperialists made them run, and carried some Cannon upon the rising Ground,
whence they began to play upon the Turkish Camp; the Spahees came to the Charge
again, and the Janisaries stood firm a little way off; but the Spahees having
been broken, betook themselves to the flight in earnest, without minding of
turning back; the Janisaries fired once upon them to force them to turn back,
which increased their Disorder: So that the Serasquier seeing there was no way
for the rallying of his Troops, scared by the loss of two Fights, thought it
was high time to fly away: the Night, and Weariness of the Imperialists, who
had been in Arms since the Morning, made their Retreat the more easy, and
hindered them from being pursued. The Christian Army spent that night in the
Turks Camp, where it had time and the means to refresh itself with the
Provisions it found in it. The next day it entered Nissa without disturbance,
the Town not being fortified. Three thousand Horse were presently detached, to
march toward Sophia, whether the Serasquier was fled: They came again some
days after, and upon the Report they brought concerning the Turks
Consternation, and the Goodness of the Country, it was resolved to leave one
part of the Army at Nissa, to spend there the Winter, and fortify in some
manner that place. During the time the Prince of Baden was at Nissa, the
Serasquier sent him Mustapha Aga, to beseech him to give a Passport and a
Convoy to go to Vienna, and join the other Ambassadors of the Port. The Prince
granted him what he petitioned for, but that new Envoy had no new Proposals to
make: they acquainted him, it may be, with the Diversion of France, least they
should conclude any thing.

Teckely having heard of the Defeat of the Turkish Army at Nissa, while he was
in his March, took his way toward Silestria; thence he went to Sophia, where
the Grand Vizier was, and got thither the 19th of October, followed with a
matter of a hundred Persons, after having left the Troops he commanded, which
were encamped some Miles off of the Town. The Vizier welcomed him very well,
and presented him with a magnificent Vest, and some gallant Horses: he
certified him the Grand Seignior was extremely well satisfied with his Conduct;
exhorted him to continue to act with Vigor against the common Enemy, and
assured him of the Protection of the Port. The Count had many Discourses with
the Vizier, and the other Turkish Officers, to consider what might be done to
stop the Imperialists Progress: While they were a consulting together, they had
notice that the Prince of Baden had taken his March from Nissa toward the
Danube, where he made himself Master of Widden, a place of moment to pass into
Walaquia, where he had a mind to give his Troops Winter Quarters: he was
arrived before that Place the 14th of October, had beaten two Bassa's encamped
thereabout, and reduced it to surrender four days after, although he had but
four Fieldpieces, the great Cannon not being come from Semandria. The Vizier,
very sorry for this News, ordered Teckely to go to Nicopoli, to prevent the
Designs they might have upon that Place, and to endeavor to retake Widden, if
it was possible.

In the mean time General Picolomini, who had tarried at Nissa with some part
of the Army, made some Incursions in the neighboring Countries: but returning
to Nissa, he died of a Cholick at Pristina, leaving the command of the Army to
the Duke of Holstein, till the Emperor had named a new Commander. The Duke of
Holstein beat again several times the Turks in Servia; but the Advantages and
Progress of the Imperialists carried every day, having rendered them too bold,
their Carreer and Progress was chect by a considerable Loss that befell them:

Not having had notice that a Body of ten thousand Tartars, delivered at last
of the fear they were in of the Polanders, who had resolved to keep themselves
upon the defensive, had passed the Danube, and joined the Turks, they continued
their March without fear, whither they speeded to find some Booty or Enemies.
One day, that five Regiments were advancing with speed to surpize a Body of
Turkish Troops, they found themselves surrounded by the Infidels, four times
stronger than they were, and were all cut off, very few scaping to carry the
news of that Defeat.

Prince Charles of Hanover perished amongst many other Persons of note, in
spite of a vigorous Resistance, not having been willing to accept any Quarter.

This engaged the Duke of Holstein to look about himself more carefully than
before; and the General Veteranie, who came to Command in the Room of
Picolomini, retired all his Troops to Nissa; least in leaving them divided, the
Tartars should surprise them, as they had lately done the four or five Thousand
Men, whom they had cut in Pieces.

The Prince of Baden, after having left a Garrison in Widden, to have always a
free Passage over the Danube, passed that River to enter into Walaquia, and
sent to the Hospodar, he was a coming to leave there Six Regiments in Winter
Quarters, to secure his Country against the Tartars. The Hospodar and the
States fearing equally, offered the Imperialists a considerable Sum of Money,
to free themselves from Lodging those Troops, and represented also that, Six
Regiments quartered amongst them were capable indeed to draw upon themselves
the Tartars, but not to stand against those Infidels. For that Reasons sake
they entreated them to give them more; but at last they come again to the
Number of Six, and engaged themselves to entertain them, and to remount those
of the Horsemen, who had lost their Horses. The Prince charged those Troops to
Build some Forts in the Places, from whence they feared the Tartars should
come; and conveyed the rest of his Troops into Transylvania, after he took his
way to Vienna.

Although the Tartars had not obtained a great advantage upon the Imperialists,
and that in going on at that Rate, there was great hopes for the Turks to
recover what they had lost; the Grand Vizier and the Caimacan were both
Arrested, and Strangled, as having ill Managed the Affairs of their Master.
Cuperli Ogli, Bassa of Chio, was made Grand Vizier, and another Bassa of the
same name got the Caimacan's place. After that they sent a Courier to Vienna,
to carry a Letter to the Emperor, and new Instructions to the Envoys that were
there.

That Courier Arrived in the beginning of the Year 1690, and presented to the
Emperor the Grand Seiginor's Letter, which contained only some General
Propositions concerning the Peace. It was thought the Envoys knew something
more, and because they demanded eagerly to know the Emperors Pretentions, that
they might acquaint their Master with them, they received these Conditions in
Writing: 1. That the Grand Seignior should leave to the Emperor all that was
remaining still in Hungary, with Bosnia, and all its Dependencies, without ever
pretending any thing in it. 2. That Moldavia, Walaquia, and the Republic of
Ragusa, should be comprehended in the Treaties of Peace, and should not be
disquieted by the Turks. 3. That the Tartars should be sent Home. 4. That the
Port should Pay Six Millions of Gold for the Charges of the War, and two
Millions Yearly, to Purehase leave for Transporting upon the Danube what they
would to Constantinople. 5. That they should Restore all the Christians that
had been taken since the beginning of the War. 6. That Teckely, and all those
of his Party, should be delivered into the Hands of the Emperor.
These Proposals having appeared too Excessive to the Envoys, their Answer
provoked the Imperial Council to Anger. They proposed only to quit to the
Emperor what remained in the Upper Hungary, upon that Condition, they should
leave Belgrade, Nissa, and all that he had conquered beyond the Save. Upon
these Proposals they were ordered to get themselves ready to Depart the 25th of
Jan. and at that very time they Embarkt upon the Danube, which they descended
as far as Comora, where two of them being fallen Sick, they were forced to
tarry. The Year ensuing they were sent to Puttendorf, to Renew it, but in vain.

They disposed themselves in the mean while at Vienna, to carry on the War, as
Vigorously as they could, and amongst several Opinions Startled up, two, they
say, were the Chief: The first was to Continue in sending a Great Body of
Troops into Servia, to Act there against the Turks, and carry further the
Conquests they had made, and to Fortify. Nissa. The other Advice was to leave
those new Conquests, and to Exaust Servia wholly, to apply themselves to
Fortify Belgrade, which was not done. All that wanted to be done, according to
the Opinion of those that proposed this Second Advice, was to Reduce Giula,
Themiswear, and Great Waradin, to be quite Masters of Hungary, and keep
themselves afterward upon the Defensive.

Those, who were for the first Opinion, represented that it would be a shameful
thing, and that it would express a great weakness, to quit what had been
Conquered: That that Conduct would not fail to raise the Enemies Courage, and
to give them some new Hopes, That in the weakness and the fear they were in,
there was only need to Repel them, and that that would quite put them in
Disorder; that so much the nearer they should approach Constantinople, so much
the more the Seditions should be more Frequent, and by Consequence the Grand
Seignior should be more incapable to gather a Powerful Army: That the
Moldavians, and Walaquians, would Declare themselves for the Turks, as soon as
they could perceive they were a Retiring: That the places, which remained in
Hungary, should fall of themselves into the Emperor's Hands, if they continued
to Intercept the Provisions, and that so much the Easier, by keeping the
Turkish Army farther off of the Frontiers of Hungary: That an Indifferent Army
could do what they wanted, by reason that the most part of the Old Turkish
Troops were dead, and that henceforth the Army could be composed only of
Soldiers newly raised by Force. They strengthened that Opinion with many other
specious Reasons, and so much the more agreeable to them who had no Skill in
Wars, that they seemed to agree with their desires, as more honorable to the
Imperial Arms.

On the other side they asserted, the Turkish Forces were not so small, nor so
contemptible as they thought, because, if they were helped by the Tartars, as
it was probable they should be, they should be in a Case to Beat the Imperial
Armeis, whereof they were obliged to make too many Detachments, and to keep
them too Remote one from the other, and that they could cut them off, if they
did Fight them, one after another, they not being able to help themseves
reciprocally: That it was impossible to entertain an Army in Servia, because
the Turks and Tartars had Ruined it, and would Ruin it still more: That if
they had the worst in a Battle, as that might happen, the farther advanced they
would be, the more difficult it would be to Retreat, which would put the whole
Army to Flight; that they should not consider it as a small matter to reduce
all Hungary into the Emperor's Hands, and to keep it so, that they should be no
more in danger of loosing it; which they would be exposed to, in undertaking
too much: That that very thing would keep all the Neighborhood in its Duty,
without any need of hazarding any thing else. They added some other Discourses
of the same nature, which aimed all to stick to the surest. But the first
Opinion was esteemed best, and they did not perceive, it was maintained with
Reasons more Specious than Solid, but after this Resolution was Embraced, there
was no more time to change for the better part.

In the Month of February, the Tartars, who had consumed all that they could
find of Provisions in Servia, repassed the Danube, and went to look for some in
Walaquia. The Imperialists quartered there, but not finding themselves Capable
to stop their Inroads, retired into the Transilvanians Territories, and gave an
opportunity to the Walaquians to Reproach them; that it happened nothing
otherwise than what they had forewarned, and that they had refused them what
they had promised them. Some thought the Hospodar kept a Correspondence with
the Tartars, and that he had drawn them to drive away the Imperialists. However
it were, by this it Manifestly appeared, that they were grasping at more than
they could keep; and they were not displeased to Mortify the Walaquians. The
Tartarians retired soon after, and the Imperialists, who feared least the Turks
should attack Nissa, or Widdin, called into Servia the Troops they had in
Transylvania, to secure those Places.

Canisa, after having suffered a blockade almost without Intermission since the
taking of Buda, surrendered it self at last to the Emperor, for want of
Victuals, as soon as they lost all the hopes of receiving any Succors.

The Surrender of that Town pleased the the Imperial Court mightily so, much
the more, that they hoped Themiswear, and Waradin would follow its Example,
which nevertheless did not happen, those places having been victualled many
times.

A little after the surrender of Canisa, Michael Abaffi dyed at Alba-Julia,
after having been a long while Sick, and dying, recommended his Children to the
Emperor, as to the Power then most capable to support them, and get his eldest
Son to succeed him in the Principality. The Turks had made him Vaivode, as you
may have seen in the first Book of this History, and the Malcontents of
Hungary had protected him, as it has been told in the Second, against the
intrigues of the Imperial Court. Because he had been in the Party of both,
during many Years. But the Emperor having made himself Master of all the Upper
Hungaria, after the raising of the Siege of Vienna, he began to keep fair with
him, rather by necessity than by Inclination, for fear least he should act
again for the Turks, or for the Malcontents; and to be revenged for what was
past, they filled Transylvania with Imperial Garrisons, and the Transilvanians
were not much better used than the Hungarians.

Charles the fourth Duke of Lorrain dyed also, in the beginning of that
Campaign, and the Imperial Court was deprived of a most able and zealous
General for the House of Austria, whose Interests his Relations were bound to.
The Duke of Bavaria was named to command in his room upon the Rhine, while
Prince Lewis of Baden was coming to take the Command of the Army in Hungary.
It Is reported for certain that this last should excuse himself, because
although he had met with such good Success in the last Campaign, his Army
wanted many necessary things; so that it had been impossible to do any thing,
if the Turks had used a better Conduct than they did. The Imperial Army
conquered a good part of Servia, and often routed the Turks; but this was not
effected without exposing themselves to great Hazards, and by a timely laying
hold of those Opportunities which the Slowness and Consternation of the Turks
have long ago furnished them with. If it happened that the Turks should take
better Measures, and act with more Vigor, there was cause to fear, least the
Imperial Arms should not be so dreadful as before: It seemed indeed the Grand
Vizier was a preparing himself to do better in this Campaign, than his
predecessors had done for some Years past: he was a gathering his Troops at
Nicopoli in Servia, whither he had given a Rendezvous to a grand number of
Saiques.

While they were expecting the opening of the next Campaign, every Party named
a Vaivode of Transylvania. The Emperor declared himself for the eldest Son of
the deceased Abaffi; and the Grand Seignior for Teckely: for although that
Principality was Elective, the States have used to choose ordinarily him they
think to be the strongest, or the best supported, to provide in the same time
for the Security of the Country, and keep to themselves a Shadow of Liberty,
which they shall enjoy in Reality, when they be able to do it with Security.
Abaffi had a strong Party in the Country, and got himself to be chosen
according to the usual Formalities, in spite of the Manifesto Teckely had sent
thither, by which he declared he had been made Vaivode by the Grand Seignior,
under whose Protection Transylvania was.

He forbid the Transilvanians also to acknowledge the Emperor of Germany's
Orders, o^ his Commanders, neither should they furnish them with any thing
whatsoever; ordering them to keep their Provisions for the Turks and Tartars
Armies, which were going to enter their own Country, to deliver them from the
Germans Yoke.

A little while after, during the time the Serasquier besieged Widden, and the
Vizier Nissa, Teckely appeared upon the Fronteers of Transylvania. The General
Heusler, who commanded four thousand Men of the Imperial Troops, had made
himself Master of the Passages, with some of the Country Millitia. Teckely who
was coming from Walaquia with an Army of fifteen or sixteen thousand Men,
composed of Hungarians, Turks, and Tartars, besides some Transilvanians and
Walaquians, caused his Transilvanians to go across some Hills, whither the
Horse could not pass: When he thought they were come to the place, whereby they
should attack the Enemy in the Rear, he assaulted them in the Front with the
main of his Army, the twenty second of August: The Transilvanian Militia, that
were not concerned in the defending of the Germans, run presently away; and the
Imperialists encompassed about, were almost all cut off; General Heusler
himself fell Prisoner into Teckely's hand, who made him Prisoner of War, and
used him very civilly.

That Victory of Teckely, which he acquainted the Grand Vizier with, and which
they took care to publish everywhere, engaged Prince Lewis of Baden to pass the
Danube at Semandria, to protect Abaffi and the other Transilvanians of the
Imperial Party against Teckely, who was come before Cronstadt, without being
able to storm that place for want of Cannon. In the mean while Nissa, where
Count Guido of Staremburgh commanded, was surrendered with himself the eighth of
September, making an honorable Capitulation; and whereof the chiefest Articles
were, That the Garrison should be conducted safely to Belgrade; which was not
exactly well observed. The Garrison of Widden surrendered itself too the twenty
nineth of the same Month, and was conveyed more safely as far as Orsowa. The
Grand Vizier, having had notice the Prince of Baden had passed the Danube, to
defend Transylvania, went from Nissa streightway to Belgrade, the Breaches
whereof he knew to be unrepared still.

In the same time Teckely did forget nothing to engage the Transilvanians to
acknowledge him for Viavode, promising all sort of Advantage to them, who would
declare themselves for him; and threatening to use as Rebels those who would
stand against him. Some Counties of Transylvania acknowledged him, and sent him
Envoys; but the most part of the Transilvanians took the Party of Abaffi, and
desired the Succors from the Emperor. The Marquess Doria, who had been made a
Prisoner by the Tartars and redeemed by Teckely, went to Vienna upon the
General Heusler's word, to get some Money for his Ransom: He carried a Letter
to the Princess Ragotski from her Husband, to whom he brought soon after an
Answer, wherein she expressed to have a great mind to be exchanged for General
Heusler a Prisoner.

The Grand Vizier marching toward Belgrade, attacked so suddenly the Palank of
Semandria, that the Garrison, which had order to quit it, and ruin the place,
had not the time to do it: Having taken the Resolution to defend itself, and
not having taken well its Measures, it was forced the fourth day, and put to
the Sword. The Turks found in it some Pieces of Cannon, and a few Ammunitions,
because they had carried into Transylvania, and elsewhere, what they had before
in it. The very second of October. he laid the Siege to Belgrade, which he
assaulted very briskly; and which the General Aspremont, who had thrown himself
into it, defended as well as he could. The Duke of Croy entered into it a little
while after with seven or eight hundred Men. But because the old Breaches were
but pallisadoed, and the place ill furnished with Pioneers, and Tools to work
the Ground; there was no likelihood to hold out long, although they had enough
of other necessary Provisions. And yet one would never have thought the Turks
had been able to make themselves Masters of it, after six days siege; but an
Accident that happened, was the cause that that place fell the eighth of
October into their hands, a Bomb having fallen upon a Tower where the Magazine
of the Powder was, which should have been in Cellars, overthrew not only that
Tower with horrible. Noise and Damage, but destroyed many neighboring Houses,
and set some others on fire. The Turks laying hold on the Disorder which that
occasioned, they assaulted the Palisadoes with such a Fury, that they took the
place, without having made yet in it any Breach, and put to the Sword all that
they met; and forced the Commander to run away over the Danube, upon some
Saiques, with seven or eight Hundred Men. They retired to Esseck, to make their
endeavors to keep that Post, which they had not Fortifyed yet; by reason they
thought the Turk would never come so far. Therefore it wanted but a little, but
they had lost it some while after. The Vizier having caused some of his Troops
to pass the Save, sent them that way, to attack that Place, which they expected
to carry easily. But having not done it with the Vigor that was required, they
had Advice, that a great many Imperal Forces were a coming to Succor it; and
they say, they thought them already come, hearing the sound of the Trumpets and
Kettle-drums, which by way of Amusement had been sent out of that place the
Night before, with an order to return with a great Noise through the Morass
Way. Upon that false Suspicion they went away the 6th of November with so great
a Precipitation, that they left their Cannon, and one part of their Bagage, to
reach the sooner to Belgrade, whither they speeded away.

There was a report then that they had offered to make Peace with Teckely, and
that they were willing to know from him, what it was he expected from the
Emperor. Some Articles too, have been published, wherein he asks not only the
Principality of Transylvania, but also the restoring of all his States, and the
Restoration of the Privileges of Hungary, many places in that Kingdom, to be
made a Prince of the Empire, and other things, that seems to be so unlikely,
that we will say no more of it. The Prince of Baden having received all the
succors he expected, advanced with an Army stronger than that of Teckely, both
for the Number and Quality of the Troops, to offer him Battle; but Teckely knew
how to avoid it, and chose rather to Retire upon the frontiers of Moleavia,
than to hazard any thing. If the Vizier had had any great skill in Warlike
Affairs, he should have presently after the taking of Belgrade, followed the
Prince of Baden, or marched in order to join with Teckely, and render himself
Master with him of Transylvania. But the Turks can, no more than some other
Nations, make so good use of their advantages, as to boast themselves of their
Victories. All that they did, was to take Lippa, and to throw some Provisions
and Troops in Giula, Themiswear, and Waradin. Those Garrisons being increased
made several inroads in many places of the Upper Hungary, and into Transylvania
also, without the Prince of Baden's Power to hinder it, who had already divided
his Troops, wearied by the long Marches they had undergone, to put them into
Winter Quarters, to hinder it.

All the remedy they found against it, was to gather as many Troops as they
could, and to follow the Turks in their retreat; which they did happily enough,
seeing they killed many of those who were the slowest, and that they delivered
a considerable number of Prisoners.

During the time the Turks were entering into Transylvania, on the side of
Hungary, Teckely entered into it too through Walaquia. They sent to meet himtthe
Prince of Auguste of Hanover, Sergeant General of Battle at the Head of a
Thousand Horses. That Prince having attacked Fifteen Hundred Men, who were
entrenched in a passage Rashly, was wholly defeated, and himself killed upon
the Spot. And yet Teckely made no use of that Defeat, by reason of the hardness
of the Season, which hindered him from engaging himself further into
Transylvania, having heard besides the Turks were retired. He returned into
Walaquia, and the Prince of Baden took his way toward Vienna.

The Young Abaffi and his Friends, supported by the Imperial Troops, began then
to search out those that had declared themselves for Teckely. They used them no
less roughly than they had done the Rebls in Hungary, as if the Emperor had had
more right to raise Abaffi to the dignity of Vaivadoe, than the Grand Seignor
had to invest Teckely with it. But it is no new thing, that the party which has
the better, has the Justice and Reason on his side. The States of Transylvania
followed the choice of Vienna, and gave their consent, that Abaffi should be
their Prince, under the Emperor's protection. Not being come yet to age fit to
govern by himself: they named a Chancellor, and a Council, composed of
Transilvanians, who took upon themselves the charge of the Affairs. They
promised also to the Emperor's Commissioners, to give their Master two Hundred
Thousand Livers per annum in Silver, and so much in Corn, while the War should
last, a Tribute much larger than that the Vaivodes of Transylvania had used to
pay before to the Port.

The Turks encouraged, by the advantages of the last Campaign, made incursions
during the Winter, and took several places, round about those they had in
Hungary. The Imperialists on their side plundered upon the Turks, and till the
Campaign was opened, many actions happened, whereby both Parties had by turn, the
advantage and disadvantage over the other: Teckely kept in play the Troops of
Transylvania, during the Winter and the Spring; and the Report that the Grand
Seignor was to give him Twenty Thousand Men, to enter into that Principality,
caused General Veterany to ask the Emperor for some new Troops, his being
extremely fatigued. The Turks, on their side, making great preparations, the
Emperor gave order to Fortify Esseck, after the Strongest and the most
Expeditious way they could to withstand the Infidels the better. He committed
the defense of Germany to several Princes, and Towns, which engaged themselves
to keep an Army upon the Rhine. In the mean while, some new troubles, which
arose at Constantinope, hindered the Turks from making the necessary
preparations, and stopped their design. Count Teckely, instead of having an
Army sufficient to render himself Master of Transylvania, or at least to keep
his ground against the Imperialists, was reduced to the necessity of making
some Excursions toward Themiswear with his Malcontents, which were not many
in Number.

In the month of July, the Imperial Army, being above 40000 Strong, and
commanded by Prince Lewis of Baden, Marched along the Danube as far as
Peter-Waradin, because it was reported that the Turks, who were made to Amount
to near 60000 Men, were upon the design of passing the Save, and going to
Besiege Esseck. In effect, a few days after the Christian Army arrived at
Peter-Waradin, the Turks, commanded by the Grand Vizier, assisted by the
councels of Count Teckely, passed the Save, and came to encamp near Semlyn,
upon the Banks of the Danube. The 10th of August the Imperial Army being
advanced that way, saw the Infidels in Order of Battle upon hills, which they
would not descend. The Imperials encamped as near them as possibly they could,
in Expectation that the Turks would not refuse them Battle, if they continued
to offer it them. Notwithstanding these last being resolved to hazard nothing,
and being perfectly well entrenched, the Prince of Baden purposed to retire,
with a Design to make them abandon their Trenches, and to draw nearer the
place, from whence his provisions were sent him, which could not be conveyed
low enough by the Danube, upon the account of the Turkish Saicks, which covered
the River. The Turks, who thought that fear made the Christians withdraw, upon
the 16th of the Month attacked the Rear of the Christian Army, by some Horse,
to incommode it in its March, nevertheless without engaging too far. For some
Days following the Turks continued to do the same, and by amusing after that
manner the Christian Army, they passed upon its Right, and went to post
themselves the 18th of August upon the Hills near the Danube, between
Peter-Waradin, and the Christians, with a design to cut off their Provisions.
They had not ill begun, and the Regiment of Dragoons of Buquoi, which conveyed
200 Chariots of Provisions, was entirely cut in pieces as well as some other
Troops, which came from Esseck, and knew not that the Christian Army was
further distant from them, than the Turks.

This Action of the Vizier's was undoubtedly one of the wisest, that had been
performed in this War, for a long time; and if he had often happened that the
Turks had used such conduct, the Imperialists had been ^ut to their utmost
shifts to oppose them. The Prince of Baden, and the other Generals perceiving
then what a trick the Vizier had played them, and seeing themselves absolutely
destitute of Provisions, because the Turkish Saicks obstructed their coming by
the Danube, and the Army of the Turks prevented them by Land, they resolved to
hazard all to break through the Turkish Camp, since they must of necessity
starve, if they stayed any longer. If so be they had been defeated, one might
have depended upon seeing the Affairs of the Ottaman Empire restored in a
little time, and perhaps all Hungary fallen into their Hands; because the
Emperor being in want of Money, and believing himself secure by his Victories,
had neglected to Fortify what he had taken from the Turks, except Esseck, and
some advanced places. On the other side, by routing the Enemy's Army, the
adrantage was but small, unless they could defeat it easily, and without loss,
which they could not expect to do. In the mean time, as there was no other way
to save the Imperial Army, than by exposing it to these Risks, it marched the
next Day, being the 19 of August, toward the Trenches of the Turks, which were
found to be much better, than had been Imagined. About three in the Afternoon,
the Right Wing attacked those, who regarded the Camp of the Imperialists, and
the Left Wing was to make a greater compass, in order to set upon that place,
which looked toward the Rhine. The Right Wing was received by the Janissaries
with so much resolution, that they repulsed it a great way from its Lines, and
with much los^. But the Left Wing having found the soil more commodious, broke
through the Lines of the Turks, whilst their Horse, who were gone out to oppose
its March, Skirmished against some Squadrons of the Christian Army. Teckely.
who was at the Head of the Horse, seeing the Camp forced on one side, and
disorder in the Troops, prepared himself to retire. The Right Wing of the
Christian Army, having followed the left, and abandoned its attack, where it
found too much resistance, gave opportunity to the Janissaries, and what
remained of Horse in the Camp, to get off on this side: The approaching Night,
(this Action having lasted near three Hours, the weariness of the Imperialists,
their losses, and their desire of Plunder,) gave the Turks an occasion to
retire, although the Grand Vizier had been killed.

The Imperialists, as it is said, left in this Fight above 6000 Men upon the
place, and had double as many wounded, of which several died in the end. A
great number of Officers remained there, and the Army instead of pursuing the
Turks, took the road of Peter-Waradin; as the Turks retired toward Belgrade,
after having lost 18000 Men of their side. This victory of the Imperialists,
being none of those which they desired to obtain often, put them out of a
condition to undertake any thing, on this side of the Danube; and they thought
only upon reposing themselves, and re-enforcing their Army by detachments out
of the neighboring Garrisons, for fear the Turks should make any attempt.

The 28th of August a party of Tartars came to take away some Cattle, and some
Horses from the Imperial Army, and although orders had been given for a speedy
pursuance of them, they could overtake but some few, who were made. Prisoners.
It was known to them, that the Turkish Army was encamped near Belgrade, and
that those Bassa's, who had saved themselves, kept it in good order,
notwithstanding the Vizier, and the Aga of the Janissaries ^ad been killed in
the Battle of Salankemen, and the Troops extremely fatigued.

The Christian Army having remained at Peter-Waradin, till such time as it was
in a condition not to be taken of a sudden, left a Garrison in it, and divided
it self in two Bodies, whereof one commanded by the Duke of Croy took the way of
Esseck; and the other, which was conducted by the Prince of Baden, passed the
Danube, in the beginning of September, and marched toward Zolnock, along the
River Teys. During this March, Lippa was retaken by General Veterani, who was
ordered to fortify it. From Zolnock the Army marched toward Great-Waradin,
which the Prince of Baden viewed the 10th of October. After which the place was
regularly besieged, and bombarded, to try if it might be won by that means: The
Turks defended themselves with much Resolution; after having disputed the
Ground with the Imperialists as well as they could, they retired the twenty
third into an Intrenchment pallizado'd, which they had made round the Citadel.
The Imperialists continued to push them even into the Citadel where they made
a pretty considerable Breach, but the Ditch being full of Water, without any
possibility of draining it, it was necessary at length to resolve upon turning
the Siege into a Blockade, upon the seventh of November. Thus the victorious
Army was obliged to abandon an Enterprise, which it had undertaken, as it
seems, only to let the Turks see, that the Victory had not been so bloody as
they imagined, since it durst afterward besiege one of their strongest Places:
if so be they did not succeed to their Wishes, at least the Turks might see by
it, that the Imperialists did not want Courage. The death of the Grand Vizier
Cuperli, who was succeeded by Hali Bassa, prevented them from showing the
Imperialists in their turn, that the loss of a Battle had not exhausted their
Forces. They were also worsted in Sclavonia, where they abandoned Gradiska, and
let several small places be taken by the Duke of Croy* who commanded that body
of the Army which acted on this side. Besides, the blockade of Waradin was not
unuseful, since by that means the Place was reduced to Capitulate upon on the
3d of June, in the following year 1692, after a Months Seige, as shall be more
at large recited in the continuation of this History, when there shall arrive
sufficient matter to make an Adition.

The Prince of Baden put his Troops in Winter Quarters, after having left a
competent number to continue the blockade of Waradin, which was conducted by
the Prince of Aversperg. If the rigor of the season had permitted them to
press the Attacks, it was impossible for the Bassa of this City to hold out
long; since several Persons, who found means to get out, reported that the
Garrison, which had consisted of above 3000 Men, at the beginning of the Siege,
was reduced to less than half; that most part of the Provisions were either
burnt, or consumed; and that the Garrison, was obliged to live in Caves covered
with Earth and Ruins, and remained there with the utmost inconvenience.

During the Siege of Waradin, a Turk, who passed out of this place through the
Camp of the Imperialists, without being known, reported at Belgrade, whither he
went, That he had heard a Radzian say, That the Counts Teckely and Petrozzi had
wrote to Prince Lewis of Baden, That had it not been for them, the Serasquier
had gone to relieve Waradin, and that the Emperor owed to them this
Obligation; That if he would Negotiate with them for their Composition, General
Heusler could instruct him of their pretensions. Notwithstanding this
information was false, the Turks and Tartars fell upon them, as upon Traitors,
and the Serasquier had much ado to secure them from the Fury of the Soldiers,
who entirely plundered their Baggages. It was easy for the Counts to show the
falsehood of this Accusation* since the Serasquier knew, that he had been of
opinion himself to attempt the Relief of Waradin. They had also a mind to
render Teckely suspected, because he had released General Heusler, upon
condition that his Wife should be restored him; but that having been done by
the consent of the deceased Vizier, and the chief Officers of the Turks, the
Serasquier made no scruple in that respect. In the mean time the noise of the
apprehension of the Count, being dispersed, was a subject of much joy to the
Imperialists, who believed him lost, and much affliction to the Hungarians that
followed him, who were at Wipalanka, upon the Danube, which they passed
immediately, for fear of being cut in pieces by the Infidels. But the two
Counts, being freed, soon went to seek them, and brought them back into Servia,
where they took their Quarters about Possarowits. Thus Teckely escaped once
more the brutallity of the Turkish Troops, amongst which he will hardly ever
remain in perfect safety. He has had this good Fortune, in his Disgraces, to
live to the year 1692 amongst these barbarous People, respected of the
Generals, and beloved of the Port, whilst it has ruined a very great number of
its best Officers, under pretense of their ill Conduct, by reason of the losses
which it had received by the War. Happy, if the same reason does not cause his
destruction one day; or if he can see a Peace concluded between the two
Empires, and live in some corner of the World, without fearing the Resentments
of the House of Austria! We will end here, till process of time gives us more
Information.

The Year 1692 was Spent without any Action between the two Armies, they being
both so weak, that neither of them durst attempt to force the other, tho they
lay the most part of the Summer near each other, on the Danube in Sclavonia.

The End of the Fourth and Last Book.
AN INDEX Of the matters contained in the Life of TECKELY.
The First Book.
REasons for Writing, and Publishing this History. p. 2. Subjects of complaints
given by the Kings of Hungary to their People, and of the Kings. p. 3, 4, 5.
The Nobility of Hungary partly cause the troubles. p. 6. Stephen Teckely,
Father of Emeric, his Quality, and his Riches. p. 7. Birth and Education of Em.
Teckly. p. 8. George Ragotski, Vaivod of Transylvania, defeated by the Poles,
the Tartars, and the Turks. p. 8. 9. Implores in vain the Emperor's
Assistance. p. 9. Francis Ragotski constrained to receive the Imperial Troops,
in some of his places. p. 10. Hungarians fear for their Liberty. p. 11. Francis
which must be read so line the instead of Paul Wesselin. Palatine of Hungary
opposes the designs of the Imperial Court. p. 12. Waradin, besieged and taken
by the Turks. p. 13. The Prince of Portia, the Emperor's Minister, lets
Waradin be taken. p. 14. Hungarians refuse to receive the Germans in their
places. p. 16. Disorders of the German Troops in Hungary, and complaints of the
Hungarians. p. 17.18. Principality of Transylvania restored to Michael Abaffi.
p. 21. Quarrels between the Hungarians and Germans, in reference to the
quartering of Troops. p. 23, 25, 28. Chimen and Anos routed and killed. p. 28.
Useless negotiation between the Emperor and the Turks. p. 29. Proposals of the
Hungarians, to defend their Country. p. 30. Achmet Coprogli, Grand Vizer
beseiges and takes New hausel. p. 31. Counts of Serin beat the Turks. p. 33.
Imperial Army against the Turks. p. 34. Seige of Kanischa vainly attempted. p.
37. 38, 39. Fort Serin taken by the Turks. p. 41. Advantages of the
Imperialists beyond the Danube. p. 43. Battle of St. Godard, where the Turks
are routed. p. 44. Fault of Monteculi after this Victory p. 45. Faults of Peter
de Serin of the death of his Brother. p. 46. Union of Hungarian Lords, to
oppose the Germans. p. 47. Truce concluded between the Emperor and the Turks.
p. 48. Blamed and defended. p. 49. Hungarians vexed at this treaty. p. 50.
Their conplaints, and their answers they received. p. 52. New Subjects of
discontent. p. 55. Conspiracy of the Counts Nadsti and Serin. p. 57. Death of
Francis Wesselini. p. 59. Francis Nadasti attempts upon the Life of the
Emperor. p. 60, 61. Peter Serin in vain sues for the Government of Garlestadt.
p. 62. Protestants misused in Hungary. p. 63, 64. General disatisfaction. ibid.
Conspiracy in Hungary to defend the Privileges of the Country. 65. The
Hungarians beg the assistanee of the Turks. 66, 67. Vain efforts of the
Conspirators. 68. The Count of Tattemback arrested. 69. The Countess of Serin
arrested. 70. The Counts of Serin and Frangipam arrested. p. 72. Assemb. of
Hung. conspired at Cassovia. 73. Francis Ragotski takes up Arms. 73, 74.
Hungarians demands to the Emperor. 74. Ragotski returns to his Obedience: 76.
Hungarian Conspirators reduced. 77. Count Wadasti arrested. 78. The Diet of
Hungary vainly sollicites for the imprisoned Counts. 79. Multiplication of
Malcontents. 80. Hungarian Lords pursued by Arms. 81. Stephen Teckely besieged
and dead. 82. His Son about 15 years old, a Fugitive in Transylvania. 83.
The Second Book.
Teckely puts himself under the protection of the Turks. 84. Well received in
Transylvania. 85. Hungary used as a Land of Conquest. 85. Abolishment of the
charge of Palatine. 86. Establishment of a Viceroy, and Sovereign Chamber in
Hungary. 87. Protest misused in Hung. by the Viceroy. 88. Minist. sent to the
Galleys, and delivered. 88. Malcontents of Hungary in Arms. 89. Diverse
Encounters. 89. Presentions of the Malcontents, and promises of the Emperor
90 Hostilities of the Turks 92 Debrezen surprised, and abandoned by the
Imperialists 93 Offers of the Emperor to the Malcontents 94 Imperialists
beaten by the Malcontents 95 Kops, General of the Emperor, whose cruel
Conduct is disapproved of at Court 96 Nagibania taken, lost and retaken ib. New
Offers to the Malcontents, and the Difficulties of satisfying them 97 E. T.
declared Head of the Malcontents 98 His first Advances 99 Weakness of the
Imperialists under C. L. 100 Teckely has an Army of 2000 Men, and takes Eperies
101 C. Lesle defeated by Teck. and Boham 102 Faults of the Malcontents in
their manner of making War 103 Weakness and ill Conduct of the Imperialists 104
Cities surrender to Teckely ib. Useless Negotiations between the Parties 105
Fight between C. Wourmb and the Malcontents ib. Truce between the Imperialists
and Malcontents 106 Teckely suspected by the Malcontents, and deceived by the
Imperialists 107 Acts more vigorously than ever against the Emperor 108
Teckely and Wesselini differ about the Command 109 Disorders of the Imperial
Army 110 Teckely thinks of being reconciled, but his Proposals being rejected,
he says he will do nothing without the Port 111 Zatchmar vainly besieged by
Teckely 112 Standard of the Malcontents ib. Kersmark, and some other Cities
taken by Teckely 113 Negotiations between the two Parties ib. The Emperor
seems to grow milder in respect of the Protestants 114 Teckely solicited by the
Turks, and the Imperialist's, and his Demands to the latter 115 The Clergy of
Hungary oppose the Emperor's good Will toward the Protestants ib. The Ancient
Govern. of Hun. restored 116 Demands of the Malcontents 117 Negotiations
caused by the Fear of the Turks 118 Reasons why the Malcontents could not
agree 119 Abaffi and Teckely united in the Siege of Zathmar 121 The Siege
raised, and why ib. Articles concerning Religion concluded in the Diet of
Hungary 123 Preparations of the Turks for the War, and an Embassy from the
Emperor 124 Offers of the Emperor to Teckely rejected 125 Marriage of Teckely
with the Princess Rogoski 126 Zathmar taken by Teckely 127 Cossovia taken by
the same 128 Several other Places taken 129 The Captains of the Imperialists
suspected of Intelligence with the Malcontents 130 Teckely declared Prince of
Upper Hungary by the Turks 131 Mutual Negotiations and Complaints 132 The
Imperialists despond in the beginning of the Year 1683 133 Diet called to
Cossovia by Teckely 134 March of the Turks toward Hungary 136 Ill Conduct of
the Imperialists 137 Second Diet assembled at Cossovia by Teckely, and its
Effects 138 The Imperial Army commanded by the Duke of Lorrain ib. Teckely goes
to see the Vizier near Esseck, and is well recompensed 139 Almost all Hungary
declares for him 141 The Emperor abandons the greatest part of Hungary 142
March of the Turkish Army ib. It passes the Raab and the Rabwits 143 The D. of
Lorrain plunders the Country 144 The Emperor leaves Vienna, and retires to
Passau ib. Preparations to defend Vienna 145 The Turks invest this City, and
immediately commit diverse considerable Faults 146 Design of Teckely upon the
Castle of Presbourg 147 This Castle relieved by the Duke of Lorrain, who beats
the Malcontents 148 Teckely decamps, and disagrees with the Turks who were
with him 148 Tartars begin to pillage Moravia 159 The Malcontents don't
support the Turks enough, and why 151 The Tartars and Turks defeated in
Moravia, by the Duke of Lorrain 152 Capital Faults of the Turks in the Siege of
Vienna ib. Battle near Vienna, wherein the Turks are routed ib. Praise of the
King of Poland, and the Duke of Lorrain 155 The Christian Army pursues that of
the Turks 156 Fight near Barcan, where the Turks had the better 157 Another
Fight, wherein they are defeated 159 Barcan taken 160 Count Teckely serves the
Turks ill 161 Proposals of the Malcontents 162 Rejected by the Duke of Lorrain
165 Seige of Gran, carried in few days 167 The Malcontents make new Offers,
and are rejected 160, 170 The King of Poland returns home, without taking
Winter Quarters in Hungary 171 The Grand Vizier strangled 172 Journey of
Teckely to Adrinople, where he justifies himself before the Grand Seignior 173
Another Vizier 174
The Third Book.
An Act of Oblivion published by the Emperor, and its Effects 2 Desertors
amongst the Malcontents punished with Rigor 3 Omissions in the Pardon 4
Teckely makes prosperous Incursions, and beats some Polish Troops, who retire
home 4, 5 Advantages of the Turks and Malcontents 5, 6 The King of Poland
offers to be Mediator between the Emperor and the Malcontents, but his
Mediation is rejected ib. State-Maxim of the Polanders, in relation to Hungary
7 Artifice to divide the Hungarian Malcontents, under pretense of Religion ib.
Letter of Teckely to the Pope, touching his Designs 8 Vicegrad taken by the
Duke of Lorrain 10 Turks defeated upon the two Banks of the Danube ib. Pest
none by the Imperialists, and abandoned 11 Seige of Buda 12 Advantages and
Losses of the Imperialists 13 Inconveniences which the Imperialists suffered
before Buda ib. Arrival of the Elector of Bavaria 14 Buda relieved by the
Serasquier, and the Seige abandoned by the Imperialists 15 Fault of the
Serasquier ib. Advantages of General Schultz in Upper Hungary 16 Teckely
surprised by Schultz 16, 17 Eperies vainly attacked by the Imperialists, who
take other Places ib. Weitzen taken by the Turks 18 Want of Provisions in
Hungary ib. Newhausel blocked up by the Imperialists, and furnished with
Provisions, in spite of them, by Teckely 19 Schultz defected by Teckely 20
Heusler retakes Weitzen, and gains some Advantages over the Turks ib. Ungwar
vainly besieged by Schutz 21 Siege of Newhausel ib. March of the Imperial Army
against the Serasquier 22 Defeat of the Serasquier 23 Newhausel taken 24
Eperies taken by Capitulation 25 Diverse Malcontents submit to the Emperor, and
Cassovia is besieged ibid. Teckely made Prisoner by the Bassa of Waradin 27
Disorder which it causes in the Party 28 The Princess Ragotski summoned to
surrender 29 Letters of Teckely, and the Answer his Wife makes to the
Imperialists 29, 30 Teckely set at liberty ibid. Manifesto or Discourse of
Teckely, containing the Reasons of the Malcontents to take up Arms against the
Emperor 32 to p. 51 Teckely takes the Field 51 Montgatz blocked up by the
Imperialists, makes a vigorous Defense 52 St. Job taken by Caraffa 54 Moncatsch
besieged in vain 55, 56 Teckely surprised by Merci 57 Design of undertaking the
Siege of Buda ib. Cities dismantled in Upper Hungary 58 Imperialists in
Transylvania 59 March of the Imperial Army to the Siege of Buda 60 Seige of
this Place 61 Endeavors of the Turks to relieve it 62 It is taken by Assault,
through the fault of the Turks 63 The Christian Army follows the Turkish, and
attacks two Places which it takes ib. Intrigues of Teckely discovered 64
Execution of suspected Hungarians 66, 67 The Turks offer to make Peace 68
Teckely surprised and defeated 70 March of the Imperial Army, which passes the
Drove 71 The Imperialists repulsed by the Turks 71 Fight of Mohats, wherein the
Turks are de feated 72 New Losses of the Turks 73 Design of Crowning the
Archduke Joseph King of Hungary 74 Disorders at Constantinople, where the
Grand Seigniour is deposed, and his Brother put in his place 75 The Imperial
Troops quartered in Transylvania 76, 77 Predictions of Teckely accomplished 78
Election of the Archduke Joseph to be Hereditary King of Hungary, and the
Difficulties in obtaining it 79, 80 Sudden Death of Count Drascowits 80 Demands
of the Hungarian Protestants at the Diet of Presbourg 82 Reduction of Agria 83
Prosperity of the House of Austria ibid. Efforts of Teckely. 84
The Fourth Book.
Confusion of Teckely 2 Moncatsch surrendered 3 Articles of Capitulation ibid.
Disorders of the Germans in Transylvania 5 Valachia fears the Imperialists 6
Teckely surprised, accused and justified 7 Manifesto of this Count 8 New
Troubles at Constantinople 15 The Princess Ragotski Misused at Vienna ibid.
Conspiracy against Teckely discovered 16 Hungarians go to join him ibid.
Alba-Regalis surrendered to the Imperialists 17 Teckely takes an Oath to the
Turks ibid. Belgrade taken by the Elector of Bavaria ibid. Envoys of the Turks
for a Peace 18 Entrance ^f the Army of France into Germany, which retards the
Peace 19 Teckely e^deavours to make an Advantage of it 20 Death of the Hospodar
of Valachia, and the Electi^n of a new one 21 Envoy of Te^kely to the Hospodar
22 Teckely's L^tter made public at Constantinople 23 Proposals of peace 24 The
Turks in perplexity 25 Teck. demands assistance of the Turks 26 He attempts to
relieve Themiswear ib Blockade of the Imperialists 27 Bravery of the Garrison
of Waradin 28 Teckely takes Navigrad in Bulgaria ib Fault of the Valachains 29
Diverse motions of the Imperial Army 30 The Prince of Baden Beats the Turks near
Possarowits 31 Taking of Orso. by Teck. and Reasons why he ought not to be in
agreat Turkish Army 31, 32 Defeat of the Turks at Nissa 34, 35 New Envoy of the
Turks for peace 36 Journey of Teckely to Sophia ib. Widdin taken by the Prince
of Baden 37 The Vizier sends Teck. to Nico^oli ib. Advantages of the
Imperialists in Servia 38 Defeat of five Imperial Regim^nts by the Tartars ib.
The Imperial Troops quartered in Valachia 39 New Grand Vizier at Constantinople
40 Pretensions of the Emperor to make a Peace, rejected by the Turks 41
Different sentiments touching the manner of cont^nuing the War against the
Turks 42 43 44 The Imperialists chased out of Valachia by the Tartars 45 Kanisa
surrendered ib. Death of Michael Abaffi 46 Death of the Duke of Lorraign 47
Difficulties in the War of Hungary ib. A Vaivod elected in Transylvania 48
Heusler defeated, and taken by Teck. 49 Nissa and Widdin, taken by the Tur. 50
Semandria taken by assault, by the same 51 Belgrade taken by assault, by the
same 52 Esseck attacked in vain by the Turks 53 Pretensions of Teckely to make
a Peace 54 The Prince of Baden cannot draw him to a Battle ib. Incursions of the
Turks in Transylvania 55 A Thousand of the Emperor's Horse cut in pieces 55
Preparations on both sides 57 March of the Turk. and Christ. Armies 58 Good
Conduct of the Vizier, and Teck. ib. Battle of Salankemen gained by the
Christians 61, 62 Seige of Waradin 64 Taking of the Place 65 Teck. of Petrozzi
accused, and justified. 66
The END.
ADVERTISEMENT OF Books lately Printed.
LEx Parliamentaria: or, a Treatise of the Law and Customs of the Parliaments
of England by G. P. Esquire with an Appendix of a Case in Parliament between Sir
Francis Goodwin, and Sir Joh^ Fortescue, for the Knights place for the County
o^ Bucks. From an Original French Mana scrip^ translated into English.

Politica Sacra and Civilis; or, a Model of Civi^ and Ecclesiastical
Government, wherein, beside the positive Doctrine, the State and Church in
General, are debated the principal controversies o^ the times concerning the
constitution of the Stat^ and Church of England. By George Lawson. Recto^ of
More in Salop.

The Tragedles of the Last Age, considered an^ examined by the Practice of the
Ancients, and b^ the common Sense of all Ages; in a Letter to Flee^wood
Shepherd, Esquire

A short View of Tragedy; its Original, Excelency, and Corruption: With some
Reflections o^ Shakespeare and other Practitioners for the Stag^ Both by Mr.
Rymer, Servant to their Majesty's.

Bibliotheca Politica: Or, a Discourse by way (...) Dialogue, whether the
Commons of England repr^sented by Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in
Parliment, were one of the three Estates in Parliame^^ before the 49th of Henry
III. or 18th of Edward Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the
Oxford-Arms; were also may be had the First Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth
Dialogues.


