THE EARL OF DANBYS ANSWER TO Sr. Robert Howard's BOOK, ENTITLED An Account of
the State of his Majesty's Revenue; as it was Left by the Earl of Danby at
Lady Day, 1679.

LONDON, Printed for Randall Tailor, 1680.

THE EARL OF DANBYS ANSWER TO Sr. Robert Howard's ACCOUNT, etc.
I Know not whether I should find fault, or thank Sr. Robert Howard for his
late Book, called An Account of the State of his Majesty's Revenue, as it was
left at Lady Day 1679, etc. Because, upon Examination it will appear to have
done me no injury, and has showed the Examiner that there was nothing to be
said in Justification of any other part of his Book, but only what concerned
the State of the Revenue, as it was found by Me at June 1673. and left at
Lady Day, 1679.

Sir Robert does likewise show how he detests such Scurrilous Language as the
Examiner is full of; for in my Answer, I have but once called a certain
untruth, a notorious Falsehood, and Sr. Robert seems to be much offended at the
Expression.

He shows himself also far more ingenuous than the Examiner was, for he
confesses many Errors in the Examiners Book, although the Examiner be very
positive in the defense of them; viz. In his absolute affirming that my Sallary
was never included in secret service. In his double charging of 200000 l. on
the one fifth of the Excise. And in saying that the whole Tax upon the first
Act for Disbanding the Army was come into the Exchequer in my time, etc. which
Sir Robert is so much my friend as to acknowledge, he believes to be otherwise,
although he confesses, Fol. 7. that he has not given himself the trouble to
examine it; and in the same page he says, he shall not meddle with their
Arguments (meaning I suppose the Examiners Arguments and mine;) so as I
perceive we must stand upon our own legs for what either of us have said, he
being resolved only to give the Public an Account how the Revenue was left at
Lady day, 1679. and not to meddle with Politic Disputes, nor matters of State,
which fills the greater number of Folioes in the Examiners Book.

Sir Robert does also know that if all the matters of Fact contained in his
Book were true, it could be no Crime in me, that the Revenue was more or less
in Debt at my leaving it: unless I had either lessened the Income of the
Revenue, or not truly answered the whole Income according to his Majesty's
Directions: or had diverted any of the Moneys given by Parliament to other uses
than were limited by the several Acts; and he does not pretend to say any thing
either as to the lessening, or not answering the whole Revenue; (but on the
contrary confesses the Revenue to be increased in my time.) And for diverting
any part thereof, he speaks as if some others did complain to him of it; but I
do not understand that he directly charges any such thing himself; nor can any
man do it but with great untruth: insomuch that were it not for some
expressions not so becoming a man's own Secretary to be guilty of, and that the
time of publishing his Book has not been so generously taken, as some men of
Honor would have done, I should not only have forgiven but have thanked Sir
Robert for the opportunity of clearing the integrity of my management in the
Treasury, however I may have been wanting in those abilities which God has
given to himself above other men: And he ought not to blame me, but my
understanding, if I could not always comprehend such Schemes and Projects of
his concerning the Revenue, whereof I have some still in my custody, which I
must acknowledge I do not yet understand, any more than I did when I first
received them.

That which makes me complain of the time Sir Robert has taken to divulge his
Book, is, because it may be too reasonably suspected, that those Reasons he
gives for having deferred it so many months, are not so probable, as some
other reasons may be, which he does not think fit to give, because if his
Relations were not well at Tunbridge; yet it seems he was well himself; and how
a man whose Office and Dwelling is in the Exchequer, and who has so great a
control over it, could want either Records or Certificates from other Offices
so long as he has taken to satisfy his Friends inquiry is not very likely.

But these Reasons were likely; First, That such a Book as this (though I dare
say understood by very few that reads it,) would make a great noise against a
man in my condition, in the time of a Parliaments Sitting. Secondly, That in
Probability, it would be impossible for me under a confinement, (and who am
without Power to send for any Records or Papers, and who am now without the
help of those Officers who acted then under me) to give any full answer (during
the sitting of Parliament) to what he has found so many months little enough to
do, who had all the Leisure and Helps for it he could desire.

3. That being under Accusations in Parliament, I might probably be called upon
to answer them at this time; So as I should not only want leisure, but in all
Likelihood I could not have my thoughts free to attend to such a matter as
this, when I had so much greater concerns upon my Hands.

And lastly, Though it contain nothing of Criminal in it; Yet it might be hoped
that any small weight, which could not receive an Answer in due time, might
contribute to the heightning of men's ill Opinions, against one he thought not
yet enough Loaded with false Aspersions.

If this was the Design, (as I have too much reason to believe, both from what
I have said, and because otherwise I do not believe he would have troubled
himself, to have Writ, what he knows will be found to have so many mistakes) I
do acknowledge, that he has gained so much of his design, that I shall not be
able, under my Circumstances, to give so full an Answer at present, as I hope
to do hereafter; If my Condition will permit: And I doubt not but to make it
appear, that I have said nothing in my first answer, but what I have still good
reason to believe True.

In the mean time I shall endeavor to show the Fallacies which are in many
parts of his Book. The wrong State of the Questions to such Officers from
whence he has got Certificates; so as though the Certificates may be true, yet
they are not properly applied by Sr. Robert.

And lastly, The dis-ingenuous swelling of the Account, to make a noise to the
world of a great Debt (besides the Anticipations) which will appear to be no
more any Ground for accusing my Management, than it has been of my
Predecessors, and must be of those who succeed me in the Treasury. As the
Examiner I doubt not but knew very well, when he made no mention of it in the
Range of his Malice, who made appear sufficiently, that he would not have
spared those, nor any other particulars to have loaded his Charge; but that he
knew how easily they would be answered.

As to the fallacious Glosses (of which he makes great use throughout his Book)
he begins Folio 2. That the third Quarter of the Eighteen months Tax was signed
(Osborn) And hopes from thence to have it inferre'd, that I had the disposal of
some of the Money of that Quarter, which I can prove that himself knows the
contrary (as well as that I never was Lord Treasurer under the Title of Sr.
Thomas Osborn;) And from the same Reason of my having signed that Quarter
(which was done at the request of my Lord Clifford, and for satisfaction of the
Creditors on that Quarter; that they should not be Post-poned by my coming to
the Treasury,) he would also have it believed, that the 21163 l. 6 s. 8 d. said
in my Book to be charged by my Lord Clifford on the fourth Quarter of that Tax,
was not so; But I must acknowledge he insists not much upon that matter; but
ends that Paragraph, Folio 3, with a Confession, that be knows nothing of it.

His next pretense is, that upon the three last Quarters of that Tax, there
appears to have been paid into the Exchequer, the Sum of 584718 l. 7 s. 5 d.
which I call but 565498 l. 13 s. 10 d., all the Charges being deducted (as the
forgiving any Receivers, or their Securities, etc.) which is notwithstanding
made received in the Exchequer; as if it came to be disposable Money to the
Kings use. And although I cannot now have the sight of Originals, I have great
Confidence, that the Certificates I received of that matter before my leaving
the Staff will prove my Computations to be true, when all the Circumstances are
Examined.

In Folio's, Third, Fourth, Fifth, and part of the Sixth, he takes great Pains
to show, that I did hinder and divert the Money on the one Fifth of the Excise,
from being Paid into the Exchequer, as the Act of Parliment did direct; and
says, Mr. Duncomb the Goldsmiths did often complain to him of it. The truth is,
I have so often heard Mr. Duncomb complain of Sr. Robert himself, that he
should not for his own sake much regard his Complaints; But in this matter it
happned, that the 200000, l. being Lent by Mr. Kent and Duncomb, and Mr. Kent
then being Receiver of the Customs, from whom Sir. John James, Major
Huntingdon, etc. (who were then Paymasters of the Army) were to receive 2000,
l. a Week out of the Customs: And the said Sr. John James, Major Huntingdon,
etc. being Receivers of the Excise, so as the one Fifth was to be Paid by them,
to the said Mr. Kent and Duncomb: An agreement was made, or Pretended to be
made amongst themselves, (and without any Direction of mine,) for the
Accommodation of the Kings service, by Mr. Kent and Mr. Duncombs taking the
2000, l. a Week, (which was in their own Hands) for part of the Money due to
them from Sr. John James, etc. upon the one Fifth of the Excise: And although
some differences did at last arise in this matter betwixt them; yet it was
settled in the Kings presence at the Treasury Chamber before my leaving the
Staff, and was so far from being diverted by me, either from being Paid into
the Exchequer, as the Act directed, or from being paid to any other uses than
the Direction of the said Act did appoint; that I will put the truth or
Falsehood of what either he or I, have writ about the Revenue, upon the proof of
that Particular. And for the 83400, l. which he says was unpaid of the 200000,
l. I confess I understand not how that could be, when Mr. Kent, and Mr. Duncomb
might force the Receivers of the Excise to pay what was due to them, on the one
Fifth when ever they Pleased; Besides, that I believe at the time of my leaving
the Staff, there was 52000, l. in Mr. Kents hands, by an arrear of the 2000 l.
a Week on the Customs, then due to Sr. John James, etc. By which Mr. Kent and
Duncomb, might pay themselves so much of whatsoever Sum was remaining unpaid to
them at that time, on the one Fifth of the Excise. And in truth the whole
matter concerned me no more, than it did Sr. Robert himself; and I have some
reason to think, that the Examiner was not so ill instructed, as to have left
that Sum out of his Charge (especially having mentioned it in his sixth Folio,)
if it could have been made any Argument against me, which (as I have already
said) it cannot be; Unless I had either given Orders to the Receivers of the
Excise not to pay the Fifth according to the Act, or had given them Orders for
applying any part of it, to other Uses, than the Act directed; either of which,
I do Challenge Sr. Robert, or any body else, to prove, and therefore it was,
that I called it, Notoriously false.

The next head wherein he is knowingly unwilling to do me Right, is, about the
Poll Bill, which I find I have spoke so fully to, in my answer to the Examiner,
that I see he thinks not fit to make any reply to what I have there said; But
only designs to make it a piece of my ill management, that 186585. l. 18. s. 9.
d. (for which he says the Commissioners of the Treasury have given Assignments)
is added as a Charge upon the Revenue, to make up his Additional Charge at the
end of his Book, to amount to the sum of 655634. l. 19. s. 6. d, whereas no
body knows better than Sr. Robert, that the Poll Bill was estimated to 400000.
l. at least; That Credit was given by the Act for 300000. l. in Money upon it,
and an indefinite Credit for stores beyond the 300000. l.; So as no part of the
Money or Credits lent upon that Act, was believed would ever have affected the
Revenue at all; And if ready Money was promised to any body upon that Act,
which was not Performed, I am sure no man can say they had that Promise from
me; And moreover though Sr. Robert puts this, 186585, l. 18. s. 9. d. as a Debt
due only to the East-land Merchants, I remember that the sum demanded by them
in my time was far less, (and as I think not full 40000. l.) so that I believe,
that reckoning must be swelled by other Demands, and is no fault of mine if
there be now such a Charge on the Revenue.

In Folio the 8th. I find Sr. Robert brings the same Paper, which was quoted by
the Examiner for a State of the Revenue, as it was made up by my Lord Clifford
10th of June 1673. I confess I do not see any use he makes of it; But he hopes
perhaps that others will, when he has told them, that the Original of that
Paper was drawn by Sr. Philip LLoyd; But that can by no means agree with Sr.
Philips own letter, which is Printed in my Answer; and Sr. Robert must give me
also leave to doubt it; because I never saw nor heard of any such Paper from my
Lord Clifford, who would Probably rather have designed such a paper for my
Information, than any bodies else, unless the King himself. But the Examiner
having said, That he has a Copy of it under Sr. Philips own hand, may put this
matter out of Dispute, if Sr. Robert have but interest enough to procure that
Copy from the Examiner.

Those points I have already spoke to, (as having been very Dis-ingenuously
handled by Sr. Robert) I take to be all the matters of Fact mentioned by him,
till he comes to the main business of his Book (beginning Folio 11th. about the
State of the Revenue at Lady Day, 1679.) Excepting a mistake of the Printer, of
Forty Pounds, Folio the 2d, which he believes, Folio 7th. has been made in the
Examiners Computation, to the Sum of above three Millions (although Sr. Robert
calls it a Repetition of the former Sum, (which it is not) And excepting an
acknowledgment he makes Folio 3d. that the Customs never yielded so much as in
my time: And excepting the Head about secret Service, Folio 7th, where he
Confesses that the Sum of 252467. l. 10. s. 5. d. is all that was Paid for
secret Service in Mr. Berties name, in three complete Years ending Lady Day,
1679; But does add, 14640. l. in the said three Years, which he does
unhansomely (and contrary to his own knowledge) Insinuate, as if the yearly
Sums for New Years Gifts (which I am not provided to say whether they be that
Sum he names for three Years or not) were privately directed to be distributed
by Mr. Bertie; Which on the contrary he knows was the Kings constant yearly
Allowances to several of his Servants, and Officers, long before my time, and
without any alteration of them that I know in my time, so that I might justly
have added this amongst the rest which have had such disingenuous applications
made of them; but that I am not furnished to answer, nor do I know what he
means, by that Sum which (with the 252467 l. to Mr. Bertie, and the 14640 l.
for New Years Gifts) he pretends to be for secret Service, and to make the Sum
of 309556 l. in the said three Years; nor do I know to whom any such Money has
been paid for secret service in that time more than the said 252467 l. 10 s. 5
d. to Mr. Bertie, and of which (as I have said in my former Answer) 57763 l. at
least has been disburst for public uses, and Sir Robert may perhaps be
mistaken in this matter as well as he confesses (in the very next Paragraph)
that the Examiner was, in his positive Averrment, Fol. 11. of that Book, that
my Sallery was never included in secret Service.

Sir Robert begins Fol. 11. of his Book, with the Examiners Charge, and my
Deductions; but confesses in Fol. 13. A mistake of the Examiner, in that
Charge, to the Sum of 58352 l. 9 s. 6 d. which it seems is charged by the
Examiner as part of the Total Charge, besides all the Advance-Moneys; of which
the 58352 l. is part, and which I could not have known but by Sir Robert's
help; so as by that computation, the Examiners Charge upon the three great
Branches of the Revenue at Lady Day 1679. ought to have been but 1427218 l. 6
s. 10 d. and whether it may not be yte less by such double Charges, which I
cannot know for want of the particulars of the General Charge, is very
uncertain.

The particulars which I say ought to be deducted from that Charge, are the
nine following, viz. 1. For the Advance on the Excise. -- 270000 l. 2. For the
Advance on the Hearth-Duty. -- 150000. 3. To be Discharged by Orders to the
Commissioners of Excise on the first Act of Disbanding. -- 101000. 4. More by
Tallyes on the Surplus of the Excise for 30000 l. and 99000 l. being no Charge
on the Rent, except the Surplus fail. -- 129000. 5. More by Tallyes which were
to pay the Forces from Lady Day 79 forwards to July following, which was 97
Days beyond my Time. -- 59588. 6. More by Tallyes on the Customs made use of to
carry on the Service of the Navy and Ordnance beyond that said Lady Day 79.
35000. 7. More by Tallyes, struck for Pensions upon the two last Quarters of
the Excise, viz. Christmas 78. and Lady Day 79. for payment of which Money,
was left in the hand of the Commissioners of Excise about. -- 33000. 8. More by
Tallyes on the Customs restored for Tynn deposited in Mr. Kents hands. --
15000. 9. More by Tallyes on the Customs Accounted by the Examiner to be unpaid
to Mr. Mountague, which were paid in my Time. 2342. Total Sum 794930 l.


I agree with Sr. Robert, Fol. 12. That the Examination of these Particulars
must determine the true State of the Charge left then on the Kings Revenue; and
by this Declaration of his own, that it must do so; it appears that Sr. Robert
did not think any great weight was to be laid upon his following particulars of
655634 l. 19 s. 6 d. by which he would swell the Debt to 2074879 l. 16 s. 0 d.

But I can by no means agree with him, nor admit his reasons, why none of the
abovesaid deductions should be allowed, but 59588 l. to the Forces, and 2342 l.
to Mr. Mountague, (nor does he agree with himself in some of them) and for the
4395 l. 3 s. 6 d. which he allows on the Tynn (...), it will appear in its
proper place to be over and above the 15000 l. deducted for the Tynn in my
Computation; and must therefore in its due place be added to my former
Deductions.

As to the Advances which are his first Exception, it is to be observed, that
Sir Robert, as well as the Examiner, makes use of a pretended Paper of the Lord
Cliffords; but omits to draw from thence (as the Examiner does) a State how the
Revenue was left Charged by my Lord Clifford; and yet without doing that, it is
impossible to compare whether the Debt be increased or decreased since that
time: Insomuch that this omission must be for some other end, and serves
particularly that it may not be seen (as it must be by drawing such a State)
and as it was in the Examiners Book, that the Advances in my Lord Cliffords
time were Accounted no part of the Debt upon the Revenue, and I wish that all
his Majesty's Debts were in such a condition as would always discharge it self,
and yet leave his Majesty the full use of his Revenue: and although Sr. Robert
be of another opinion, I cannot help believing, that if all his Majesty's
Revenue was brought into the same way, which I brought the Excise ( viz. of
being Let upon a certain great Rent, and that secured by a great Sum advanced,
and the Overplus (after certain Salleries paid for management) to be to the
Kings own use, with an encouragement to the Managers of increasing their Wages
by a small allowance out of every pound which they can improve beyond the Sum
secured, the whole Revenue would be increased by the Industry of the Managers
(who in that case work for themselves as well as for the King) much more than
would pay the Interest of the Sums advanced; as has been made appear by the
Overplus of the Excise in my Time; and which I fear it would not have done by
any who had only taken pains for the King, without any prospect of gain to
themselves more than their bare Salleries; But to conclude this Point, since it
has never heretofore been reckoned in the State of the Debt (not by the
Examiner himself) and his Majesty having the Use of his whole Revenue
notwithstanding the Advance Money, and that Sir Roberts best Reason, is only,
that he is of Opinion it might be better done by management without Advance: I
suppose these first and second Deductions will be thought but reasonable, and I
must here desire it may be observed, that Sir Robert, Fol. 12. says, I have
reckoned the Advance on the the Excise 20000 l. more than really it was; and
yet in the end of the very same Paragraph, he confesses that the Advance on the
Excise indeed was as much as I call it, viz. 270000 l.

My third Deduction is 101000 l. to be discharged by Orders to the
Commissioners of Excise, etc. as aforesaid.

To which Sir Robert gives no color of contradiction, only he says, it was
part of a double Security given to Sir John James, etc. by which he
acknowledges there was so much Money in their hands for the discharging of
Tallyes; and then, whether it was in the Examiners Charge or no is no great
matter, nor is it less to be allowed for one of the Deductions; only here I do
observe Sir Robert is so intimate with the Examiner, that he knows of what
particulars the Examiners Charge is made up, which I should have been glad to
have known either from the Examiner or Sir Robert, and then I could have
answered more particularly every part of the Charge, in the same method as I do
now set down every particular of the Deductions which ought to be allowed.

My fourth Deduction is 129000 l: by Tallyes on the Surplus of the Excise,
which I say is no Charge upon the Rent, Fol. 10. of my Book; and yet Sir
Robert, Fol. 15. of his says, that I say it is no Charge on the Revenue, which
I do not say; and the difference I make herein is, because I found the Revenue
of the Excise Let at a certain Rent of 530000 l. Per Annum, at my entrance to
the Treasury; which I first raised to 550000 l. Per Annum, and then to 560000
l. Per Ann. and it was never Let for more than that Sum under any certain Rent,
and it was at the said Rent of 550000 l. and no more, which Sir Robert made his
Calculations concerning the State of the Revenue to the King in 1675. about
which something will be said in its proper place; but I mention this now, to
show that this Branch of the Revenue was no more impaired by me, than himself
confesses the Customs to have been in my time: And it is as well known that I
raised the Hearth-Money from 145000 l. Per Ann. to 162000 l. Per An. so that
how he will make out the Revenues being impaired from June 73. to March 75. and
from March 75 to Lady Day 79. (as he says Fol. 21.) I do not understand. Since
therefore the highest Rent of the Excise was but 560000 l. Per An. and that by
my way of Letting that Branch, betwixt a Farm at the said certain Rent of
560000 l. and a management accountable to the King for the Overplus, there has
arisen a Surplus of 129000 l. and more beyond the said Rent of 560000 l. I
think it ought to be allowed as a Deduction, the Revenue not being abated by
it; but on the contrary is accounted at 560000 l. Per An. which is 10000 l. Per
An. more than Sir Robert Accounts that Branch of the Revenue in his
computations to the King, and is 30000 l. Per An. more than that part of the
Revenue was Let for at my entrance to the Treasury, which is the time taken for
making the comparison betwixt the Charge on the Revenue then, and at my leaving
the Treasury in 1679. so as in truth I might justly (though I do not) Account
all the increases of the Revenue on any Branch of it in my time to balance the
increase of the Debt in the said time, and then I am sure the total of the Debt
would be much less than it was when I entered to the Treasury; but I have only
Accounted this one Surplus, because it could not be depended upon as any
certain Rent, nor was it charged to any certain uses, as all the certain Rent
of the Excise was; but was applicable to such uses as his Majesty should direct.

My Fifth Deduction is 59588 l. to the Forces, etc. which Sir Robert is pleased
to allow.

My Sixth Deduction is 35000 l. made use of to carry on the Service of the
Navy, Ordnance, etc.

And my Seventh Deduction is 33000 l. for Tallyes struck for Pensions upon the
two last Qarters of the Excise, etc.

These two last, viz. The sixth and seventh I have put together, because Sir
Robert has got Certificates in these two Particulars seeming to contradict the
reasons given by me for the allowance of them as Deductions from the Charge;
which I am glad to find is all he can pretend to contradict by any Authority;
because both the Sums together if they were not allowed, do amount but to 68000
l. and (as I have remarked before) he acknowledges, Fol. 13. that the Examiner
has mistaken 58352 l. 9 s. 6 d. by a double Charge of so much of the Advance
Money; so as the difference of my first computation would be lessened but 10000
l. if these two Sums were not to be deducted; but to show that the matter of
Fact is as I have said in both these Particulars, I must show that those
Certificates (if true) from the Ordnance, and Commissioners of Excise, are
nothing to the matter he pretends to make out by them: For as to the Ordnance I
must needs say that it was not only the Office from which I could get very
little of any Accounts in my whole time; but (notwithstanding any Directions or
Orders to the contrary) they would take no notice of that stop which was put to
the Exchequer before my Time; but did apply those Moneys to payments under that
stop, which were ordered to the payments of Service forwards; so as it was
impossible for me without entirely discharging the old Debt of that Office to
have brought up their payments to the time of my leaving the Staff; and this
makes the latter part of my time seem not to be provided for in that Office;
but I do say that Tallyes struck in my time to the Sum of 35000 l. (and which
is reckoned as part of Sir Roberts Charge of 1419244 l. 16 s. 6 d.) were paid
after my time, and the Money applied by the present Commissioners of the
Treasury in the stead of other Money which they must have paid: and Sir Robert
himself knows that these Lords Commissioners when they appointed a weekly Sum
out of the Customs, of 2000 l. a Week, to discharge the Debt by Tallyes in
Course, made use of the Tallyes struck for the Navy, Ordnance and Forces in
their Course too, and by that means had so much also of the 2000 l. a Week,
which they applied to the payment of the several Offices; as I doubt not but
both the Commissioners of the Treasury, and Paymaster of the Forces will own:
and to say this was no carrying the Offices of the Navy and Ordnance forward
beyond the time of my leaving the Staff (because it did not pay the whole Debt
of those two Offices) is no Argument; for until the whole Debt can be paid,
all payments are directed in course: and as I paid Debts before my time,
(especially to the Navy) so these Gentlemen must pay before their Time, and so
must the Payments of any who shall succeed them, be applied to the Payment of
Ships and Yards, etc. due before their time, unless it may be supposed that
Ships abroad, etc. (at the alteration of the Treasury into other hands) shall
never be paid.

But had Sir Robert sent to the Office of the Ordnance for a Certificate to
know, how much money I had paid them in all in my time, and what the accrued
Debt was in the said time, I doubt not but it would have appeared, that I had
supplied more Money to that Office, than would satisfy the whole Debt accrued
in the said time.

As to the 33000 l. or there abouts (for I have not positively named that Sum)
the matter of Fact is,

That a stated Sum for Pensions was directed Yearly; so that if Tallyes were
not struck, yet the Money remained in the hands of the Commissioners and
Receivers of the Excise, until such Tallyes were struck: And that this Money
did remain in their hands at my leaving the Staff (in part of a greater Sum) Sr
Robert who was one appointed to state their Accounts, cannot but know; As also
that those Commissioners, and Receivers (being to be laid aside) did apply all
the Cash in their hands, to Tallyes in Course, and paid over this 33000 l. or
there abouts, and the other Moneys in their Hands to discharge Tallyes in
Course; And such Tallyes as are reckoned part of the Charge, left by me on that
Branch of the Revenue.

But the said Commissioners and Receivers of the Excise, might perhaps give the
present Lords Commissioners of the Treasury an Account of little or no Cash in
their Hands, for the Reasons aforesaid; and yet this is no manner of Argument
to prove what Sr. Robert would infer by his printed Paper: Unless, as he had
lessened thereby my Deductions, he had also lessened the Charge, as he ought to
have done; Knowing that with the Money in their Hands, at my leaving the Staff,
they really paid as much in Tallyes, which are a part of the Charge said to be
left by me. And this if Sr. Robert would have Writ to them to Certify, they
must have owned to be True; And consequently (from what I have said concerning
these two Deductions) I hope others will think them Reasonable, although Sr.
Robert do not.

My eighth Deduction, is 15000 l. by Tallyes on the Customs, etc. This I must
needs say was not so plainly expressed, as it ought to have been in my former
Book: For these Tallyes were given to Mr. Kingdon (then Play Master of the Army)
and not being made use of by him before my leaving the Treasury, they were
since delivered up by him, to the present Lords Commissioners of the Treasury;
so that they relate not to that (...), which Sr. Robert has taken the trouble
to set down, Folio 18th. But I am sure Sr. Robert knows it to be true, that
such Tallyes to the Sum of 15000 l. were delivered up by Mr. Kingdon to the
Lords Commissioners, and he ought therefore in justice to have added them to
that Sum of 4395 l. 3 s. 6 d. on Mr. Kents account, for the Knowledge of which
I am beholding wholly to Sr. Robert, because otherwise I should have been
ignorant of that Deduction.

My ninth and last Deduction, is, 2342 l. by Mr. Montagues Tallyes, which Sr.
Robert is also pleased to Admit.

Having gone through the Deductions, and having given the reasons on which they
are grounded, I hope they are so clear as will give every body satisfaction,
and I shall now follow Sr. Roberts Method in his Folio 19. By taking

First, the Examiners charge which was 1485570 l. 00 s. 00 d.

Then Substract my former Deductions, which were 794930 l. 00 s. 00 d.

Then Substract likewise the Deductions now to be added by Sr. Robert Howards
assistance amounting to 58352 l. 9 s. 6 d. which is double Charged on that
advance of Excise; And also 4395 l. 3 s. 6 d. Deducted on Mr. Kents Account of
Tynn. Viz. 062747 l. 13 s. 00 d.

Which together amounts to the Sum of 857677 l. 13 s. 00 d.

And the remaining Charge will be 627892 l. 07 s. 00 d.

I suppose Sr. Robert admits the Charge left on the three great Branches of the
Revenue, by the Lord Clifford, to be as I have said in my Book, viz, 469371 l.
Because he says nothing against it, and in that Computation are neither
reckoned Advance-Monies, nor Moneys unpaid to Ships, andc. which amounted then
to above Treble the Sum Sr. Robert now reckons to Sr. John Narborow's Fleet.

And then the Charge left by me on the said three Branches being but 627892 l.
07 s. 00 d.

And the Charge by my Lord Clifford, being 469371 l. 00 s. 00 d.

The Anticipations are increased in my time, viz. In Five years and three
Quarters (although no Supplies were given by Parliament, but what were
appropriated and were so applied) only by the Sum of 158521 l. 07 s. 00 d.

And as I have said in my Answer to the Examiner, Folio 11th. I paid in that
time, 318473 l. to the Goldsmiths, for their Perpetual Interest, which is
almost double the Sum, increased upon the Anticipations; Besides the Rebellion
of Virginia, etc. which I have mentioned in that Answer, and therefore will not
repeat them here.

Before he closes his Account, Sr. Robert thinks fit to add to the Examiners
Charge, A further Charge of 655634 l. 19 s. 6 d. By three particulars, viz.

Unpaid on the one Fifth of the Excise, 83000 l. 00 s. 00 d.

The Debt of the Eastland Merchants. 186585 l. 19 s. 09 d.

The Debt to the Navy upon the return of Sr. John Narborow's Fleet, 385648 l.
19 s. 09 d.

Of which he says the present Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, have paid
and satisfied. 478646 l. 18 s. 06 d.

I suppose the Examiner knew nothing of this matter, or certainly it would not
have been Omitted by him; and I must here observe, that what Sr. Robert calls
in me, a Charging the Revenue by Tallyes, he calls now in Others, A satisfying
of Creditors, although it be the very same thing, and by Tallyes at a very
great distance of Payment; Which if I had done, I perceive Sr. Robert would
have made no use of for me, but to have added it to my Load of Anticipations.

For the 83000 l, as I have already said (and am very confident of the Truth of
it) there was remaining in Mr. Kents hands at Lady Day, 79. 52000 l. for 26.
Weeks, of 2000 l. per Week on the Customs due to Sr. John James and Partners;
And for the remaining 31000 l. or for the whole 83000 l. I know no man that
either did, or could have Protected them from the Payment of it, according to
the Act; If Mr Kent and Mr. Duncomb had prosecuted the Receivers of the Excise
about it; Nor did I ever use any Authority or other means in that matter,
betwixt them, than by persuading them (as I did all men, who were concerned in
the Kings Service) to accommodate one another Occasions in their several
Employments, as far as their own safeties and conveniences would permit: nor
should I have either Charged the King or any but the Receivers of the Excise
themselves, to have made satisfaction to any Body for any Sum which was due to
them by virtue of the Act of Parliament out of the one Fifth of the Excise.

For the 186585 l. 19 s. 9 d. ( which Sr. Robert calls the Debt to the Eastland
Merchants (and which I do not remember to be so much in my time as 40000 l.) it
became a Debt by the Money of the Poll-Act falling so infinitely short of what
it was calculated to be by the Parliament; and for which there will be found
very little of my directions, insomuch that as I did not charge the Revenue
with it in my time, so I take my self to be no cause of the accruing of that
Debt.

For the 385648 l. 19 s. 9 d. due to the Fleet upon the Return of Sir John
Narborow: I wonder Sr. Robert will name it, when he is comparing the State of
the Debt left in 1679. with the Debt left in 1673. when he knows how vast a
disproportion there is betwixt that Debt to the Navy, and this in 1679. the Sum
then due to the Fleet being much above a Million: So that I look upon this last
Addition to be (as I have said before) only to make a noise, besides that Sir
John Narborows Fleet came in since I was out of Employment, and I thank God I
am able to prove that there never was three Ships in all my time, that were not
paid off with ready Money, and as soon as the Ship Books were perfected by
which they were to be paid.

Lastly, if Sir Robert will give me leave to reckon as the Examiner has done,
Fol. 14. I may reckon the Advance of the Excise, viz. 211647 l. 10 s. 6 d. (for
Sir Robert does acknowledge, Fol. 12. that I had only disposed of 58352 l. 9 s.
6 d. of the 270000 l. advanced on that Branch) to be so much in ready Money,
toward payment of the said Fleet.

So that upon the whole, I can no more conceive these three last particulars
ought to be added to the Charge of the Revenue in my time, than the Examiner
did, when he had Must'red up all he could think possible to be laid to that
Account; and for the particular of the Ships, it is impossible but there must
always be a Debt to be paid by whomsoever shall succeed in the Treasury, only
it will be less or bigger, as the Ships kept abroad are more or fewer in
number, insomuch that Sir Robert needs not give himself the trouble of proving
this particular with that care which he seems to take about it.

Most of Fol. 21. is taken up about Sr. Roberts Paper which was given to the
King the 5th of March 1675. by which he says he intended other uses than have
been mentioned in my answer to the Examiner.

I shall say more to that Paper and some others of Sr. Roberts Schemes, as also
to some managements of his own in his Office, and his mistaken Certificates,
(which I have in my Custody) when my leisure will give me leave to ask him the
meaning of them: In the mean time his Paper of the 5th. of March being Printed
in my Answer, every man is at liberty to make his own construction of it; and
not being present my self at the delivery of it, I can only say what was told
me when I received that Paper, from those whom I do perfectly believe. One
intent of the Paper Sr. Robert says was to prevent those frauds which had been
committed in the Exchequer; but since he has not thought fit to instance any
one particular of those frauds, I am apt to believe, he either knows none, or
none that he is willing to speak of; for he knows, that if any fraud came to my
knowledge (as some did) I made it always to be examined in public; and I take
it for one of the highest Vindications of my Integrity in the Treasury, that
Sr. Robert cannot charge me with any other applications of Money to my own use
(out of those great Sums which have passed through my hands) more than the Sum
of 2747 l. 5 s. 11 d. bestowed upon me at the making up of my Account as
Treasurer of the Navy: whereas there are good store of instances of Lord
Treasurers heretofore, who from less Foundations of Estates than my self, have
left visible Monuments of more Money laid out in some one single Building of
theirs, (besides the Estates added in proportion to them) than I have got in
near six years enjoyment of the same Office: So that since the blame can only
be laid upon my management (who could be no wiser than God had made me) and not
upon any corrupt actings in my employment; I do not only willingly undergo Sir
Roberts Rebukes, but do acknowledge my own failings, and hope that by Sr.
Roberts good Advice his Majesty will for the future be served as he ought to be.

In the last Page of his Book Sir Robert says, it is only to give a short
Account, to show his Judgment concerning Tallyes of Anticipation, and how
extremely satisfied he is (which I verily believe) to see his Opinion approved
by the present Lords Commissioners.

He has mentioned something of the Anticipations also, Fol. 5. which I passed
over in that place, because they would more properly be spoke to both together,
as also the matter of Interest depending upon such Anticipations, which is
likewise in the said Fol. 5.

And in the first place I do agree with Sir Robert as much as any body else can
do, that it is better to avoid Tallyes of Anticipation (where it can be done)
than to make use of them; but that the Revenue must be ruined by them, Ideny;
or that the Interest is left to any such uncertainty as he would have believed;
but that it must be by the knavery of the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, or the sworn Auditor of the Exchequer (before whom the Account is
brought) if the King be wronged in what Interest he pays upon such Tallyes.

I doubt not neither, but the present Lords Commissioners of the Treasury have
endeavored to avoid such Tallyes, and so did I, till I found it impossible for
me to help it, and (if I am not misinformed) although the present Lords
Commissioners have spared 2000 l. a Week by their other retrenchments, to
discharge Tallyes (which I was not able to spare, and supply the Kings other
Occasions) yet those Tallyes which were in course, being paid, I hear and have
good ground to believe true, that now the Lords Commissioners are necessitated
to comply with some Lenders of Money so far, as to give them Tallyes of
Anticipation to a considerable Sum: nor do I know how it can be helped, unless
Sir Robert can be able to do more by his Legislative Capacity for remedy of the
matter, than he will ever be able to do by his private; and if this be now the
Case, as well as it was in my time, then by Sir Roberts Rule the Exchequer will
still be no wiser than it has been in knowing when Interest is to commence
upon such Tallyes.

It Is true that the Exchequer does not presently know the Commencement of
Interest upon Anticipations; but I doubt not but the Lords Commissioners do
take care, that the Vouchers (though called private ones) shall be as
authentic as public ones; and it is the Duty of a sworn Auditor to see they
be so, from whence they are entered in the Exchequer, and from that time the
Exchequer does know the times of lending upon Tallyes of Anticipation, and
consequently the charge of Interest upon them; so that the Bugbear is made far
more terrible than it is, although (as I have said) it were better to be
avoided, if the Kings necessities will permit.

I have now gone through Sir Roberts Book, and hope I have made appear that the
State of the Revenue at Lady Day, 1679. was not as it has been represented
either by the Examiner or Sir Robert Howard; and since Sir Roberts friend (to
whom he writes) had no curiosity to enquire into those other parts of the
Examiners Book which concerned the affairs of State therein mentioned, I shall
repeat nothing upon that Subject, but conclude that his friend is satisfied in
those matters, which are of much the greatest Concern to me; but I hope it will
be taken notice of, that both the Examiner and Sir Robert (how much soever they
may be strangers to one another) have carried on the same design against me, as
if it had been with the same hand; saving that Sir Robert has showed himself to
be the better Accomptant, by rectifying diverse Errors in the Examiners
Computations, and that he has been much more civil than the Examiner in his
Language.

I shall conclude this Answer to Sir Robert Howard with this single Request to
all my Countrymen; That they would not believe any thing against me by
Reports, till they see it proved; And then as I shall desire no other favor;
so I doubt not but to be restored to the good Opinion of all such, as have not
particular prejudice against me.

DANBY.

FINIS

