TWELVE Dissertations OUT OF Monsieur Le Clerk 's GENESIS, CONCERNING The
Hebrew Tongue. Manner of Interpreting the Bible. Author of the Pentateuch.
Temptation of Eve by the Serpent. Flood. Confusion of Languages. Original of
Circumcision. Divine Appearances in the Old Testament. Subversion of Sodom.
Pillar of Salt. Coming of Shiloh. Several Obscure Texts in Genesis Explained
and Illustrated.


Done out of Latin by Mr. BROWN.

To which is Added, A Dissertation concerning the Israelites Passage through
the Red Sea, By another Hand.

Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta docere.

Hor. LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane. 1696.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE following Dissertations contain such Variety of Learning, and Liberty of
Thought, out of the common road of Commentators, and Divines (who generally
confine themselves within the Rules and Pale of the Church) that the Publishing
of them in English was thought necessary for the instructing and polishing of
those, who employ their happy Hours* in the Study of the Holy Scriptures. It Is
true, Two very Reverend Prelates of our own Church have lately treated of these
Matters not without Reflecting on the Author Mr. Le Clerk; yet it is no ill
manners to cloth him in the same Language, that the Justice and Reason of
their Contempt and Accusations may the more clearly appear.

I am not insensible of the many Calumnies fixed on the Learned Author upon the
account of these Dissertations, and the Letters he formerly Published
concerning Inspiration, and the Lives of some Fathers, yet his late Treatise of
the Causes of Incredulity, and the Truth of Christianity; has dissipated all
those Aspersions, and demonstrates to the World, that he could never give any
occasion to Infidels or Unbelievers to insult the simplicity of the Gospel, or
the Lines of the Church; it is maliciously suggested, that he has forgot to
reckon his own Writings amongst his many Causes of Deism, and Skepticism; for
tho in his Juvenile Pastimes at Saumur, and Geneva, he might sow some wild
Tares, and run beyond the bounds of Discretion in Matters of Faith; yet by
culture and ripeness of years, he arrived at that strength and presence of
mind, that all his Productions became chaste, and very charming, insomuch that
the Illustrious City of Amsterdam adopted him into the Number of her
Professors, where he adorns the Oriental Chair, and deserves to shine in a more
Noble Sphere; but the Climate, we live in, is too gross to receive such a fine
and exalted Genius, born to illuminate the dark Mysteries of Antiquity, and to
let us into the Sanctum Sanctorum; for certainly never any Mortal came better
prepared to unvail the Beauty of the Scriptures; many great Endowments meeting
in him; a singular Penetration, vast reading and Study, a profound skill in the
Languages with an universal erudition, a clear Judgment, an honest Candor, and
a Sublimity above Party or Faction; Talents not very common among Those who
have the Honor to unlock those Venerable Archives.

The Bible without dispute contains more good Morals, and more hidden Treasures
than all the Volumes of the Alexandrian, the Vatican, or Bodleian Libraries,
and therefore our Libertines have no reason to deride the pains taken to open
them.

But some cry out aloud, there lurks a Snake under the Grass, and Venom sprouts
out of the Mouth of the tempting Serpent; Beware of his winding Insinuations,
and his gentile Turnings. Oh incurable Jealousy! that will not distinguish
between Superstition and Religion, between Godliness, and Gain, or between the
Ancient and Modern Christianity. A Man must be of a very sower habit of Body,
that will not bear an innocent Freedom, especially in an Age and Kingdom, where
Nullius in Verba is the Motto.

Critics and Philosophers have always claimed a particular sort of Liberty,
and Boldness, which the wisest States have thought fit to dispense with; for
Truth is not easily come at, many rubs and thorns lying in the way, so that few
work through it. Therefore the same Indulgence, that has been granted to Seldom,
Grotius, Bochart, Marsham, F. Simons, Spencer, and Others in their Observations
upon the Hebrews, and in all their Oriental Enquiries, may also reasonably be
expected for Monsieur Le Clerk, who often refines upon them all, and keeps
within the Decorum, which a Wise Man would never exceed.

What has been said for the Philological Part may extend to the Physical, in
which if M. Le Clerk has offended any nice and delicate Scrupulosity, He has
many Orthodox Predecessors in the same kind, both beyond the Seas, and in this
Country, not to name any more than Bishop Wilkins, Seth Ward, Isaac Vossius,
the Learned Bishop of Worcester, the celebrated Master of the Charter House,
who Apologizes very ingeniously for so doing; but there is a sort of Men, who
cannot endure any dissent from Moses his Philosophy, (unless it be in
themselves) and pretend to steer exactly according to the Mosaic Chart in all
their Systems; yet so unfortunate are they, that they frequently run upon the
same Sands and Rocks, where they have split others; Clodius accusat Maechum,
Catilina Cethegum; and such is the luck of these upright Authors, who very
awkardly strain the Phantomes of their own Brains into the Old Testament, that
they put all into confusion, and had better let it rest in Sacred Silence; the
Church would do well to enjoin such Writers, not to weave their own Threads with
those of Moses, least the old Nap should be lost, and a party-colored Coat
appear in its room. What a monstrous Mosaic dress have we in Whiston's Theory
with a train of Comets at his Tail; in Woodward's Essay with all the Mountains
down about his Heels; in Nicholl's Conference with multitudes of Arks, or new
Miracles of preserving in, or else creating de novo after the Flood, and with
his Lions in Greenland.

Gens ratione furens, and mentem pasta Chimaeris. It Is wonderful that these Men
should venture to beat up the unenvied Solitudes of a Carthusian, (who never
hunts after the common prey of Dominion and Wealth, as being inconsistent with
our Blessed Savior's Kingdom) and at the same time expose themselves to the
prosecutions of every vulgar Eye; but with this difference, that he has left
Moses pure, free, and undefiled as he found him, whereas they have polluted him
with their own mixtures, and make him act what part they please, in any habit,
or under any mask, as best serves their Scenes and Opera's. How shall the
Children of Israel know their true Moses, so patched and disfigured with the
borrowed Plumes of such Birds of Paradise. The Apostle gave good advice against
the vain Philosophy of these Men, who corrupt the Scriptures by introducing
their own Chimerical Hypotheses into them, that thereby they may stamp them
Standard, and cry down all others as Counterfeit, of base allay, or of false
weight. It Is to be wished that this infamous piece of Quackery was banished out
of Parnassus, and that Apollo admonished his Subjects to treat one another in
modest and humble Manners, avoiding the haughty Titles of Supremacy and
Infalibility; for Opinion and Probability cannot be a certain Rule, or any
Foundation to domineer over one another. Monsieur Le Clerk may be allowed to be
as good an Interpreter as any Prelate in Christendom; and Dr. Burnet as great a
Friend to Moses as any Chaplain or Vertuoso in England.

Glory to God in the highest, Peace on Earth, Good Will among Men.
Dissertation I. Concerning the Hebrew Tongue.
I. The Design of these Dissertations. II. That the Hebrew Tongue is no more
the Primitive, than any of the other Oriental Languages. III. That the
Difference of Languages arose from the Dispersion of Mankind. IV. That Abraham
spoke the Chaldean Tongue. V. That Hebrew was originally the Language of the
Canaanites. VI. That it was a barren ambiguous Language, and carried but to a
small Perfection by the Israelites. VII. In what Condition it was after the
Babylonian Captivity. VIII. What Care the Israelites at that time took of the
Sacred Volumes.

ALTHOUGH it is not my Intention in these Preliminary Discourses to ramble through
all those common Places, which relate to the Old Testament in General, yet I
thought it improper to put a Treatise of this Nature into the Reader's hand,
without any foregoing Address or Ceremony. As I was frequently obliged to set
down several things in my Annotations for known or granted, because I could not
prove them there at large, without running into perpetual Digressions, which I
always studiously avoided; so I judged it a propos to handle and prove them
more copiously in these Dissertations, least the prejudiced Reader should
imagine that I have all along built upon a precarious Foundation. Now the
things which I barely delivered in my Comments without farther Proof, may be
chiefly reduced to these three Heads: 1. The Hebrew Tongue. 2. The Method I
followed in my Interpretation. 3. Whether Moses was the Author of the
Pentateuch, and what end he proposed to himself in writing.
I shall begin with that concerning the Hebrew Tongue, and manage the other
Points as they follow in order. But before I proceed any farther, the Reader is
to be informed, that I never designed to discuss all the Questions that are
usually proposed concerning that Language, but only such as are of absolute
Necessity toward the better understanding of my Commentary, which I shall
handle just as they come into my Head, without confining my self too
Religiously to Method and Regularity: Therefore he is not to expect any
complete elaborate Discourse at my hands, which I neither promise here, nor
ever had it so much as in my Thoughts to perform.

II. The Jews out of a Fond Affection to their own Country, and several
Christians who are apt to be too much influenced by them, commonly pretend,
that the Hebrew Language was that which Adam, the first Parent of Mankind,
spoke. The most plausible Argument for which Opinion, is deduced from a few
Names and Etymologies; but though the Maintainers of it boast, that they put the
Matter beyond all Dispute, yet I am inclined to believe, they are not so
Invincible as it is pretended. To which purpose 'twill be necessary to hear the
full Merits of the Cause, before we proceed to give Sentence.

1. In the first place they allege the Name of the first Man Adam, which in
the Hebrew Tongue alone alludes to the word Earth, out of which his Body was
formed, for only the Jews call the Earth Adama. This Paronomasia or Similitude
of Names, plainly appears in the second Chapter of Genesis verse 7. Et formavit
Jehova Deus Adam pulverem ex Adama, hoc est, terra. The Chaldees indeed have
the word Adam, but then they call the Earth Arhah, which Term has no Affinity
with the name of our first Parent. 2. For the same reason Eve's Name Hhavah is
derived from the word Hhai, Living, because she was the Mother of all Hhai,
Living, Genesis 3.20. Now this Etymology is corrupted in the Chaldee, which
renders it chol bue enascha, of all the Sons of Men. 3. So in the second
Chapter of Genesis, v. 23. She, says Adam speaking of his Wife, shall be called
Ischah, Woman, because Meisch, she is taken out of Man. Therefore since this
chiming of the words is to be found in no other Language but this, they
conclude that it was unquestionably the very same that Adam spoke. 4. After
Abel was killed, Seth was born to our first Mother, Eve, whose name she derives
from a Radix in the Hebrew Tongue, Genesis 4.25. She called his name Scheth; For,
says she, God has raised me up, Schath, another Son in the room of Abel.
These and several other Names are brought by the Rabbis, to prove, as they
imagine, that Hebrew is the Primitive Language; and they urge them with that
Assurance and Ostentation, as if 'twere downright Obstinacy to contradict so
evident a Truth; but we have many weighty Reasons on our side, to incline us to
believe, that the Primitive Language was no more related to the Hebrew, than it
was either to the Chaldee or Arabic. But that the Reader may better comprehend
our Meaning, we own that Opinion seems to be most probable to us, which
maintains that neither Hebrew, Chaldee, nor Arabic, nor indeed any other
Oriental Language, was that which Adam spoke, because in process of Time, and
by the Dispersion of Mankind, it was split into several Dialects of the Eastern
Tongues, and begot the abovementioned Languages, and some others nearly
resembling them. Thus, for instance, the Language of the Old Romans, is neither
that which the Italians, French or Spaniards use, and yet it produced these
three Languages, and has left several of its old Remainders in them. I know the
Rabbis are of a different Opinion, who pretend that it was preserved unmixt
and entire in the Family of Heber; but I shall soon demonstrate, that this is
precariously affirmed, and wants Reasons to support it.

As for what relates to the Argument borrowed from the Etymology of Names, it
is to be observed in the first place, that some of them are not so much proper
Names given to the Children at their Birth, as Cognomina, or Sirnames by which
they were known to Posterity, and so in process of time passed for proper
Names. For which reason they might sometimes be changed, and yet the
Paronomasia of the Primitive Language be happily preserved at the same time, as
will evidently appear by the following Examples.

Adam, as all the World knows, is not a proper Name, but bestowed on the first
Man, (...), or by way of Pre-eminence, and so our first Father might be thus
called by the Hebrews, though his Contemporaries called him otherwise. Nor is the
Agreement of the words, which we confess falls out patly enough in the Hebrew
Tongue, an Argument to the contrary, for therefore Man might be called Adam by
the Hebrews, because they knew the first Man's Body was formed of Clay. Thus in
the Latin Tongue, which I believe no Man in the World ever dreamt to be the
Primitive Language, we might say that God called the first Man Homo, because he
was formed ex humo, i. e. out of the Ground. Besides the same thing might
accidentally happen in the words Isch and Ischah, as amongst the ancient Latins
See what Fetstus in Querquetulana virae says, Foeminas antiqui quas nunc
dicimus, Viras appellabant, unde adhuc permanent Virgins and Viragines. St.
Jerome uses this last word, whom herein we had no mind to imitate, because
Virago neither signifies what Ischa does in Hebrew, nor Vira in Latin, but a
Woman of a Masculine Spirit.
vir and vira were in use.

We might here produce the frequent Alterations of Names, even of those we call
Proper, but the Reader may find them in the Learned Grotius's Annotations on
Genesis 11.1. and in Huetius's Demonstratio Evangelica, Propos. 4. c. 13.. 4. We
shall at present content our selves to give an Instance or two, not taken
notice of by them, of an Etymology happily expressed in another Language. Every
one has heard of a Famous City in Egypt, which the Greeks called (...), which
name (for it is of Greek Extraction) is rightly derived (...), from dirt,
because it was built in a dirty place. For thus Strabo in his Seventeenth Book,
Page 552. of the Geneva Edition put out by Casaubon, (...). -- (...).

Now if the Books of the Hebrew Prophets were all lost, Who would not Swear
that this City had no other Name? Who would not believe that it was built by
some Greeks that settled there, or by the Posterity of Lagus, and bore this
Greek Name ever since its beginning. However it is undeniable from Ezekiel
30.14, 15. that it was called Sin by the Egyptians, which word signifies dirt,
as Bochart has observed, Phaleg. l. 4. c. 27.

The same has happened in the name of another place not far distant from
Pelusium. Diodorus Siculus in the first Book of his Bibliotheca mightily
commends Actisanes the Ethiopian, who after he had conquered Ammoses King of
the Egyptians, and subdued the whole Country, neither put the Guilty to death,
nor yet wholly dismissed them unpunished, but carried multitudes of the
Condemned, he thus used them, (...) (or (...)) (...). Cutting off their Noses,
he transplanted them into the farthest parts of a desert Region, and built a
City, and called it from this accident Rinocolura. Strabo in his sixteenth Book
makes the same Remark, and so does Stephanus upon this word. Now those Persons
that do not know, that the Egyptians at this time did not speak Greek, would
easily suffer themselves to be persuaded, especially seeing it named among the
Cities of Egypt, that Rinocolura was the very name by which this City went
among the Egyptians.

But if any one would rather desire to see Examples fetched from the Holy
Scriptures, he may observe how the Seventy Interpreters turn the Proper Names
of the Bible into Greek, Genesis 11.9. (...) (Babel) (...). Therefore the name of
it was called Confusion ( Babel or Babylon) because there the Lord confounded
the Lips of the whole Earth. See likewise Genesis 31.47. and 32.20.

Nay what is highly remarkable, Moses has derived the Original of his own Name
from an Hebrew word, and has introduced the Daughter of Pharaoh speaking
Hebrew, who without question expressed her self in the Egyptian Tongue, Exodus
2.10. The Child grew up, and his Nurse brought him to the Daughter of Pharaoh,
who called his name Mosche; because, said she, I drew him out of the Water,
Mishithinou. And the reason of it is plain, for since Moses saw he could easily
imitate the Egyptian Origination in the Hebrew Tongue, he made no Scruple to
bring in this Princess, expressing her self after that manner. But in the
Egyptian Tongue he is called (...), that is, taken out of the Water; for with
the Old Egyptians (...) signified Water, and (...) taken out. Thus in the New
Testament, he that was called by the Syrians Chipha or Chepha, was called
(...), Peter, by the Greeks; and so that Paronomasia, which our Savior used in
the Hebrew or Syro-Chaldaic, was conveniently enough translated into the Greek
Tongue, Matt. 16.17.

However I would by no means be thought to affirm, that the Name of Adam, and
suchlike, were changed: For it might so happen, that both the Primitives and
Derivatives of the first Language were often preserved in the Hebrew: But we
must not conclude from thence, that therefore Adam spoke pure Hebrew. There are
some Names, which with equal Felicity may be deduced out of the Chaldee; as for
instance, the Name Hhavah, for Hhai signifies Living, no less in Chaldee than
it does in Hebrew. Nay, there are some Names which cannot Analogically be
derived from the Hebrew Roots, although Moses deduces them from those Roots,
which if we should urge, as the Rabbis do, to support the contrary Opinion, we
should from thence conclude, that the Hebrew Tongue has no Affinity with the
Language of the Antediluvians. Thus Genesis 2.1. And she brought forth Cain, and
said, I have got (Kanithi) a man of the Lord. The Name Kajin, according to the
common Rules, ought to be deduced from Koun, which signifies to Lament in
Pihel; as Kajits the Summer, from Kouts; Tsaiid, Hunting, from Tsoud; and
several more of the like nature. From the Root Kanah we should more properly
deduce Kanovi. Now, as we have observed, if we were minded to copy after the
Rabbis, and follow their Conduct, we might say, That from hence it is evident,
that the Hebrew Tongue is not the first, since Moses was not able to express in
it the Etymology of the word Kain. We might gather the same from Genesis Chap.
5. v. 29. where the Father of Noah calls the Name of his Son Noahh, saying, he
will Comfort us, Jenahhamenou, for if we are to derive the Name of this
Restorer of Mankind from Nahham, we ought to have called him Nohhem, that is to
say, a Comforter, not Noahh, which can be deduced from nothing else but Noahh
quievit. So that if a few happy Etymologies will prove the Antediluvian
Language to have been the same with the Hebrew, surely those of a different
Nature will demonstrate the contrary. But since both these Propositions cannot
be true, what remains, but that we should own that the Hebrew Language is not
indeed the first, but the Offspring of it; as are likewise the Chaldee and
Arabic, and that some Remainders of it are still preserved in these three
Dialects. True it is, that the Original of the Name of Tubal Cain, which is
neither to be traced out of Hebrew nor Chaldee, is plainly found in the
Arabic, as we have shown at the third It Is worth Observation, says our Author
here, that the two words, of which this name is compounded, signify in the
Arabian Laminam aeri^, aut ferri; but as far as we can find by the Holy Writ,
which is our only resort in this case, they are wholly unknown to the Hebrew
Tongue; though, as it appears by the Context, there is no question to be made,
but this is the true signification of them.
Chapter v. 22. Besides the Etymology of the word Babel is more happily deduced
from the Chaldee word Bilbel confudit, than from the Hebrew Balal, which
signifies the same; for there is a greater Affinity between Babel and Bilbel,
than between Babel and Balal.

But to deliver my Sentiments freely, concerning the Antediluvian and some
other ancient Names, many of them were not so much given them as Names at their
Birth to distinguish them from other Men, as they are to be looked upon as
Sirnames, afterward bestowed upon them for some particular Event or Accident
that befell them. And from hence it came to pass, as we have already shown, that
these Names were changed by the Hebrews, as it is certain some of them were
changed by the Arabians. The first begotten Son of Adam was Cain, as Moses
tells us, a Tiller of the Ground, which furnished the Arabians with an occasion
to reckon the Lord knows who, one Habdel hharits, that is to say, the Servant
of a Tiller, among the Sons of Adam; which rather signifies Cain's manner of
Living, than another Son of our first Parents, as some People imagined.
Concerning which Consult, Schickard in the Prooemium to his Catalogue of the
Persian Kings. His other Son was called Hebel, that is, a fading thing that
soon disappears, because he was killed by his Brother in his Youth. We know
indeed that some Expositors have conjectured, that from a Prophetical Spirit
this Name was given him at his Birth by his Parents; but a bare simple
Conjecture can never amount to a Demonstration. A Person of singular Piety, and
consequently instructed in all the Knowledge of Divine Matters, which those
Times were capable of, is called Hhanoch from the Verb Hhanach, that is,
docuit, instituit, whence the Participle Hhanouch, doctus, learned. For this
reason the same Man is called by the Arabians Idris, which signifies learned;
for daras with the Hebrews and Arabians, is accurate and subtiliter indagavit.
His Son was called in After-ages Methouschelahh, i. e. After his Death a
breaking out, to wit, of Waters, happened. After the Flood Peleg, that is,
Division the Son of Heber, in whose days the Earth was divided, Chap. 10. v.
25. We have also observed on the Monsieur le Clerk here observes, that Nimrod
is derived from the Hebrew Radix Marad, to Rebel, from whence the Arabic word
Maridon is derived, which signifies Obstinate, Proud, or Insolent. And such
sort of a Man he must needs be, continues our Author, who first dissolved the
Paternal Government, and affected a Superiority over his Brethren. I can never
persuade my self, that this Name was given him as soon as he was born, no more
than several other Names were given to others, which have a relation to their
Disposition, or the Inventions they found out. They rather seem to be their
Cognomina or Sirnames, of which their Posterity had some remembrance, when
their Names were utterly forgotten.
Tenth Chapter v. 8. that Nimrod was no very honorable Title for him to whom
it was given. Perhaps we might discover several others of the like kind, if we
had a fuller and larger History of those Times. But these we have cited, are
more than sufficient to show, that some of those Sirnames might be changed by
Moses.

And therefore their Argument of Primitive Antiquity, deduced barely from
Names, is not of that Consequence as the Rabbis, and those that implicitly
follow their Authority may imagine. However since the other reasons that are
alleged by the Jews fall infinitely short of this, we lie under no Obligation
to trifle away our time in confuting them, especially since the Vanity of them
has been already demonstrated by the Learned Huetius.

III. There seems to have been but one Language before the Deluge: This we are
sure of, that there was but one in the Family of Noah, till the Fantastical
Project of the Building of Babel was set on foot, that is to say, as long as
they continued all in the same place. But after that, upon the account of some
Differences arising at Babylon, Mankind was dispersed into several Provinces of
the World, and when in process of time these distant Families preserved either
none, or but a small Correspondence one with another, several new Dialects
sprung up. Thus we see that the Latin Tongue has given birth to the Italian,
Spanish and French Tongues, not to mention the several Dialects of each of
these. So the Saxon Tongue alone begot the Modern German, the Dutch and
English. We have See this handled at large in the sixth Dissertation.
elsewhere shown that the variety of Languages did not immediately arise by any
sudden miraculous Impression of the Divine Power; and indeed those that
maintain the contrary Opinion, own that there was rather a variety of Dialects,
than of new Tongues.

Therefore the Primitive or first Language has upon several accounts been
changed; as for instance, it was turned by the Arabians into the Arabic, by
the Chaldees it was wrested into the Chaldean, and by the Canaanites insensibly
changed into the Canaanean Dialect. The Jews, who fansied it to be the Hebrew
Tongue, pretend it remained without Change or Corruption in the Family of
Heber, which nevertheless is no where attested in the Holy Scripture. Nay, on
the other side, it sufficiently intimates, that the Posterity of Heber, who
continued on the other side the Euphrates, rather spoke Chaldee, as we shall
see anon.

Since therefore the Rabbis are not able to produce one positive Testimony out
of the Bible, to prove that the Antediluvian Language came down entire and
incorrupted to the Descendants of Heber, they endeavor, which is the last
Refuge of a declining Cause, to evince it by far-fetched Reasons. They pretend
that neither Heber nor his Son Peleg, from whom the Israelites are lineally
descended, were concerned in building the Tower of Babel. But this is a
downright Dream, supported by no manner of reason, as we have shown in our
sixth Dissertation.

First, They pretend that the Family of Cham, assisted by some of the Posterity
of Shem and Japhet, fell upon this design, and that Nimrod was the chief
Surveyor and Encourager of the Work, which they gather chiefly from Genesis 10.9,
10. where Babel, Erech, Acchad and Chalne in the Land of Sinaar, are said to be
the beginning of Nimrod's Kingdom. But nothing more can be evinced from hence,
but only that Nimrod, after the rest of Mankind had quitted Babylon, continued
there still with his Family, and was either the Master or Founder of those
Cities. Secondly, They mightily inveigh against the Impiety of the Builders of
Babel in most Tragical Strains, and thence conclude that the Godly Patriarchs,
of which number Heber was one, were not engaged in that wicked Design: But we
have shown, that though for certain reasons God Almighty was pleased to
disapprove the Design, yet there was no Wickedness in it. Besides I would fain
know who it was informed the Jews that Heber was so Pious and Godly a Person? I
am sure his Piety is no where commended; nay on the contrary, Abraham's
Ancestors who lived on the other side the Euphrates, are not obscurely charged
with Idolatry in The Passage in Joshua is this, Your Fathers dwelt on the other
side of the Flood in old time, even Terah the Father of Abraham, and the Father
of Nachor, and they served Other Gods* And indeed the old Jews derived the
beginning of their Religion from Abraham, who as Josephus tells us. lib. 1. c.
8. of his Jewish Antiquities, (...) was the first that had the Coutage to
profess one God the Creator of all things.
Joshua 24.2. Thirdly, They pretend that the Posterity of Heber escaped the
Punishment which this bold Attempt drew upon the rest of Mankind, since they
always preserved the Hebrew Language in its Primitive Purity and Perfection.
But we need not now repeat, that the Language, which afterward was called the
Hebrew, can with no more pretense set up for the first Tongue than the Chaldee,
for we hope we have already demonstrated that Point, but I would fain ask them
a few questions, If Heber and his Sons had no share in this Transgression (if
it deserve that name) how happened it that the Posterity of Joktan, who was the
Son of Heber abovementioned, came to speak Arabic? How came it to pass, that
most of the Children of Shem, who, as they pretend, was none of the Builders of
Babel, that his Children, I say, who settled beyond the Euphrates, either spoke
Chaldee or some other Language more remote from the Hebrew? In a word, whatever
the Rabbis impudently prate of the Hebrew Tongue's being preserved in one
Family, it is, in my Opinion, the Product of their own empty lying Brains,
which in all Ages of the World were known to be Famous for inventing of Fables,
and Heber's Posterity liable to the common Fate of the rest of Mankind, as they
came to be scattered into various Regions, so no doubt of it but they expressed
their meaning in different Sounds.
If we should then enquire, what was the Language that Abraham spoke on the
other side the Euphrates, (letting bare Conjectures, or rather Rabbinical
Comments alone) the most probable Opinion is, That he spoke that Language which
not long after was received in those places, I mean the Chaldee. He lived till
the seyentieth Year of his Life, perhaps, at Vr of the Chaldees, whither one of
his Ancestors went and settled, after Mankind had resolved to seek their
Fortunes in different Countries. Afterward he continued for some time at Haran
in Mesopotamia.

Now it is manifest beyond all Dispute, that Chaldee was spoke in these places,
in the days of Jacob the Grandchild of Abraham; for in Genesis 31.47. Laban is
said to have called a heap of Stones erected in remembrance of the Covenant he
made with Jacob, Jegar schaha doutha, which words are merely Chaldee, and
signify the Heap of Witness. Nor does the Language of his Grandfather Nachor
seem to be any other than this, because Languages do not use to change in so
short a course of time; for it is to no purpose to say that the Posterity of
Peleg preserved the Hebrew Tongue among themselves, since no reason can be
assigned, why Laban, who descended from him, as well as Abraham, spoke the
Chaldean Tongue, while the rest of the Gentiles spoke another. Besides if the
Hebrew Language was in use among the Descendants of Peleg beyond Euphrates,
certainly some remainders of it would be shown us, since it is an undeniable
Truth, that the Aramean or Chaldean Dialect was spoken on the East of
Euphrates. In short, no tolerable cause can be assigned, why only Abraham's
Family should preserve the old Language in Canaan, and propagate it to his
Posterity, and yet the other Children of Peleg in Mesopotamia should utterly
forget it, and learn a new Dialect. As the Posterity of Peleg, that fixed their
Habitations beyond the Euphrates, had frequent Inter-marriages with the
Inhabitants of those places, so likewise the Children of Abraham not only took
them Wives out of their Father's Family, as Isaac and Jacob did, but also
married Canaanitish Women, as is evident by the Example of Jacob's Sons.

The Sacred Writers expressly tell us, that in the following Ages, on the North
and South of Mesopotamia, the Syrian Tongue was spoken, which the Jews did not
understand; but we are no where told, that they were ignorant of the Language
of their Neighbors the Canaanites. At the same time I do not deny but that
there may be different Dialects in one and the same Language, as we find by
experience in all Modern Tongues, but still those Dialects are understood by
all the Neighbors.

When Sennacherib Monarch of Assyria, that is to say, King not only of the
Nations beyond the Tygris, but likewise of the Vpper-Mesopotamia, sent an
Ambassador to Hezekiah King of Judah, to stir up the People to a Rebellion:
Hezekiah's Courtiers thus address themselves to him, because he talked in
Hebrew. Speak, we pray thee, to thy Servants, in the Aramean or Syrian
Language, for we understand it, but talk not to us in Hebrew, least the People
that is upon the Wall should hear, 2 Kings 18.26. It also appears out of
Daniel, Esdras and Nehemiah, that the Chaldean Tongue was spoken at Babylon.
Nabuchodonosor, Dan. 1.4. commands some Youths to be chosen out of the Jewish
Nobility, that were carried to Babylon to be instructed in the Learning and
Language of the Chaldeans. So likewise Jeremiah speaks of the Chaldeans, Chap.
5.15. Behold, says the Lord, I will bring a Nation upon you from afar, O House
of Israel, which is a powerful Nation, and an ancient Nation, a Nation whose
Language thou know not, neither understandest what they say.

But no where do we find any like this said of those Nations that were situated
between the Mediterranean-Sea and the Jordan. The Dialects of the neighboring
People were indeed easy to be distinguished from the Jewish Tongue, as
Nehemiah particularly tells us of that of Asdod and some others, Chap. 13.24.
but it is no where affirmed, that they were not understood by the Jews.

V. Having thus shown that Hebrew was neither the Primitive Tongue, nor
preserved in the Family of Heber, nor yet Abraham's Mother Tongue, it now
remains for me to enquire where it was spoken: To give my own Opinion freely,
though it is different from that of several Learned Men, who therein agree with
the Jews, I suppose it was the Language of Canaan, and that the Posterity of
Abraham learnt it between the Mediterranean-Sea and the Jordan, but by no means
brought it thither out of Chaldaea; neither can I discover after the severest
Examination, the least Absurdity in this Opinion; for here we have a Chaldean
remove himself with his whole Family into another Country, and having past the
Euphrates and Jordan, wanders up and down Canaan for a hundred years, enters
into Covenant with the old Inhabitants, acquires a prodigious Wealth among
them, marries several Concubines, gets Children, lives in mighty Credit and
Reputation, and consequently has frequent Conversations with them. Now after
all this, Can any one think it strange, that he learnt a Language which has so
great an Affinity with his own Mother Tongue, and that his whole Family
conformed themselves in their Speech to the Natives of the Place. Add to this,
That Isaac passed his whole, and Jacob the better part of his Life among them,
that the Children of them both were brought up in the same Country, and had
their Wives from thence. So that upon a due Survey of the matter, it had been a
downright Miracle if they had still preserved the Chaldean Tongue, so little
reason have we to wonder, that the Canaanitish Language became familiar to
these People.

And therefore I look upon that Opinion to be ill grounded, which supposes that
the Israelites spoke a different Language from the People of Canaan. It Is
certain that Isaiah plainly calls Hebrew the Language of Canaan, Chap. 19.18.
In that day, says he, there shall be five Cities in the Land of Egypt which
shall speak the lip of Canaan; which is all one as if he had said, the Language
of Canaan. For the word lip, both there, and in Genesis 11.1. signifies Speech,
because the Lips are no less serviceable in speaking, than the Tongue it self.

Nor is this Opinion supported by bare Probability, or to be called a
Conjecture merely deduced from the Name, for Bochart, in the second Book of his
Canaan, Chap. 1. has fully demonstrated it to be grounded upon Truth, which we
shall lay down before the Reader in a few words, because in some Particulars we
dissent from that admirable Man. His first and strongest Argument to prove the
Language of the Canaanites to be the same with that of the Hebrews, is brought
from the Names of Men and Places, which are purely Hebrew. N. Fuller in the
fourth Book of his Miscellanies, Chap. 4. maintains the contrary Opinion:
Though I grant, says he, all those names to be purely Hebrew, yet I deny that
any of them were Canaanitish names, or given by those People; I rather believe
that the old names that were imposed by the Canaanites, the Primitive
Inhabitants of that Country, were afterward pronounced and expounded by the
Hebrews, who succeeded them in that Land, after the Hebrew manner. Which
Hypothesis, were it true, no Argument could be formed out of the Antediluvian
Names to prove the Antiquity of the Hebrew Language, and yet Fuller would not
willingly grant this, nor indeed any of the Patrons of this Opinion. But in
truth this is no better than a Chimaera, to which the Holy Scriptures give not
the least Countenance; for though we should allow that some of these words were
disguised with a Hebrew Sound and Termination, yet who can imagine that all of
them were served after this manner, and that neither Moses nor Joshua should in
one single Line inform us, that they changed all the names, before the
Israelites possessed themselves of the Land of Canaan. Now besides that this is
altogether Incredible and without President, there are two things that
demonstrate it to be absolutely False. One is, That Moses and Joshua give us an
account of the Alteration made in several Names, by which it appears, that this
was the particular Case of some few Cities, and not common to them all. Consult
Genesis 23.2. as also Numb. 32.38. and Joshua 15.13, 14. c. 19.47. The other is,
That not only the names of those Cities in the Possession of the Israelites are
of Hebrew Extraction, but also of the neighboring places which they had not
subdued, as Gaza, Asdod, G^th, Hekron, Ascalon, which belonged to the
Philistines, Tyrus, Sidon, Barepta, etc.

The Second Argument to prove the Canaanean Original of the Hebrew Tongue is
deduced from hence, That though the Sacred Writers expressly tell us, that
several of the neighboring Nations were of a Language different from the
Hebrews, yet there is not the least thing like this said of the Canaanites: We
have already taken notice that this was frequently observed of the Chaldeans.
The People of Egypt are called Lohez, Psalm 114.1. that is to say Barbarous;
besides there was an Interpreter between Joseph, who pretended himself to be an
Egyptian, and his Brethren, see Genesis 42.23. likewise Psalm. 81.6. In the mean
time, though the Hebrews maintained such frequent Correspondences with the
Canaanites, and transacted so much Business with them from Abraham down to
Joshua, yet we find not the least mention of an Interpreter passing between
them.

The Third Argument arises from the very use of the Interpreter whom Joseph
employed; for if only Jacob's Family spoke Hebrew, How was it possible for
Joseph to get an Interpreter? He could have no other but some Fugitive Servant,
who would have soon known both Joseph and his Brethren.

The Fourth is by Bochart, derived from the Remainders of the Phoenician
Tongue, which in the second Book of his Canaan, he emply demonstrates to be
purely Hebrew.

We shall add a Fifth, which proceeds from the manifest Footsteps of Paganism,
that are easily to be traced in this Language. For since Tongues are Images of
the Sentiments of our Mind, and are formed and modeled according to the
Opinion of those People that use them; it cannot otherwise happen, but that the
common Speech of any Country, must derive a great Tincture from the received
Opinions of the Inhabitants. Thus learned Critics have observed, that the
Arabians have more than five hundred names for a Lion, more than a thousand for
a Sword, two hundred at least for a Serpent, and fourscore for Honey. The
reason of it is, because the Arabians use frequently to talk of these things,
since their Country is so pestered with Lions and Serpents, is inhabited by a
Warlike People, and abounds in Honey. It Is an easy matter to observe both in
the Greek and Latin Tongues, though we were destitute of all other Arguments,
which are indeed innumerable, that the Greeks and Latins were of Opinion, that
the Gods beheld the Actions of Mankind, and were Faithful Witnesses of the
Truth, from those frequent Forms of Swearing, which they used so everlastingly
in all their Conversations.

I will not give my self the Trouble to confirm a Truth, which is supported by
so many Examples, not to mention the Custom of all the Modern Languages, but
come immediately to the Point. The Hebrew Tongue which flourished, and was for
some time cultivated by the Canaanites, a People who had strange Notions of the
Divinity, and were infected with Polytheism, retained several visible Footsteps
of those Errors, even after it became the Mother Tongue of the Hebrews, who had
quite different Sentiments. The Phoenicians not only believed a Plurality of
Gods, but ranked several Men in the number of their Deities (as Eusebius tells
us Praep. Evang. l. 1. c. 6.) and therefore more frequently made use of the
word Elohim, which is of the Plural Number, than the Singular Eloha God, which
we see still continued in the Hebrew Language, though they maintained the
contrary Opinion, and were always zealous Assertors of one God. Hence it comes
to pass, that sometimes they join a Verb in the Singular Number to it, pursuant
to their own Notions of the Unity of God; and sometimes in the Plural, after
the manner of their Neighbors, though they only meant one God by it, see Genesis
1.1. Chap. 20.13. and our Monsieur le Clerk is of opinion, that the Hebrews
spoke the same Language with the Inhabitants of Palaestine, an Idolatrous
People, so they borrowed this Fashion of speaking (...), i. e. in the Plural
Number of God from them, though pursuant to their own Opinion, of the Unity of
God, they attributed only a Singular Signification to a Plural word. Therefore
it is not to be wondered at, that sometimes they joined a singular Verb to the
word Elohim, as Genesis 1.1. as having a greater regard to the Sense of the word,
than the Number of it; and at other times ratione numtri habita, add a plural
Verb to it, as Genesis 20.13.
Annotations on those places. It Is also observable, that the same word Elohim
does not only signify the Supreme God, but likewise Angels and Magistrates.
The reason of which is plain, Because the Phoenicians did not observe a
sufficient distinction between God, Angels and Magistrates, since several Men
were reputed as Gods by them. For otherwise if this Language had been invented,
and cultivated by a People free from Idolatry, as the Hebrews afterward were,
they had neither communicated a name belonging to the Divine Nature to
Creatures, nor had they used it plurally in their ordinary Discourses. It Is
certain we have nothing like this in any of the Modern European Languages, nay
not in the Arabic of the Mahometans, who profess themselves like the
Europeans, to be invincible Adversaries to Polytheism.

Every one knows that the Hebrews inveterately hated that Opinion, which
supposes the Divinity to be (...), i. e. resembling the Humane Nature; neither
is it to be imagined, that these People, who were the Worshippers of one
invisible eternal God, if they had had the inventing of their own Language,
would have in their common Talk so much favored the abovementioned Opinion,
from which we see most Christians nowadays carefully abstain for the same
reason. But the Holy Scriptures afford us an infinite number of Examples of
this (...); and Salom. Glassius, a most industrious and learned Writer, bestows
the longest Chapter of his Sacred Rhetoric, which is the Seventh, Tract. 1. in
enumerating them: And true it is, that mention is made of God's Soul, Face,
Eyes, Ears, Nose, Mouth, Neck, Arms, his right and left Hand, Fingers, Heart,
Bowels, Bosom and Feet. Not is this all, for an observing Reader may find
several other remarkable Instances of the (...) upon other Occasions. We find
attributed to God Sadness, Repentance, Anger, Hatred, Jealousy, a Knowledge,
not from Eternity and constant to it self, but acquired by Experience,
Remembrance, Forgetfulness, Laughter, Noise, Labor, Vows, Going down, Rising
up, Walking, Sleeping, Watching, and several things of the like nature, which
though they are said more humano, are yet to be understood (...), which the
abovementioned Learned Author has ingeniously remarked, whom the Reader, if he
pleases, may consult himself. These frequent Examples were formerly insisted
upon, and abused by the (...), from whose Errors nevertheless the Hebrews were
always free, as they were from the Idolatry of their Neighbors.

Some feeble Objections may be urged against this Opinion, but they are so
effectually confuted by Bochart, that a Man must be incurably Obstinate, who
after he has read his Reasons, will still persist in the defense of them; so
that since they will fall down of their own accord, if we do but remember what
has been already advanced, it is not necessary to dwell any longer upon them.
But some body perhaps will think to affright us with the Title of Holy, which
is a Compliment the Jews have passed upon their own Language. Now if they mean
no more by it, but that Holy Laws were given them by God Almighty in that
Tongue, and other most Holy Revelations made by the Prophets, we have no
Controversy with them upon that Article; we grant it all, and urge it as well
as they. God, if he had so vouchsafed, might have declared his Will in the
Indian Language, but this had not conferred the least Sanctity upon the Indian
Letters and Accents, nor ought the Indian Tongue to have been accounted less
Holy for its Penury and Barrenness. Our Savior and his Apostles revealed the
most Holy Doctrines of the Gospel in the Galilean Tongue, which was known, but
despised by those of Jerusalem. The Apostles also preached the Gospel to the
Gentiles in every Language, which is no less Holy for all that, than if they
had delivered it in the same Tongue which Adam spoke, for that lies not in
empty Sounds and Words, but in the Things and Thoughts. And it is perhaps out of
Envy to them, that the Rabbis have expressly forbid Prayers to be said in any
other Language but the Hebrew, nay not excepting the Syrian. Rabbi Jochanan's
Precept in Talmud Schab, Fol. 12.2. as it is generally known, so it is deservedly
laughed at, Whoever Prays to have his Necessities relieved in the Syrian Tongue,
the Ministering Angels do not assist him, for the Ministering Angels do not
understand Syriack. It Is not worth the while to confute those People, who
believe, as the Rabbis do, that this is the Language of the Angels, and will
be that of the Just after the Resurrection Those that can so easily swallow
such Stuff, deserve indeed the name of great Opiniatres, but are not, I
believe, much affected with solid Reasoning.

VI. It Is now high time to come to something else, which no less disagrees from
the Rabbinical Opinions than the former, but is of much greater use in the
Interpretation of the Sacred Volume. It Is commonly boasted by these highflyers,
that the Hebrew Language is infinitely the finest in the World; in short, they
are so liberal in their Commendations of the Hebrew Style, that they despise
all other Tongues in comparison of that. We confess indeed there are some
Beauties and Elegancies peculiar to the Hebrew Tongue, as there are to all the
Tongues in the World, but at the same time believe it is not to be compared
with others more refined and copious Languages. But before I proceed any
farther, I am to inform the Reader, that it is considered by us, not such as
perhaps it was in its flourishing Condition, but as we find it in the Holy
Writings. I freely acknowledge that there were much more words, and a greater
Variety of Phrases used, than we find in this small Volume; but as far as we
can judge of it by its remainders, we have just reason to believe it to be a
barren, ambiguous, unrefined Language, which now we shall endeavor to prove.

The Excellency of every Language consists principally in three things, viz.
Plenty of Words and Phrases, Perspicuity of Speech, and Purity; the Rules for
which are copiously laid down by those that have treated of Rhetoric. Now it is
certain that several Languages, but especially the Greek, are much superior to
Hebrew in all these Considerations, and it is a plain Case, that Hebrew can with
no Pretense be said to be the finest Language in the World.

In the first place, Those that attentively read over the Holy Writings, or
consult the Hebrew Lexicons, will be soon convinced that it has but very few
Words, and very few Phrases. There are not only the same words, but (what
argues a miserable Poverty) we meet with the very same Expressions every where,
but especially in the Historical Books. The same Thread of Narration, the same
Particularities of Style and Expression are visible all along: Nor is this only
observable of the Writers of one Age, for all the Historians of all Times and
Ages, have writ exactly after the same manner. I would demonstrate this
Assertion more at large, were not most Men convinced of the Evidence and Truth
of it: Therefore I will dwell no longer upon so plain a Chapter, I will only
add, That the very Rabbis, who generally omitting the true Praises of their
Country, still affect to Honor it with their Romances and Legends, are
uncontrolable Witnesses of the Poverty of their own Language, since for the
Interpretation of the Law, they are obliged to coin innumerable Words for the
present Occasion, or else to setch them out of the Syro-Chaldaick and other
Languages: And in these the Talmudical Books abound, and without them they
could never be able to deliver or express their own meaning. Every one knows
that there are at least ten times more words in Buxtorf's Rabbinital Thesaurus,
than in his Bible-Lexicon. Nevertheless, with all their Foreign Assistance,
this Copia Rabbinica falls infinitely short of the Grecian and Latin Treasures.

If we enquire into the Cause of the great Sterility of the Hebrew Language, we
shall find it to be the same as has been observed of other Languages. Where
Arts and Sciences lie under Contempt, and sew Treatises are written, there must
of necessity be a great want of words to express several things; for Men never
impose Names on things or the Notions of the Mind, of which they never think,
dispute, or write. For example, Before the Greeks diligently cultivated
Philosophy, there were a thousand things of which Men never thought, and for
expressing of which they had wanted fit words, if they had not coined new ones.
The same thing befell the Romans, when they first began to treat of
Philosophical Subjects in Latin. I call those things Qualities, says Cicero, l.
1. c. 7. Acad. quaest. which the Greeks call (...), which very Term among the
Greeks is not used by the Vulgar, but only by Philosophers, and several
Instances there are of the like nature. The Logicians too have their particular
by-words which the People do not understand, and this Method is common to all
Arts: For either new words are to be coined, or else they are to be borrowed
from elsewhere; and if the Greeks follow this Conduct, who have for so many
Ages exercised themselves in these Affairs, How much more Lawful is it for us
to do it, who but now begin to treat of them? By this Instance, which may be
backed with several Arts unknown to the Hebrews, it is easy to perceive how
great a Penury of words they must unavoidably labor under. As they were in a
particular manner ignorant in Grammar, Rhetoric, and the whole Circle of
Philosophy, as appears by their Writings, they must consequently be destitute
of all those great Assistances that those Arts use to furnish. Poetry indeed,
as far as the Genius of their Language would permit, was cultivated somewhat
better by them; several things are majestically and beautifully said in their
Songs, but yet so as to convince every impartial Reader, rather what they might
have done, if they had used the same Application with other Nations, than what
Perfection of Eloquence they had already acquired.

Secondly, Want of words begot Ambiguity, for when we are destitute of proper
Terms to explain our meanings by, we must wrest them into another Sense, or
else express particular things in words common to several more. For Metaphors,
as Cicero well observes, l. 3. de Orat. c. 38. are like borrowing, where what a
Man has not of his own, he supplies himself with elsewhere. Now if one and the
same word signifies several things, one in its proper Acceptance, the rest
(...) a borrowed or tralatitious Sense, it is no easy ^atter to distinguish its
several Significations, and when Particulars are called by common Names, it
often happens that we do not clearly ^nderstand, in what respect they differ
from ^ther things of the same Genus. For instance, Erets signifies among the
Hebrews Clay that Vessels are made of, a Tract of Ground either ^ore or less
suitable to the present Occasion, ^he whole Globe of the Earth, and the Men
that ^nhabit it; so that it is hard to say, which is its proper Signification,
and which Figurative. When an universal Designation is fixed upon this word,
which is expressed by chol, All, it is doubted whether the whole Kingdom, or a
less compass of Ground, or the Globe of the Earth, or whether all Men, or only
some, are to be understood by it; so that nothing but the Context, or the
Nature of the thing in debate, can assist our Conjectures. When figurative
Words and Phrases cannot be so urged, as fully to express the things they
describe, how far they may be urged without an Error, is often doubtful.

Now if we consider the various Significations of the indeclinable Particles,
and how almost all the Tenses are confounded in the Verbs, and add to this
their everlasting change of the Gender, Number and Person, of which subject
abundance of Learned Men have written carefully, we shall have no great reason
to boast of the Perspicuity of the Hebrew Tongue. Read but over Chr. Noldius's
Concordance of the Particles, and Glasstus's Grammatica Sacra, two well
approved and excellent. Treatises, and when that is done, I believe the most
obstinate Man will be convinced, that perhaps no Language in the World is
fuller of Ambiguity and Obscurity than the Hebrew.

But yet I would not be so understood, as if a General Scheme of the Jewish
Religion and History could not be had out of the Books of the Old Testament;
for as that is not of it self obscure, the chief Matters relating to it are so
frequently inculcated, that by virtue of those Repetitions, they are made plain
enough. Besides we do not every where meet Ambiguities and Reasons to doubt,
though it is certain there are but too many of them. Hence it is that nothing
belonging to the Religion or History of the Israelites in general, has been
called in question, though infinite Disputes have happened among the Learned,
concerning some particular Circumstances, and other abstruser Matters, which
are never to be decided by any Light of the Understanding, or any Application
of Mind. Our Commentary all along abounds with such sort of Questions, wherein
we cannot pretend to state Matter of Fact, but only deliver what we think our
selves, and what others before us have conjectured; for there are infinite
places so unaccountably perplexed, that it is easy to demonstrate the
Impossibility of finding out the genuine Meaning of them, and every Person that
has but a competent Knowledge of these Matters, will be soon sensible of this
Truth, if he does but carefully consider it. For this reason those Persons that
pretend to be influenced by the Truth, and not by a Party, will not easily
condemn another for his Opinion, provided it does not hurt the Sum and
Substance of the Book. But this is not a place to talk of these Matters.

In the Third place this sufficiently shows, that the Hebrew Language was never
cultivated with any extraordinary care, for as the Culture of Ground has this
end, to procure Plenty of wholesome Fruits for the Tiller, so are Languages for
no other design cultivated, but that Men may have plenty or words to serve them
upon all Occasions, and withal a Perspicuity of Oration, without which the
greatest Plenty is useless. For certainly the end of Speaking, is not to amuse
or tire our Hearers with multiplicity of words, but that we may be understood,
and by the Mediation of Speech, to convey our Thoughts into the Minds of others.

Now the Hebrews not only neglected Grammar, and those other Arts and
Disciplines that help to enrich a Language in words, but were utterly
unacquainted with Rhetoric that serves to refine them. Upon this account they
every where trample upon the Rules of the Rhetors, even those that do not
depend upon the changeable Wills of Men, but are built upon the everlasting
Rules of Reason, and ought to have the same Authority all the World over. No
body doubts but that Clearness is one of the greatest Happinesses any Tongue
can boast of, since innumerable Mistakes may arise from words not rightly
understood, which are not only troublesome in the common Offices of Life, but
extremely dangerous in Matters of greater Consequence. But the Hebrews, as we
find, never took any great Pains to render their Language Perspicuous.

If it is not, it ought at least to be a Matter of Commendation among all
People, neither to use fewer words than are necessary to make a Man understood,
nor more than are requisite, especially in a simple Narration, that so our
Hearers may fully comprehend our meaning. A Narration, says Cicero, who was not
only an admirable Orator, but a great Master of Speaking, lib 1. de Inv. cap.
20. ought to have three Qualifications. it ought to be Concise, Clear, and
Probable. We shall not meddle with the two last, as having already treated of
Perspicuity, and because a Dispute about Probability is impertinent here, but
let us see what he says of Brevity. 'Twill be short, says he, if we begin no
higher than the present occasion demands, and do not ramble into far-fetched
Stories; and if we relate a thing in General, without mentioning every little
Particular; for, generally speaking, it is enough to say such a thing was done,
without descending into the Circumstances, and if we proceed no farther in the
Story than things are worth knowing: And if we do not make Digressions into
Foreign Matters: And if we so speak, that from what is already said, the Reader
may sometimes guess at what is not said: And if we not only omit whatever is
destructive of Perspicuity, but also whatever neither hinders nor helps it: And
if every thing is only told once, and if we do not begin with that where we
left off last. Though these Rules are agreeable to Reason, yet the Jews
neglected them, as might be proved by a thousand Instances if there was
occasion for it, which the attentive Reader will easily discover in our
Annotations. Unless we carry this along with us, while we strive to accommodate
the Hebrew Histories to the Precepts of Rhetoric, we spoil all, and do not
understand what they mean. They are frequently defective in what is necessary,
and abound in Superfluities; both which, unless they are supplied, or else are
known to be redundant, it is impossible to understand them. An Emphasis is urged
where there is none at all, and when any thing is omitted in a Narration,
though it is by no means Rhetorical, that they will tell you, against all Sense
and Reason, ought not to be understood. Hence arise those angry Wars between
the Interpreters, and bold Decrees pass concerning the Sense of some ambiguous
places, which it is a mortal Sin to endeavor afterward to revoke. Hence
proceed Anger and Hatred, and all those Mischiefs which Theological Quarrels
usually draw after them.

There is another Rule likewise which is frequently neglected in the Narrations
of the Hebrews, and yet is not undeservedly commended by the Skillful in
Rhetoric. As we have already seen, they not only advise us to make the
Narration as clear as we can, but also Methodical and Open, That what is first
transacted be first related, and the Series of Things and Times so preserved,
that Matters be told exactly as they were done. How Religiously the Hebrews
have followed this Rule, let only the Book of Genesis declare for them, the
good Order of which History will raise a thousand insuperable Difficulties, if
we do not remember that the Jews were no Slaves to the Regularities of Time and
Action. Thus what is said concerning the Dispersion of the Nations in the tenth
Chapter, ought to be placed after the ninth Verse of the eleventh Chapter. The
third, fourth, fifth and eighth Verses of the eleventh Chapter are likewise
Inversions of the Narrations, as also the 23d Verse of the 24th Chapter. See
the Notes on Chap. 20.2. Chap. 36.6. Chap. 34.1. and what we have remarked in
the Chronological Tables on this place.

If from these Observations that respect entire Sentences, and the due ordering
of them, we pass to single Words and single Locutions, we shall find the
Precepts of Rhetoric no less neglected there. But at present we will only
content our selves to produce two or three Instances of words used in a
Figurative Sense. And here, as the Rhetoricians tell us, All Disparity is to be
avoided, because every Metaphor is, or ought to be, grounded upon some
likeness. Upon which Score neither the Romans, nor the Graecians, instead of to
occasion a Dearth, durst have said to break the Staff of Bread. Which
Expression being not rightly understood, has made very Learned Men fall into
strange Mistakes, as we shall show in a proper place.

Because, as the Masters of Eloquence observe, the chief Excellence of a word
figuratively applied, consists in making a greater Impression upon the Sense;
therefore all gross sordid Images are carefully to be avoided, that may
nauseate the Hearer. Therefore by this Rule it was not lawful to say, That God
was a Warlike Man, That he was roused up like a Sleeper, and like a valiant
Man, who after he has slept out his Wine, cries aloud. And several other
Expressions of the like nature.

I will instance in no more, for these are sufficient to convince the most
prejudiced Reader, that the Hebrew Language is extremely Rude and Impolite. But
before I dismiss this Article, I must inform him of two things, and then take
my Farewell of it. The First is, That we by no means pretend to deny, that the
Hebrew Writings are here and there imbellish'd with extraordinary Sentences,
and that there are many sublime Passages, but especially among the Prophets.
But this is not enough to give a Language the Denomination of Polite, since no
Tongue in the World can arrive to a sufficient Perfection of Purity, without a
long and laborious Application to Grammar and Rhetoric for some Ages at least.
A Book ought to observe from the beginning to the end of it, all or most of the
Rules of Elocution and Order, to make it pass for an elegant and regular
Composition. For as Pliny says, l. 3. Ep. 13. Even the Barbarians now and then
invent finely, and discourse magnificently, but none but learned Persons can
dispose things fitly, and paint them with an agreeable Variety.

The other is, That whatever has been hitherto said by us concerning the Hebrew
Tongue, has only a relation to the Words and Style, as the People commonly used
them, but not to the things themselves that were revealed by God to the Jewish
Prophet, and by them communicated to the World. No sound Christian ever denied
that these things were always of the greatest Moment, and sometimes to be above
the reach of Humane Understanding. But though God Almighty discovered them to
us by the Jews, yet he permitted them to use such a Style as was most Familiar
to themselves and their own Countrymen: For the Spirit, by which they were
influenced, by a wonderful Condescension, accommodated himself to the received
Customs of their Language. Hence it comes to pass, that the Apostles delivered
the Doctrine of Christ not in an Attick Style, or with Plato's Eloquence, but
after their own way suitable to the People, for though they were Divinely
inspired, yet they were but indifferently skilled in Humane Learning, as we are
told by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2.1. and elsewhere. And herein the Divine Wisdom
manifestly appears, that these Heavenly Truths should be revealed to, and, for
several Ages, preserved by a Barbarous unlearned People, as the Greeks called
them, and yet not the least tittle of them be known to those Nations that were
in full Possession of all Arts and Sciences. That this was not done rashly, but
pursuant to the Will of God Almighty, St. Paul teaches us, (...). But this en
passant, least any Censorious Reader should imagine, that we confound Divine
and Humane things together; but to carry on this Argument as it deserves, would
take up a greater space than the narrow limits of this Dissertation will allow.

VII. As long as the Jewish Government stood, and the People kept unmixt from
other Nations, we may probably suppose they preserved the Strength and Purity
of their Language; so that from Moses down to Esdras, it received no sensible
Alterations. For while they were not debauched with the Manners of their
Neighbors, consequently they made no change in their Writings; by which means
their Language might have been extremely altered, even whilst it was enriched
and polished, which we know was the Fate of the Latin Tongue. And therefore
it is not strange if we observe little or no difference of Style in the Sacred
Historians.

But after that the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, as well as the other Ten,
were carried into Captivity, and those that went not beyond the Euphrates, were
scattered up and down the Neighborhood, among Nations that spoke different
Dialects of the Canaanitish Tongue: When the Jews, I say, after Seventy years,
returned into Judea at last out of several Countries, their Language could not
avoid being vitiated with a mixture of other Dialects. At that time, says
Nehemiah 13.23. I saw Jews, that took to them Wives from Asdod, Hammon and
Moab, and their Children spoke one half (Hhatsi) in the Speech of Asdod, and
knew not to speak pure Hebrew: And thus they spoke after the Tongues of several
People: Nehemiah indeed expressly tells us, he prohibited such Marriages, but
'twas not in his power to hinder the Jewish Language from being corrupted by
that mixture: Nay, those that came from Chaldaea no less introduced Chaldaisms.
In following Ages, when infinite numbers of Jews not only lived in Judea, but
in the neighboring Nations, as Syria, Egypt, nay, and in remoter places, and
yearly visited Jerusalem upon the Score of their Religion, it must of necessity
follow, that not only those that lived out of Judea, but even the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem, that daily conversed with these Strangers, and married among
them, must strangely adulterate their Language. So that at last, instead of the
true genuine Hebraism, there sprung a Syro-Chaldean Mixture, as appears by the
words of that Language that are to be found in the New Testament, not to
mention now the Dialect of the Talmud.

As other Writers have demonstrated these Matters more copiously, and a detail
of Particulars is not our business here, I will only observe, that within some
Ages after their return from the Captivity, the old Hebrew, as we find it in
the Sacred Writings, was no longer the Mother Tongue of the Jews, and therefore
those that had a mind to be Masters of it, were obliged to study and peruse the
Holy Volumes. Now though they had no more Hebrew Books than we have at present,
yet in this matter they were much Happier than we, because the Tongue they
spoke, had so great an Affinity with the ancient Hebrew, and therefore was no
small help toward the attaining it. For this reason we find, that the Seventy
Interpreters have I shall give two Instances of it. They have translated Genesis
1.6. Rakiah, (...), Firmament, and not expansus, as most of the later
Interpreters have done; following the Signification of the word Rakah, which in
Syriack denotes the same as firmare, comprimere. Thus also Genesis 3.15. where we
after the Hebrew have rendered it, He shall bruise thy bead; the Sept. have
translated it (...), He shall observe thy head. E. Castle remarks, That this
Root in the Arabic signifies observare, spectare: To which the LXX might have
an Eye.
explained several obscure words out of Chaldee, or Arabic, rather than the
Hebrew Books, where sometimes they are extant but once, or are read in a
different Sense.

But now if we consider the lamentable Condition of the Jewish Republic, on
every side oppressed, and overrun by the Kings of Syria and Egypt for many
years, we shall find they had no opportunity to apply themselves to the Study
of Grammar: And indeed some Learned Men, after a careful Examination of the
Septuagint Version, which was published in those times, have long ago concluded
that they neither had any certain fixed Grammar, or Glossary, or Lexicon of the
Hebrew Tongue: For they frequently violate all the Laws of Grammar, and in the
translating of unusual words, the meaning of which is not to be gathered from
the Context, they are so strangely put to it, that it plainly appears they were
not led by Grammar Rules, had no certain Knowledge of the true Signification of
words but guessed and conjectured as well as they could, and so blunder'd right
or wrong through all the difficult places. I am not ignorant that Isaac
Vossius, and some other Persons, who never gave themselves the trouble, I
suppose, to compare it with the Hebrew Original, endeavor to defend this
Translation, and say it is in many places corrupted by the Negligence or
Boldness of the Transcribers, where there is an evident Mistake in the
Translating a Hebrew Word. But those that examine this Version diligently, will
soon perceive the contrary; nor indeed is it credible, that it was every where
almost corrupted in the obscure places, to omit a hundred other things that may
be said against so precarious an Hypothesis.

In those, and the following Ages, down to the time of the A.D 494.
Masorites, though Jews seem wholly to have employed themselves in the Study of
Allegories and Rites, but not of Philological Learning; which was the reason
that they looked upon this Translation, which is far from being perfect, not
only as the most exact thing of that nature in the whole World, but as Divinely
Inspired. See the History of Aristeus, Philo in his Book de Vita Mosis, and
Josephus Jud. Ant. l. 12. c. 2. No surer an Argument can be given, how far the
old Hebrew was neglected in those times, than their blind Admiration of these
Interpreters, who (to speak impartially) are rather to be pardoned, than
commended for their Performance.

In the mean time we do not say this, as if we thought that Translation to be
of little use. On the other hand, we always believed it to be extremely
Serviceable, provided we help the Unaccuracy and defect of Method in the
Interpreters with Grammar Rules, and the assistance of correct Lexicons. As
their Authority ought not to over-weigh Grammar-Reasons, that are deduced from
the immemorial Custom of any Tongue; so where Grammar does not contradict, and
where the Sense allows, it ought to be in great Esteem with us. The Opinions of
that Age, which arose perhaps from some ancient Tradition, nay, even
Conjectures that are supported by the use of the Syro Chaldaic Language, then
in its flourishing Condition, are by no means to be dis-regarded by such as are
well skilled in the Sacred Philology.

But as in those things they are much superior to us, so we mightily exceed
them in Method; for since we have most accurate Grammars, and follow fixed
established Rules, we no longer unriddle the Construction of a Sentence by
guessing, nor are we carried up and down by uncertain Conjectures, as we may
observe the Ancients were. We have likewise several Lexicons compiled, from all
places of Scriptures compared together, by most Learned Men, and Concordances
wherein are all the words in the Bible, and the places where they are to be
found, most accurately set forth; by which Assistances we are now able more
certainly to d^^cover the various Signification of words, and with more Reason
to defend them. Nor have we only very large Glossaries of the Hebrew Tongue,
but likewise of the neighboring Languages, as Chaldee, Syriack and Arabic,
and out of these can we more conveniently compare these Tongues with one
another, than those that lived in the days of the Seventy Interpreters.

Of what prodigious Advantage a certain Method, made up of immutable Rules, is,
may for instance sake be soon known from the Latin and Greek Tongues. In
Cicero's time the Greek Tongue flourished in Greece and Asia; he not only
learnt it at Rome, but in Greece it self, and both writ and spoke Greek not
amiss. Who would believe now, that in any of his Translations out of Greek, any
Passages could drop from him that are liable to Censure? Yet for all this, some
Learned Men have discovered several Mistakes in him, and the reason is, because
he acquired the Greek Tongue rather by Custom than Rules; for which consult H.
Stephens's Lexicon Ciceronianum. Nay what is more, do not we see that Cicero
and Varro, the most Learned of the Romans, have committed such miserable
Mistakes, even in the Derivations of the Latin Tongue, that we are ashamed of
them? For though the Latin was their Mother Tongue, and they daily took pains
to learn Greek, yet they were altogether Ignorant of the Etymologick Art, and
therefore committed unaccountable Errors. The case of the LXX Interpreters is
the same, for being wholly Strangers to our Grammatical and Critical way of
Interpretation, they often mistake, and unexpectedly fall into those Errors,
which we may easily avoid.

VIII. If what I have advanced concerning Philological Learning being little
minded by the Jews under the second Temple be true, as it evidently appears by
what has been already said, and might be made out by many more Arguments, we
may probably suspect that the Holy Volumes were not always transcribed with
that Exactness and Care by the Copyists then, as they deserved. It Is certain
the LXX Interpreters, whoever they were, which it is not our business now to
enquire, seem to have made use of a very faulty Manuscript, and sometimes were
not able to guess the ductus literarum, as Learned Men have long ago observed.
I own indeed, that all the various Lections, which may be collected in their
Translation, are not owing to a vicious Manuscript, and that several of them
perhaps ought to be imputed to their Conjectures. As In the second Chapter of
Genesis v. 2. the Hebrew reads it On the seventh day God ended his Work; but
the Septuagint, On the sixth day. And so Genesis 8.4. the Hebrew is, The Ark
rested on the seventeenth day of the month; but the ^XX say, The twenty seventh
day of the month; and below v. 7. in ^he Hebrew, it is the Raven went forth and
returned; but the LXX insert a Negation, (...), be did not return.
Genesis 2.2. Chap. 8.4, 7. and in abundance of other places: But then that very
liberty they assume to themselves of guessing, is a plain Demonstration that it
was not generally believed at that time, that the Copies were free from Faults,
since they were supposed to stand in need of Correction so often.

Besides we find that the Book which the Masorites made use of, and was of
venerable Antiquity without question, has frequently faults in the Text.
Chetib, which are amended in the Margin.
Keri, and which are often wanting in the Samaritan Copy. As for instance the
(...) Finalis, which is to be found in the Samaritan, is often omitted in the
word Naharah, a Girl, which ought not to be left out; and hi is frequently read
for hou, which (generally speaking) is amended in the Samaritan Book. It Is
true, these and some others of the like nature, are but small inconsiderable
Mistakes, however they show that Mistakes might creep in, and indeed did creep
into the Text, and if they did it in a word so common and easy as Naharah,
certainly they would much sooner do so in an obscure, difficult, and rare word,
especially where the Sense was abrupt, and the Series of the Oration did not
help out the Transcribers, who did not understand it.

Nevertheless, because the Books of the Law were more frequently read than any
of the rest, and are more easy to be understood, I must own there were but few
Faults in them, and those of small Importance: And moreover that our Copy, I
mean that of the Masorites, seems to be more Correct than the Samaritan, for
which reason I have all along Faithfully set it down, not so much as changing a
Letter. As I hinted above, some Faults are left by the Masorites, which might
have been amended, but it is better, in my Opinion, that those very Faults
should be left in the Copy, than that it should smell too much of a Critical
hand, which I have often observed in the Samaritan, though it is not without
its Faults, as Learned Men have long since taken notice.

After all, to deliver my own Sentiments, upon a serious Examination of the
whole Matter, I am clearly of opinion that no Books of great Antiquity, have
arrived to our hands so correct as are the Holy Writings of the Hebrews,
although it is certain they are much the oldest of any; I mean those that were
copied out by the Diligence of the Masorites, and so transmitted to Posterity.
And that this did not happen without a particular Providence, which has
hitherto so miraculously preserved the Sacred Histories, and the Revelations of
the Prophets, for the common Benefit and Use of Mankind, no Man is better
satisfied than my self. I have likewise frequently in this Book defended the
common Readings against the Conjectures of Learned Men; as any one may see that
will peruse my Annotations. At the same time I freely own, that the most
indefatigable and judicious Lud. Cappel, has infinitely deserved of the Sacred
Learning, by his Critica Sacra, and Arcanum Punctuationis. To speak
ingenuously, most of his Opinions do extremely please me, and I have set them
down as if they had been so many Demonstrations. But since I was obliged to
choose one certain Edition to follow, and that the most accurate, I have only
followed the Masoritick Copy in my Translation, as being the most correct of
all, and yet I have not neglected to set down in my Commentary, all the various
Lections out of the Samaritan, and the Ancient Interpreters, that seemed to be
of any Moment. But I shall say more of this Matter in the following
Dissertation.

Dissertation II. Of the best Manner of Interpreting the Bible.
I. The End of this Dissertation. II. What it is to Interpret, and the
Principal Heads of that Method which we have followed. III. How Difficult a
Matter it is to Interpret the Holy Writings. IV. What seems the best way to
attempt it. V. Hebraisms, after what manner they are to be translated. VI. The
Difficulty of turning the Hebrew Particles into Latin. VII. What trouble there
is in a Narration that consists of Preterperfect or Future Tenses joined
together by the Conjunction Vau. VIII. The Masorite Copy to be followed as the
most correct* IX. What Assistances are to be had out of the Old and Modern
Interpreters. X. What helps the neighboring Languages afford. XI. Of what
great use the comparing of several places of Scripture is. XII. What helps may
be safely borrowed from Etymologies. XIII. That the Errors of some later
Interpreters may be more easily avoided now than in the last Age.

SINCE after the Labors of so many Learned Men, who both in this, and
especially the last Age, have endeavored to Interpret the Holy Scriptures,
it is my Lot also to undertake the same Province; I think it but necessary to
acquaint the Reader upon what Motives I attempted, and after what manner I have
performed it. I am sensible that I have engaged not only in a very difficult,
but a most invidious Affair, by reason of the different Parties and Factions
that disturb the Repose of the Christian World. For in a Business of this
nature, if a Man does not do something singular to distinguish him from the
rest, he must expect to meet with the Contempt and Laughter of the Learned and
Unlearned, and if he advances any thing unheard of, and untouched before,
(which I dare presume to say is no easy matter) for his Recompense he is sure
to incurr the Hatred and Malice of the World, especially as it is managed by the
Divines now adays. Nevertheless after I had seriously revolved all this in my
Mind, I was at last determined by the Authority of Philo Judaeus, who after he
has commended the Divine Volumes of Moses as they deserve, and shown what a
Fatigue and Trouble his Interpreters must expect, (...), says he, (...), etc.
Yet we must not therefore desist, but for the sake of Piety, strive to say
something above our Power, and advance as far as it is lawful for Humane Minds
to aspire, that are possessed with the Love and desire of Wisdom. In the
beginning of his Book (...).

Having therefore with God's Assistance, as I hope, undertaken this difficult
Affair, I have all along endeavored neither to disgust the Nice Reader with
any nauseous Repetitions, nor disoblige the Lovers of Antiquity with any new
Doctrines. After what manner I have accomplished it, I design to lay open in
this Dissertation as plainly as I can; but first of all I shall show with what
Difficulties I struggled, and by what means I was able to overcome them, and in
this Age particularly better than could be done in the last; not that we
pretend to a greater share of Judgment, but because we have much better helps
now to enable us to surmount them.

II. Before we come to the Interpretation of the Holy Books, 'twill be
necessary to remind the Reader as briefly as we can, what is meant by the word
Interpret, for we do not here design to deliver all the Rules of that Art. Now
since they that speak, make use of certain Words or Forms of Speaking, in order
to be understood by others, and to raise the same Motions and Affections of the
Mind in their Hearers as they feel themselves, those may be said to interpret
other Men's words, (if we take the word in a large Acceptance) whosoever express
them in another Tongue, that they who hear the Interpreter speak, think
altogether the same things, in the very same order and manner, as the Person
that spoke first would have them. If all Languages were equally Copious, and
furnished with words of the same Force and Energy, we might safely then render
Word for Word, and Phrase for Phrase, and consequently we should only have
occasion for a literal simple Translation. But since Languages do not answer
one another so exactly, it is impossible to make a Verbal Translation if the
Narration is somewhat long. Many things must of necessity be explained in sewer
or more words, as the occasion demands, if the Interpreter has a mind to be
understood, and to gain that Point in the Minds of his Hearers, as he whose
Interpreter he is desires he should. Nay sometimes though we increase or
diminish the number of words, yet the same Notion cannot be expressed in two
Languages, by reason of the Diversity of the Idiom. An infinite number of Words
and Expressions, whether Figurative or proper, are so peculiar to their own
Tongues, that they can by no means be transfused into another, without a long
and troublesome Circumlocution, which cannot be inserted into a Translation.

From hence it is easy to conclude, That no Translation can be in all Respects
complete, that is to say, such a Translation, that after the perusing of it,
the Reader shall think the very same things, and be affected after the same
manner, as if he understood the Language out of which the Version was made, and
was able to draw for himself out of the Original Fountain. And as this holds
certainly true in all Languages in the World, so it is most sensibly perceived
in the Latin Translations of the Hebrew Books, by reason of the vast
Disagreement between the Hebrew and Latin Tongues, as we shall more fully
demonstrate below. We know indeed that the ancient Jews and Christians, who
were ignorant of the Hebrew Tongue, thought the Greek Version of the Old
Testament, but especially that of the Pentateuch, commonly said to be done by
the LXX Interpreters, to be the most absolute thing in its kind that ever was,
(...), etc. Whether the Chaldeans learn the Greek Tongue, or the Greeks the
Chaldean Tongue, and light upon both Scriptures, the Chaldean, and that into
which it is translated, they admire and adore them as Sisters, or rather as one
and the same both in words and things; not content to call them Interpreters,
but Prophets, and Revealers of heavenly things, that happily expressed the
genuine Thoughts of Moses with a most pure Spirit. These are Philo's words in
his Book de Vita Mosis, which we could heartily wish were as true as they are
remote from Truth. We should then have the best and surest Interpreters of
Moses, and the exemplar of a perfect Translation, which they were very far from
obliging the World with.

But since it is evident that, what Philo pretends was done by the LXX
Interpreters, is impossible to be performed, by reason of the great difference
of Languages, as it has been already observed, we did not therefore attempt to
translate the Old Testament, because we hoped that those who were only well
skilled in Latin, might be able, after the reading of our Translation, to reach
the meaning of the Prophets, as well as those that understand Hebrew, and hear
them speak in their own Native Tongue; we thought 'twas enough to aspire
toward it, as far as the most different Idioms of the two Languages would give
us leave; and since without taking too great a liberty, we could not bend the
Hebrew Phrase to the Genius of the Latin Tongue, we often expressed the
Hebraisms Word for Word, especially such as the Christian World has been long
accustomed to, or whenever we did not certainly understand the meaning of any
place. Of which more hereafter.

But because the Hebrew Phrases, and manner of Expression, being different from
all others, would give a great deal of Trouble to those that are only
acquainted with Latin, we have added a plain Paraphrase more suited to the
nature of that Tongue; by the reading of which, if they cannot attain to the
very words of Moses, yet since we have in the same order expressed that in
Latin, which Moses did in Hebrew, they will in some measure comprehend his
Sense, and not as I imagine, deviate much from the true meaning of the Text. By
this means what we were not able to compass by one single Version, perhaps we
may perform by the help of the Paraphrase.

But after all, we thought we should not fully satisfy the Curiosity, if not
of the most Learned, yet of those who were not altogether Strangers to Hebrew,
if we did not in our Annotations explain the Hebraisms, Opinions, Customs,
Rites, the Allusions to them, and the nature of places, as far as we could
arrive to the Knowledge of them, and give an account of our whole Translation
and Paraphrase. Thus in our Paraphrase we have in a few words shown what our
Opinion was; and in our Annotations more at large why we were of that Opinion:
Nevertheless there is something in the Paraphrase, which is not always to be
found in our Annotations; for in the former, the Reader will discover the
Connection and Series of the whole Oration, which for brevity sake we could not
always attend in our Comments. Besides we have observed both by our own and the
Experience of others, that especially in difficult Books, notwithstanding the
Annotations of Learned Men upon every word, the Connection was very often
obscure, so that though all the words were well enough understood, yet the
Force and Order of the reasoning did not appear. Therefore we thought our
selves obliged to obviate this Inconvenience by making a continued Paraphrase,
after the Example of several judicious As the Learned Publishers of the Books
in usum Delphini have generally done.
Authors. Which Conduct, if it does not seem altogether so necessary in
Historical Writings, as some who have not duly considered the Matter may
imagine; yet the great Usefulness of it will at least appear in the Hagiographi
as they are called, and the Books of the Prophets. However I dare without
Vanity affirm, that several, who after they have read the Translation, think
they understand the Series of the Oration well enough, will, if they cast their
Eyes on our Paraphrase, even in the Historical Books, confess that they missed
several things, which they fansied they understood very well. But I had rather
the Reader should be convinced of this Truth, by the perusal of our Work, than
by our own Boasting.

In our Annotations we have only endeavored to open and illustrate that which
is called the Grammatical, and by the Schoolmen the Literal Sense. We have
there laid down no Theological or Theoretical, no Moral or Practical
Conclusions, as well because it would have too much swelled the bulk of the
Work, as because after the Grammatical Sense is once fully understood, it is the
easiest matter in the World to find out the Theoretical or Practical Doctrines,
especially to those that have read any Systems of Divinity or Morality. We have
also meddled with no Theological Controversies, because it was not our
Intention to gratify this or that Party, but (what all good Christians ought
to agree in) the lovers of the Holy Scriptures and of the Truth. As for those
Persons that take a delight to know these Squabbles, which it were better for
the Interest of Mankind that they were extinguished, they may have Books and
Comments more than enough, written merely to gratify a Faction, and these they
may turn over at their leisure.

Perhaps some People will censure me, that I have not handled every thing more
like a Divine, but let them know, whoever they be, that I purposely left that
Province, to be managed by their sublimer Wits. We might indeed be justly
blamed, if we omitted any thing we promised to perform, but since it was never
in our Thoughts, as we have solemnly affirmed, to retail Theological Dogma's,
it would be hard measure to condemn us for what we never promised. Nay, they
have our leave to despise these our Performances in comparison of Theological
and abstruser Contemplations. We'll not disown, if they please, that we did not
penetrate into the obscure meaning of the Holy Writers, that lurks under the
Cortex Grammaticus. Let us be thought to understand no more in the Sacred Books
of the Hebrews, than the Authors were willing the People should understand,
which Antonius in Cicero, speaking of the Grecian Learning, frankly owns of
himself. If we have been able to attain but to this small Pittance every where,
we shall mightily congratulate our selves, and others of vulgar Understanding,
to whose Apprehension this was suited.

But as we had often occasion to doubt, whether our Conjectures were right, and
could not make out the meaning clear enough by the help of Grammar and
Criticism alone, or else several meanings of equal Probability offered
themselves: The Reader may observe, that both in our Paraphrase and Commentary,
we use a doubtful and no Dogmatical Style, and perhaps he will there discover
frequenter Reasons for suspending his Opinion, than in most Writings of this
nature. But since every Man Believes and Doubts for himself, I must inform
those Learned Gentlemen that have a greater insight in these Matters, that I
writ for my self, and such as stand upon the same level, and may they hug
themselves with the sweet Contemplation, that they know more than their
Neighbors. Least we should betray any one into Mistakes, we made a scruple to
assert some things positively, when neither by the assistance of others, nor by
our own Endeavors, we were able to fix any certain Judgment: However it does
not follow, that People do not invent, because they do not affirm. As we vastly
disagree from the Opinion of those Persons, who believe that nothing can be
made out in Scripture, with the help of Grammar alone, unless Tradition comes
in for a share; so we do not believe that it can explain and clear every thing:
We are sure we have found it so. Now where the matter was not evident beyond
all possibility of Dispute, we have taken care to restrain all rash
Determinations, which would be an unpardonable Imposition on the World, if we
should affirm things false, or things unknown; besides that, nothing can be
more Scandalous, than to let our Approbation run before our Knowledge.

III. So much we thought our selves obliged to say, concerning our Manner of
Interpreting in general, now we shall proceed to lay before our Reader the
Difficulties that gave us no little Pain, when we first began to set Pen to
Paper. If we rendered word for word, it was apparent that the Version would
become unserviceable to those that were unacquainted with Hebrew, for whose use
it was principally intended: For it had been utterly impossible for them to
understand it, unless they perpetually consulted the Comments, where
nevertheless many Grammatical Criticisms of small importance are omitted: And
frequently too, those that are unskillful in Hebraisms, would have wrested them
in a wrong Sense. And now, if to avoid these Inconveniences, we had followed a
different Conduct, allowing our selves too great a Latitude; it was to be
feared, lest in obscure places we might impose our own Conjectures upon the
Reader, instead of the meaning of the Sacred Writers. I know 'twill be replied
to all this, That a middle way is then to be observed, whereby the Translation
shall neither be made so servile and close as to become obscure, and mis-lead
those that are only skilled in Latin, nor too lax or redundant, so as to show
the Interpreter rather than the Writer himself. But so severe an Undertaking is
much harder to be well performed, than it is easy to talk of it, as we shall
show by a few Examples.

It Is a frequent Hebraism, And he lift up his Eyes and saw: Et sustulit oculos,
and vidit. See Genesis 13.10. and 18.2. and 22.4, 13. and 24.62. and 31.10, 12.
and 37.25. and 39.7. and 43.28. This Phrase with the Hebrews, as it appears by
the abovementioned places, signifies to look round about one, to see things at
hand, and remote, and the like. We frequently meet with it in the other Books
of the Old Testament in the same Sense; so that there is no room left to doubt
of its Signification. Now the Latins have the same Phrase, but then it is in a
different meaning. Those that are afraid and ashamed, we use to say, dare not
oculos attollere; and on the other hand, those People, tollunt oculos, that are
possessed with no Apprehensions, as it were easy to prove by several
Instances. Therefore this Hebraism we saw, was not to be verbally translated.

There is a like Expression, Chap. 29.1. Et sustulit Jacobus pedes. And Jacob
lift up his feet, and went into the Eastern Country. Now who could make any
thing of tollere pedes? The Latins indeed say, Efferre, infer, far pedem,
but in another Sense.

The Reader must be forced to own, that these Hebraisms were so to be rendered
in the Translation, as to have Latin Phrases substituted in their room. But
there are other Hebraisms too, no less frequent, that afford us a juster
occasion of doubting. The Hebrews often use to subjoyn an Infinitive to any
other Mood or Tense of the same Verb, as dying thou shall die, seeing I saw;
and innumerable others that occurr in all the Hebrew Writers. If you translate
it verbatim into Latin, a Reader that only understands that Language, will ask
you what is the meaning of that Phrase, or whether it is a peculiar Emphasis of
the Hebrew Tongue or not? If you neglect the Hebraism, and omit the Infinitive,
those that have taken some pains about that Language, will complain that here is
a notable Emphasis lost. Therefore let a Man manage himself as carefully as he
can, yet he will lie under a necessity of displeasing one or other. I know
indeed that some of the later Interpreters, instead of the Infinitive, which
the Latin will not bear, use some Adverb or other, to express the Emphasis
which they imagine to lie concealed under this Phrase, as Genesis 2.17. Instead of
moriendo morieris, they have utique morieris; and Exodus 3.7. where we find
videndo vidi, they turn it probe vidi. But though we should grant there is some
mighty force in this Hebrew Phrase, if it can at any time be expressed, as in
the latter Example, I would desire to know what is the meaning of utique
morieris? Sometimes too they use the trusty Adverb omnino, as Exodus 21.20.
Omnino vindicator, 22. Omnino mulctator, 28. Omnino lapidator, etc. Which
Phrases after all are not perspicuous to Latin Ears. Now for our part, we
thought it much better to leave the Infinitive wholly out, either because it
cannot be expressed in Latin, or because it is not Emphatical, but only an usual
Form in the Hebrew Law, like which there are abundance in the Roman Law that
are altogether redundant. Consult the above cited Chapter of Exodus, and our
Thou shall surely die, as we render it; but in the Original it is, dying thou
shall die. Upon this place our Author observes, that the Hebrews frequently
join a Verb with the Infinitive or with a Verbal, but especially in their Laws,
rather to conform with the Custom of their Language, than to denote any
Emphasis. Abimelech threatens, Genesis 26.11. that whoever touches Isaac or his
Wife, shall die the death. So likewise among the Greeks, but chiefly the
atticks, we see that Nouns of the same Signification are frequently joined to
Verbs, as (...). And sometimes among the Latins we meet with vitam vivere, and
several Expressions of the like nature, where no Grammarian ever dreamt that a
particular stress is to be laid upon the words, but continues our Author, In
sacris haud (...) acutiores, quam opus est, sumus.
Annotations on Genesis 2.17.

Sometimes we meet with words that have none of the same Efficacy in other
Languages to match them, such as Tholedoth, Generation; for amongst the Latins,
Generatio scarce signifies any thing else but the Action of getting, or the
manner how Animals are generated; and sometimes perhaps the same as Aetas, or
(...): But with the Jews it does not only signify this, but denotes Original,
Ancestors, and Posterity. If you are minded to gratify a Latin Reader, and
tell him what Generation signifies amongst the Hebrews, you must use a
long-winded Periphrasis, which a simple Translation will never endure.

We frequently meet with the word Phakad in the Holy Scriptures, which uses to
be translated visitare, to visit, and yet that is not the meaning of it as we
have The Hebrew word properly signifies curam gerere, to take care of, and is
taken in a twofold Sense, for sometimes it signifies the care of a Friend, and
sometimes that of a Revenger. He that turned the Septuagint Version into Latin
before St. Jerome's time, has translated several places of it barbarously and
unskillfully, which St. Jerome, by reason it was received in the Latin Churches,
did not think fit to change. Hence it comes to pass, that abundance of
barbarous, or at least improper words, have crept into our Lexicons and Modern
Versions.
observed upon Genesis 21.1. The Greeks turn it (...), etc. Nor does this word
signify different things in respect of the various Conjugations, but even in
the Conjugation Kal, it sometimes signifies a Kindness, and sometimes a
Punishment: A Kindness in the abovementioned place of Genesis, and a
Punishment in Exodus 20.5. Nor does any other Language, as I know of, afford us
a word, resembling this in signification, which may be taken both ways: But
still it is to be translated, and it is incredible what trouble these and such
other words give the Interpreter. We have translated it Genesis 21.1. Curam
gerere, not that it pleased us, but beccause we could think of nothing better.
If we had turned it, The Lord, as he said, visited Sarah. Jehovah, quemadmodum
dixerat, Saram visitavit, a Latin Reader would have understood nothing else by
it, but that an Angel visited Sarah in the name of God, as the year before
Moses tells us three Angels had done the like, Chap. 18.

Since these, and innumerable Idioms of the like nature, are every where to be
found in the Sacred Volumes, an Interpreter must take extraordinary Pains to
discharge his Duty Faithfully and Modestly, unless he would have his Fidelity
called in question, and his Boldness censured. We own indeed, it is not so great
a Fatigue to translate now, after so many great Men whose Translations we have,
as the first Interpreters to their Cost found it. It Is undoubtedly true, that
both the Ancient and Modern Translations are mighty helps to us: Far be it from
us who have found by Experience, how great a Task they sustained, to detract
from the Praises of these deserving Men, or to deny the great Service they have
done the World, by their endeavors to illustrate the Scriptures. Nay, we are
sensible, that if they had not carried the Torch before us, we had not been
able to reach so far, as even those that have performed the worst in this kind
have done. But if we may be allowed to speak the truth freely, the better part
of the Ancients either slavishly followed the Track, or else digressed too far
from it; and translated the Hebraisms either with too servile a Superstition,
or too bold a Freedom; nor was it a much less trouble to choose the best out of
their several Versions, than to see whether we could not find out a better of
our own. Generally speaking. It was much easier to find what to censure, than
what to follow. To prevent being imposed upon by the Authority of others, every
thing was to be carefully weighed after the same manner, as if we had been the
first that undertook such a Work; otherwise we had relied on the Credit of
other People, and neither satisfied the World nor our selves. Now what expense
of Time and Pains it requires to perform all this, only those are able to
judge, who have attempted something of the like nature, for others can never
imagine it.

IV. Nevertheless, so many Hardships and Difficulties were to be overcome, to
attain to a perfect Translation, such as we had conceived an Idea of in our
Mind; but if we could not reach that height, we must be content to come as
near it as possibly we could. Therefore we proposed to our selves constantly to
follow a middle way, that is, neither to render those places that were obvious
enough in the Original, obscure with the Hebraisms, nor out of too nice an
Affection of writing Latin, to indulge our selves in too bold a Version.

But this, you will say, a thousand People have threatened to do, many years
before you were born, and yet we do not rest satisfied with their Performances;
Do you think then that you shall be able to answer our Expectations? No, I am
not so blinded with Self-love as to imagine any such thing; but since the
Condition of Humane Affairs is such, that nothing is perfect in all Respects,
and nothing pleases all alike, it is sufficient if I do not incurr the
Displeasure of all, and if my Attempt does not lagg behind the Endeavors of
others.

Cicero formerly translated the noblest Orations, of two of the most Eloquent
Men that Athens ever bred, Aeschines and Demosthenes, one against another;
neither did he literally translate them like an Interpreter, as he tells us
himself, for the Translations are not extant, but like an Orator, giving them
all the Spirit, and Life, and beautiful turns of the Latin Tongue. As this was
impracticable in a literal Version, he had a greater Respect to the Sense than
the Expressions; for he did not think himself obliged to tell over all his
Authors words to the Reader, but to give him them in weight. Now since this was
not to be done in too strict a Translation of the Holy Books, we endeavored to
reach it in a looser Paraphrase, that so those Persons that are not delighted
with the Barbarousness of a Translation, or do not understand Hebraisms, may
have somewhat to read and understand. But perhaps we have departed farther from
our Original than Cicero did from his, because the Hebrew Language differs more
from the Latin, than the Athenian way of Writing did from the Roman.

It Is true, in our Version we have followed the Hebrew closer than the Purity
of the Latin will allow us; but since it could not be avoided, we hope we shall
make our Reader some amends by our Paraphrase. Therefore though it is the
confessed Genius of the Latin Tongue, to love. Perspicuity more than the Hebrew
does; nay on the contrary, endeavors to avoid all Obscurity as much as it can;
we acknowledge our Translation to be somewhat Obscure, but as we are used to
commend Pictures not for showing us a handsome Face, but for representing Nature
to the Life, so a Translation, where the Language of the Original is clear,
ought to be clear, and where it is obscure, ought to be obscure. Now we mean
here by obscure, not those things that are obscure to the ignorant in Hebrew,
for then most of the Scripture Expressions would be obscure; but those that are
not sufficiently understood, even by such as are tolerably versed in that
Language. On the other hand, by the word clear, we do not only mean those
things which are obvious to all Understandings, not excluding those of the
duller sort, but which give no manner of Difficulty to the Skillful in that
Language, or may be so expounded, as to leave no Doubt at all in the Minds of
the Learned.

V. Now that we might be able to observe this Method through the whole Work, we
laid it down for an unalterable Law in translating the Hebraisms, which so
often occur: 1. That all the clear Hebraisms, which would bear a Translation,
should be translated. 2. If any of them could not well be rendered into Latin,
yet if our Ears were accustomed to them, they should be literally translated.
3. That all obscure Hebraisms should be retained. Which it will not be amiss to
illustrate by a few Examples.


Nothing is more common in Scripture, than Speeches and Dialogisms that are
ushered in by the Verb Vaijomer, and dixit, or the Gerund Lemor, dicendo: Now
it is evident that the former may be fully and pertinently expressed by the
Latin word inquit, the latter by his verbis, and yet the Interpreters have
generally forborne to use them; as if this, forsooth, had been too great a
Liberty to take. Now this runs through all the Bible, so that you may find an
infinite number of Sentences with these words, and dixit, and he said. So in
Genesis 3.1. And he said to the Woman, yea has, etc. 2 And the Woman said unto
the Serpent, we may eat, etc. 4. And the Serpent said unto the Woman, etc. 9.
And he said unto him, where art thou? 10. And he said, I heard thy Voice, etc.
11. And he said, who told thee? etc. 12. And the Man said, the Woman, etc. 13.
And the Lord God said unto the Woman, etc. 14. And the Lord God said unto the
Serpent, etc. 16. To the Woman he said, etc. 17. And unto Adam he said. But why
we should servilely be confined to the order of the Hebrew words, as if there
was something extraordinary in them, we saw no reason; and the comparing of our
Version with the rest will show, which of us has expressed himself most
agreeably to the Genius of the Latin Tongue. So Chap. 8.15. And God spoke unto
Noah, saying, Et loquutus esi Jehova ad Noach, dicendo, or dicens, is indeed
exactly conformable to the Hebrew words, but does not express the meaning, any
better than Alloquutus est Noachum Deus, his verbis. It Is certain that many of
the Interpreters, by their obscure Diligence, have made their Translations so
insupportable, that they are not to be read without Contempt. But let not the
Reader imagine, that this is occasioned by the over great care they took to
render even the least Particles of Scripture as far as 'twas possible; for if
this Scruple had possessed them, they had never translated the obscure places
with so much boldness, as if it were not an invidious labor, we could easily
show.

It Is a common Hebraism to call ones name, vocare nomen alicujus, instead of
nomen imponere, To give one the name of. As in Chap. 5.29. (and it is often in
the Book of Genesis alone) And she called his name Noah, Et vocavit nomen ejus
Noach, that is, Ei Noacho nomen indidit, Noachum cum nomine appellavit. There Is
not the least reason in the World to doubt but it is so, and yet after the
vulgar Interpreter's Example, several since have translated it Vocavit nomen
ejus Noah, which is obscure and barbarous, when the Hebrew Phrase is plain
enough.

We frequently meet in the beginning of a Narration, Et fuit, And it came to
pass, in the Hebrew. As Chap. 6.1. Et fuit, cum caepit homo multiplicari, And
it came to pass, when Men began to multiply, etc. which is the same in effect
with ours, Cum in terris augeri coepissent, as also the vulgar has translated
it. But the Tigurine Version, and others have it barbarously, Et factum est,
cum caepissent homines multiplicari.

Several Interpreters have not only Superstitiously every where translated word
for word, but have preserved the very Situation of the Hebrew words, and the
Construction as far as they could conveniently, nay and farther too, but in
this matter, we must own that we had a greater regard to the Latin than the
Hebrew. We saw that a world of Hebraisms had in spite of us crept into our
Translation; nor was it necessary, since 'twas of no advantage to the Reader,
to place the Latin words after the Hebrew manner, where it was plain, that
though the Order was inverted, yet the Sense was not. Arias Montanus who
published the Interlineary Translation, as they call it, was obliged to
preserve the Order, and as far as he was able, even the very number of the
words: But those that published their Version apart from the Original, were not
obliged in my opinion to be at so great an Expense to write barbarously. I will
produce one instance to explain my meaning, The Tigurines, whose Translation is
otherwise not to be despised, have thus rendered the 15, 16, 17 Verses of Gen 8.
Loquutus est autem Deus ad Noah, dicens, Egredere ex arca, tu and uxor tua,
filii tui, and uxores filiorum tuorum tecum. Cuncta animantia quae tecum sunt,
ex omni carne, tam in volatili, quam in jumento, tum etiam omni reptili quod
reptat, educ tecum, and repant in terra, fructum edant, atque augescant. But we
have done it thus. Tum allocutus est Noachum Deus, his verbis, Egredere ex arca
tu, unaque tecum uxor tua, filii ^ui, atque little conjuges. Omnem etiam
bestiam, quae tecum est, ex omni carne, inter volucres, inter pecudes, atque
inter omnia reptilia quae in terris repunt, una educito, reptentque in terra,
and in ea crescant, ac multiplicentur. There is nothing in the Hebrew words,
which ours do not comprehend; nor has the Superstitious Nicety of the
Tigurines, unless I am mistaken, performed more. But we do not cite this, or
any other places, because they have something remarkable in them, but because
we happened to meet with them first. To conclude, All the Translations of the
Old Testament we ever saw, are liable to the same Fault, excepting that of Seb.
Castellio, which is somewhat too bold.

It Is by no means our Intention to blame those Persons, who in their
Translations of the Bible, have thought fit to despise all the Rules of
Rhetoric, as to their Periods; for since the Hebrews have shorter turns of
their Sentences, and are not subject to the same Laws as the Greeks and Latins
are, there would be a wretched Confusion indeed, if their Style were to be
suited to the Precepts of Rhetoric, which yet Castellio does too often.
However I see no cause why we that speak Latin, should so Scrupulously adhere
to the Hebrew order.

There are other Hebraisms, as we observed before, the Signification of which
is no less known, and yet we are scarce able to translate them into Latin,
without a long Circumlocution; but since our Ears are already accustomed to
some of them, we use them as the Latins formerly did several Greek words which
their Language wanted; and besides they have been long ago naturalized, and
made Free of the Church by the Latin Fathers. Some few Examples of them we'll
lay before the Reader, as we did of the former.

Thus Genesis Chap. 5.22, 24. and Chap. 6.9. Moses has used incedere cum Deo,
to walk with God, instead of that which in Latin we say, Sancte ac pie vivere.
However the Metaphor could not be changed, without assuming too great a
Liberty, for who can endure Castellio's translating it, Ad dei voluntatem vitam
agere, ex dei voluntate sese gerere?

Chap. 6.9. Noah is said to be Vir justus ac integer in generationibus suis: A
Just Man, and perfect in his Generations. And Chap. 7.1. it is in ea
generatione; in that Generation, viz. that which was destroyed in the Deluge.
Every Body sees it is all the same thing as if Moses had said, that Noah was the
only righteous Person among the Men of that Age; Castellio has translated it
Saeculum and Aetas, the latter of which is tolerable, but the former cannot be
endured. For what Man that has made but a small progress in Hebrew, reading
this Translation, would not believe that the Hebrews had a word which exactly
answered Saeculum, when indeed they have not.

Of the same nature is Chap. 6.8. Gratiam invenire, to find Favor: Which
Phrase has several Significations, and the Latin Tongue affords us no one
single Expression that comes up to the full extent of it. Sometimes where the
Sense would bear it, we have translated it, Si qua mihi est apud te gratia, for
Si inveni gratiam in oculis tuis, as Chap. 18.3. but this was not to be done
always. Castellio, Chap. 6.8. instead of that which Moses expresses by Noachus
apud deum gratiam invenit, inverts the Phrase, and turns it, Noae fuit
propitius. Chap. 18.3. Si vis mihi gratissimum facere. Chap. 19.19. Tanto me
obstringis beneficio: In all which he has not once hit the force of the
Hebraism, though he takes so large a Scope.

We find in the same Chapter v. 19. a common Hebraism, by which omne animal is
called omnis caro, and for which Castellio uses omnia corpora; but besides
that, it is too remote from the Hebrew word, Caro is so often taken in that
Sense, both in the Scripture, and the Ecclesiastical Writers, that it is much
better to retain it, than interpret it by another.

Thus in the first Verse of Chap. 11. we read, Cum universa terra labii unius
eorundemque verborum esset: The Phrases are Hebrew, but we durst not change
them in the Latin, both because we could not light upon Expressions proper to
match them, as also because Learned Men are not agreed about their meaning, as
we have See Dissertation VI.
observed about that place. Castellio has it thus, Cum autem universus terrarum
orbis eodem sermon atque oratione uteretur.

The same Reason, supported by the Frequency of the Phrase, prevailed with us
to retain the Hebraism Anima mea, my Soul, instead of ego. Say, I pray thee,
says Abraham to his Wife, Chap. 12.13. thou art my Sister, that it may be well
with me for thy sake, and my Soul shall live because of thee. Castellio
translates it, Vt tua causa atque opera meae utilitati, salutique consulatur.
The same Expression is to be found often in Homer, which all the Interpreters
have literally translated.

Many more Hebraisms, we must confess, are to be found in our Translation,
which because they were either obscure, or of a doubtful Signification, we
translated literally, lest we should obtrude our own private Conjecture upon
the Reader, for the true meaning of the Sacred Writers. Sometimes too we have
retained even the words, when we saw the Learned disputed about the
Signification of them with doubtful Success; but a few Examples will sooner
show whether we did well in this, than a long Harangue.

Therefore Chap. 6.14. we turned Arcam facies nidis instructam, rather than
mansiunculis after St. Jerome or Cellis, because, though several rooms seem to
be understood, in which the Creatures were lodged separately, yet for all we
know Moses may mean a Floor, or something else that is called Kinnim. Castellio
borrows the word Loculata out of Varro, who calls a Fish Pond so, where the
Fish are kept in several Chests, which suits not ill with this place, though we
durst not follow him.

What seems to be the meaning of Servus Servorum, Genesis 9.25. we have shown in
our As in a numerous Family there are several sorts of Servants, so some of
them are in a more honorable Post than others, and command those below them,
who may therefore be said to be Servants of Servants. But since this is the
earliest mention we find of Servitude, it may not be amiss to examine the Rise
of it. So long as Men were but few in number, and mindful of their common
original lived together; there seems to have been no such thing as a Slave or
Servant in the World; for the two causes of Servitude, Poverty and Force, were
wanting. But upon the Dispersion of Mankind into abundance of Colonies, several
that were not able to maintain themselves without a dependence upon others,
parted with their Liberty merely to be sustained. After the Trade of War became
fashionable, many that were taken Prisoners by the Enemy, and had their Lives
spared, were by Force reduced to the State of Slaves, partly that they might
not be in a Capacity to hurt them for the future, and partly that they might
not be kept Gratis; and the Vernae, that is, the Sons of these, were, by the
Misfortune of their Birth, subjected to the same Condition.
Annotations upon that place. It may be a Hebraism like Sanctum Sanctorum,
Canticum Canticorum, to denote the vilest sort of Slave, and it may without a
Hebraism too be said Servus Servorum. Nay, Castellio has not altered these
words, which is somewhat strange, considering how much he indulges himself all
along in his beloved Periphrases.

We have In thee all Nations of the Earth shall be blessed. The meaning of
which place, according to our Author, is this. Whenever thy Name or Example is
cited, most of the Eastern Nations shall use the following Form of Benediction,
May God bless thee as he blessed Abraham. Thus Genesis 48.20. In thee shall Israel
bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh.
shown, Chap. 12.3. what is the meaning of in aliquo been dicere, and our
Exposition seems to be well grounded, because it is agreeable to the Genius of
the Hebrew Language. But least those that interpret these words after a
different manner, should complain that they were robbed of a Text; as also
because otherwise we must have made use of too long a Periphrasis, we have
translated it word for word. Castellio has here translated as they would have
it, In te omnes beabuntur orbis regiones.

Chap. 6.4. we find this passage in Moses, There were Nephilim (we render it
Giants) in those days; where the word The Radix Naphal, from whence this word
is undoubtedly derived, not only signifies to fall, but to rush on after the
manner of Robbers; for which reason Aquila translated it (...), and Symmachus
(...).
Nephilim seems to import Robbers; but because it does not fully appear whether
such sort of People are meant in that place, we thought it advisable to retain
the Hebrew word. They that after the Septuagint and vulgar Translation have
translated it Giants, have indeed owned themselves to be of their Opinion, but
have brought no Arguments to prove it: And indeed, neither from the Story it
self, nor from the Signification of the word, are they able to bring one proof
that Giants are meant here. On the other hand, both the Story which relates
them to be Viros Fortes, and the word it self favor our Interpreation, yet for
all that we durst not insert it amongst Moses's words.

For the same reason we have not changed the word Shiloh, Chap 49.10. because
its Signification is unknown. Our See Dissertation XII.
Annotations upon that place have made it appear, that no one knows what is the
true meaning of it. However were we to choose our Opinion, we should incline to
follow the Translation of the Septuagint, because it is less Obnoxious to the
Calumny of the Jews, and cannot be pretended to carry the least Partiality in
Favor of the Christian System. Therefore in our Paraphrase we have taken the
same course with the LXX, but in the Version rather chose to make use of the
Hebrew word.

VI. But a much greater Difficulty we found it, to translate the Conjunctions
and Prepositions, by reason of the different meaning which each of them has in
the Holy Scriptures. For whereas the Latin Conjunctions and Prepositions have
not so large a Signification, the Ambiguity of them is so far restrained by the
structure of the Sentence, that they can only be taken in one Sense; but among
the Hebrews, who take but little notice of their Situation, one small Particle
has the Significations of the Latin ones. So that if we should sometimes use a
Latin Conjunction or Preposition, which generally answers that in the Hebrew,
our Translation would appear very uncouth to a Latin Ear; but if we use
another, we fix a determined Sense of our own, upon that which seems to be
doubtful in the Hebrew. Let us do what we can, we shall find it a difficult
matter to avoid these Inconveniences; nay I dare say, no Interpreter was ever
yet able to do it.

For instance, Vau supplies the place of all the Conjunctions, and if we may
believe Chr. Noldius, has seventy three Significations, the chief of which is
Copulative, like that of the Latin Conjunction Et. Nevertheless if it were
always translated like Et, it would not only be the most disagreeable thing in
the World to one that understands Latin, but nothing would be more obscure and
perplexed, since with the Latins it is not all one whether you say Et, or
whether you say Atque, Aut, Tamen, Certe, etc. Now if it so happens that the
place is doubtful, and the Conjunction Et cannot possibly be used, because it
would spoil the Sense in Latin, a Man must of necessity make use of another,
and so determine the meaning of that place, which before was doubtful.

Now in this, as well as several other Matters, we find it is impossible to make
a Translation of the Scripture, without a Man's interposing his own Sense
against his Will: Though it were to be wished that the Sacred Volumes could be
so translated, that our own Conjectures might not be read, instead of the
Divinely Inspired Author's meaning, whether obscure or clear. But this is
impracticable for the abovementioned Reasons; and therefore after we have done
all that we can, to explain the Sense of the Scripture as plainly as it is
possible, the World must either acquiesce in our Endeavors, or every one must
study Hebrew in his own defense, and take the best Method he can to satisfy
himself.

We have taken that care all along in our Translation, as very seldom to
interpose our own Judgment, where the place was somewhat doubtful; but it was
impossible to use this Caution every where. However we have faithfully set down
in our Annotations, what Conjunction or Preposition was read in the Hebrew
word. In the Hebrew it is and Noah, and he staid, but M. le Clerk has translated
it Noachus tamen, Expectavit tamen. But with our Author's leave, haec videntur
esse (...) notata.
Consult our Notes upon Genesis 6.8. Chap. 8.12. We have also observed, that
sometimes the true Signification of the Particles is wrested, where the
Translator did not clearly understand why the Sacred Writers have used them in
certain places. See our Comment upon Where agreeably to the Hebrew our Author
has translated it supra Firmamentum, St. Jerome, sub Firmamento, the LXX (...),
or juxta Firmamentum; the English, in the Firmament. But his Reasons are too
long to be set down.
Genesis 1.20. some have made no difficulty to use Latin Particles, not such as
exactly answer the Hebrew, but such as they would have used, if they had been
obliged to express the same things in Latin after their own manner; which
Conduct may throw both Translators and Readers into very shameful Mistakes. But
we, in the Translation of the Hebrew Particles, have never receded from the
most commonly received Signification of them, unless we were absolutely forced
to do it, although sometimes it was none of the most proper. For we are well
satisfied, that all Nations in the World do not connect their Sentences after
the same manner, and that we are not to introduce them using the same Thread of
Narration, if we design faithfully to Copy their different ways of Speaking. If
this had been duly considered by that Learned Author, who has obliged the World
with a laborious and useful Book, called, The Concordance of the Particles, he
had mightily lessened the Significations which he attributes to them, for very
often he minds nothing else, but how to substitute an agreeable, or a more
emphatical Latin Particle in the place of the Hebrew.

The same ingenious Person has observed, that these Particles are sometimes
redundant, and sometimes deficient, which he has evinced by several
unquestionable Examples, though some of them it is true may be called into
question. For as there are some places where it is apparent that they either
abound or ought to be supplied, so there are others where they give us no small
difficulty, which it is not in the power of every little Pretender to remove.
For instance, if in Genesis 19.26. where we have rendered it, And she became a
Pillar of Salt, we suppose the two Particles (...) and (...) to be wanting, as
they commonly are, then the Sense of that passage will be, And she became like
a Statue in a saltish Soil, which seems to be the genuine Sense of the words,
as we have observed in our Dissertation upon that subject. It Is undoubted that
(...) is to be understood Genesis 24.23. Chapter 38.11. and perhaps it is understood in
the abovementioned place rather than expressed, to avoid the harshness of the
Sound, which would happen there if the foregoing word terminated in (...). We
have likewise shown, upon Where Ishmael is said in the Original to be Onager
homo, instead of instar Onagri. So Job 11.12. Pullus Onagri nascitur homo,
instead of rudis instar Pulli Onagri.
Genesis 16.12. that (...) Similitudinis (as the Grammarians use to call it) is
frequently wanting. However, least we should forcibly seem to fasten our own
meaning upon Moses's words, we have rendered it verbatim as it is in the
Original. See a farther instance of an Ellipsis of the like nature In the
Hebrew it is, The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their Father;
where the Particle and is wanting after Nabor.
Genesis 31.53.

We have brought some As that of Levit. Et Postridie E T reliquiae ex to
comedentur. Where the Particle Et is certainly superfluous. See other Examples
in Chapter Noldius, where he handles this Particle, Numb. 74.
Examples upon Genesis 20.16. where Vau abounds, and if we did not know that it
was redundant, the meaning would be perplexed and obscure. It is manifestly
redundant, Genesis 22.4. Nay sometimes it abounds in the beginning of a Book, as
in the first Verse of the Prophet Jonah, And the Word of the Lord, etc. who for
all that is no more tacked to Obadiah, than Obadiah is to Amos. This occasioned
a certain Person to conclude absurdly, that all the Books of the Old Testament
were the Collections of one and the same Man, connected together after that
manner.

VII. To this may be added, their everlasting way of forming their Narrations,
by Preterperfect or Future Tenses joined together by the Conjunction Vau, which
gave us no small trouble. It Is very certain that no Emphasis is designed by it,
and that it may best be expressed by Latin Participles, or other Particles,
with which the Latins use to join the parts of their Sentences together, as all
Interpreters have done, although some of them have used this Liberty more
sparingly than others. However it is an eternal Drudgery in a strict
Translation, frequently to change the structure of the Phrase; nor indeed can
any thing excuse our so doing but mere Necessity. Therefore in the first
Chapter of Genesis we were often forced to omit the Conjunction, and exchange
it for the Latin Particles vero, autem, deinde, tum, enim, postea, dein,
quoque, etiam, at que, and suchlike. At other times we used Participles, as
the Reader will discover in abundance of places, if he comparts our Translation
with the Hebrew. For instance, the two and thirtieth Chapter is thus joined
together. 1. AND Jacob went -- AND they met him. 2. AND Jacob said -- AND he
called the name of the place -- 3. AND Jacob sent -- 4. AND he commanded them
-- 6 AND the Messengers returned -- 7. AND he was afraid -- AND was in distress
-- AND he divided -- 8. AND he said, etc.
Which would be insupportable in Latin.

There are several Versions of the Bible, especially into the Modern Languages,
which have all along preserved this Conjunction, as if it added some peculiar
Energy or Beauty to the Narration; but those that are acquainted with the
Genius of the Hebrew Tongue, can satisfy them of the contrary. In a plain
Narration indeed, this troublesome Conjunction may pretty well be born in some
other Tongues; but in an Argument or so, if it were used in French, it would
not only wound the Ears in a wonderful manner, but so fatally disturb the
Sense, that what would be clear in Hebrew, would be in French the most confused
Stuff imaginable.

However in this, as well as other things, too great a License is to be
avoided, least by omitting a Particle, or altering the structure of a Sentence,
we may happen to alter the Sense, and render the Narration indirect and
oblique. For by this means an unskillful Reader will imagine, that some things
are related en passant, while the Historian makes haste to go to others that
are more material. Thus according to our Translation, Moses begins the 32d
Chapter in these words, Jacobus iter suum perrexit, occurreruntque Angeli Dei,
quos cum vidit Jacobus, haec sunt ait Dei castra, eique loco Machanajim nomen
imposuit. By this manner of relating the Story, it is plain that the meeting of
the Angels is made a more remarkable Circumstance, than if we had rendered it
with Castellio, Jacobus iter suum perrexit, in quo cum ei Divini Angeli
occurrissent, ille eis visis ita dixit, hoc divinum agmen est. Itaque locum
inde Machanaim appellavit.

It was no small Perplexity to us in our Translation, that not only the
Beginning, Progress and Conclusion of the same thing, were expressed by Verbs
that were tacked together by the never-failing Conjunction Vau, but likewise by
one and the same Verb. Thus in the above cited Narration, and Jacob went, the
Hebrew word may be as well taken to signify the Beginning of a Journey, as the
Continuation of it. However we translated it in the latter Sense, as the
occasion there required.

VIII. We have already declared in the eighth Section of the former
Dissertation, that we have followed the Masoretick Copy in our Translation: But
although we call it Copy in the Singular Number, it may be called Copies, since
by this name we comprehend both the Readings in the Text, and those in the
Margin, which came from two several Books; unless we suppose that the Keri
proceeded from the received way of reading in the Synagogue of Tiberias by some
Oral Tradition, as it is called; and the Ketib to have been the Reading it self,
written in a Book of venerable Antiquity. However the matter was, as these two
Readings have been deservedly compared by the generality of Translators, so
that which seemed the best we justly preferred, and this is the conduct we
followed. Sometimes indeed the Keri affords a more convenient Reading than the
Ketib, but the latter very often is better than the former. But as I often
thought of this, and several other things of the like nature, I suspected that
the Rabbis, to inhance the value of their Trade, observed the same Conduct as
the Greek Rhetoricians were said to do, Who least the World should imagine they
knew but few things, invented abundance of strange Terms that were nothing to
the purpose, that their Art might have the Reputation of being more difficult
than really it was. However, we have all along followed the Masoretick way of
Pointing, except that with the generality of Interpreters we have not minded
the Accents, but only followed the Sense and the Structure of the words. We
shall not here repeat what several Learned Men have said upon this occasion.
Let the Reader only turn over the 23d Chapter of Buxtorf's Thesaurus, lib. 2.
where he treats of this Subject, and he will be satisfied that what I have
advanced concerning the Rabbis is true, and that these Masters affect an
abstruse unedifying Knowledge, and have clogged a Study, which otherwise would
be easy enough, with endless Difficulties of their own raising. The two first
words of Genesis sufficiently confute all that Learning.

Of greater moment is the distinction of Verses, as they are called, which
however Elias Levita a Jew, and several Christians, have demonstrated to have
been made by none of the Prophets. And indeed this distinction is not to be
found in the Manuscript Copies of the Old Interpreters, nor can be used in many
places, without maiming the Period, or dividing the Verb from what relates to
it, which is extremely ridiculous. Therefore though to comply with a received
Custom, and that the Citations might more easily be found o^^ we have
distinguished the Verses by Numbers, yet we have only had a regard to the Sense
in the manner of our Pointing; Sometimes the Period (if the parts of a Sentence
in the Latin Translation of an Hebrew Book may be called by that name) ends
with the Verse, and sometimes it is carried beyond it. Nay sometimes it begins
in the middle of a Verse, and sometimes it terminates with it, as seemed most
agreeable to the nature of the Latin Tongue.

The Reader will likewise find, both in our Translation and Paraphrase, two
other sorts of Divisions, which we must give him an account of. We have not
always followed the Chapters in the distinction of our Sections, although in
complaisance to the ancient Custom, we have marked them on the top of the Page,
and in the Margin, but we have divided the Argument into greater or lesser
Sections, according as the Matters of Fact happen to be connected. And this we
did upon the following Consideration, that both the whole Argument in one
Series, and our Annotations upon it, might be read in the same order, because
both the Divine Historian, and our Comments upon him, would by this means be
better understood. It Is certain, the Jews have their own Sections, plainly
different from our Chapters, which they follow in their public Readings in
their Synagogues.

Besides this, we have divided every Section into several Paragraphs, (to
borrow a Term of Art from the Lawyers) though somewhat of the longest, which we
supposed would contribute to the Perspicuity of the History, and be of great
Advantage to the Reader. For where the particular Reasonings, or several parts
of the Narration, are not continued as it were in the same breath with the
rest, but divided by certain Intervals, we better comprehend both the Parts and
Series of the Oration, and imprint it on our Memory, and if there be occasion,
recollect it in our Minds. This is the reason why the Grammarians in former
times, to distinguish the several parts of the Chorus's in their Tragedies, and
the Lawyers to distinguish the Heads of their Laws, made use of Paragraphs. And
therefore, though in the Manuscripts and in the Editions no distinctions of
this nature do appear, (for we do not mind the Jewish) yet we thought it a
propos to make use of them, as being clearly of opinion, that nothing ought to
be despised, which tends to Perspicuity, and the Convenience of the Reader.

Nor will any one, as we imagine, blame these our Divisions, as if they
contradicted what we so solemnly professed before, viz. That we would follow
the Copies of the Masorites. For though these Divisions are very serviceable to
Perspicuity and Order, yet they make not the least Alteration in the Reading or
Pronouncing of words, in which two respects we said we looked upon these Copies
to be the most correct of all.

We hope the Reader will not be displeased, that after the Example of several
Modern Interpreters, we have not written the Proper Names, as they are now
adays read by the Jews. Our Ears have been so long accustomed to them, that we
can scarce endure those that either speak or pronounce them otherwise; for who
with any Patience could hear a Fellow thunder out Chenahan, Jitschak, Jahacob,
Mosche, Jehoschubak, etc. as those names are pronounced by the Jews, according
to the roughness of their Language. There are also several words that were
otherwise read by the LXX Interpreters than they are by the Masorites, as
Jerusalem, not Jerusalaim; Nabuchodonosor, not Nebuchadnetsar, and suchlike.
Which of them pronounced the rightest, we shall not now enquire, for we do not
regard the thing it self, but only the Custom of the Christian Churches from
the Beginning.

But then we observed this Conduct, to set down the more celebrated and usual
Names after the Christian manner, and the less known and frequent after the
Jewish, because, generally speaking, they do not seem to be written true in the
Greek and Latin Books. Wherever we have neglected to do it, the Reader is to
impute it to our being too attentive upon the things themselves, and
consequently not able to mind the words, and not imagine that we did it on
purpose.

As for what regards the Letters, we have herein followed the Ancients, that is
to say, Beth has always the power of the Latin, B, Zain is pronounced like a Z,
Cheth as a X, which comes the nearest of any to the double Aspiration of the
Hebrew Letter, which in our Commentary we have expressed by a double H, where
we have observed how the Hebrew words are to be written; Teth like a T, Jod
like the J Consonant of the French, Caph like a X, Ain like an H, though it is
of a different sound, but we could not think of a better. Pe like the ph of the
Greeks; Tsaddi like Ts; Koph like K; Schin always after the same manner, that
is, as ch is pronounced by the French, sch by the Germans, sh by the English;
and lastly, Tau like the Greek th. We could give our Reasons for this way of
Pronunciation, if they would not take up too much room in this Dissertation.
But those that are not so well versed in these things, may consult Drusius's
old Hebrew Alphabet. But as we hinted before, in the more remarkable Names we
have had a greater regard to Custom, than to the power of the Letters, and at
other times thought it sufficient to make use of those Latin Letters that
nearest resembled them.

IX. Forasmuch as we have endeavored to translate, and write Annotations upon
the Sacred Volumes of the Hebrews, after so many Learned Men, we freely
acknowledge that we have all along made use of the Labors of other Writers,
and derived considerable Assistances from them. In the first place, we profess
that we have always consulted the Old and Modern Translations in all difficult
places, but so as never to give a blind assent to what they say, but especially
the Moderns. We weighed and examined every Word and Expression, if it contained
any Difficulty, with no less Care and Application than if no one had gone this
way before us, and therefore explained the Reasons of them which we knew to be
certainly so. Yet a vast difference ought to be made between the Ancient and
the later Versions, which we have accurately observed; for since, as we took
notice in the former Dissertation, the ancient Interpreters were able to know
the Significations of Words and Phrases from the use of the Languages then in
being, their very Authority is by no means to be despised, when it opposes no
Reasons deduced from Grammar. On the other hand, The Opinions of the Modern
Interpreters, unless they are supported by the Truth, ought to be little
regarded, because they had no other way to find out the Meaning of the
Scripture, but by long Study as well as we; and therefore are not to be
admitted, unless they give substantial Grounds for what they avouch. This is
the Reason why we seldom borrowed any Testimony from the new Translations,
because that after all the plausible Reasons they give for their particular
Versions; yet whether the Authority of their Translations goes for or against
us, it is of it self of no weight at all. However we would not be so
mis-understood as if we despised them, since we have frequently used them with
great Advantage on our side; but we thought our selves obliged to make this
open Confession, that the Reader might know once for all, why we allege their
Authority so seldom. Besides, all or most of their Versions could not be
compared, without too great a Fatigue to the Reader, and too tiresom a
Prolixity; nor censured, without incurring the Envy of several ill-disposed
Persons, which we would willingly avoid. Wherefore we thought it more advised,
to omit all the Modern Versions whatever, and only to take our Testimonies from
the Ancient, and to compare them one with another, though we are far from
pretending to give an accurate Collation of them. This would have proved too
tedious a Work, and indeed far different from our Design, who intended to find
out what the Sacred Writers meant, and not how often or how much the
Interpreters have deviated from their Sense.

We have likewise consulted the Annotations and Commentaries of several
Writers, but more especially have we read over a far greater number of Books,
that have occasionally treated of Sacred things, and explained several Passages
of Scripture. Out of all these, whatever seemed necessary, and to the purpose,
have we inserted into our Commentaries, and indeed we have generally cited the
names of the latter. But as for those who have professedly written upon the
Sacred Books, we have more seldom made use of their Names, because, as they may
be easily consulted, so large Collections out of their Books are in every
Bodies hands. Our principal Aim was, to set down those Observations, by which
we believed the Scriptures might be illustrated, and not to swell our Volume
with a Catalogue of Names, which have no Authority in things of this nature.
But as we said before, we have more frequently cited by name those that have
not writ a continued Commentary, as well out of Gratitude, because some of them
have given us much greater Helps than all the Commentators put together; as
also because we might give a short Abridgment of their Opinions; and it would
be no superfluous Labor to direct the Reader where he might find them
delivered more at large.

We have already, in part, explained the Design of our Commentary in the second
Section, however we shall add, That we have observed that choice in selecting
the Interpretations, as only to referr to those that seemed to be the most
probable of all, and lay down the Reasons that support them, omitting a
Confutation of the rest, except a very few upon the most difficult places, and
where they might be comprehended in a few words. It had been in our Opinion a
prodigious Work, and (to speak a bold Truth) of very little use, if we had been
obliged to cite the Opinions of all the Commentators, to have added their
several Reasons, to have particularly confuted what we thought improbable, and
to defend what we looked upon to be the best grounded. Such an Undertaking
would far exceed in bulk every thing that has yet been published upon the
Scripture, and would rather overwhelm the Reader than help him. Indeed those
that attempt to explain the Bible, would be very unhappy Persons, if they were
forced to set down all the Conjectures of other Men, for no other reason, but
merely because they writ before them. Nay, the Readers would be in a more
miserable Condition, if they were not allowed to pass their Judgment upon the
meaning of the Scripture, unless they heard and weighed the Opinions of all.
Both of them must in their own defense lay aside all Examination of the Holy
Volumes, since the Life of a Patriarch would not be long enough to go through
so infinite a Labor. And therefore we have made use of our own Judgment in our
choice of the Interpretations which we produce and examine in the doubtful
places, and yet we would have no one infer from hence, that we despised all
the rest, which either are already made public, or lie concealed in the
Cabinets of the Learned; for although out of an Infirmity common to all
Mankind, and even through our own fault, we own we may err, yet it may easily
happen, that while a Man is distracted with multiplicity of Thoughts, many
things may escape him, and that several excellent Interpretations may be out
abroad in the World, which he never so much as heard of.

How unwilling we are to neglect any probable Interpretation, where the Sense
is doubtful, the Reader will soon be convinced, if he observes how often we
refrain our hand, which we have already hinted, and need not here repeat.

X. Since the Hebrew Tongue, such as it has come down to us, is contained in
the small Volume of the Old Testament, wherein are several Words and Phrases
that occurr but once, or seldom, and are not sufficiently cleared by the Sense
of the places, we often thought it convenient to borrow assistance from the
neighboring Languages, as we saw had been practiced by Men of the greatest
Learning before us with general Approbation. If out of all the Latin Authors,
we had only Livy's Works for instance now remaining, I make no question but
that a world of obscure Passages in him, might be happily explained by the
Italian, Spanish and French Languages; for there are still remaining in those
Tongues, many Roots and Derivatives from an infinite number of Latin words,
which might be of great use to illustrate that Historian; and therefore several
Persons of the first Rank, not without good reason, have successfully borrowed
helps from the other Oriental Languages, to prove which Assertion Monsieur
Bochart alone will furnish us with several Examples, and the Reader may farther
satisfy himself by consulting our own Annotations.

And yet this assistance is not unadvisedly, or without warrantable grounds to
be used, for it frequently happens, even in Languages which are derived from
the same Stock, that words of a like sound have yet a very different
Signification. For instance, Abbacinare in Italian, signifies to make blind;
Bassiner in French, to wash; Abbellare in Italian, to please; Embellir in
French, to adorn; Abbronzare in Italian, to dry; Bronzer in French, to blacken.
They that have leisure to turn over any Lexicon, and compare the two Tongues,
will meet with an infinite number of the like instances. And this very thing,
even in the Interpretation of Latin Authors, has often deceived those Persons
whose Mother-Tongues were derived from the Latin, while the words thus derived
from the Latin, bear a quite different Signification. So while the Latins, by
the word exterminare, mean ejicere terminis, to turn one out of his Country;
the Italians by esterminare, and the French by exterminer, understand to
destroy by killing, which are very different. Now if any Frenchman or Italian
were to read in Cicero, Orat. pro L. Flacco, that by the Valor of P. Valerius
Publicola, the Kings were exterminati, i.e. turned out, unless he were a Man of
Learning above the common sort, he would be apt to imagine, it might be
translated Verbatim as it is used in their own Language; whereas Cicero does by
no means say, that the Kings were killed, but only turned out by Valerius. Nay,
that most Learned Man, Des. Heraldus, in his Annotations upon Arnobius, lib. 1.
p. 2. was of Opinion, that a certain place of that Writer was faulty, because
he understood the word as it is used in the French Tongue, Exterminati sumus
dum long, says Arnobius, examina maerorum tanta mortalium sunt importata
saeculis. His meaning is, That ever since the Christians leaving the Borders of
Judea, were spread all over the Roman Empire, numberless Calamities, if we may
believe the Pagans, afflicted the whole World. An infinite number of such
Examples may be found, by those that will examine the Matter curiously.

And therefore the Hebrew words can only then be explained by the neighboring
Languages, where the Sense and Circumstance of places will naturally lead an
Interpreter to them, for the Affinity of Sound and Signification are not
sufficient. Nay, the desire of extolling the mighty use of the Oriental
Languages, which they learned with incredible Toil and Industry, seems
naturally to have led some Learned men upon Thus some Learned Men have derived
the word Schammim, Heavens, from an Arabic word Samaa, or Samisa, or Samava,
i. e. high, lofty, though the latter seems rather to be derived from the
former; and it is probable that the Appellation of the word, which signifies
Heaven, was found out before that which signifies high: Thus also Ludolfus,
whose incomparable Skill in the Aethiopick Language, is well known in the
World, maintains that the word Adama is derived from an Aethiopick Root of the
same sound, which sign fies beautiful and pleasant; and that the Earth was so
called for its being pleasant, and our first Parent for his beauty.
seeking the Roots of the Hebrew names in those Tongues.

XI. The most infallible way to trace the Signification of an obscure word, is,
in my Opinion, taken from the comparing of places, for when any word,
wherever we find it, has one certain limited Signification that suits it
best, we cannot forbear but we must think it true; and this is performed by the
Modern Interpreters, who are furnished with Lexicons and Concordances, with
much greater Success than the Ancients could pretend to, who were destitute of
these helps. Nevertheless they have not gone so far, as to leave no Discoveries
to be made by the Diligence of Posterity. For it often happens, while they
dissent from those of former Times, because they do not comprehend the Reasons
they went upon, and while they indulge themselves too much in their own
Conjectures which are wholly supported by obscure or ambiguous places, that
they fail of attaining the true Signification of several words. It Is not enough
to find out a Signification for a word, which perhaps is not amiss, for a
Translator is obliged to give the Author's true meaning, and therefore ought to
consult the Vsus loquendi, which for the greatest part is best found out of the
Old Interpreters and Languages. But what we endeavored to perform throughout
the whole Work, will best appear by reading it; and how troublesome an
Employment this Collation of places is, those Persons will soon understand,
that are pleased to make the Experiment.

XII. The Original of words, where it can certainly be known, does often direct
us to their true Signification, and therefore the Interpreters have spared no
Pains to find out the Etymologies of obscure words. For Example, We have shown
what the word Pharaoh is not a proper Name, but a common Title to all the
Egyptian Kings till the time of Ezekiel. 'O (...), says Josephus, l. 8. c. 2.
(...). Our Author derives it from an Arabic word still in use, Pharaha, summum
tenuit; and Pharahon not only signifies the top of any thing, but the Prince of
a Family. Hhartumim, which we have rendered Magicians, he deduces from the
Syriack and Chaldee Roots hhor or hhavar, vidit, and toum, claudere. Clausa
enim and ignota aliis hominibus videre seu scire existimabantur Magi: For which
reason Aquila translated it (...), occultatores. As for the word Tsenoumoth,
which our English Bibles have rendered withered, M. le Clerk has translated it
trita, that is, thrashed. Tsunma in Chaldee signifies a hard Stone; so
Tsenoumoth may signify Ears of Corn that are thrashed by a Staff sharpened upon
Stones. Isaiah 28.27. makes mention of such a Staff; and Thevenot, Part 2. lib.
1. c. 5. tells us, that in most parts of the East they beat out the Grain with
such a Flail.
Pharaoh signifies, by finding its Root in the Arabic, Chap. 12.15. who are
called (m) Hhartumim, Genesis 41.8. we have discovered by the Signification of the
words it is compounded of. We have likewise discovered what are those (m) Ears
which are called Tsenoumoth in the same Chapter, which was shown by no one, as
we know of, before.

Bochart has borrowed a great many things out of the same Fountain, which he
has happily made use of, in tracing out the Nations that are called by their
ancient Names in the tenth Chapter of Genesis; to which we have added a few of
our own, as well to confirm some of his by new Arguments, as to confute others.
See what we have written concerning the name of the Tibarenes, v. 2. of the
Riphui and Thogarma, v. 3. of Tharsi and By this name Bochart supposes Italy to
be meant, but our Author concludes it to be Macedonia: 1. Because Alexander is
said, 1 Macc. 1.1. to have come out of the Land of Chettiim; and Perses the
last King of Macedon is in the same Book, c. 8.5. called the King of the
Chittims. 2. Because the old name of Macedon, (...), or (...), as we find it in
Stephanus, Hesychius, and others, alludes to the word Chittim.
We had not room to insert the rest.
Chittim, v. 4. of the Numidoe and Mauri, v. 6. of the Chasluchoeans and
Caphthoroeans, v. 14.

But here also especial care is to be taken that we be not deceived by the
Affinity of words; to prevent which, it must be supported by Historical
Authority, as Bochart has done, and we have often endeavored to do the same.
See for Example our Observations upon the name Bochart, lib. 2. c. 14. Phal.
thinks it was so called from Haran, Abraham's Brother, which is scarce
credible, since besides the difference in Writing, we are told v. 28. that
Haran died at Vr of the Chaldaeans, and we are no where informed that he was
ever here. Now how is it probable that this City should take its name from a
Stranger, who perhaps never saw it in his Life, and whose Father did not build
it? Our Author with more reason derives it from Hharar exustus, adustus fuit,
by reason of the vast Deserts that lay round it, burnt up with the heat of the
Sun. And such a Description Plutarch gives us of it in his Life of M. Crassus,
so doet Appian the Historian in Parthicis, p. 141. Ed. Steph,
Charroe, upon Genesis 11.31. We must likewise take heed, not to deduce all our
Reasonings from the bare Etymology, as the Rabbis often do, who have Histories
ready at hand that are built upon them. Oftentimes words have so strangely
deviated from their Primitive Signification into another, that those who use
them do not at all think of their Original. The two Greek words (...) and
(...), are famous Instances of the Truth of this, as we could show, if we were
now treating of the Greek Tongue.

XIII. Furnished with these helps especially, not to mention any more, we begin
our Translation and Commentary upon the Old Testament. It Is true, several
Learned Men have gone the same way before us, especially in the last Age, and
the beginning of this, who deserve great Commendation for their Performances.
But if we may be allowed to speak the Truth, though they neither wanted
Abilities nor Diligence, yet two things stood in their way, which hindered them
from giving any lasting Satisfaction to those that came after them.

The first was, The want of due Helps, which we now enjoy; for we may justly
say of the Writers of this Age, that they have taken more Pains in illustrating
and cultivating the Sacred Philology, than was done in two thousand years
before. Hence it comes to pass, that we have such vast numbers of excellent
Works to assist us to understand the Holy Volumes. The Truth of this
sufficiently appears by the Polyglott Bibles, the Lexicons, and Treatises of
all sorts that adorn our Libraries, which before had no such Treasures in them,
and the reading of our Work, wherein they are so often commended, will
undeniably evince it.

The other was, The general Bent of the last Age, rather toward Theological
than Grammatical Learning, by reason of the new Controversies that then
employed the whole Christian World; so that the Interpreters rather busied
themselves to confute Errors, than give us a plain and critical Enarration of
the words. I will not say, that by thus inclining their Studies, Men of Parts
and Learning have been so far led out of the way, that they have sought out
Doctrines, which were true indeed, and agreeable to Religion, in improper
places, though nothing be more certain; however it is manifest, that by so
doing, they have neglected several helps necessary for the understanding of
Languages, since it is impossible for a Man to grasp every thing at the same
time. They that have read the most celebrated Commentaries of the Divines of
the last Age, and examined their Translations, know how true this is, and to
prove it to those that never looked upon them, would be labor lost.

They that employed their time most this way, chiefly depended upon some late
Grammarians of the Jews and Modern Rabbis, but were in a manner destitute of
all other Assistances of Critical Learning. I would fain know which of them in
the last Age, applied the Histories of the old Eastern People who bordered upon
the Hebrews, and what we find in ancient Authors relating to their Manners,
Opinions, and their Country, toward the Illustration of the Scriptures; two or
three perhaps and no more. Nevertheless St. Jerome had long ago advised, though
no body would regard him, That 'twas one thing to compose Books of our own, as
for instance about Covetousness, Faith, Virginity, Widows, and upon each of
these Heads to ^^duce Testimonies from all parts of the Bible, and set them off
with a little secular Eloquence, and make a magnificent appearance upon such
common subjects; and another thing to dive into the Sense of the Prophets and
Apostles, to know why they writ so, by what reasons they support their
Opinions, what peculiar things the Idumeans, the Moabites, the Ammonites, the
Tyrians, the Philistines, the Egyptians and Assyrians have to themselves in the
Old Testament. For it is necessary, continues he, that they should have
different Causes, and Arguments, and Originals, according to the Diversity of
Places, and Times, and Men, to whom they were written. But neither in St.
Jerome's time, nor afterward, did any one, before our Age, regard this Advice
as it deserved; so that our Ancestors have left us a very ample Harvest for
this sort of Learning; upon this account we may pretend to set out more
accurate Translations and Annotations upon the Scriptures than they did, though
we are otherwise inferior to them in Wit, Learning and Industry. In their times
Theological and Moral Precepts could hardly be inculcated enough, but now since
they are known to all, we lie under no necessity to dwell upon them any longer
Therefore have we employed our selves in that way of Interpretation which we
have described in this Dissertation, and have endeavored to observe the Laws
we enjoined our selves very Religiously. How we have succeeded in our
Performance, let other Persons judge, who have pursued these Studies out of a
desire to find out the Truth, to whose Censure we most willingly submit our
Undertaking, and shall be always ready to receive their Instructions and
Emendations, with all imaginable Gratitude.

Dissertation III. Concerning Moses, the Writer of the Pentateuch, and his
Design in writing.
I. The Necessity of Treating of the Writer of the Pentateuch. II. Three sorts
of things we find in the Pentateuch; 1. Those that happened before Moses: 2.
The Actions of Moses, which were without doubt first written by himself: 3.
Other things which really are, or at least seem to be, later than the Age of
Moses. III. Those Passages, which some People imagine to be later than Moses,
are examined. IV. That very few places can come under that Denomination,
however, that the Pentateuch ought not to be given away from Moses upon that
account. V. That it is uncertain who made those Additions. VI. That the Design
of the Writer, is of great Importance toward the better understanding of his
Writings. VII. Moses's Design in writing the Pentateuch, inquired into.

THE two former Dissertations had a relation to the other Books of the Old
Testament, as well as to those of Moses; but now we intend to treat of the
Mosaical Writings, exclusive of the rest; for we cannot well omit the
Discussion of that celebrated Question, which has been so warmly debated in
this Age, viz. Whether Moses writ the Pentateuch. Some Authors that have made
no small noise in the World, have positively asserted that it was not writ by
Moses; or at least, that, such as it has come down to our hands, it is not
wholly his. However we in our Commentaries, according to the received Opinion
of the most ancient Times, have all along attributed it to him. Therefore we
must now enquire, which of the two Opinions is most agreeable to Truth; and
this we shall perform after such a manner, as not to bring the least Reproaches
or invidious Reflections, but only Reason and Arguments, against those that are
of the contrary side; neither out of an unmeasurable Prepossession, shall we
deny those things that are evidently plain. Then after we have fully proved the
Pentateuch to be the Work of Moses, we shall endeavor to find out his Design
in writing it. No Thinking Man will doubt, but that both these Disquisitions
are of the last Consequence toward the better understanding of these Books;
and since they could not so conveniently be handled in our Commentary, we shall
dispatch them in this Dissertation with all the brevity we can.

II. There are three sorts of things to be found in the Writings of Moses,
which we must here take into our Consideration. We shall have soon done with
the two first, but we shall dwell somewhat longer upon the last. The first
comprehends those things which were done before Moses was born, at least before
he came to years of Maturity; of which nature is the History comprised in
Genesis, and the beginning of Exodus, and here (if we except a few places which
we shall hereafter examine) we find nothing that may induce us to believe, that
Moses was not the Author. No body doubts, but that the Creation of the World,
and the other Matters of Fact, which are there related down to Moses's Parents,
might be written by him. Learned Men only doubt whether Moses really writ them,
and if he writ them, whether he was the first that conveyed them down to
Posterity in writing, or whether he might not take what he has from ancienter
Memoirs, which were afterward lost.

If Moses was the first that writ of these Matters, and they were never
consigned in Writing before, it necessarily follows, that he must either have
them by an immediate Revelation from God, or else that they were communicated
to him by Men, who preserved them in their Memories; for there is no other way
for him to arrive to the Knowledge of them. Now he no where tells us, they were
communicated to him by God; nor, though such a thing is possible, yet since
Moses is silent in the matter, dares any one pretend to affirm it as an
undoubted Truth, but only the Rabbis, who were never ashamed of Lying, and
whose Assertions consequently are not much to be regarded. Now it scarce seems
probable, that so many Names, and the Particulars of so many Years, could be
handed down by Tradition. It Is much more probable, that the ancient Patriarchs
left them in Writing, and so transmitted them to their Posterity; which
Monuments coming into the hands of Moses, he diligently copied and connected
them with the History of his own Age; for what Design and Purpose we shall
afterward enquire. Now what sort of Writings they were, and how numerous, only
those Persons can inform us, who lived in those Times, if they were restored to
Life again. We conjecture that some of them were written, carminibus, (...), in
Verses of the same Termination, wherein we shall at some better convenience,
show the Poetry of the Hebrews to consist. Lamech's Speech, Genesis 4.23. M. le
Clerk has observed to consist of words of the same Termination in the Hebrew,
and it is his Opinion, that Moses borrowed abundance of Passages from ancient
Verses, in which Antiquity used to preserve the Memory of all remarkable
Transactions before the discovery of Letters. The same remark he makes upon
Chap. 7.11. adding, That there is something of a Poetical Spirit in the latter.
But I look upon this Criticism to be ill grounded, for why might not such a
Passage fall from Moses unawares, as well as this Hexameter Verse from Tully in
one of his Orations, In qua me non inficior mediocriter esse? Besides, who
would conclude that Tacitus compiled his History out of Poetical Monuments,
because he begins with, Vrbem Roman a principio Reges habuere.
See our Notes upon Chap. 4.23, 24. and Chap. 7.11. It Is certain that almost
all Nations in the World preserved the Fragments of their ancientest Histories
in Verse, as several Learned Men have proved: And it appears, that even among
the Hebrews, in Moses's time, the Memory of great Actions was celebrated in
Verse, which the People learned by Heart, as the Songs of Moses himself, that
are extant both in Exodus 15. and Deuteronomy 32. demonstrate. Nay, God himself
commanded the latter to be learned by the Children of Israel, as we find in
Deuteronomy. 31.29. Nor ought any one to wonder, that we carry the beginnings of
Poetry so high, since Music, by the Invention of some Instruments, flourished
even before the Deluge, as Moses expressly tells us, Genesis 4.21. Nay, it is
probable, that Men employed themselves in Vocal Music, before they thought of
the Instrumental. But though some few memorable Transactions might be preserved
in Verse, which the long-lived Patriarchs perhaps might have by heart, yet a
Chronology, including the Calculation of so many years, seems too unruly an
Argument to have been included in them. And Moses makes mention of the Book of
the Battles of the Lord, of which we shall treat when we come to Numbers 21.14.

The second sort of things, which we read in the Pentateuch, it is evident were
written by Moses himself. First, God commanded him to write the Law, and Moses
is accordingly said to have written it. In Exodus 34.27. God, after he had
repeated the chief Precepts of the Law, thus speaks to Moses, Write thou these
words, for after the Tenor of these words, I have made a Covenant with thee
and with Israel. But in Exodus 24.4. after several Laws were made, Moses is
said to have written all the Words of the Lord; and frequent mention is made of
the Book of the Covenant, or Law, as in the seventh Verse of the same Chapter.
In Deuteronomy 28.58. If thou will not observe, says Moses, to do all the words
of this Law, that are written in this Book, which perhaps he then held in his
hands; see likewise v. 61. and Chap. 29.20, 27. where the Curses are said to be
writ in it. This does Moses deliver to the Levites, Chap. 31.9. and commands it
v. 26. to be put in the side of the Ark, that it may be a Witness against
Israel. Mention is made of the same Book, as if it comprehended all the Divine
Laws, after the Death of Moses, Joshua 1.8. where Joshua is commanded by God,
not to suffer that Book to depart out of his Mouth, that is, perpetually to
read it, and administer Justice to the People out of the Laws delivered in it.
See likewise Chap. 8.31.

It Is true indeed, that the Jews by the word Thorah, Law, are used to
understand the whole Pentateuch; nevertheless it is certain, that it is of a
doubtful Signification, and may signify more or fewer Laws. So Joshua 8.32. it
is said, that Joshua wrote a Copy of the Law of Moses, upon twelve Stones of an
Altar, as he was commanded by the Book of the Law. See Deuteronomy. 27.2, 3. in all
which places Thorah signifies only a small part of the Law, as Learned Men have
observed, because it was not possible for the whole five Books of Moses to be
writ upon twelve Stones joined together to make a apiece Altar. But it is
evident from the places abovementioned, that at least all the Precepts of the
Law were written by Moses, and indeed so many troublesome Laws could not be
remembered, unless their Memories were refreshed by a written Book, especially
when they began to be observed. Some Persons are of Opinion, that only the Book
of Deuteronomy is to be understood in Joshua, and the above cited places of
Deuteronomy; and that afterward that Book alone was found in the time of
Josiah King of Judah. But although Deuteronomy is the Repetition of the Law,
yet many things are there briefly handled; neither are they so clearly
described, that the Israelites, who were none of the acutest People in the
World, and always inclined to Idolatry, could have an accurate Knowledge of the
whole Law, only out of that Book; and therefore if Moses designed to have it
all observed, as no body questions but he did, he ought to have given the
Israelites a larger Exposition of it; and this he actually performed; for we
have shown from two places of Exodus, that the Laws which we see there, were
written by him, and not Deuteronomy alone. The Book in which he writ them, is
called, The Book of the Covenant, Exodus 24.7. which after he had solemnly read
before the People, without question he did not throw it away, since it was as
it were a public Instrument, wherein were preserved the Laws of the Covenant
made with God. Besides Moses writ some other Treatises not extant in
Deuteronomy, of which we shall discourse hereafter, and which without doubt he
bequeathed to Posterity, since they have arrived safe to our hands. Therefore
the abovementioned Conjecture, that only Deuteronomy was left us by Moses, is
altogether groundless, and contrary to the Sacred History.

Matters being thus, no one will doubt that the Laws which are contained in
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy, are the very same that were written
by Moses.' It Is certain, that the Laws, which were written in Moses's time, were
still extant in the Reign of Josiah, as it appears from 2 Kings 22. nor can any
tolerable Reason be assigned, why they were not incorporated at least into the
Books of the Pentateuch. Therefore whatever Laws we find in the Pentateuch, we
ought to look upon them as written by Moses himself, and consequently the
greatest part by much of the Pentateuch came from the same hand. Nay it is
evident, that several other things were writ by him.

Secondly, Moses is said, Deuteronomy. 31.22. to have written the Song which we find
in the following Chapter; and since that is set down word for word as he made
it, we cannot deny that the rest which belong to the Law, are the very words of
Moses, without opposing the plainest Truths imaginable.

Thirdly, He is in express Terms said to have written some part of the History
of the Hebrews, for he transmitted in Writing the War against the Amalekites,
and God's Sentence pronounced against them, Exodus 17.14. After the like manner
he writ the several Mansions of the Israelites in the Wilderness, Numb. 33.2.
Moses wrote their goings out according to their Journeys, by the Commandment of
the Lord. And yet that part of their History, which we find in that Chapter of
Numbers, was not of so great a Consequence as to be writ before the rest; from
whence it naturally follows, that the four last Books of the Pentateuch, at
least, were written by Moses, for if he writ all the Laws, and the whole
History of Israel, he is certainly the Author of these Books, wherein nothing
else is contained; for who, after Moses had once written, would attempt to
write and model them anew? Indeed if we consider the frequent Repetitions which
we met with in these Books, and the great disorder in the delivery of the Law,
we shall soon be inclined to think, that these Books are come to our hands,
just as they were at several times first written by Moses, in that long
uncomfortable Pilgrimage in Arabia Deserta: For if they had been compiled out
of Moses's Memoirs, they had certainly been digested into better order, and all
the Repetitions had been cut off, as is usually done in Works of that nature;
but if we except a few Passages, they have descended to Posterity just as they
were published at first, when a full Collection was made of all that Moses
writ, and at several times repeated to the Israelites, who after all these
Repetitions, did scarce understand their own Law sufficiently. But about the
middle of this Age, a certain Author that shall be nameless started up, whose
Opinion afterward found some Disciples, and these have been so hardy, as to
deny that Moses was the Writer of the Pentateuch, and pretend to show several
Passages in him, which were manifestly writ since his time. Aben-ezra indeed
had formerly delivered himself much to the same purpose, but worded it so
warily, and obscurely, that he is hardly to be understood. Now we will here
consider their Reasons.

III. Their Arguments are partly drawn from the Style of the whole Book, and
partly from particular places. As for the former, they pretend that the
difference of Style, which is easily observed in the Pentateuch, plainly shows,
that it was not written by one hand; for some places are writ in a short
compendious Style, full of Ellipses, and others in a loose redundant one. But
this Objection soon vanishes, if we consider, that the variety we find in these
Volumes, is rather to be ascribed to the unrefin'd Condition of the Hebrew
Tongue, than any diversity of Writers. Others object, That Moses never speaks
of himself in the Pentateuch in the first Person, but that all his Actions and
Speeches are related in the third; but these People are easily confuted by the
Example of Xenophon, Coesar and Josephus, and other Historians of the first
Class, who whenever they have occasion to speak of themselves, always do it in
the third Person.

But it is not so easy to solve some Arguments, that are drawn from several
places of the Pentateuch, although some of them I must own are trivial enough,
as will appear by examining them. In the first place they object that passage
in Genesis 2.11, 12. The name of the first is Pison, that is it which compasses
the whole Land of Havilah, where there is Gold, and the Gold of that Land is
good; there is Bdellium, and the Onyx-stone. Now this they say was written by
one that lived in Chaldea because Pison, as they imagine, is a branch of the
Euphrates, which after it has washed Chaldea, falls into the Persian Gulf; and
then the Geography of these Countries, according to them, does not seem to be
so well known in Moses's time, that so particular an account could be given of
them, especially if we consider at what a great distance they lay. But we have
shown that the Country of Bochart, l. 5. c. 5. Hieroz. Part 2. supposes the
Land of Havilan to be that part of Arabia near Catipha and Bahare, where
precious Stones are dug up; and the Pison to be that Branch of the Euphrates,
which Petrus Texeira, an Eyewitness, affirms to fall into the Persian Gu^ph at
Catipha near Bahare. But our Author places Havilah nearer to Judea, not far
from Coelesyria. In 1 Samuel 15.7. Saul is said to have destroyed the Amalekites
with Fire and Sword, from Havilah until thou come to Sur, that is over
against Egypt. Now who can believe that Saul marched with his Forces an hundred
and fifty German Miles, (for so much it is at least, from the Frontier of Israel
to Havilah, in Bochart's own Tables) especially if he considers how destitute
of all Provisions Arabia Deserta was, and that Readiness Army consisted of 200000
fighting Men. Besides if Havilah had been more remote than Sur, the Sacred
Historian would not have said, that Saul wasted the Country of the Amalekites
from Havilah to Sur, but from Sur to Havilah. Therefore Sur and Havilah he
concludes to be the Borders of those People, the former to the South, and the
latter to the North. As for the Pison, he is of opinion that some Footsteps of
it are to be found in Chrysorrhous, which rises near the City of Damascus,
plentifully supplies it with Water, and is in a manner wholly lost in several
little Streams, as Strabo, l. 16. and Pliny, l. 5. c. 18. tell us. Petrus
Belonius, Observat. l. 2. c. 91. says, That Damascus is so abundantly furnished
with Water from this River, that not only every private House, but every Garden
has a Fountain out of it. Now this Description admirably agrees with the Hebrew
word Phison, which is derived from the Hebrew Root Phasha, diffusus fuit. The
Greeks called it Chrysorrhoas, because of the Gold Sands found in it, which
Moses informs us was very good in the Land of Havilah. For the same reason
Pactolus, a River of Lydia, bore the same name.
Havilah was nearer to Judea, and that (b) Pison was perhaps the Chrysorrhoas
that runs by Damascus. But supposing Chaldea is here meant, yet by reason of
the Merchants that traffick'd from thence into Egypt, that Country might very
well be known; for if in Jacob's time Caravans of Merchants traveled from
Gilead into Egypt. why might they not likewise come from Chaldea too thither?

2. The same is suspected of Chap. 10.8. and the following Verses, where a
larger account is given of Nimrod and his Empire, than there is of any other
Heads of Families and Countries; and this they imagine might be said more
agreeably after the Babylonian Captivity, than before the Israelites had any
manner of Commerce with those People. But the mighty Reputation of Babylon, and
the other Cities there mentioned, seem to afford sufficient Cause, why Moses
should write a little more particularly about their Beginnings, who otherwise
of himself, is apt enough to make such Discoveries of Antiquity. As we have
frequently Thus in the 35th Chapter of Genesis v. 8. Moses tells us why the
Oak, under which Rebecca's Nurse was buried, was called Allon-bachouth, i. e.
the Oak of Weeping; not that this Circumstance was of greater moment than
several others which he omits, as Jacob's coming home to his Parents, Rebecca's
death, etc. but only because he had a mind to acquaint his Reader, why this
Oak, which lasted to his own time, was called so. It Is not the most unuseful
part of an Antiquary's Business, to give the Original of Names. Hence it is
that we have an account of the name of Babil, Chap. 11.9. of Zoar, Chap. 19.22.
of Bethel, Chap. 28.9. Not to instance in any more.
observed upon Genesis.

As for what concerns the name of Nineve, which seems to be of a later date
than Moses, as deriving its name from Ninus the Son of Belus, who according to
the exactest Computation of Chronology, flourished about the time of Deborah,
perhaps the Original of it was otherwise than is commonly related. For who in
so great an Antiquity, and so vast a defect of ancient Monuments, dare
positively affirm any thing? Perhaps too some one else might add it to Moses's
words, as Learned Men have conjectured of several other Names.

3. It Is pretended, that the following passage, And the Canaanite was then in
the Land, Chap. 12.6. could only come from a Writer who lived after the
Canaanites were turned out of their Country. But what Judgment is to be made of
these words, we have sufficiently shown in our Some are of opinion, that out of
the eleven Families of the Canaanites, some of them were called so, (...),
above the rest, who inhabited these places. And it is true indeed, that the
Canaanites are often mentioned as a particular Tribe, see Genesis 13.7. Chap.
15.21. Exodus 3.8, 17. Chap. 33.2. Chap. 34.11. and elsewhere. But then they are
expressly said to have lived near the Sea, and near Jordan, but not at Sichem.
However perhaps they dwelt here in Abraham's time, and Moses had a regard to
that. Our Author prefers this Solution to the rest.
Commentary upon that place; neither is it necessary for us to repeat it here,
perhaps they might be added by a later hand, after the Expulsion of the
Canaanites by the Children of Israel; and perhaps it is one of those superfluous
Observations which frequently occurr in the Sacred Volumes, which might have
been omitted, without any Injury done to the History.

4. In Chap. 13.8. we meet with the word Hebron, by which name that Town did
not go till after Moses's time, as appears from Joshua 14.15. Chap. 15.13.
where it is said to have changed its old name Arba in the days of Caleb and
Joshua; and indeed that City seems to derive its name Hebron from the Nephew of
Caleb. But Learned Men have rightly observed, that this passage might be added
by another hand since the time of Moses, to expound an obscure Name by one that
was better known. See likewise Chap. 21.2.

5. The like Conjecture is drawn from the word Dan, which we find Chap. 14.14.
and it is urged, that the name of it was Laish or Leshem, till it was taken by
the Children of Dan. See Joshua 9.47. But we have handled this Matter in our
Commentary, where we plainly make it appear, that it is not well Josephus
relating this History, lib. 1. c. 10. tells us, That Abraham attacked the
Assyrians, (...), near Dan, and adds, For this is the name of one of the heads
of Jordan. If this is true, it is certain that this Head was so called, long
before the City Laish obtained its new name; and afterward when the Children
of Dan possessed themselves of these places, that not only this Fountain, but
the neighboring City took the same name. A place may happen to receive the
same Appellation for two several causes, as for instance, B^ersheba, i. e. the
Well of the Oath* was so called from two Covenants that were made near it. See
Genesis 21.31. Chap. 26.33. And this might be the case of Dan.
grounded.

6. In Chap. 20.7. we read the word This word seems to have been in use with
the Hebrews at first; afterward the word Roe a Seer was more commonly used;
but at last Nabi came in fashion again. Horace de Art Poetica has a passage
which is very applicable to this purpose. Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere,
cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, si volet usus.
The same Fate has befallen this word, which that judicious Poet observes to
have happened to several more: It was used in Moses's time; under the Judges it
grew out of date, and after them was again revived.


Nabi, a Prophet, which notwithstanding seems not to have been in use till
after Moses's Age 1 Samuel 9.9. After all, perhaps the meaning of the Sacred
Historian may be this, That not so much the word Nabi was left off in the time
of Saul, as that it was not used in that Phrase, Let us go to the Seer.

7. Moses speaking of the Mountain, where Abraham was to have offered up his
Son as a Sacrifice, has the following words, Chap. 22.14. And Abraham called
the name of that place Jehovah-jireh, as it is said to this day, in the Mount
of the Lord it shall be seen. Some are of opinion, that this was the Mountain
Moria upon which the Temple was built, and which did not go by that name till
the Temple was erected upon it. But this is a mere Conjecture, and although
Moriah and Jehovah-Jireh seem to signify the same thing, yet it does not
follow from thence that it is but one name. With no greater reason on their side
do others observe, that Moses could not be the Author of that Proverbial Saying
(for so they call it) Prospicietur in monte Jehovae, since the Person that
added it to the Text, seems to speak of it as if it were still used in his
time. But why might not Moses say, that this Proverb was in use etiamnum hodie,
since perhaps this Form was used, from the days of Abraham down to Moses. This
I am certain of, that there is nothing in the whole Matter, which does not
fitly agree with Moses's time. There was a convenient distance enough between
Abraham and Moses, for the latter to take notice, that the aforesaid Form, of
which Abraham was the Author, continued till his own time. Nay, if the Interval
had not been quite so great, yet Moses might very warrantably express himself
after that manner, since this Form is sometimes used by those that writ but a
few years after, of which we find two Examples in St. Matthew, Chap. 27.8.
Chap. 28.15. as others have observed before me. To these we may add suchlike
passages out of St. Jerome, for he, speaking of the Ecclesiastical Writers of
his own Age, expresses himself after the same manner, Saebadius Bishop of
Agennum in France. -- Vivit usque hodie, lives till now, or to this day,
decrepita senectute, (...), as the Greek Interpreter has rendered it. Didymus
of Alexandria -- Vivit usque hodie, and has passed the eightieth year of his
Age; (...). Epiphanius Bishop of Salamis in Cyprus -- Superest usque hodie, and
in his old Age is writing several Books. Eunomius of the Arian Party, usque
hodie vivere dicitur. Priscillianus Bishop of Abila, usque hodie, to this very
day, is accused by some, of the Gnostick Heresy, though others maintain that
he was not guilty of what is laid to his Charge. Priscillianus was slain by
Maximus the Tyrant, but seven years before St. Jerome writ this. We have touched
upon this somewhat largely, because several places in the Sacred Historians are
illustrated by this Observation.

8. Likewise they object the name of Migdal Heder, Genesis 35.21. that is, The
Tower of the Flock; by which name is supposed to be meant, a Tower upon one of
the Gates of Jerusalem, which was called the Sheep-gate; but this is uncertain;
however if we may believe latter Ages, the Tower of the Flock did not belong to
Jerusalem. Consult our There was a Tower at Jerusalem, or not far from that
City, of the same name, as we are informed by Micah 4.8. St. Jerome, following
the Tradition of the Inhabitants in his time, places it not far from Bethlehem
in his Epitaph of Paula, who after she had visited Bethlehem, Not for from
thence, says she, she descended to the Tower of Ader, i. e. of the Flock, near
which Jacob fed his Flocks, and the Shepherds watching by night, were so happy
as to hear, Glory be to God on high, etc. Which as it might be true, so it
receives no great Confirmation from so Fabulous a Voucher as Tradition is.
Observations upon this place of Genesis. Nor is there any reason why this
place should not retain its ancient name in following Ages.

9. They suppose that Moses could not possibly write, Chap. 36.31, nor reckon
up so many Kings of Edom. Now these were the Kings that reigned in Edom, before
there was any King in Israel. After this follow the names of eight Kings, who
reigned successively one after another, and make as many Generations as there
were from Jacob to Obed, Grandfather to David, and Contemporary to Saul the
first King of Judea; since from Jacob to Moses there are only four, taking
Moses into the account. Now some answer, That Moses foreknew that the
Israelites would set up Kings over themselves, to which purpose they cite
Deuteronomy, Chap. 17.14. But is it credible, that God likewise revealed to
him, how many Kings the Edomites were to have, and by what Names they were to
be called, before the Jewish Theocracy was turned into a Kingly Government? Now
Moses no where tells us, that such a Revelation happened to him, and indeed
whoever will read over the nine Verses, wherein the Succession of the Kings of
Edom is contained, will soon be satisfied that there is no Prophecy in the
case; for the Sacred Historian there speaks as of a thing past and gone, that
nothing can be more clearly expressed: For what more evident Testimony can
there be given that the thing was already past, than these Phrases, And he
died, and there reigned in his stead? Some body, whose name has escaped me,
solves it another way; for he humbly supposes that these Kings reigned at the
same time in different places; and for my part I humbly suppose he never read
this Chapter, his Head being certainly filled with Metaphysical Contemplations.
To deal ingeniously with the Reader, the best way to get clear of this
Difficulty, will be to own frankly, that these nine Verses from V. 31 to 39,
were added by some one who lived after the Kingly Government was set up in
Israel.

10. Some have objected, that Canaan is called the Land of the Hebrews, Chap.
40.15. which, in propriety of Speech, could be said only at that time, when the
Hebrews had possessed themselves of it; and that therefore the Sacred
Historian, who was later than Moses, accommodated Joseph's way of speaking to
the Style of his own time. But we have It Is plain enough, says our Author upon
this place, that after Joshua had led the Israelites into Canaan, all that
Country might be called, and really was called, the Land of the Hebrews: But if
we should take it in this Sense, it would follow that this Passage was written
after the time of Joshua, as some have believed. If we would have it written by
Moses, we must only understand some part of Canaan where the Hebrews generally
fed their Flocks without any disturbance. For though they were Strangers, and
wandered from one place to another, yet those Fields might properly enough be
said to belong to them, where they had pitched their Tents for several years,
with the Consent of the old Inhabitants. Now it appears by the Book of Genesis,
that they sojourned for the greatest part about Mamre and Hebron as far as
Sichem, partly by the Permission of the Natives, and partly by Force.
answered this Objection in our Commentary.

11. In Exodus Chap. 6. after the Sacred Historian has informed us of Aaron's
and Moses's Pedigree, he thus goes on v. 26. These are THAT Aaron and Moses to
whom the Lord said, bring out the Children of Israel from the Land of Egypt
according to their Armies. These are THEY that spoke to Pharaoh King of Egypt
to bring out the Children of Israel from Egypt. These are THAT Moses and Aaron.
Now we do not urge the third Person here, say some, which it is plain several
Historians have used, but the Demonstrative Pronouns that and they, which Moses
would scarce make use of while he was alive, and writing of himself. But we
must here call to mind, that Moses did not only write to his own Age, wherein
his Father and Grandfather were well known, but likewise to the following
Ages, to whom he seems in this place to direct his Discourse, and not to his
Contemporaries, who knew all these Particulars well enough. It was of
Consequence for them to know, that Aaron the Brother of Moses was descended
from Levi, and that he was the first Head of the Sacerdotal Families; therefore
it ought not to seem strange to any one, that in this place Moses and Aaron are
as it were pointed at, and their Genealogy shown to the Israelites of future
Ages.

12. The words of Exodus 16.35. are alleged, which they pretend could not be
written till after the death of Moses. And the Children of Israel did eat Manna
forty years, until they came to a Land inhabited: They did eat Manna until they
came unto the Borders of the Land of Canaan. For it appears from the fifth
Chapter of Joshua, that Manna did not cease till after the death of Moses. To
this some answer, That Moses fore-knew, as is evident from Numbers 14.33. that
the Manna would cease after the end of forty years, so soon as the Israelites
entered the Land of Canaan. But this is here related, and not foretold, and
therefore Moses uses the Preterperfect Tense Comederunt, did eat: For which
reason I should rather choose to say, that this Verse, as well as some more, has
been added to the Text by way of Parenthesis, occasioned by what immediately
goes before, where mention is made of an Omer full of Manna to be laid up in
the Ark.

13. Some Persons deny the following Verse to belong to Moses, But an Omer is
the tenth part of an Ephah; because when a Measure is in use, it is not
customary to define it; and therefore they believe that after the Hebrews were
scattered into several Countries, and consequently began to use the Measures of
other Nations, this was purposely written, that they might understand which
Measure was meant in this History. The same is observed about their Money,
Numb. 3.47. Chap. 18.16. But it does not appear, that the Jews used any other
Measures in Palestine, so as to make it necessary to define the old Measures;
nor does an Ephah seem to be better known than an Omer. But Moses, who
instituted the Jewish Commonwealth, might designedly give a short Description
of the Coins and Measures, to the end that they might not afterward be changed.

14. The Sacred Historian thus begins, Deuteronomy. 1.1. These are the words which
Moses spoke to all Israel on this side Jordan in the Wilderness. From whence
they gather that the Writer of this Book was then in Canaan. But we have
discussed the Ambiguity of the Particle Bheber upon M. le Clerk has promised
the World a Paraphrase and Comment upon the other four Book of Moses, but they
have not seen the light as yet.
that place of Deuteronomy to which we refer the Reader.

15. In the same Book Chap. 2.12. there are some words which they pretend could
never come from Moses, The Horims dwelt in Sur before time, but the Children of
E^au succeeded them when they had destroyed them from before them, and dwelt in
their stead, as I^rael did unto the Land of his Possession. But at that time
when Moses writ this, two Tribes and a half had already settled themselves near
the head of Jordan, and turned out the old Inhabitants, and Moses had an Eye to
that.

16. Chap. 3.11. Thus the Sacred Writer speaks of the King of Basan. For only
Og King of Basan remained of the remnant of Giants, behold his Bedsted was a
Bedsted of Iron: Is it not in Rabbah of the Children of Ammon? Nine Cubits was
the length thereof, and four Cubits the breadth of it. Now some can scarce
believe, that it was possible for Moses to speak thus of a Man that was lately
dead, and overcome by the Israelites, and whose Bed was rather in Basan, of
which Territory he was King, than among the Ammonites who were none of his
Subjects. But Moses had a mind to give a particular account of a thing, which
was well known at that time indeed, but would have been unknown to Posterity,
unless he had delivered it in writing. As for what concerns the Bed, how it
came to be carried into another Kingdom, who can tell? But since there is no
Absurdity in this Story, nothing can be gathered from a thing, the reason of
which is altogether unknown.

17. In the same Chapter, v. 14. we meet with the following passage, Jair the
Son of Manasseh took all the Country of Argob unto the Coasts of Geshuri and
Maacathi, and called them after his own name Bashan-Havoth-jair unto this day.
We shall handle this matter more at large in our Commentary. In the mean time
if this were added by a later hand, yet it would not follow from thence, that
the greatest part of the Pentateuch was not written by Moses.

18. We will not deny the last Chapter of Deuteronomy to be writ by some one
else, where Moses's going up to Mount Nebo, and his death, are related, and yet
all the foregoing Chapters are not therefore to be given away from him. We may
easily suppose that this Book was supplied by another hand, which had been in a
manner imperfect, if it had not ended with the death of Moses. But those Jews
that are of opinion, that Moses foretold all these things, as being assisted by
a Prophetical Spirit, do not deserve to be heard. What can be said more
plainly, to make us understand that these things were written long after
Moses's death, than what we find in the three last Verses?

IV. Hence we may gather from these eighteen places, which are commonly brought
to prove the Pentateuch to be of a later date, that most of them are doubtful,
and consequently ought not to be made use of as Arguments to prove these five
Books to belong to another Age. Very few of them manifestly seem to be added by
another hand, and do not in the least hinder, why we should not ascribe these
Volumes to Moses. After the same manner, some ancient Grammarians tell us,
there are several Verses here and there inserted into Homer's Poems, yet no one
from thence takes occasion to deny that the Iliads and the Odysses were written
by Homer. We must not imagine that in former Ages they had such plenty of
Books, or so many Copies of the same Book as now we have; and so it might
easily happen, that in succeeding Times one of the Prophets might make some
Additions to Moses, which afterward were incorporated with all the Copies.

Indeed if it did not otherwise evidently appear, that the greatest part by far
of the Pentateuch was written by Moses, I confess there would be great weight
in the abovementioned Objections, to incline us to believe that these Volumes
were written much later than is commonly pretended; but since we have proved it
beyond all manner of doubt, that almost all the Pentateuch belongs to Moses, we
have no reason to ascribe those Books to any one but him.

V. It has been long controverted among Learned Men, who it was that made these
Additions which we find in the Books of Moses, and they have gone upon various
Conjectures. Some would have him to be Joshua, others Esdras, and lastly,
others to be the under Scribe among the Hebrews, but this is only guessing, for
they bring no Reasons to enforce their Opinions. Because Joshua succeeded
Moses, therefore some People fancy it was he that inserted those Passages that
seem to carry Discoveries of a later Age. Again, others ascribe this to Esdras,
who is, by the Jews, said to have regulated the Sacred Volumes, and by some, to
have made them up again out of his Memory after they were certainly lost. But
since these different Hypotheses are supported by no competent Witnesses, that
is to say, such as flourished in the same Times, or such as might have learned
the Truth out of the Memoirs of their Contemporaries, they may be as easily
rejected, as they are brought upon the Stage. Nor is a multitude of Authors,
who lived several Ages after, and never cite any that are older than
themselves, and who do but transcribe one another, of any weight. Esdras is
only called a Scribe, and a ready Scribe in the Law of Moses, in those Books
that go under his Name. See chiefly the seventh Chapter of Esdras, and this
seems to have given occasion to that Fable, of his restoring the Sacred Books;
though (...) rather signifies a Learned Man, as we might easily demonstrate,
than one that is busied in transcribing of Books. Several uncertain things have
been positively asserted concerning these under Scribes, as we shall show at a
more proper place upon the following Books, but this is the most uncertain of
all, viz. That they inserted the above mentioned Additions into the Mosaical
Volumes.

And therefore after a diligent Examination of the Matter, we ingenuously own
that here we do not know what to conclude; perhaps one of those who are already
supposed, perhaps some one else, and perhaps several hands have at several
times inserted these things into Moses. Therefore we can have no surer or safer
Sanctuary here, than prudently to suspend our Judgments; by which conduct, if
we do not discover the Truth, yet at least it is not excluded from the Mind.

VI. If we were able to discover all the Designs that Moses proposed to himself
in writing, this would be of much greater Importance toward the better
Interpretation of his Volumes; for these Books are not like the Works of
Mathematicians, where we find nothing but general Propositions, that have a
relation neither to certain Places, nor Times, nor Men, and do not allude to
any thing but the business in hand. Moses writ for the Benefit and Instruction
of a particular People called the Jews, though I do not deny that by the means
of Divine Providence, his Books were afterward serviceable to innumerable
other Nations. Upon this account he said abundance of things merely for the use
of that People, which he had omitted, if he had not been influenced by this
Consideration. He likewise had an Eye to the Opinions and Customs of the
neighboring Nations, which he assented to, or rejected, according as they
agreed with Reason and the Truth.

We know indeed, from the nature of the thing it self, that the general aim of
his writing, was to teach the Israelites the Worship of one God, and to deliver
them the Laws which he had received from him; but it is to be wished, that we
particularly knew for what Reasons he followed one certain Method in Writing
more than another, and what he chiefly had an eye to in that Abridgment of the
ancient History which he has left behind him. From hence perhaps we might be
able to comprehend why he omits several Transactions, to give us a Narration of
some other Events, which are not, as we imagine, of so great Importance; why he
used such and such Words and Expressions, why he mentions some things only en
passant, and treats of others in a more copious and frequent manner; with other
things of the same nature, which would give considerable light to many obscure
places.

Were it possible for any one so to secure his Readers, before they were
admitted to the perusal of Moses, that they should find no rugged places, or at
least but few, that were hard to be understood; so universal an Obligation
could never be requited with Thanks and Commendations enough. For Example, No
one reads the short Prologomena which Asconius Pedianus has given us, before
some of Cicero's Orations against Verres, but he would with all his heart be at
any Expense, that all the rest of his Orations were recommended and illustrated
by such Prefaces. For those Prefaces or Arguments are no small helps toward
the understanding of Tully, and would be infinitely more serviceable to the
World, if they were but longer.

Now since we are destitute of such Assistances, by reason of the shortness of
Moses's History, and the great Scarcity of ancient Oriental Authors, and can by
no means supply the Defect of those things which are necessary to such a
Design, it remains that we must often be involved in the greatest Difficulties.
And as I often considered of this Matter, when I had the Mosaical Writings in
my hands, so I was resolved to collect and gather out of Moses himself,
whatever might be pertinently said upon this occasion. I flattered my self that
I should not be so rigorously censured, if I did not answer the Reader's
Expectation, as if I only raised his Appetite, and did not endeavor to
satisfy him; for this reason I made no scruple to set what follows before my
Commentary, whatever the Learned World may think of it.

VII. That no body may mistake me, or expect to find what I never promised, I
do not here inquire what was Moses's, or rather God's Intention in delivering
the Law, which we shall consider when we come to the particular Laws, but what
was Moses's chief and principal aim, in writing and publishing the Pentateuch,
such as we now have it. All Men, as we observed before, know well enough that
Moses chiefly writ to teach the People of the Jews, that only one God was to be
worshipped, and after what manner that was to be done; but we must more
distinctly show, what method he took to reach that mark, (if I may be allowed
so to express my self) and what other ends he might possibly have.

1. We must chiefly, and in the first place remember, that it never was in
Moses's thoughts, to write the Annals of all Mankind down to his own time; but
only to select those Passages out of the Histories of former Ages, which agreed
with his general Design before mentioned, or some other particular by ends.
Hence we find that nothing can be shorter than his History is, from the
Creation of the World to Abraham, since it is dispatched in the first eleven
Chapters, which make up about one fifth part of the Book of Genesis, and yet
the History before Abraham includes above two thousand years, but from Abraham
to the death of Joseph where the Book of Genesis ends, it is not quite three
hundred years.

Nay, out of this General History of two thousand years and upwards, he only
selects a few things, that were either necessary to the Series and Order of the
following Transactions, or might serve to instruct the Minds of the Israelites
in Piety and Virtue. And this is the reason why he omits an infinite number of
things, which the Curiosity of the Reader would be apt to demand a detail of,
and only presents us with a naked Chronology of the first Times. However he
occasionally sprinkles some things, which he imagined might more easily induce
the Israelites to observe the Law, and therefore not only tells them that the
World was created, and that it was made in the compass of six days, but that
God rested on the The Learned Master of the Charter House to his Archaologie
has explained himself much to the same purpose, as M. is Clerk does here in
this Paragraph.
Seventh, as we find expressly in Genesis 2.1, 2, 3. (because this day was to be
kept Holy, and 'twas chiefly celebrated in the Law in remembrance of the
Creation) that the Jews might understand why they were so solemnly commanded to
rest on that day. For the same reason, Chap. 1.14. Moses, where he mentions the
several uses that are made of the Sun and Moon's motion, observes by the by
that they showed Seasons or solemn Festivals. When he might have contracted the
History of the first Sin, as he does many more, and only said that our first
Parents were not in all respects obedient to God, for which reason he inflicted
upon them all those Evils that now visit Mankind, he chose perhaps to enlarge
more copiously upon it in the third Chapter, because it might be useful for the
Israelites, who were commanded to abstain from several Animals and Fruits, to
know, that the first Sin proceeded from Intemperance; that so this Example
might deter them from being seduced with the outward Appearance of any
prohibited Flesh or Fruit.

2. Moses's Design was, to write the History of the Jewish Nation from its
first Founder Abraham, who was commanded by God to go out of Chaldaea into the
Land of Canaan, where properly and in Truth the Original of the Hebrews is to
be sought. For while Abraham was beyond the Euphrates, he lived among the other
Gentiles, but in Canaan, living apart from all the rest, he did in some manner
represent a particular Nation by his Family. This is the reason why Moses, from
that time, omits all other Nations, and only speaks of Abraham and his
Posterity, although no question is to be made, but that innumerable Events
worthy of remembrance happened in other Kingdoms. As for instance, It had been
worthy the relating, what sort of a Priesthood that of Melchisedeck was, and
how he maintained the Worship of the High God among a People that were
abandoned to Idolatry. Nevertheless because these things related to the History
of another Nation Moses, who still keeps to his purpose, omits them. From hence
we may learn by the bye, that we must not always draw an Argument from his
Silence; and that for instance, we cannot, affirm that all other Nations were
forsaken by God Almighty, merely because Moses says nothing of God's Favors to
them.

3. He seems likewise to have designed to reform the Manners of the Israelites,
not only by direct and open Precepts, but by a more oblique Thus our Author
supposes, that to dissuade the Jews from taking to themselves Wives out of a
strange Nation, he let them see, how Fatal to the Sons of Seth their Marriages
with the Daughters of Cain proved, Genesis 6.2.
way, of instructing them by Narrations. It was a common Custom with the
Israelites, to cast off their Wives at pleasure, which by reason of the
Hardness of their Hearts, he would not absolutely forbid, but hints to them,
That it was not so from the beginning; and that whoever could receive this
saying might. Therefore, says he, a Man shall leave his Father and his Mother,
and shall cleave to his Wife, and they twain shall be one Flesh, Chap. 2.24.
Compare our Savior's words, Matt. 19.4, etc. with these.

Polygamy too was in Fashion among them, which he could not openly attack,
without alienating the Hearts of all the People from him. However in that
compendious History of the Antediluvian Ages, especially where he mentions the
Posterity of Cain, he judged it a propos, not to omit Chap. 4. that the first
Instance of Polygamy was in that Generation, and privately Insinuates, that
Lamech, who first assumed that Liberty, was of a fierce Disposition, and
despised his other Wives, as appears by his History.

4. Moses endeavors, in this History, to raise an Aversion in the Israelites
to the Fables of their Neighbors, and consequently to their Religion, which
for the most part was built upon them; and this seems probable for the
following Reasons: He not only teaches, that the World was created, which the
neighboring Nations seem to have believed, or rather knew it, from ancient
Monuments; but he likewise shows how many Generations there were from the
Beginning of the World down to his own time, and reckons every particular
Person so generated, to oppose the Truth to that mighty number of Generations,
which the Egyptians pretended to have been in their own Country. For not to
mention what the Learned Sir John Marsham has collected relating to this Head,
Herodotus, who lived about the middle of the Fourth Chiliad of the World,
according to the Computation of the Hebrews, tells us in his Second Book, Chap.
142. that the Egyptians pretended, after the Gods had ceased to reign in Egypt,
that there reached to his Age three hundred forty five Generations, which make
up Ten thousand four hundred seventy three years. See the Boasting of the
Egyptians, Ezekiel. 29.3. and our Annotations upon Numbers 13.23. But Moses shows,
Genesis 10.6. that after the Flood, Egypt was Peopled by the Posterity of Cham,
who came thither out of Babylon. The Egyptians too Romanced very much
concerning the Generation of Men in their Country, and about the Flood, which
may be found in Diodorus, L. 1. They boasted that they were the So they
ascribed the Invention of Music to one Thouth a Friend of Osiri^, who, as
Diodoras as tells us. l. 1. invented the Harp with three strings, but Moses
gives it to Jubal. They likewise pretended, that under the Reign of Osiris, the
Art of working in Brass and Iron was found out in The^ai^. See the same
Historian, lib. 1.
Inventors of all things, as the same Authors tell us, most of which Moses
confutes by the bye, giving a quite different Account of things, and plainly
shows that others were the Inventors of them. For Example, The Egyptians
ascribed Agriculture, and the Invention of Squeezing Wine from the Grape to
their Osiris, which belongs to Noah, as we are informed by Moses, Chap. 9.20.
The Phaenicians too had published several Fictions, if Philo Byblius's
Sanchoniathou has given us a true account of their Theology, a Fragment of
which is to be seen in Eusebius's Praeparatio Evangelica, l. 1. cap. 10. which
Moses contradicts, as will soon appear by comparing the two Histories.

5. He seems likewise, by not only Writing his Law, but Publishing it, and
commanding it to be read every Seventh Year, Deuteronomy. 31.10. tacitly to reprehend
the Conduct of the Egyptian Priests, who had several secret Rites, and hidden
Dotrines, which it was not lawful to discover to the People. The Egyptian
Priests had not only their Mysteries and Sacred Doctrines, which they did not
hold it Lawful to reveal to the People, but peculiar Letters or Characters
which none but themselves could read. Vid. Herod. L. 2. Diod. Biblioth. L. 3.
See our Notes upon Genesis 41.8.

6. Most of the Oriental Nations not only boasted of their Antiquity, as
Diodorus Siculus has observed in his first Book, but likewise extravagantly
praised their Founders, and reckoned them among their Gods, as after Diodorus,
Herodotus in the place abovementioned, and Manetho in Eusebius's Praep. Evang.
l. 2. c. 1. and several others have remarked. Now Moses shows them to be
descended of Cham, Noah's third Son, who was so far from Meriting a place among
the Divinities, that he could not be esteemed a Good Man. He likewise observes
all under one, Chap. 9.22. that the Canaanites were descended from that Race
which God had cursed. Nor did he forget, Chap. 19.37, 38. to take notice that
the Ammonites and the Moabites came from Incestuous Parents. And as the
Edomites might perhaps boast that they proceeded from the eldest Son, he
exposes his Scandalous Selling of his Birthright, Chap. 25. Nay, perhaps he
had this in his Head, when he observes that the younger Children were often
preferred to the elder, as we have observed upon It Is remarkable enough (says M.
le Clerk upon this place) that Moses takes care all along in his History,
wherein he omits innumerable Particulars of the greatest Consequence, to
observe that several First-begotten Sons either forfeited their Birthright, or
were inferior to their younger Brothers in all good Qualities. Thus Cain, the
Firstborn, was not so acceptable to God, as his Brother Abel, and at last lost
the Privileges of Primogeniture, Genesis 4. Shem seems to be preferred to Japhet,
Genesis 5. and 9. Abraham to Haran, Genesis 11. Isaac to Ishmael, Genesis 17. and Jacob
is set before Isaiah. Amongst the Sons of Jacob, Reuben loses his Birthright,
which was partly conferred upon Judah, and partly upon Joseph, and Joseph's
younger Son is preferred to the Elder. If it were lawful for us to interpose
our own Conjectures, continues he, we might with probability enough, suppose
that the Moabites, the Ammonites, Ishmaelites and Edomites, who were all
descended from the eldest Sons, did, upon that Score, claim a Right over the
Israelites, where they happened to be more Powerful than them: For which reason
Moses, who writ chiefly for the sake of the Jews, often took notice, that the
elder Brothers were, not without good cause, Postpon'd to the younger: Nay,
Moses himself, who was the younger of the two, was preferred to his Brother
Aaron, Non sine aliqua fratris inpidia, Numb. 12.
Genesis 48.19. therefore it is highly Credible, that Moses had a mind to mortify
the Pride of the neighboring Nations, and furnish the Israelites with some
Topics to upbraid them with.

7. Lastly, While he writes the History of the Hebrews, although it is true he
enlarges more copiously upon their Affairs, yet we must not believe (and the
Brevity of it is a convincing Argument of what I here maintain,) that he never
designed to write full Annals. It appears from the Sacred History it self, that
several things are omitted by him, which however are told in another place,
though they had no relation to it. He says nothing of the Idolatry of the
Ancestors of the Israelites, when they were beyond the Euphrates, of which
Joshua 24.2. makes mention, unless perhaps it is obscurely hinted at in Genesis
31.53. He is utterly silent of the Idolatry of the Israelites in Egypt, which
nevertheless Ezekiel the Prophet lays to their Charge, Chap. 20.7, 8. He has
likewise omitted a particular sort of Superstition, into which they fell when
they were in the Wilderness, of which Amos 5.25, 26. gives us an account. But
for what reasons, we are wholly in the dark.

But since by these Examples, and indeed by the Work it self, it is evident that
Moses did not write Annals, we must less admire to see him neglect the order of
Time, which ought to be observed in a larger History. For it is well known, that
in such sorts of Histories, as Lives are, the true Series of things is never
accurately kept, as we find in the most celebrated Biographers of the Greeks
and Latins, Plutarch, Diogenes, Laertius, Corn. Nepos and Suetonius.

These seem to be the particular Designs of Moses, these his more secret Ends
of Writing, besides that universal and manifest End, which the Reader finds at
first sight, namely, of bringing the Israelites to the Worship of the only true
God. They that remember these Hints, as they are reading of Moses, will
discover several more things than we have here mentioned, as we have likewise
taken notice of many things in our Commentary, which we did not think
convenient to repeat here.

Dissertation IV. Concerning the Temptation of Eve by the Serpent.
I. How differently Interpreters have explained this History: Some affirm that
it was a real Serpent. II. Others look upon the whole to be Allegorical; or,
III. Pretend that the Devil was signified by that Name: Or, IV. That he
informed the body of a Serpent. V. That the manner how Sin entered into the
World cannot certainly be known. VI. Another Explication of this Passage. VII.
Why the Serpent is called Subtle. VIII. The meaning of the word Naked. IX. Why
a Punishment was inflicted upon the Serpent.

I. SOME of the Ancient Jews are of Opinion, that the whole passage in Moses is
to be understood of a real Serpent, which Creature they imagine to have
formerly had the Gift of Speech, so that Eve might very well understand him.
Josephus in the first Book of his Antiquities, c. 1. pretends, that at that
time (...), all Creatures using the same Language, and consequently being
endued with Reason and Understanding, the Serpent, incited by Envy, tempted Eve
to Sin, and among other things received this signal Punishment, viz. That he
should be deprived of his Feet, and ever after crawl upon the Ground. Aben
ezra, and several Rabbis, interpret this place after the same manner. To
explain my self impartially, If Moses had been of this Opinion, he could not
have spoken more plainly to the purpose, than now he does: For in the first
place, he describes the Serpent to have been the most Subtle of all Creatures:
Next, That he employed his Subtlety in Deceiving our First Parent, and held a
Dialogue with her, as if he had been a Master of Reasoning. Lastly, That his
creeping upon his Belly was imposed upon him as a Punishment. Josephus himself
could not have more fully explained his Sentiments, than Moses has done.

II. But other Persons, who were Jews likewise, not being able to digest so
many unpalatable things, as Speech and Reason attributed to a Brute, and the
Serpent's losing his Feet, although Moses seemed to express as much in the
plainest manner imaginable, yet rather than understand him so, they chose to
commit Violence upon his words, and betake themselves to Allegory. Philo
indeed, in his Treatise De mundi opificio, and elsewhere, denies that these
were Fables and Fictions, wherein the Poets and Sophisters take so great a
delight. Nevertheless he owns them to be Figurative Documents, that are to be
explained Allegorically, in order to find out the bidden meaning of them. And
lastly affirms, That it may be rightly conjectured, that the Serpent is a
Symbol of Pleasure, which Argument he handles more copiously afterward.
Maimonides also Part 2. Mor. Nev. c. 29. supposes, that these Passages are to
be expounded by way of Allegory, and some of the later Rabbis declare
themselves to be of the same Opinion.

III. But others that have a just Indignation to this Libertine way of
Interpreting the Scripture, which wholly depends upon the Fancy of the
Interpreter, and yet not able with Josephus to follow the literal Sense, have
fallen into different Sentiments, none of which labors with fewer
Inconveniences than the two above cited Opinions. Some Divines of no mean Rank
in the Learned World, maintain, that it was not a Serpent, properly so called,
which appeared, but that the Devil was signified by that name, that therefore
the Devil is called the old Serpent by the Hebrews, and is thus described by
St. John in the Revelations 12.9. The great Dragon the old Serpent, called the
Devil and Satan, who seduceth all the Earth. See likewise Rev. 20.2. For this
Reason the Devil is called by our Blessed Savior, a Murderer from the
Beginning. And the Author of the Book of Wisdom 2.24. tells us, That Death
entered into the World by the Envy of the Devil. See also 2 Cor. 11.3. where
the Serpent is said to have deceived the Woman by his Subtilty. But this
Hypothesis is easily refuted; for neither can the Devil be called the most
subtle Beast of the Field, but in a Figurative Sense; neither will the
Punishment inflicted upon the Serpent, suffer us to doubt, that a Serpent's
Body at least appeared here. To remove these Difficulties some conjecture, that
the Devil did not put on a real Serpent, but only formed the Exterior
Appearance of one. But the abovementioned Objections are as directly levelled
against this Opinion as the former.

IV. For this reason several Persons have believed, that the Devil used the
Serpent's body as an Organ to act his Imposture by, and that God, to show his
utter Aversion and Hatred of Sin, punished the very Organ by which this
Seduction was effected. But if it were so, what occasion was there to say, that
the Serpent was the most subtle Beast of the Field. For the Devil might have
abused the most stupid Creature in the World to this purpose with as much
Success; for he did not employ the Serpent's Craft, but his own, to deceive Eve.

V. But others observing these and the like Difficulties in all these Opinions,
came at last to this Point, as to own, that all we could apparently gather from
this Aenigma, was, that the First Parents of Mankind began to Sin, from whence
a Series of innumerable Evils were derived to them and their Posterity. It Is
indeed certain, that now and heretofore Mankind has been in a State of great
Corruption, nor can the beginning of this Infection be carried lower than the
Original of the World. But then after what manner Sin entered into the World,
so that we might understand plainly, and without the least Reasons of doubting,
all the Circumstances of the first Sin, none but those can signify to us, who
were present at the matter, if by any means they could be revived again.

VI. Lastly, Others finding in this History, frequent mention made of
Discourses, where none at all seem to have passed, imagine, that the Serpent
did not speak, but that Eve saw him eating the Forbidden Fruit, and was
seduced, by his Example, to eat of it her self. Especially if we consider that
this prohibited Fruit, by its beauty, and perhaps by the specious name of
Knowledge, might help to induce her, as she was gazing on it. Indeed the
Serpent's Punishment, below v. 14. Thou shall lick the Dust all the days of thy
Life, seems to intimate, that the Serpent had deceived Eve by eating of the
Fruit, and because he had occasioned her Ruin by eating of Fruit from a high
Tree, therefore he was condemned to lick the Juices of the Earth. The Favorers
of this Opinion do not deny, but that some Evil Spirit might act his part in
this Tragedy, for which reason the Jews not rightly comprehending the meaning
of this place, might in after-Ages call him by the name of the Serpent. But as
the Sacred Historian introduces the Serpent Speaking, who had no Speech at all,
according to the Genius of his Narration, as is plain from the first Chapter of
Genesis, where he frequently represents God Almighty speaking to all the parts
of the Creation; so likewise because he was to give him his share in a
Dialogue, by whose Example our first Parents were deceived, he therefore
attributes Subtlety to him, which however can be supposed to belong to a Beast,
no more than the Faculty of Speaking does. For this reason he is said to have
used both Speech and Craftiness, because, as the Maintainers of this Opinion
allege, he as effectually ruined our first Parents, as if he had seduced them
by a crafty artificial Harangue. And therefore both the Subtlety of the
Serpent, and his Conversation with Eve, are considered by them, not as
Circumstances that can be urged, but as some Oriental Ornaments of the History.
This was in part the Opinion of Isaac Abarbinel, who denies that the Serpent
could maintain any Discourses with Eve, and asserts, That nothing more is meant
by this Colloquy, but the Reasonings of the Woman from what she gathered from
the Serpents action, and his eating of that Tree. He pretends, that she
inferred from the Serpent's Example, that the Forbidden Fruit was Wholesome and
Nutritive, which Opinion does not well agree with the words, You shall be like
Gods; the meaning of which could never be deduced from this single action of
the Serpent.

In so perplexed and obscure a Matter as this is, it is the safest way, as I
imagine, openly to confess our Ignorance, provided we still preserve the
Substance of the History, as it is explained in the fifth Opinion, but so as not
to condemn those that differ from our Sentiments. We are now at liberty to
examine more at large the most remarkeble Particulars of this Relation.

VII. We find in the Sacred Writer, that the Serpent was the most Subtle of the
Beasts of the Field Now some are apt to believe, that Moses in this Passage had
a Respect to the Craft of the Devil, who either appeared himself, or actually
entered into the Body of the Serpent. But what wonder is it, that the Devil
should be more cunning than a Beast? And Secondly, How comes he to be reckoned
among the Beasts of the Field? Therefore others conjecture, That the Craftiness
of Serpents properly so called is here meant, and to this purpose observe, That
as they lie hid in the Dust, or under the Herbs, they use to bite the heels of
the Animals that pass by: For which reason Aristotle Hist. Animal. l. 1. c. 1.
ranks them among the insidious and wily Creatures, and therefore Moses going
about to relate the Fall of our first Parents, which was occasioned by the
Serpent, after what manner soever it happened, very pertinently observes, that
the Serpent is an insidious Animal, and indeed we find the Hebrew word, 1 Samuel
23.22. applied to Men lying in wait, and starting out of Holes. Otherwise, as
for what regards Subtlety considered in general, there are several other
Animals more cunning than a Serpent, among which Aristotle reckons Foxes,
(...). Others are cunning and mischievous as Foxes.

Those that hold this Narration to be wholly Figurative, pretend that Moses
prudently makes mention of the insidious nature of the Serpent, to prepare his
Reader for what he was going to tell him, of the Fall of our first Parents.
Thus the most ancient Philosophers, both Asiaticks and Graecians, who used to
deal in Apologues borrowed from Brutes, if they are to speak concerning Craft,
were wont to introduce a Fox, and to mention him in the beginning, as the most
Cunning of Beasts, or else gave some by-hints of his Subtlety. Thus we find in
Phaedrus, that, Dolosa vulpes avidis rapuit dentibus. The Crafty Fox with
greedy Teeth devoured. The same Creature is described by Avienus, as capable of
acute Discourse, and is called by him Arguta, in his Fable of the Fox and the
Leopard. But as no one of tolerable Sense, will infer from this, that the Fox
is fitter to hold those Politic Discourses than any other Creature, so they
say we lie under no Obligation to ascribe that Opinion to Moses, which Josephus
erroneously attributes to him, viz. of assigning both Voice and Reason to
Brutes.

VIII. Immediately upon eating the Forbidden Fruit, the Sacred Historian tells
us, That our first Parents knew themselves to be naked, that is, They were
sensible they had transgressed. Thus in Exodus 32.25. after the Golden Calf was
consecrated, Moses is said to have seen the People naked; and in the New
Testament, (...) is sometimes taken for a Sinner, see Rev. 16.15. Those that
interpret naked in its proper Sense, involve themselves in insuperable
Difficulties. When Adam and Eve were alone, they could no more be ashamed of
their Nakedness, or discover it if they knew nothing of it before, than when
they were in the State of Innocence. But say others, The Fruit of this
Forbidden Tree, provoked them to Lust, and some undecent Motions of Body, which
suppose to be true, (although it is a Conjecture without any manner of
Foundation,) what will they be able to gather from hence? Can a Man's Appetite
toward his Wife be said to be Vicious, which Nature it self has implanted upon
all Creatures, or could they be more ashamed, because being naked, they felt
this Appetite after their Transgression, more than they did before? When only
they two inhabited the Universe, their Bed under the bare Canopy of the Heavens
was equally as Chaste, as if it had been covered with a Roof, and Wall, and
Cieling, and Tapestry. It Is certain they could never be ashamed of that thing
for which they were created, no less than other Animals; neither are we at this
day ashamed of it, but before Witnesses, for certain Inconveniences, which
would arise from thence, though it is not so convenient to mention them in this
place. I know what several of the Ancients, as well as Moderns, have said upon
this occasion, but they are such groundless precarious things, that I will not
stay to confute them.

IX. We are now arrived to the last part of our Disquisition, viz. The
Punishment inflicted upon the Serpent, which we shall examine in as small a
compass as may be. Those that affirm the Devil tempted Eve out of the Serpent's
Mouth, do not at all wonder that God Almighty here is said to speak to the
Serpent, that is, to the Devil. But others that deny the Serpent to have ever
talked to Eve, are of opinion, that God's words here directed to the Serpent,
were not for its own sake, which as being destitute of reason it could not
understand, but for the Comfort of Adam and Eve. However both are agreed in
this. That God might punish the Instrument, by which Mankind was seduced, to
express his just Hatred of Sin; as we find a like instance in Exodus 21.28.
where an Ox that had goared a Man or a Woman, so that they died, was commanded
to be stoned, and his Flesh not to be eaten. One part of the Malediction is,
That he should crawl upon his Belly, concerning which, there are two different
Opinions. Some, in which number we find Josephus and several of the Modern
Jews, believe, that God deprived the Serpent of his Feet, and commanded him to
creep upon the Dust; and indeed if Moses had this in his Thoughts, he could not
have expressed himself more plainly concerning it. But others believe it very
improbable, that God should make any Alteration in the Nature of a Serpent,
merely for the Transgression of Man, and therefore pretend, that what was
natural to him, turned to his Punishment, as Nakedness in a Man, and the Pains
of Childbirth in a Woman. Indeed if Serpents had Feet at any time, they must
of necessity have more than four, by reason of the prodigious length of their
Body. But still it is difficult to comprehend, how a thing which was merely
natural, and accompanied with no Pain, should be turned into a Punishment. As
it is no Punishment for four-footed Creatures that they cannot fly, no more is
it to those Reptiles that are destitute of Feet, to crawl upon their Bellies.
Let the Reader examine which side has the fewest Difficulties, and choose either
this or that Opinion as he sees fit.

Dissertation V. Concerning the Flood.
I. The different Opinions about the Flood. II. Some bold it to be Universal,
and endeavor to prove it from the express words of Moses. III. Others make it
particular: The Arguments alleged by them. IV. Their Answers to the Reasons
commonly urged by the Maintainers of the first Opinion.

I. ALL Interpreters are agreed, That the Deluge was so far Universal, as it
overwhelmed all the then inhabited part of the World; and that all the Race of
Mankind, except Noah's Family, were destroyed by it. But some are of opinion,
that the whole Globe of the Earth was covered with Water, which others again as
positively deny.

II. They that hold the Affirmative, in the first place, ground themselves upon
the express words of Moses, who introduces God laying his Commands upon Noah,
Chap. 6.19. of every living thing of all flesh, to take two of every sort into
the Ark, to preserve the several Species of them, lest they should be lost.
Which Command Noah accordingly obeyed, and taking Pairs of every Bird, every
Beast, and every creeping thing upon the Earth, according to their several
Kinds, placed them in the Ark. Now these Expressions denote, that all living
Creatures whatever were to be destroyed, for otherwise Noah might have
recruited himself much easier out of some other Country where the Deluge did
not reach, and consequently where they were not destroyed, than have kept them
in the Ark, which was infinitely more troublesome. As for the Birds especially,
there was no necessity to gather them, because as they could have easily flown
to the dry places, so after the Country that was overflowed was dry again, they
would have soon returned. Nay, it had been much more commodious for Noah to
have gone to that part of the World which was not covered with Waters, than to
be shut up so long in the Ark.

Secondly, As the Species of all Animals are said to be preserved by Noah's
Care, so Moses could not in more express words have told us, that all the rest
over the face of the World were destroyed, than in the following Lines, Chap.
7.21. All the flesh died that moved upon the Earth, both of Fowl and of Cattle,
and of Beast, and of every creeping thing, etc. All in whose nostrils was the
Breath of Life, of all that was on the dry Land died. And every living
Substance was destroyed, which was upon the face of the ground, both Man and
Cattle, and the creeping things, and the Fowl of the Heaven. If a Man was never
so much minded to tell his Reader, that all sorts of Creatures in all places
were destroyed, it is impossible to do it more plainly. How can the Birds of any
one Country be supposed to be lost, if they had the next Country to fly to,
which was free from the Flood. Could not so much as one wild Beast save himself
thither by flight?

Thirdly, We are told in the eighth Chapter, that Noah staid within the Ark
till such time as the Earth was dried, when it had been much more easy for him
to have gone to some of those Countries which had not been visited by the
Deluge; especially, since the Soil of such a place would have been much better
for him upon all accounts, than that of a Country corrupted by the Salt Water.
Nay, he might, as we observed before, have fled thither before the Flood, with
his Family and all his Effects, and so have avoided the Fatigue and Trouble of
building an Ark, which employed him without question a whole year.

Fourthly, The height of the Water shows, that the whole Terrestrial Globe was
covered; for since the highest Mountains under Heaven were covered fifteen
Cubits, that is, two and twenty Foot high with Water, it is certain that no part
of the Earth could escape the Flood; and so we find, that when the Waters began
to decrease, the first place the Ark lighted upon, was on the highest ridge of
the Gordiaean Mountains.

'To these Reasons, which are borrowed from Moses's Narration, we will not add
the general Consent of ancient and modern Interpreters, because all of them
purely depend upon it. Now those that are of Opinion that it was no otherwise
Universal, than as it overflowed so much of the World as was inhabited by
Mankind, and destroyed all Men but those that escaped in the Ark, think they
have defended their Hypothesis with invincible Arguments, and in the next place
have produced Answers to all the abovementioned Reasons, which, to say the
Truth, do not equal the Force of Arguments. After the same manner, those that
maintain that all the World was covered with the Flood, prove their Opinion out
of Scripture, much better than they resolve the Objections of their Adversaries.

III. That only the inhabited part of the World suffered by the Flood, they
think is manifest from hence, That since God Almighty only proposed to destroy
Mankind, there was no necessity for the Flood to reach farther than Men had
planted themselves. It is likewise past Dispute, that he designed to punish Men
alone, because Men alone are capable of Sin, in whose Destruction, if any
Beasts are involved, they perished for no other reason, but because they
happened to be in the same place where Men lived. Now before the Flood Mankind
could not extend it self far, and perhaps had not exceeded those Countries
which lie about the Tigris and Euphrates. It Is a foolish thing, says Isaac
Vossius, in his Dissertation de Aetat. Mund. p. 283. to imagine, that Mankind
was so much multiplied before the Flood, as to inhabit all the corners of the
Earth. How slow Humane Nature was in producing Men at that time, we may easily
gather from this, That Noah was but the ninth from Adam. Whoever computes the
Matter fairly will see, that from those eight Persons who escaped the Flood,
till the time of the Dispersion of the Nations, more Men might be born, than
from Adam alone in the space of two thousand years. Nevertheless it is certain,
that before the Confusion of Babel, Mankind possessed but a small part of Asia.
Therefore those Persons are very much mistaken, who suppose, that in Noah's
time the whole World was inhabited, when perhaps only Syria and Mesopotamia
were planted. Now no reason obliges us to extend the Inundation beyond the
Bounds of the inhabited World: Nay, on the other hand it is absurd to say, That
the Effects of the Punishment which was inflicted upon Mankind, should be
exerted where no Men were to be found.

Secondly, If we consider how prodigious the height of the Waters must be, to
cover all the highest Mountains in the World, there is not Water enough either
in the Sea, or Clouds, to rise so high: If there are no Mountains whose tops
are above three Miles high, for which consult Isaac Vosstus in Pomp. Melam. l.
5. c. 2. and Varenius's Geogr. Genesis l. 1. c. 10. yet the Water must have risen
so high. But it is evident, that neither the Seawater, nor that in Fountains
and Rivers, nor Showers, were sufficient to effect it. The Water which is
contained within the Earth, could never be carried so high, unless the Earth
sunk in, and the Mountains were levelled; which contradicts the Mosaical
History, and though the Water of the Clouds were joined to it, yet it is
impossible it should ascend so high, since we see it is made up of Vapors
exhaled from the Waters below; for the collected Water of the Clouds, must have
made a much greater Mass, than the Globe of the Earth, if it could so far
overflow it, as to exceed the highest Mountains twenty Foot at least, which may
be proved, by considering the greatness of the watery Circles which must
encompass the Earth; and the farther they are removed from the Center of it,
must needs be so much the greater. Some Persons, to clear themselves from these
Difficulties, in the first place pretend, that the Air was condensed in its
lowest parts, and in the Caverns of the Earth, or at least something else
served instead of Water: And lastly, That even the Air condensed into Water,
fell down with the Rain. But all these are mere Conjectures, of which Moses
mentions not the least Syllable; besides they must needs confess, that they add
Miracle to Miracle, merely to overflow those Countries where there is no reason
why a Deluge should be sent. If we should suppose the whole circumambient Air,
says the abovementioned Vossius, in Epist. ad And. Col. p. 385. to be turned
into Water, yet we shall never make the Mass of Waters rise one and thirty Foot
and a half higher than the Superficies of the Earth. My reason is, Because
Water will never be made to rise higher, either by Pumps, or any other
attractive Power: For the Air that presses without, and forces the Water into
the Tub or Pump, makes an exact aequilibrium with the Water which is included
in the Tub. Therefore according to the weight of the Water enclosed in the Tub,
is the weight of that Cylinder of Air which presses the Water without; so that
if the whole body of Air were condensed, and turned into Water, yet the
Superficies of the Waters would not be above thirty two Foot high. To this we
may add, That to turn this Air into Water, it must be so much condensed, that a
certain quantity of it must equal the like quantity of Water in weight. But to
effect this, the Air must be at least eight hundred times thicker than it is;
for it appears by undoubted Experiments, that the exact weight of this lower
Air which we breath, and which without question is the heaviest, is eight
hundred times heavier at least than that of Water. See Edm. Halley's second
Dissertation in the Transactions of the Royal Society. T. XVI. p. 104.

Others that cannot digest this Condensation of the Air, are of opinion that
the Rain and Seawater was rarefied. However if we should admit so great a
Rarefaction of Water, they are Vossius's own words, yet to make the quantity of
it no more than fifteen times greater than usual, which is the least we can
suppose, it ought properly to be called a Mist and not Water, wherein as
neither Men nor the other Terrestrial Creatures could have been destroyed, so
the Fishes could not have lived in it. Besides, had Noah's Ark been made of the
lightest Cork imaginable, yet so light and thin a body could never have
supported it.

If any one should still insist, that the Waters were created out of nothing,
and annihilated again after all Living Creatures were destroyed, it may be said
in the first place, That there is nothing to countenance this Conjecture to be
found in Moses, who on the other hand expressly tells us, That the Waters of the
Abyss and the Heavens were sent upon the Earth: And in the next place it ought
to be considered, Whether it is suitable for the Divine Wisdom to create a
mighty Mass of Waters, to overflow those places where there were nothing but
Beasts, and afterward to annihilate them. Lastly, It appears from the eighth
Chapter, That the Waters were diminished by the Wind, and not by any
extraordinary Effect of the Divine Omnipotence.

From hence a third Argument is deduced, whereby they endeavor to prove, that
the Deluge was only particular. God, says, Moses, Chapter 8.1. sent a Wind, and the
Waters abated. The only thing the Wind could do was, That a few more Vapors
should be exhaled, or that the Water should more swiftly be carried into some
certain place, into which of its own accord it would not run soon enough; but
it could never exhaust the Ocean. Who can therefore believe, that the whole
Earth, covered with Waters to so prodigious a height, could be dried up by the
Wind? It Is certain this could no more be effected by the Wind, than in the
Beginning of all things, the Sea could be compelled into its Alveus by it;
especially if we consider, that the Sun perpetually draws up Vapors from the
Earth, even without the Wind; which Vapors being in too great Plenty in the
Air, fall down back again upon the Earth in Showers. Besides, if the Wind could
draw up so vast a quantity of Water in Vapors, it would follow, That there
would be always much more Water in the Clouds than in the Ocean, since if they
were all poured down, they could cover the whole Earth, not the highest
Mountains excepted. But we have already shown that this cannot be done.

Fourthly, If the Sea-waters were spread all over the Face of the Earth, the
Trees and smaller Plants could scarce have been preserved from Destruction; and
if all Trees in all Countries had been spoiled by the Saltness of the Water,
how came they to be propagated again, since God is no where said to have
created them anew. Now no one will be so Obstinate as to deny, that in the
compass of a year, or somewhat less, both Plants and Seeds will be corrupted in
Salt Water: And those that are skilled in Natural Philosophy will scarce
affirm, that they would grow again, out of putrified Mud fermented by the Sun,
as was formerly believed. It Is true, the force of this Argument is somewhat
abated, if the Patrons of the Universal Deluge answer as they use to do, that
the Saltness of the Sea was very much taken off by so great a quantity of fresh
Water mingled with it. However it is hard to imagine, how several Plants could
continue so long a space even under fresh Water, without being killed.

Fifthly, If all the Animals of all Countries in the World came to Noah in
general, as it is plain they must needs come, suppose both Hemispheres were
covered with Water, It may be enquired into, how so many Animals, which are
peculiar to America, could come from that Continent to Mesopotamia? If America
is any where joined to our part of the World, it must be far Northwards under a
cold Climate, which Beasts, that are proper to the Torrid Zone, cannot endure.
Nay, if we suppose it to be joined to our Climate under a more favorable
Latitude, how could the American Beasts, but the Serpents more especially,
possibly get over so many Rivers, and Lakes, and Mountains, and find their way
through so many Woods in so long a Journey? By what means, says Isaac Vossius,
p. 398. could that Animal, for instance, which from the slowness of its Motion,
is called the Lazy, arrive to Noah's Ark, and travel so many Miles, which after
its own natural Pace, it could not perform in the space of Twenty thousand
years.

Let the Patrons of an Universal Deluge likewise inform us, after what manner (
Id. p. 186.) these Animals, leaving Noah's Ark and the ancient World, found
their way into America, and Lands that are disjoined by a vast Ocean. Another
Absurdity too would follow, which is this, that such innumerable sorts of
Creatures, which were unknown to our World both formerly and now, should pass
through such mighty Tracts of Ground, and not leave any remainders of their
several Kinds in their former Habitations.

Sixthly, The very building of the Ark presents us with no less Difficulties,
if it were true, what the generality of Mankind believes, viz. That it was a
common Receptacle of all Beasts, and that we cannot name one Animal, whose
Posterity did not come out of this Mansion. If we only compute those Creatures
which are frequently found in the old World, yet the room which the Scriptures
allow for this Ark, could not contain so many different Species, and the Food
that was necessary to maintain them so long. But if we take in the Beasts of
the New World, and the Southern Hemisphere, there will not be room enough for
the Animals themselves, much less for the vast Provisions to keep them alive
there. Besides, a Man cannot easily comprehend, how these Animals, after what
manner soever they were distributed into their Cells, and their several
Apartments kept clean, could live so long in this close Confinement. The
Question too may be put, whether they generated in the Ark, which, if any one
denies, it is very strange, that these Brutes, which if you except a few of
them, are hot for Copulation once a year at least, should abstain from it; and
if it is affirmed then, as their Offspring increased, there must be of course a
greater Consumption of their Provisions. Several Persons here have recourse to
Miracles, which as they might happen, so we need not suppose them without
urgent necessity. But what necessity is there, that Countries destitute of Men,
and the Animals of those Countries, should be overflown?

Seventhly. To lessen this Difficulty, perhaps it may be objected, That no more
Creatures were created in every Species than in that of Man. But the
abovementioned Learned Man thus confutes them. God, says he, from the
Creation, filled the whole World, according to the respective Faculty of every
Country and Sea, with all sorts of Beasts, Fishes and Trees. But Man alone is
said to be created by himself. Now it would be monstrously absurd to imagine,
That only two Animals of every Species, and that only in one place, were formed
by God Almighty. For if we are of that Opinion, what will become of those
Plants and Animals which only breed in peculiar Continents, and which, for the
abovementioned reason, could not be transferred, and propagated from our World
to theirs?

IV. These are the Arguments which have been urged to prove, That only the
inhabited part of the Earth, and its Animals, suffered in the Deluge. But
because the Maintainers of the contrary Opinion object. That when God speaks,
all Humane Reasoning ought to cease: True it is, say the Patrons of a
Particular Flood, and so it ought, if the Divine Words would only admit of an
Interpretation. And thus the most Reverend Bishop of Worcester, Dr.
Stillingfleet, in the third Book and fourth Chapter of his Origines Sacrae,
where he treats of this Subject with that Learning and Judgment which is so
peculiar to him, owns, that it cannot be proved by any necessary Arguments
drawn from the Scriptures, that the whole Superficies of the Earth was
overflowed. We are at leisure now to examine the Answers they bring to the
above cited Reasons.

First, Though All Creatures are said to be admitted into the Ark, yet they
observe that the word All is of doubtful Signification, and is very seldom
taken absolutely, but in most places is restrained to the Subject then in hand.
Even in the Writings of Moses himself, where he tell us, That a Famine
prevailed in All the Earth; our Divines own, that it is to be understood only of
a particular part of the World. Thus Vossius, nay, other Writers, when they
speak of a considerable number of Animals, express themselves after the same
manner. Livy, speaking of the Circensian Spectacles as they were exhibited in
his Age, has the following words, Lib. 44. c. 9. It was the Fashion then, even
before our Modern Vanity was introduced, of filling the Circus with the Beasts
of ALL NATIONS, to divert the People with several sorts of Spectacles. Here a
few Nations, that were either Neighbors, or Subjects of the Roman People, are
called Omnes Gentes. In like manner several Birds and Beasts in the Prophet
Ezekiel, Chapter 31.6. where the King of Egypt is described under the
Representation of a Tree, are called All. In the Leaves of it All the Birds of
the Air built their Nests, under its Boughs All the Beasts of the Field did
Copulate, and under its Shade did dwell All Nations. See Daniel 4.18. so
likewise Hosea 4.3. where the great Devastation of Judaea is described:
Therefore, says the Prophet, the Earth shall Mourn, and All dwelling therein,
among the Beasts of the Field, and the Birds of the Air, they shall fall Sick,
yea, the Fishes of the Sea shall be destroyed. Therefore All Animals, Clean and
Unclean, that were let into the Ark, are to be understood only of those which
that Country produced, where the first Seat of Mankind was, viz. That Fruitful
Territory about the Tigris and Euphrates: And perhaps the All here does not
comprehend those of All Kinds, but only All those which are useful to Man. Of
which Nature are the Cattle they feed upon, as Oxen, Sheep, etc. Horses, Asses,
Camels, which were there employed in carrying of Burdens, but therefore called
Unclean, because they were not used for Food. Of Birds there might be Cocks,
Geese, Ducks, Pigeons, Ravens, etc. Nor is it strange that Noah was commanded
to preserve these Animals, which could not be had out of the neighboring
Countries, nor tamed without a long and tedious Trouble.

As for what relates to Noah, the Reasons why he was not ordered to fly to the
adjoining Country where the Deluge did not reach, were, because other People
should not follow him thither. Besides, it was convenient, that the Ark wherein
he was to be preserved from the Deluge, should be built before those very
Persons to whom he foretold it, that so they might be convinced he spoke to
them in earnest. God Almighty, as Vossius conjectures, thought that his Justice
was not to be exerted but in a convenient place. Now what more convenient place
can be imagined than this, where the Guilty were to be punished in Noah's
sight, and he that was Innocent, should be saved in the midst of Sinners?

Secondly, Where it is said, That all living Creatures were destroyed, the
place must be understood only of those Animals that were within the Limits of
the overflowed Countries: Which is not only the answer of Vossius, but of Dr.
Stillingfleet. Nay, from what has already been said, concerning the word All,
we may gather, That it is not inconsistent with the Mosaical Narration, to
suppose, that not all, but many Animals, and especially such as were in a more
particular manner serviceable to Mankind, were destroyed. Thirdly, Noah tarried
in the Ark till the Waters were dried up, because it would be more convenient
for him to set footing in a Country which he was formerly acquainted with, and
which was free from Wild Beasts, than in an unknown place, full of Savage
Creatures. No doubt on it, but the Soil was sufficiently damaged by the
Stagnation of the Water; but Mesopotamia, and the adjoining Countries, being
watered by vast noble Rivers, received less Detriment from the Salt Water, than
others that were destitute of fresh Streams; so that it is reasonable to
believe, they recovered their former Fertility in a short space. Fourthly, The
highest Mountains that were covered to so vast a height by the Flood, were
those which were situate in these Countries, beyond which Mankind was not at
that time propagated. Nor does that Addition, Under Heavens, oblige us to
believe the contrary, since it is sometimes used of a few neighboring
Countries, as Deuteronomy. 2.25. On that day will I begin to send the Fear and Terror
of thee, through the People under all the Heavens, Sub omni Coelo.
Having thus considered what might be said in behalf of this Opinion against
the former, it now remains to be inquired how far, according to this
Hypothesis, the Deluge might extend. But since we do not know what Countries
were then inhabited, What Man dares presume to define the Bounds of the Flood?
Perhaps that Tract of Ground which lies between the four Seas, the Persian, the
Caspian, the Euxine, and the Syrian; in which compass we find the Tigris, the
Euphrates, and several other vast Rivers, were by the Eruption of all Waters,
and by the Clouds, gathered from all parts of the World by the Divine Power,
and there condensed into Moisture, buried and overflowed. It Is true, this could
not be effected without a Miracle; but then there is no way to solve the
Difficulties of so great a Cataclysm without a Miracle. However the less and
fewer of this Kind we suppose, provided the rest may be conveniently explained,
that Exposition uses to be accounted the most agreeable to Truth by all
Interpreters, because God is never so prodigal of Miracles, as to have recourse
to them where Natural Causes are sufficient; much less does he violate and
overturn all the established Laws of Nature without good reason. In this very
History we find, that God was pleased to give Noah notice when it was time for
him to go into the Ark, because he could scarce know it of himself, but he does
not tell him the time when he was to go out of it, but left the Matter wholly
to his own Discretion, because he might very well know it without the Divine
Assistance. He might, if it had so pleased h^^, have preserved all the Animals
in the Ark alive without any Aliment, which had made the Ark considerably
lighter, and had saved Noah a great deal of trouble; and yet we see he did not
do it, because these Creatures might be supplied with Food by Humane Diligence.
Where the Industry of Man ceases, there the Divine Help begins; and Vice versa.

Thus the Favorers of a Particular Deluge support their Opinion, but it has
been objected against them, That if this Supposition were true, the Superficies
of the Water could not have been perfectly Spherical, and consequently that the
Ark in this great Declivity, must necessarily incline to the lower places. But
as Vossius has very well answered, that which happens in lesser Inundations,
the same might fall out in this great, and more than Natural Deluge. For the
same Power which drove the Seas and Clouds to that Tract of Earth which was to
be destroyed, did likewise sustain the Ark, and the Declivity of the Water, as
long as there was occasion for it.

Dissertation VI. Concerning the Confusion of Languages.
I. What is meant by The whole Earth was of one Lip. II. And Let us make our
selves a Name. III. Who are denoted by the Children of Men. IV. This passage,
Let us go down, examined. V. The different Opinions how the Confusion was
effected. VI. That the Design of Babel might be Foolish, but was not Impious:
Some Conjectures why God thought fit to blast it.

I. BEFORE this wonderful Confusion happened at Babel, the Sacred Historian
expressly tells us, Genesis 11.1. That the whole Earth was of one Lip, and of the
same words; or as we have translated it, of one Language, and of one Speech;
because it is evident that the word Lip, both here and in several other places,
signifies Speech; and the reason of it is, Because the Lips are no less
serviceable to us in speaking, than the Tongue it self, see Isaiah 19.18. No
one doubts, but that one Universal Language was spoken by all Mankind at this
time; but whether Moses has here a regard to that (...), is not so plain.
Perhaps these words may signify, that Men lived in a State of Peace and
Concord, because it is equally necessary toward the Building of any City, that
Men should agree in their Sentiments and Inclinations, as well as in their
Language: Nor does the Idiom of the Hebrew Language reject this Interpretation.
Thus for instance to denote the unanimous Agreement of the Canaanites to beat
back the Israelites by main force, They gathered themselves together (says the
Sacred History Joshua 9.2.) to fight with Joshua, and with Israel with one
mouth. Thus likewise the False Prophets agreeing together in their Predictions,
declared good unto the King with one mouth, 1 Kings 22.13. Hence it is, that to
speak with the Lip of another, is the same thing as to agree, as appears by the
above cited place of Isaiah, In that day shall five Cities in the Land of Egypt
speak the lip of Canaan, and Swear to the Lord of Hosts; that is to say, They
shall be of the same Opinion with the Hebrews that inhabit the Land of Canaan.
And indeed the words Vnum Labium, and una Verba, seem rather to signify
Agreement of Mind than of Language, although it is certain there was but one
Language then in the World. For by cadem or una verba we are not here to
understand the same Sounds, and the same Syllables, but voces consentientes
Unity of Mind. Solomon Jarchi expounds it the same design.

II. Learned Men have rightly enough observed, that in Scripture to make ones
self a Name, is all one as to get ones self a Fame or Reputation, in which
sense this Expression is to be found, 2 Samuel 8.13. Isaiah 63.12. Jer 32.20. and
Dan. 9.15. and so this Tower might be said to be built in nomen, i. e. to
spread the Fame of the Builders all over the World, which Phrase is to be met
with 1 Chronicles. 22.5. where mention is made of the Building of the Temple of
Jerusalem. But this cannot possibly be the meaning of this place, for what an
odd sort of a Conclusion would this be; Let us acquire our selves a Reputation,
lest we be dispersed all over the Earth? Besides with whom would all Mankind
which was concerned in the Building of this City, have gotten Glory and Fame?
With their Posterity, as some will be apt to say, but then what fine Sense
would this make, Let us make our selves Famous with Posterity, lest we be
scattered into several Countries? If we carefully examine these words, and
revolve the whole History in our Mind, we shall find the meaning of the place
to be to this or the like purpose. Let us build us a City that may be the
Metropolis of all the World, in which let there be one Government, the Seat of
which Empire shall be perpetually in that City, lest Mankind be scattered all
over the World, according to the Fancy of every rambling Family. If this
Interpretation be admitted, it will follow, that to make us a Name, at least in
this place, signifies in a manner the same as to leave our name somewhere, i.
e. to make a place Famous with our Habitation, so that it derives its name from
the Inhabitant, see 1 Kings 9.3. and 14.21. Perhaps a Name here denotes a
Monument which is called by the Name of the Person that erected it. Thus
Absalom in his Life time had reared up for himself a Pillar, which is in the
King's Dale, for he said, I have no Son to keep my Name in remembrance, and he
called the Pillar after his own Name, and it is called unto this day Absalom's
place, 2 Samuel 18.18. So Cain not long after the Creation of the World built a
City, which he called after the Name of his Son, Genesis 4.17. In like manner Men
were now resolved to build a City, which perhaps they would have called (...),
or by some such sort of a Name. But if instead of the Hebrew word (...) Schem,
a Name, we changed one Letter and read it (...) em, that is to say, a
Metropolis, the same Sense would arise; nor could it be pretended that this
Expression is incongruous, Let us build us a City and Tower, and make us a
Metropolis, lest we be dispersed through all the Earth. And therefore the
Intention of Mankind perhaps, might be to build a Mother-City or Metropolis, in
the Vale of Shinaar, to which the Cities around it should be subject. Thus upon
the building of this Metropolis, there would have been but one Empire in the
World, which perhaps was designed at first with no ill Intention, but because
this Project drew several great Inconveniences along with it, as we shall
hereafter observe, God was pleased to blast and disappoint it.

III. By the Children of Men, Bochart. Phal. l. 1. c. 10. with several others,
would understand the Unfaithful only, because the Daughters of Men, Genesis 6.2.
signifies the Female Descendants of Cain, distinguished from those of Seth, and
thinks it by no means probable, that Noah, Shem, Arphaxad, Salah and Heber were
concerned in the building of so vain and daring a Structure. But in the first
place it is evident enough, that all Mankind, consisting of the Faithful as well
as the Unfaithful, are generally meant by the Children of Men. Secondly, It is
manifest that this Phrase is here to be taken in that Sense, from the first
Verse of this Chapter, where they are called the whole Earth, as well as from
the Silence of Moses. Thirdly, The Posterity of three Women, and that within
the compass of an Age, were not sufficient to have laid the Foundation of an
indifferent City, much less can we suppose that any of them refused to give
their assistance toward so vast an Undertaking, which required so many hands.
Fourthly, Noah, and the rest from whom the Hebrews are descended, are without
reason exempted out of this number, since this Attempt had nothing of Impiety
in it, although we own it was undiscreet, and not agreeable to the Will of God,
as shall be demonstrated below; neither if there had been any harm in it, does
it therefore follow, that Men obnoxious to Sin, although in other respects they
were not bad, abstain from it. Besides who can imagine, that while Noah and his
Sons were alive, at so small a distance too from the Flood, Mankind was divided
into Faithful and Unfaithful. We may indeed rationally enough suppose, that
some of them were not so Pious as others, but however they do not therefore
deserve to be stigmatized by the odious Character of Unbelievers.

IV. Let us go down. The Interpreters are divided about the meaning of this
passage, as well as that of Let us make Man in the first Chapter of Genesis.
Some both Jews and Christians are of opinion, that God is here introduced
speaking (...) after the manner of Kings, who as they act not only by their own
Judgment, but that of their Privy-Counsellors, use the plural number when they
speak to their People. Nay sometimes they speak after this fashion, when they
consult their Nobles. Thus 1 Kings 12.9. What Counsel give you that we may
answer this People? says Rehoboam to his young Advisers. 2 Chronicles. 10.9. Esdras
4.18. Thus God himself also is described like a King consulting his Noblemen,
1 Kings 22.20. And the Lord said, Who shall persuade Ahab that he may go up,
and fall at Ramoth-Gilead? And one said on this manner, and another said on
that manner.

Others pretend there is no necessity to have recourse to this Custom of Kings,
since sometimes we find in the Hebrew, as well as in the Greek and Latin
Languages, particular Men speaking of themselves in the plural Number. Thus
Bildad speaks to Job, when only they two were together, Quando tandem finem
imponetis sermonibus? Intelligite and postea loquemur. Cur reputamur ut
Jumentum, and sorduimus in oculis vestris? Job 18.2, 3. see likewise Cant. 1.4.
2 Samuel 16.20. and Dan. 2.36.

Some of the later Rabbis, as well as the ancient Jews maintain, that God
speaks to his Angels here as to his Guards. The Chaldaean Wise Men indeed never
describe God doing any thing but without a great attendance of Angels, as
Jamblichus often informs us, and particularly 5. c. 21. that all those Powers
that are subject to them, go before the Presence of the Gods, and whenever they
make a Procession to the Earth, bear them company. And the Jewish Masters, who,
as some Learned Men imagine, borrowed their Doctrine concerning Angels out of
Chaldaea, were of the same Opinion. Origin in his Homily upon Numbers 11. is of
this Opinion, and St. Austin de Civ. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 5.

Lastly, Some Christians believe that the Hypostasis of the Son and the Holy
Ghost are here spoken to by the Hypostasis of the Father. It Is indeed certain
that several Christians, even immediately after the times of the Apostles,
imagined that in that famous passage of Genesis, Let us make Man, God the
Father spoke to the Son. Thus Barnabas in the fourth Chapter of his Epistle,
according to the Paris Edition, but in the fifth of that of Oxford, Our Lord,
says he, vouchsafed to suffer for our Salvation, though he is Lord of the
Universe, to whom his Father said before the Creation of the World, Let us make
Man. Hug. Menard upon this place of Barnabas, has proved that some of the later
Fathers after him, as Justin, Irenaeus, Theophilus, and several more, were of
the same opinion. But after all, several Men of the greatest Reputation in the
Learned World, think that neither of these two Passages are to be urged too
positively against the Jews, as if they amounted to the force of a
Demonstration.

V. The Hebrew Root balal, which we have Englished to confound, properly
signifies to mingle things of a different nature; but what it means in this
place, is not agreed among the Annotators. Some are of opinion that God utterly
extirpated the Memory of the Primitive Language out of the Minds of Men, and
sent a new one to each Clan or Family: Others maintain that this happened
neither to Heber nor any of his Progeny, who still kept up the use of the
Primitive Language, viz. the Hebrew: And lastly, others pretend that only the
Memories of Men were disturbed, so that they fell upon new Dialects of the
first Tongue, but invented no new ones wholly different from the first; and
these support their Hypothesis by the Signification of the word Balal, which
signifies to mingle and not to create. However, most of them are agreed that it
happened in an instant, by a Divine Miracle. For my part, I see no reason why
we should believe this Confusion was wrought in a moment: Though this History
indeed is related in the compass of a few lines, and the event that followed
upon God's Determination, is immediately subjoined, yet no rational Man will
from thence conclude that it was all transacted on the sudden. Don't we find
that Moses delivers the Original of Mankind in a short Compendium, and that the
Occurrences of several Ages are related in a few lines. And therefore it is more
credible that a Spirit of Discord was sent among Men, upon which they abandoned
this foolish Undertaking, and dispersing into the neighboring Countries, and
removing their Habitations from one place to another, as they happened to be
straightened for want of room, till in process of time living at a great distance
from one another, and maintaining little or no Correspondence, their Languages
came to be changed. Now because these Passages are related by the sacred
Historian in a compendious Narration, the Interpreters erroneously believed
that they were done in as short a time, as the Verses in which they are set
down, may be read.

As we have already shown, that those Persons may be said to speak one Tongue
who live amicably and like Friends together; so the Jews say of those that are
at variance, that their Tongues are not only confused, but divided. Thus David
in the 55th Psalm v. 10. when his Enemies concerted together how to destroy
him, Lord, says he, divide their Tongues; that is, make Discord and Dissension
arise among them that they may no longer unanimously agree to act against me,
and contrive my Destruction.

VI. As we have already observed, these Persons who attempted to build a
Metropolis for all Mankind, may rather be charged with Imprudence or Folly,
than any Impiety. Let us now see whether we may be able to conjecture for what
reason God disliked and frustrated their Undertaking. 1. Two celebrated Rabbis,
Aben Ezra and Levi ben Gersom, who deny that the Builders of Babel were guilty
of any Sin, because they designed nothing more by this Project than to
perpetuate the Society of Mankind, and hinder them from dispersing, are of
Opinion, that therefore God was pleased to frustrate their Attempt, least if
they all lived within the limits of one Country, all Mankind might at once be
destroyed by an Earthquake, Conflagration, Hail, Deluge, or any Accidents of
the like nature. 2. Since Empires are at first possessed by those that are not
the best of Men, but such as either by Fraud or Strength aspire to a
Sovereignty above their Fellows, all Mankind would have been subject to the
Arbitrary Will of one Tyrant, as Nimrod is not long after said to have been,
which might have proved the occasion of innumerable Calamities. For when there
are several Republics, or different Kingdoms, if the Inhabitants of one place
happen to be oppressed by Tyrannic Power, those that are able to endure the
Yoke no longer, may fly into other Countries; which if there was only one
Governor of the Universe they could never do, because they could not go to
desolate uninhabited places without apparent danger: Therefore all Men would be
obnoxious to the Cruelty of one wicked Tyrant, if there was no more than one
Monarchy in the World. 3. If the profligate Lives and Immoralities of the
supreme Governors are copied by the common People, as we find it true by a
thousand Examples, then the Vices of ill Princes had in a short time been the
Vices of all Mankind. On the other side, when several Kingdoms are on foot at
the same time, if the Infection of Vice prevails in one place, Virtue and Good
Manners flourish in another. If the truth of this Assertion wanted to be
confirmed from Citations drawn out of History, we could easily convince the
Reader, that both under the Persian Empire which possessed a great part of
Asia, and under the Macedonian which succeeded it; and lastly, under the Roman
Monarchy when it was in its greatest extent, there was more Wickedness of all
sorts committed, and the Manners of Men were generally more debauched and
irregular, than when these conquered Countries set up several Republics and
Kingdoms of their own. 4. Josephus, Ant. lib. 1. cap. 4. who thinks that God
would have them dispersed into several Colonies for the greater Increase and
Propagation of Mankind, immediately adds this Reason, which is not to be
despised, least they should quarrel among themselves, (while every one would
pretend to make himself Master of the nearest and most fertile Lands;) but that
cultivating a greater space, they might enjoy a proportionable Increase of the
Fruits of the Earth.
Therefore to close this Dissertation, for these Reasons, or some others of the
like nature, it was by no means expedient that Mankind should live together in
one Society and Government.

Dissertation VII. Concerning Circumcision.
I. The Question debated, whether the Jews borrowed this Ceremony from the
Egyptians, or they from the Jews. II. The Reasons anciently assigned for the
Institution of it. III. The time when it was performed. IV. Other Jewish Rites
examined in relation to their Original.

1. IT has been a Question long debated among Learned Men, Whether the Jews
borrowed this Ceremony from the Egyptians, since it appears by the undoubted
Testimonies of the Ancients that other Nations, and particuly the latter, used
Circumcision; or on the other hand, Whether the Egyptians had it from the
Jews? Herodotus, l. 2. maintains the first Opinion: The Colchians, the
Egyptians, and the Aethiopians, says this Historian, are the only People that
used Circumcision from the beginning. Now the Colchians and Aethiopians were
Colonies of the Egyptians, and therefore borrowed, without doubt, this Custom
from their Founders. He immediately subjoins; The Phaenicians, and the Syrians,
that live in Palaestine, own that they learnt it of the Egyptians. And to say
the truth, the People of Egypt, as they were always extremely tenacious of
their own Customs, so they expressed that Contempt for those of foreign
Nations, that they imagined themselves to be polluted, even with keeping any
Correspondence with Strangers. They follow the Customs of their Fathers, and
learn no other, are the words of Herodotus, l. 2. cap. 78. who repeats the same
cap. 91. Notwithstanding this Testimony is so plain against them, yet several
Persons maintain that Circumcision began among the Jews, and particularly from
Abraham, whom God commanded to observe it, as is evident from the 17th Chapter
of Genesis, as a peculiar sign to distinguish his Posterity from other Nations.
The Learned Spencer, de Legibus Mos. lib. 1. cap. 4. cites the Reasons urged on
both sides at large, and compares them whom the Reader may consult for his
farther Satisfaction. It Is indeed not improbable to suppose, that though this
Custom had been long before observed by the Egyptians, either for the sake of
Cleanliness, which they principally affected, or for some other reason we are
unacquainted with; yet God for another End might enjoin Abraham to observe it.
And thus neither the Jews derived it from the Egyptians, nor the Egyptians
from the Jews, although the Egyptian Custom gave the occasion to the Divine
Precept. It seems incredible to many, that so inconvenient and troublesome a
Ceremony, and when performed upon Persons that were arrived to years of
Maturity, so indecent; and lastly, which does not in the least contribute to
Piety, and Good Manners, should be at first instituted by God Almighty. They
therefore suspect that Abraham, who had seen it done in Egypt, and perhaps was
informed by some Egyptian Servants, whom he had carried with him from Egypt
into Canaan, of the Reasons they alleged for a Rite which seems otherwise so
absurd, to have mightily approved of it: which, when God Almighty perceived,
who by a wonderful Condescension accommodates himself to humane Imbecility,
commanded Abraham to observe that Custom, which he liked in other Nations. And
yet it is not to be concluded from hence, that the Circumcision of the Jews and
the Egyptians is the same, because, not to mention that it was not done at the
same time, and perhaps the Rites too were different, the cause in both was not
the same. Origin, in his Learned Book against Celsus, has a remarkable Passage
upon this occasion. Lib. 5. p. 263. of the Cambridge Edition. The reason of the
Jewish Circumcision was not the same with that of the Egyptians or Colchians,
and therefore we must not suppose the Circumcision was the same. As for
instance, a Priest that offers Sacrifice, does not offer it to the same
Divinity, though he seems to perform those sacred Rites after the same manner;
and as he that prays does not say the same Prayer with another, although he
supplicates for the same things; so likewise though one be circumcised, we must
not infer that there is no real difference between his Circumcision, and that
of other People. For the Intention, the Law, and Will of him that circumcises,
makes it a different matter.

II. The ancient Jews were used to assign four Reasons why this Covenant was
rather instituted in the Prepuce, than any other part of the Body. The first
is, (...); the Prevention of a troublesome Disease, and hard to be cured, which
they call a Carbuncle, because it is apt to be inflamed. These are the express
words of Philo, in his Treatise concerning Circumcision, who was of Opinion,
That those that were uncircumcised, were more obnoxious to this Distemper than
the Circumcised. Cornelius Celsus, l. 6. c. 18.. 5. teaches us a way how to
cure this Disease; but I very much question whether it visits the
Uncircumcised, more than the Circumcised, provided they live chastely.

The other is, (...); the Purity of the whole Body, which becomes those of the
sacerdotal Function: For which reason the Egyptian Priests shaved their
Bodies, because something stuck to the Hair and Body, which was to be cleansed.
But too great an Affectation of Cleanliness is troublesome and superstitious, as
a moderate Care, especially in a hot Climate, is both wholesome and commendable.

The third is, (...); the resemblance of the circumcised part with the Heart:
So that the Circumcision of this part was as it were a Symbol of the
Circumcision of the Heart; that is to say, of a Mind purged from all unlawful
Affections; which is the reason that the Jews are frequently upbraided with an
uncircumcised Heart. See Leviticus 26.41. But Philo, and some others, believed,
that the renouncing of all dishonest Pleasures was chiefly signified by it:
Because among the great variety of Pleasures, that of carnal Copulation is said
to exceed the rest; our Lawgivers thought fit to circumcise the Instrument of
Coition, obscurely intimating hereby, a Circumcision of all superfluous and
immoderate Pleasure, and not of one alone; but this being the greatest, and
that to which Mankind expresses the fiercest Inclination, comprehends all the
rest. And this indeed is agreeable to the Custom of the Eastern Nations, who
instructed their Disciples, not only by words, but things in order to make the
greater Impression upon their Minds.

The fourth, and the most necessary of all, as Philo tells us, was (...); a
Preparative to beget a numerous Issue; for, if we may believe him, those
Nations which use Circumcision, are infinitely more populous than others. But,
with Submission be it spoken, this Reason seems to be none of the truest, as is
evident by the Example of the Modern Jews and Mahumetans. But perhaps Philo was
of this Opinion, because he saw his Countrymen the Egyptians begot abundance
of Children, which is not however to be ascribed to their Circumcision, but to
the Disposition of their Climate and Soil; or as some would have it, to the
Water of Nile. Rabbi Levi Barcinonensis, who has plainly and briefly expounded
the Mosaical Precepts, after he has told us of I know not what Perfection of
Body and Soul, which, as he pretends, is either signified, or conferred by the
Jewish Circumcision, adds this as his last and strongest Reason, that God for
ever blessed hereby distinguishes his Select People from others, by setting a
Mark on their Bodies. And pursuant to this it is worthy of Observation, that in
the East, and in Greece, and Italy, Men were anointed naked, or walked in the
Sun, or used Athletical Exercises, or washed themselves in Company with others;
whereby 'twas an impossible matter to conceal Circumcision: for which reason
those Persons that had no mind to pass for Jews, got a Trick of drawing forward
the Prepuce, as you may find in Grotius upon the 1st Epistle of the
Corinthians, Chapter 7. v. 18. The same Artifice was used by those under the
Emperor Domitian, who thought fit to live within the City, and yet would not
pay the Tributes that were imposed upon those of the Jewish Nation; for they so
well dissembled the matter, that when they were searched they could not be
discovered. I remember, says Suetonius, in his Life of Domitian, chapter 12. I was
present when an old Fellow, ninety years of Age, was examined by the Procurator
and a large Assembly, whether he was circumcised or no.

III. As for the time of its Celebration, it was precisely observed on the
eighth Day after the Birth of the Child; which is to be understood of their
Children or Servants that were born at home, for they could not circumcise the
rest, before they had them. Nothing but Sickness, as the Rabbis inform us,
could excuse the deferring of it beyond this time; and indeed, since this
Ceremony was performed upon an Infant with much more Ease and Decency, than it
could be upon those of a riper Age, it seems agreeable to believe, that a
positive time was appointed, least by degrees it should be deferred too far,
and at last wholly laid aside. But besides the express Words of the Law, the
Jews might be the more inclined to observe the Execution of it upon the eighth
Day, because, as we find in Origin, contra Cells. l. 5. the Colchians, the
Egyptians and Israelites, used it later; by which Circumstance they supposed
their Circumcision to be distinguished from all others. The voluntary Neglect
of it, according to some Christian Interpreters, was punished by Death,
according to others by Excommunication; however, this is certain, that an
uncircumcised Hebrew, if he were publicly known to be such, forfeited all the
Rights and Privileges of a Member of that Republic; and if he was not actually
banished, was reckoned to be no better than a Heathen. It Is probable, that the
Author of these Verses, which are to be found among the Fragments of Petronius,
meant this, which without doubt he had heard from some Jews of his Age.

Judaeus licet and porcinum nomen adoret,
Et celli (i.e. Asini) summas advocet auriculas;
Ni tamen and ferro fucciderit inguinis oram,
Et nisi nudatum solverit art caput.
Exemptus populo Graiam migrabit ad urbem,
Et non jejuna sabbata lege premet.
Vna est nobilitas, argumentumque coloris
Ingenui, timidas non habuisse manus.
The Pagans erroneously believed, that a Hog was worshipped by the Jews, because
they abstained from eating of that Creature; the other Calumny of their adoring
an Ass's Head, is indeed grosser; but after this manner either Petronius, or
some one else, describes the Jewish Religion. However, he tells us, that the
Adoration of these Deities was not sufficient for the Jews; but that unless he
was likewise circumcised, he was not esteemed a Jew, but reckoned as a Greek;
who being descended from Abraham, presumed to worship the God of the Jews,
uncircumcised.

IV. What has been said of Circumcision, may be affirmed of several other Rites
and Ceremonies in use with the Hebrews, viz. that whatever laudable or innocent
Institutions their Neighbors the Heathens had, the Patriarchs might confirm
with their Example. Now, as when we go to handle any thing of value which we
mightily esteem, or when we are to appear upon any solemn occasion, we wash our
Hands, least any Filth or Dirt should stick to them, and put on our cleanest
Apparel: So those, that were going upon the Exercise of Religious Duties,
thought it a heinous Sin to approach the Altar with unwashed Hands, and dirty
Linen; not that Nastiness was of it self hated by God Almighty, but because it
seemed to intimate a Neglect of the Business then in doing, and might give
those Persons, who judge of things by exterior Appearances, a Contempt and
Disrelish for sacred things. And as the Patriarchs were not unacquainted with
this Reason, can any one think it strange that it was approved by them? If any
one pretends to maintain, that the Patriarchs were the Inventors of this, and
the like Rites; in the first place it is certain he is destitute of the
Authority of the Scripture, which no where affirms so much: and secondly, it
will be a difficult matter to prove, that the most flourishing Nations in the
World borrowed these Rites from the Hebrews, who were a despicable and unknown
People, and neither for Magnificence or Antiquity to be compared with the
Egyptians and Babylonians. Thus for instance, we read, Genesis c. 28.18. that
Jacob erected a Stone, and poured Oil upon the top of it. It Is evident from
several Authors that the Phoenicians, and particularly the Syrians, used to
consecrate rude, unwrought Stones, and anointed them with Oil, and several
believe that they imitated Jacob in this particular, and that from them this
Custom was propagated to other Nations. But certainly it is much more probable,
that Jacob followed a Custom used long before his time, and that one Man
imitated those populous Nations, where he lived, than that these Nations should
tread after the Footsteps of a Person who was in a manner unknown to them, and
differed from them in his Sentiments of Religion. Before God Almighty had
revealed to Moses after what manner he would be worshipped, and what sacred
Rites he would have observed, pious Men were left to their own liberty, to
follow what Rites they pleased, provided the Religion of the Mind, which is the
only true Religion, was not violated by them: for as Words depend from use,
which alone stamps a peculiar Force and Meaning upon them, so the Signification
of all external indifferent Ceremonies is just such, as the Person that uses
them, does make them.

Dissertation VIII. Concerning the Divine Appearances in the Old Testament.
I. That Moses no where gives us a full account of them. II. Of those that
happened by night, or when they were asleep, III. Of those that were seen in
the daytime. IV. By what Means they were able to distinguish them from Humane
Impostures. V. How they knew God from a Good Angel; and lastly, a Good Angel
from an Evil Spirit.

I. THough Moses makes frequent mention of the Divine Appearances, yet he no
where gives us so full a Description of them as to let us know by what
particular Tokens, the Ancients, to whom God vouchsafed to reveal himself, were
able to discover him. Therefore we have nothing more left us to do, but out of
the several Histories we find scattered up and down the sacred Writers, to
gather as many Circumstances of this matter as we can. Briefly, then, both God
and Angels are said to have appeared by night and by day, in Dreams, and in
waking to Abraham and several more beside him.

II. By night he said those things to Abraham which we read of Chapter the
fifteenth, where God is said to have spoken to him in a Vision; which seems to
be the same, as in the Visions of the night, Chapter 46. v. 2. In the same, viz.
the 15th Chapter, Abraham, being fast asleep, hears the Voice of God calling
out to him. Jacob likewise sees, and hears God in his sleep, chapter 27.12, 13. and
elsewhere. Nay, God warns Abimelech, chapter 20.20. and Laban, chapter 31.24. when they
were asleep. Now it appears from the abovementioned places, that they heard a
certain Voice in their Sleep; but it is not so perspicuous, from whence the
Sound of the Words seemed to proceed; neither does Moses inform us what sort of
Ideas, or Images, affected their Minds, when they understood that God spoke to
them. Perhaps no Impression was made upon them, but only a Voice heard, as it
is evident by the History of Samuel, 1 Samuel 3. who heard a Voice which awaked
him. Others in their Sleep thought they heard a Voice, and made answer again,
as Abimelech, chapter 20. and Abraham, chapter 15. Jacob also saw a certain Resemblance
of God sitting upon a Ladder, which seemed to speak, chapter 27.19. But Moses does
not subjoin what it was; however, it appears to have been the same which was
seen by those that were awake, of which we shall discourse anon.

If any one shall here enquire, how they distinguished Divine Dreams from those
that were purely natural? It Is easier to acquaint him with what others have
conjectured, than to give any positive Determination of the matter. But the
Mischief is, that what they tell us upon this occasion, is not drawn from their
own Experience, nor from the Relation of those who have actually tried these
things, but from certain Philosophical Conjectures, as we may see in Jamblichus
de Myster. Sect. 3. cap. 2. and Seqq. and J. Smith, who in his Dissertation of
Prophecy, chapter 3. and 4. has gathered all the Opinions of the Ancients about
this difficult Point. If we were obliged, out of the several Conjectures, to
choose that which pleases us most, we should believe that those speak most
judiciously to the business in hand, who affirm, that Divine Dreams are no
otherwise to be distinguished from the rest, than that, 1. They have none of
those confused and idle Phantasms that delude us in other Dreams, but
distinctly represented to our Minds whatever Things or Being God was pleased to
send, without any mixture of foreign Images or Words; so that every thing was
very plainly seen, or heard. 2. That they are more lively than other Dreams,
and make a more forcible Impression upon the Mind, so that they were deeply
sixth in the Memory, which however did not always happen, as appears by
Nebuchadnezzar's Dream, Dan. 2. where he is said to have forgotten it, although
he knew that Daniel, when he remembered him of it, spoke the Truth to him. 3.
That they should hear God, or his Angels, so speak to them, that they should be
fully convinced that their Dreams proceeded from them. Now if all these
Circumstances concurred in a Dream, there would be no room left to doubt, but
that they were divinely inspired, especially when it was a received Opinion,
that God Almighty revealed himself oftentimes to Men in Dreams, admonishing of
several things when they were asleep, and that these were the true
Characteristicks of Divine Dreams.
Neither is it to be supposed, that God, who sees and hears all things, should
suffer those that love him to be imposed upon by unclean Spirits, or even
perplexed by the santastical Operations of Nature it self, so as to be deceived
in an Affair of this consequence.

III. To come now to those Divine Appearances that affected them by day, and
when they were awake. 2. A Voice was heard without any Resemblance, or Image,
which was enough to have awaked them, though they were asleep. Thus Samuel
being called by name, awaked, and distinctly heard the other words which God
spoke to him, 1 Samuel 3. Thus likewise Elias heard a strong and vehement Wind,
overturning Mountains, and bruising the Rocks before the Lord: after this he
perceived a Commotion, and after that he saw a Fire, then he heard the
whistling of a small Wind; which being done, a Voice came to him, saying, What
do thou do here, Elias? 1 Kings 19.11. and Seqq. without any Form, or
Representation at all. 2. Sometimes that Voice was sent down from Heaven, as
that which Abraham heard, when he was going to sacrifice his Son Isaac. 3. A
Voice at other times did proceed neither from Heaven, or the Clouds only, but
from the midst of a Fire, or Storm, as Exodus 19. and 20. and no Form was
discovered of him that spoke: After this manner God speaks to Job out of a
Whirlwind. 4. A Resemolance showing it self to Men that were awake, sometimes
discoursed with them, and did several things in their sight; so that one Man
thought he spoke all the while with another Man; whereas it appears by what
follows, and the whole Narration, that God, or an Angel, lay hid under a humane
Shape, as Genesis 18. and elsewhere. See likewise Judge. 13.5. and Seqq. Oftentimes
too God appeared like a Man in Prophetical Visions by night, as Isa. 6.1. Ezekiel.
1.26. I am of Opinion, that as often as we meet with this Expression, and God
was seen, as in Genesis chapter 12.7. that a humane Shape was seen.


Thus we have shown how many several ways God is said to have revealed himself
to those that were asleep, and awake; but so, that we did not make any
Distinction between the Divine Appearances, and those of Angels: it remains for
us now to enquire, by what means they could secure themselves from humane
Impostures; and next how they knew God from a Good Angel, and a Good Angel from
a Bad One, whenever any of the abovementioned Revelations happened to them?

IV. That there was no humane Fraud or Imposture used, if a Voice was heard,
did appear from hence. 1. Because sometimes this Voice was much greater than a
Man's; such was that, which from the top of Mount Sinai, a very high Mountain,
was on every side heard by the whole People of Israel. St. John, Rev. 1.10.
compares the Voice of Christ appearing, to the Sound of a Trumpet; nay, to the
Noise of the Sea, or a mighty River, in the 15th Verse of the same Chapter. 2.
Because it came from those places where no Man was, or from whence it could not
be sent by Men, as when Samuel heard a Voice proceeding from the place where
the Ark was, and Abraham and the Israelites from the Clouds, and the midst of
Fire.
They sometimes discovered an Angel discoursing with them under a humane Shape,
by the Majesty of his Looks, and the unusual Splendour of his Eyes. The Wife of
Manoah in Jud. 13.6 The Man of God, says she of the Angel whom she saw, comes
toward me, and his Look is like the Look of an Angel of God, very terrible. By
this means Nebuchadnezzar seems to have known the Angel among the Children,
whom he commanded to be thrown into the fiery Furnace: The Resemblance of the
fourth, says he, is like that of one of the Sons of God. Sometimes miraculous
Actions, that were above the Power of humane Performance, were added, as not to
mention any more, we may gather from the History of Gideon, Jud. 6.17. I don't
now speak of the Event of things foretold, for the Question at present is, How
at the very moment when an Appearance happened, they were able to distinguish
it from a humane Trick, before the Truth of those things they predicted, was
ratified by the Event?

V. The other Question is much more difficult, viz. By what means they knew,
whether the Highest, and the God of all Gods, appeared, or (if I may be allowed
the Expression) one of the inferior Gods, or good Angels, dispatched for that
Message by him? The ancient Jews don't seem to have sufficiently considered
this matter, since it is impossible to find out in any Narration of these
Appearances, whether God himself or an Angel speaks; and God and his Angels are
said to have appeared promiscuously in one and the same (...). See Genesis chapter
16.12. chapter 22. v. 1.11, 12. Exodus 3.2. and Seqq. So, though, Exodus 20. the Lord
God is said to have spoken, yet the old Hebrews were of Opinion, that the Law
was delivered by Angels, as appears from Galatians 3.19. Heb. 2.2. Act. 7. v.
38.53. and the reason of it seems to be this, because good Angels never tell or
command Men any thing in their own name, but behave themselves as the
Ambassadors and Ministers of the High God. Hence St. Austin, Quaest. in Genes.
37. and elsewhere has observed, that it is not so much the Angel that speaks,
as God in the Angel. Perhaps. says he of Abraham, he understood it was God that
spoke to him, by some plain and manifest Proofs of the Divine Majesty. Which
being so, it signified nothing to know whether God or an Angel spoke to them.
The Chaldeans indeed, whose Doctrine Jamblichus delivers in his Book of
Mysteries, Sect. 2. chapter 3. and Seqq. pretended to know, what was the certain
Token of the Presence of God, or an Angel, or an Archangel, or a Demon, or a
Prince, or a Soul? This was Porphyry's Question, in which Jamblichus largely
endeavors to satisfy him; but I shall not here cite those Passages in him, not
that every thing he there says is groundless and chimerical, but because the
Brevity of our Work will not allow us to be more prolix upon this Subject.

The pious Men among the ancient Hebrews don't seem to have been very
apprehensive of the Frauds of Evil Angels in this Affair, because they did not
question but that the Good Angels, who were appointed by God Almighty to
protect the Virtuous, would frustrate any such Design. And indeed it was not
agreeable to the Divine Goodness, to expose those that feared him, to
invincible Temptations, which he had certainly done, if there were no exterior
Signs to distinguish Evil Spirits from the Good, or if those Characteristicks,
which were looked upon by all Mankind to be infallible Indications of a Divine,
or Angelical Apparition, might be usurped by a wicked Power. Nevertheless I
will not deny, but that among a vicious reprobate People, whom God Almighty may
be supposed to have delivered over to the Devil, it might so fall out, that
unclean Spirits sometimes deceived them with the like Appearances, as we have
mentioned. But this was not the case of the Righteous.

Dissertation IX. Concerning the Subversion of Sodom, and the Neighboring
Cities.
I. The Occasion of this Dissertation. II. The Situation of Sodom, and the
Neighboring Cities. III. The Sins they were guilty of. IV. A Description of
their Subversion. V. The Lacus Asphaltites, or Dead Sea, an everlasting
Monument of their Destruction. VI. A Description of the Country about it, from
whence the seventh Verse in St. Jude's Catholic Epistle is explained, and some
other places of the New Testament. VII. This History gave occasion to some
remarkable Circumstances in the Story of Baucis and Philemon, which Observation
is illustrated by several Examples. VIII. Whether the Subversion of these
Cities, situated upon the River Jordan, is to be ascribed to a Miracle, or is
the common Method of God Almighty's Providence, when he punishes Offenders.

I. AMong those other Punishments which the sacred Historians tell us the
Divine Justice has inflicted upon wicked Men, few of them are more wonderful
than the sudden Destruction of Sodom, and the adjoining Cities. However, the
Interpreters of the Scripture, when they come to this surprising Relation,
scarce seem to have employed the care they usually bestow upon other places.
For which reason we judged it convenient to publish this Dissertation, where we
have treated this Matter more amply than the narrow limits of our Commentary
would allow. All the Translators which it has been my fortuen hitherto to see,
as if they imagined there was no difficulty in the case, or else had nothing to
remark upon so important a Scene, barely tell us, that this Country was burnt,
and subverted by fire from Heaven; and having done so, think they have
discharged all that is required from a Translator. The truth is, what we have
heard, and imbibed from our Infancy, becomes at last so familiar to us, that we
receive it almost without Examination. But as I have read this History with no
little Application, so methinks I have discovered several Particulars in it
worthy of Observation; by which not only this Narration may be wonderfully
illustrated, but many other Passages of the H. Bible conveniently expounded.
What we have therefore observed upon this Occasion, we have thrown into the
following Dissertation; which if we have not handled with that Accuracy as the
Dignity of the Subject seems to deserve, yet since we have done it to the best
of our Abilities, we hope the Learned Reader will favorably receive it.

II. Before we examine the Destruction it self, it will be necessary for us to
give a short Description of the Situation of Sodom, Gomorrah, Adma and Zeboim;
because by this means we shall the better understand how we come to see nothing
but a stinking Lake, where this most delightful Country formerly stood. Moses
thus describes the Situation of these Cities, Genesis 13.10. where he relates
after what manner Lot and Abraham parted: But Lot lifted up his eyes, and
beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered every where, before
the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the Lord, or the
land of Egypt, as thou come unto Zoar.

In the first place from hence we gather, that these Cities were situated on
both sides of the River Jordan; for the plain of Jordan is here called, (...),
as the Septuagint has rightly translated, rather following the Sense than the
genuine Signification of the Hebrew word Chicchar, which properly signifies a
plain Country, as we find Genesis 19. v. 17. where it is opposed to a mountainous
Region. For this reason in following times this Country was called the (...),
or Great Field; as likewise (...), or the Valley. To make this more evidently
appear, we will here set down the words of Josephus, who thus describes it in
the fifth Book de Bello Jud. Chap. 27. Near to it, Meaning Jericho.
we find a barren Mountain, but of a vast length, for Northwards it reaches as
far as the Country of the Scythopolitae, and toward the South it extends as
far as the Land of Sodom, and the bounds of the Dead Sea. Opposite to it,
beyond Jordan, lies a Mountain which begins from Julias, and the Northern
Country, and Southwards spreads as far as Somorra which adjoins to Petra, a
City of Arabia. And here too is a Mountain, called the Iron Mountain, which
reaches as far as the Country of Moab. The Valley between these Mountains is
the same we are now talking of, and Josephus gives us the following Description
of it. The Country which lies in the middle between these Mountains, is called
the EGAPEDION, or Great Field, and reaches from the Village of Ginnabrin to the
Lacus Asphaltites. It Is a Thousand two hundred furlongs in length, and sixscore
in breadth. The River Jordan runs through the middle of it. The same place,
from the nature of its Situation, is called (...), or the Valley; although St.
Jerome, in his Loci Haebraici, erroneously pretends, that it is a Hebrew word.
Aulon, says he, is not a Greek word, as some Persons imagine, but Hebrew: It Is
the name of a large and spacious Valley of a prodigious length, which is
surrounded on every side by a continued ridge of Mountains; which begin from
Mount Libanus and beyond it, and reach to the Desert of Paran. There are
several noble Cities in this Aulon, or Valley, as Scythopolis, Tiberias, and
the Lake near it; nay Jericho, the Dead Sea, and all the Countries about it
through which the River Jordan runs, which arises from the Fountain Paneas, and
so falls into the Dead Sea. The upper parts of this capacious Vale were
exceeding fertile, full of Pastures, and planted with all sorts of Trees; so
that as Josephus, l. 3. de Bell. Jud. cap. 4. informs us, it would invite even
those who are the least inclined to such a Life, to cultivate it. But the
middle parts, except where the River Jordan watered them, were burnt up in the
Summer, as we are told by Josephus in the abovementioned place. In the Summer,
says he, all this Plain is burnt up, and by reason of the extreme Vehemence of
the Heat, the Air becomes very unhealthful, for it is all parched, but where
Jordan runs; on the Banks of which River there are the most beautiful Groves of
Palm Trees. But here we have to do with neither of these parts, but only with
the lowest, which reaches from Jericho to the Mountains of Idumea, where now
the Lacus Asphaltites is, of which more hereafter. In the mean time, we must
observe by the bye, that the Waters of Jordon, by reason of the perpetual ridge
of Hills that shut it up on every side from East and West, had no Outlet at
all, but ran to the Southward.

In the second place, we must not lightly pass over what Moses says, that the
Southern part of this Valley, as you go to Zoar, was watered like the Paradise
of the Lord, or the Land of Egypt. All which words require a particular
Illustration by themselves; but first of all we will show by the Testimony of
other Writers, that this tract of Ground was exceedingly well watered, which is
a thing of great importance in the present Disquisition. To begin then with the
Country about Jericho: Strabo in his sixteenth Book, page 525. of Isaac
Casaubon's Edition at Geneva, affirms, that it is plentifully stored with
Water. Jericho is a Plain, on every side surrounded with Hills, and in some
parts bending like a Theater. It abounds with Palmtrees mixed, and several other
Trees, but it particularly abounds with the former. It Is an hundred Furlongs in
length, and is all well watered, and full of Inhabitants. Now how this Country
comes to be so plentifully watered, Josephus informs us in the abovementioned
place, in the following words: Near Jericho is a plentiful Spring, and most
convenient for watering. We shall not here set down what he relates of an
Alteration made in this Water by Elisha, nor what he tells us of the great
Wholesomness of this Well, as being borrowed from an uncertain Tradition; but
thus he goes on: It waters a far greater space than any other Fountain, viz.
seventy Furlongs long, and twenty in breadth. Southwards of the Province of
Jericho he describes the Brook, or Vale, of Kedron, which carries Water from
Jerusalem to the Dead Sea; but because Kedron is frequently mentioned as a dry
Valley, and there is some reason to doubt whether it was a Valley, or a Brook,
we shall leave the matter undetermined, and proceed to the Eastern Bank of the
Lacus Asphaltites.

In this place was a famous Fountain, called Callirrhoe, to which Herod went
from Jericho when he was sick, as Josephus tells us, lib. 17. of his Jewish
Antiquities, chapter 8. Crossing Jordan he went to the hot Waters near Callirrhoe,
which, besides their Virtue in all Diseases, may be safely drunk. This Water
runs into the Dead Sea. Pliny places this Fountain on the Southside of the
Lake; for after he has said, lib. 5. cap. 16. that Eastwards it looks upon
Arabia Nomadum, and Machaerus on the South, he adds; On the same side is a hot
Spring of a Medicinal Virtue, called Callirrhoe, denoting the Excellency of its
Waters by its Name.

From the East too the River Arnon falls into the Lacus Asphaltites, which
arising in the Borders of Arabia, as we find in Josephus, l. 4. c. 4. of his
Jewish Antiquities; and running through the whole extent of the Desert, falls
into the Dead Sea, and divides the Country of the Moabites from that of the
Amorites.

More to the Southward was the Brook Zered, mentioned by Moses, Numb. 21.12.
Deuteronomy. 2.13, 14. and this likewise seems to fall into the Lacus Asphaltites.
From whence we may gather, that all the lower part of Jordan, where the Dead
Sea now is, was not only watered with the Streams of that River, but likewise
with several Fountains and Brooks which ran into it. Now since all this Water
had no Inlet into the Sea, it must of necessity follow, that it was all
swallowed up in the Sands, every way encompassing it, which might so much the
more easily be done, because the Inhabitants of hot Countries use to divide
their Rivers into several smaller Branches for the benefit of their Fields; and
this is the reason that these Rivers, being thus exhausted in several places,
are not able to carry their Waters to the Sea. We brought the like instance of
Chrysorrhoas, in Genesis 2.11. I know indeed the Counterfeit Aristeas very gravely
tells us, that Jordan carries its Waters into another River near the Country of
the Ptolomies, which River has a Passage into the Sea. But every body knows
this to be a mere Fiction, and are satisfied that the Lacus Asphaltites has no
Outlet.

But to return to Moses, he not only informs us, that the lower-most part of
the Plain of Jordan was well watered; but he compares it to two well watered
places, and that part of it, which by reason it received so great Plenty of
Water, was exceeding fruitful, he thus describes, as the Garden of the Lord, as
the Land of Egypt, in the way that leads to Zoar. This is the true Order of
Moses's words; which if they were to be read as we find them in our Bibles, it
would be an Hyperbaton, therefore they are to be placed as we have done them.
For from this mountainous Country, which we have already described out of
Josephus, where Abraham pitched his Tents, when Lot parted from him, as he went
to the opposite Hills beyond Jordan by Zoar, he first saw the Vale of Jericho,
watered with a most plentiful Fountain, then Jordan and Callirrhoe. Therefore
this Plain by which Men went to Zoar, very well deserved to be called
well-watered. An Example of the like Perturbation of the words we find in
Genesis 25.18. But if any one will not admit of a Trajection here, the Syrian
Interpreter published in the London Polyglots, furnishes us with another
convenient Reading, where for Zoar we meet Zoan, that is Tanis, mentioned by
Moses, Numb. 13.23. and Psalm. 78.12. And indeed to describe any wellwatered
place, one could not produce a fitter instance than the Lower Egypt, and
particularly where the Road was from Canaan to Tanis. For it was not only
abundantly refreshed with the Nile, cut into several Branches, but it was full
of Lakes and Morasses. To confirm which Assertion, because it is sufficiently
known to all that are not utterly unacquainted with the Chorograpy of Egypt, I
will only allege the Testimony of Strabo, lib. 17. p. 552. Above the Mendesian
and Tanitic Mouth of the Nile, is a vast Lake, etc. then the Tanitic Mouth, and
the Tanitic Province, in which is Tanis, a samous City. Between the Tanitick
and Pelusiack Mouth (through which those that come from Canaan to these places
must travel) there are Pools, and great and continued Morasses, full of
Villages.

But it is wholly indifferent to us whether Lection, viz. that of the common
Bibles, or that of the Syriac Interpreter, the Reader will be pleased to
follow, provided he remembers that the Plain of Jordan is compared to the Lower
Egypt, upon the account of its well-watered Pastures. As for the Paradise of
the Lord, to which it is likewise compared, we cannot say any thing of it here,
which we have not taken notice of in our See the 12th Dissertation.
Annotations.

In the third place we must take notice, that there were Pits of Bitumen in
this Tract of ground, as Moses informs us, Genesis 14.10. where after he has
related the Overthrow of the Men of Sodom, the Valley of Siddim, says he, was
full of Slime-pits, and the Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and were there
destroyed. From this remarkable Passage we gather, that even before there was
any such thing as the Lacus Asphaltites, that Plenty of Bitumen boiled up out
of the ground, and there was used to be got. Which being diluted by the
confluence of so many Waters, it becomes Liquid, as we are told by Pliny, lib.
35. c. 15. though it seems to have been thick before, for the reason alleged
in our Commentary. Least the Reader should be at a loss, we have transcribed
Pliny's words, and some others of the like nature, concerning Bitumen out of
other Authors. Bitumen, says he, which in some places is a Mud, in others an
Earth, is a perfect Limus, or Mud, as it comes out of the Lake in Judaea; but
in Syria near a Seaport Town, called Sidon, it is an Earth: Both of them may
be made thick and consistent. There is likewise a sort of Liquid Bitumen. as
that which comes from Zant and Babylon, etc. All which the Greeks call
Pissasphalson, from the likeness of Pitch and Bitumen. Consult Dioscorides,
lib. 1. c. 99, and 100. Strabo in abundance of places tells us, that Bitumen
was got both out of the Earth, and out of Fountains. These are his words, lib.
16. p. 511. Great quantities of Bitumen grow in Babylonia, of which
Eratosthenes speaks after the following manner. The Liquid Bitumen, which they
call Naphtha, is to be found in Susiane the dry, which will grow hard in
Babylonia, a Well of which stuff there is near Naphtha. Consult likewise what
he says of a Fountain of Bitumen in the Province of the Apolloniata, lib. 7. p.
219. and the several Authors cited by Is. Causaubon upon that place.

But as Moses mentions Pits of Bitumen in the Plain of Jordan, so likewise does
Herodotus, l. 6. c. 119. tell us of a Pit which affords three sorts of things,
for they draw Bitumen, Salt, and Oil out of it, after the following manner:
It Is drawn out by a Bucket, with half a Bottle fastened to it, which serves
instead of a Picher; this being let down into the Pit, whatever it brings up is
immediately poured into a Cistern, and being poured out of that into another,
it produces three several things; it affords Bitumen and Salt presently, etc.
But this was Liquid Bitumen; some of the Ancients have even taken notice of the
Caverns from whence the Babylonians had it dry. Curtius, lib. 5. c. 1. There is
a Cavern in that place, from which a Fountain throws up a prodigious quantity
of Bitumen, so that it is manifestly plain that the Babylonian Walls of mighty
Workmanship, were cemented with the Bitumen of this Fountain.

This therefore was the Nature of this Soil, this the Situation of the Cities
in the Plain of Jordan. Upon which it happened, as we shall hereafter see, that
as the Ground sunk down, a great Lake of Bitumen sprung up in its room.

III. As the Babylonian Soil was wonderfully fertile, by reason it was
irrigated by the Euphrates, and the nature of the Country; so the lower most
part of this large Plain was for the same reason of equal Fecundity with it.
And as the Babylonians who flowed in all manner of Plenty, were addicted to all
sorts of Lust; so the Sodomites and their Neighbors, by the same Infirmity of
humane Nature, (which uses to abuse God Almighty's Gifts) abandoned themselves
to all the degrees of Wickedness, as Moses particularly informs us, Genesis 18,
and 19. After Men were satiated with good things, says Philo in his Book
concerning Abraham, this Satiety, after the manner of the World, soon begot
Wantonness. If we may take Cicero's word for it, Men derive their Manners, not
so much from the Seed of their Parents, as from those things which are afforded
by the nature of the Soil, and our manner of Living. The Carthaginians were not
born deceitful and Liars, but made so by the Nature of the place; for by reason
of the abundance of their Harbors, and their frequent Dealings with Merchants
and Strangers, the desire of Gain put them upon the Art of tricking and
cheating. The Genoeses inhabiting a Hilly Country, were hard and clownish; the
very Nature of their Soil taught them this, which produces nothing but with
much Cultivating and Labor. The Campanians were always proud, by reason of the
great Fertility of their Land, the Plenty of Fruits, the Wholesomeness and
Beauty of their City. From this Abundance and Superfluity of every thing, arose
that Pride which disposed these People to demand of the ancient Romans, that
one of the Consuls should be chosen out of Capua; and afterward that Luxury
which helped to ruin Hannibal, whom all the Difficulties and Fatigues of War
could not conquer. Cicero argues after this rate, in his Oration de lege
Argrario, delivered before the People against Rullus, and likewise in another,
which he spoke in the Senate House: He is utterly against the sending a Colony
to that place, which by reason of the Fruitfulness of the Soil, and the Plenty
of all things, is said to have begotten Pride and Cruelty. All which things
exactly proved true in the Inhabitants of the Plain of Jordan, whose Soil, that
we may observe this by the by, was not unlike that of the Campanians, which to
this day abounds in Bitumen and Sulphur.

Now these People, as they were corrupted by Prosperity, so it seems Adversity
made not the least Impression upon their Minds, or reformed their Manners.
Although they were conquered by the Etymaeans and their Confederates, which
Afflictions might have awakened a less flagitious People to a Sense of their
Duty; yet it wrought not any good Effects upon these Debauchees, who, as soon
as they were delivered out of Captivity, carried their old Customs and Vices
home along with them. See the 14th Chapter of Genesis. Now the Sinfulness of
these People did not only consist in this, that they were given to Uncleanness
and Lasciviousness, as appears from Genesis chapter 19. but in all manner of
Wickedness. Certainly the Debauchery of that place could admit of no new
Accessions, but was already arrived to its height, where they could think of
abusing Strangers after so abominable a manner. Therefore Josephus deservedly
begins this History with the following words. The Sodomites waxing proud for
their Riches and Wealth, grew contumelious toward Men, and impious toward
God; so that they were wholly unmindful of the Favors they received from him.
They hated Strangers, and burnt in mutual Lust with one another. Hence we see
that in the Prophets the proverbial Appellation of wicked Men is that of Sodom
and Gomorrah. Thus Isaiah calls the People of Jerusalem, chapter 1.10. Hear the
Word of the Lord, ye Princes of Sodom, listen to the Law of your God, ye People
of Gomorrah. See likewise Ezekiel 16.46. and Seqq.

IV. And therefore the Divine Justice offended at these horrid Enormities,
resolved utterly to destroy some Cities situated in the farthest part of the
Plain of Jordan, which Moses relates to have been done in the following manner;
The Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah Brimstone and Fire from the Lord out of
Heaven, and he overthrew those Cities, and all the Plain, and all the
Inhabitants of the Cities, and that which grew upon the ground, Genesis 19.24, 25.
We have already shown, that this whole Tract of Land was full of Bitumen, which
as it will easily take fire, was soon kindled by the Lightning; and the Flame
was not only to be seen upon the Superficies of the Earth, which frequently
happens in such places, without the Destruction of the Inhabitants, but so
pierced into the Subterranean Veins of Brimstone and Bitumen, that that matter
being destroyed, the whole Earth sunk down, and offorded a Receptacle to the
Waters flowing thither. All which Particulars we will now endeavor to handle
more copiously, and to illustrate by other Examples.

First, Though Moses only mentions two Cities which God destroyed by Lightning,
namely Sodom and Gomorrah, yet there were two more destroyed at the same time,
Adma and Zeboim, which lay near the two abovementioned Cities, as appears from
Chapter 14.2. Nay, Moses himself affirms as much, Deuteronomy. 29.23. where taking
occasion to describe the Punishments with which God would visit the wicked
Israelites, he tells them, that Strangers as they traveled that way should
gaze upon their Lands, burnt up with Brimstone and Salt, in which there should
be no sowing, nor should any thing grow, nor any Herb appear, as in the
Destruction of Sodom, Gomorrah, Adma, and Zeboim, which the Lord overthrew in
his Anger and Wrath. See likewise Hosea 11.8. Now the reason why these two last
Cities were omitted, seems to be, because perhaps the Kings of these places
were tributary to those of Sodom and Gomorrah. Strabo indeed in his sixteenth
Book does not mention that only four Cities were subverted by this Subterranean
Fire, but thirteen; but perhaps he might be deceived in this matter, as well as
he was in believing that the Lacus Serbonis was the same with the Asphaltites..
Perhaps to, nine other smaller Towns, which depended upon these four, were
destroyed at the same time. It Is certain, that Ezekiel does not only make
mention of Sodom but its Daughters, Chap. 16. that is, the Cities that were
situate in the same Province; As I live, says the Lord God to Jerusalem, thy
Sister Sodom, and the Daughters thereof, (that is to say, the Cities which it
had built around it, or else sent Colonies into) have not done as thou and thy
Daughters have done. It may not improbably be supposed, that Strabo, a Man of
great Diligence, and infinite Reading, might have an account of the number of
these Cities from some Writer of the Phoenician History.

Secondly, God is said to have rained down Fire and Brimstone from the Lord,
which is a Periphrasis for Lightning, as in Psalm 9. ver. 6. He will rain
Whirlwinds upon the Wicked, Fire and Brimstone; and Ezekiel 38.22. I will
punish him with Pestilence and Blood: a mighty Shower, Stones of Hail, FIRE and
BRIMSTONE, will I rain down upon him. Now Thunder is therefore called Fire and
Brimstone, which is as much as to say, Brimstone set on fire, and lighted. So
in the third of Genesis, v. 16. we find Pain and Conception, that is Pain which
follows Conception. He that is desirous to see more Examples of this nature,
let him consult H. Grotius upon John 3.5. But the reason why Thunder is thus
described, no one certainly can be ignorant of, that has either smelt those
places that have been struck by Thunder, or has read what Learned Men have writ
upon this occasion. I will only give my self the trouble to set down two or
three Testimonies. Thunder and Lightning likewise, says Pliny, lib. 35. c. 15.
have the Smell of Brimstone, and the very Light or Flame of them is
sulphurous. And Seneca, in the second Book of his Natural Questions, chapter 21.
tells us, that all things that are struck by Lightning, have a sulphurous
Smell. And indeed, our Natural Philosophers have plainly demonstrated, that the
Thunderbolt is nothing else but a sulphurous Exhalation. For this Persius, in
his second Satire, calls it Sulphus Sacrum; Ignovisse putas, quia cum tonet,
ocyus ilex.
Sulphur discutitur sacro, quam tuque domusque
On the other hand, because the Thunderbolt is of a Sulphurous nature, the
Greeks seem to have called Brimstone in their Language, (...); that is, Divine,
by a proper name (...), because it comes from God.

Now God is not barely said to have rained down Brimstone and Fire, but
Brimstone and Fire from the Lord; where the Addition of from the Lord, which at
first sight may appear to be superfluous, does more particularly describe the
Thunderbolt, which by the Hebrews and other Nations is frequently called the
Fire of God, and Fire from God. Thus in the second Book of Kings, c. 1. v. 12.
THE FIRE OF GOD came down from Heaven, and devoured him. See likewise Job 1. v.
16. Isaiah uses the same Expression, c. 66. v. 16. He shall be punished with
the FIRE OF THE LORD. After this manner the Latin Poets speaks, herein
intimating the Graecians; as Ovid. Met. l. 15.

Jamque opus exegi, quod nec Jovis ira, nec Ignes,
Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas.
Statius, in the first Book of his Thebais;

Ilicet Igne Jovis, lapsisque citatior astris,
Tristibus exiluit ripis.
Because Men have no power over these kinds of Meteors, and it is impossible for
them by any contrivance to ascend up to the Clouds, therefore God is supposed
to dwell there, and to cast his Darts from thence: although he is equally
present in all places, and does not send his Thunderbolts for any peculiar
reason.

Thirdly, Though Moses does not inform us after what manner the Thunderbolts
subverted these unhappy Cities, and the adjoining Territory, yet since he makes
mention of them, we cannot comprehend how it happened any otherwise, than that
the Thunderbolts falling in great plenty upon some Pits of Bitumen, the Veins
of that combustible Matter took fire immediately, and as the Fire penetrated
into the lowermost bowels of this bituminous Soil, these wicked Cities were
subverted by a Tremor, and sinking down of the ground. We will not here enlarge
how easily Naphtha, which is a sort of Liquid Bitumen, is set on fire. The
Reader may at his leisure consult what Strabo, l. 16. Plutarch in the Life of
Alexander, and Pliny, l. 2. c. 105. have said upon this Subject. Perhaps in
some part of this delicious Plain which was overthrown, there was only the
thick Bitumen, but even the very Vapor of that Matter, which exhales from
Grounds impregnated with it, is easily set on fire. In Lycia the Hephoestian
Mountains if you do but touch them with a lighted Torch, immediately take fire,
so that the very Stones in the Rivers, and the Sands in the Water burn. If you
take a Stick out of these Waters, and draw Furrows upon the ground with it,
according to the common report, a track of Fire follows it. These are Pliny's
words, l. 2. c. 106. There is a small Hill in the Province belonging to
Grenoble, from whence a Smoke of a Bituminous Smell is perpetually seen to
proceed: Now this Smoke by a lighted Flambeau, or Chaff, is soon set on fire,
which we our selves knew to be true by Ocular Experience.

In that lamentable Earthquake, which in the Month of January 1693. shook all
Sicily after so prodigious and miserable a manner, some Authors of very good
credit have assured us, that Thunderbolts fell in several places of the Island.
And this Observation is not unknown to the Ancients; for Seneca, Quoest. Not.
l. 2. c. 30. says, Aetna has sometimes burnt exceedingly, and thrown up a
wonderful quantity of burning Sand, the day obscured by the Smoke and Ashes, so
that the People were terrified at so unexpected a Scence of Darkness. At these
times, as the common Tradition goes, there is a great deal of Thunder and
Lightning.

And therefore the ^itumen which is so plentifully found in the Soil of Sodom,
might be set on fire by a Thunderbolt; and since it flows, or is dug not from
the Superficies of the Earth, but from Veins of a mighty depth, when once it
had taken fire the Flame must of necessity run along all those Veins, and at
last shake and subvert the ground. The same thing frequently happens to the
Fields about Aetna and Vesuvius, for the very same reason. Innumerable Authors
have written of the Soil of Sicily, but Justin shall serve for all, who in the
beginning of the fourth Book thus describes it. The Earth is naturally thin and
friable, and by reason of the several Caverns and Pipes, so penetrable, that
the greatest part of it is exposed to the violence of the Winds. Nay, the
Genius of the Soil is proper for generating and nourishing of Fire, because it
is said to be crusted within with Sulphur and Bitumen, which is the reason,
that when the Wind struggles with the Fire under ground, it frequently belches
out sometimes Flames, sometimes Vapors, and sometimes Smoke, and that in
several places. Cornelius Severus prosecutes this Argument at large in his
Poem, entitled, Aetna. The same Observations have been made of the Grounds
that lie about the Vesuvius in the Kingdom of Naples, and several Towns have
frequently been there overthrown by Earthquakes. Pliny the Younger in the 16th
Epistle, l. 6. where he relates the Death of his Learned Uncle, who was
suffocated as he approached too near the fire of that Mountain. The Houses,
says he, with frequent and prodigious Tremblings nodded, and as if they had
been removed from their Foundation, seemed to move this way and that way. And
Seneca in the sixth Book of his Natural Questions, chapter 1. has the following
Passage. We are told that Pompeii, a famous City of Campania, was subverted by
an Earthquake. -- This Concussion happened on the Which is our fifth.
Nones of February, under the Consulate of Regulus and Virginius, and
occasioned incredible losses in Campania; which though it was never free from
these Motions, yet it seldom suffered by them.

That which Seneca tells us happened to the City of Pompeii, do we say was the
very same Calamity which visited these Cities in the Plain of Jordan. Nor was
this the first time that this Valley was shaken, as the Territory about Pompeii
was not subverted the very first time it shook, as the Jewish Authors affirm,
from whom St. Jerome has borrowed what follows in his Hebrew Traditions. It is
frequently asked, says he, why Lot, after he had first preferred Segor to his
flight up the Mountain, that he desired it might escape because he designed to
live there, should so soon alter his Mind, and depart from Segor to the
Mountain? We answer, that the Conjecture of the Hebrews concerning Segor is
agreeable to the Truth, viz. that it was frequently overthrown by Earthquakes,
and was first called Bale, and afterward Salissa; and therefore Lot was
afraid, and said to himself, If while the other. Cities were standing, this was
often subverted, how can it now expect to escape in the common ruin? But to
lay aside these uncertain Traditions, we will rather observe in the words of
the Roman Philosopher, that God punished the Sodomites and their Neighbors, by
a Calamity of a large extent, which has not only destroyed single Houses, or
Families, or Cities, but whole Nations, which sometimes buries all in Ruins,
and sometimes in a deep Gulf, leaving no Remainders behind it. By which it may
appear, that that which is not now, was formerly, but triumphs over the most
magnificent Cities, and is not so merciful as to leave any footsteps of their
ancient Glory.

Strabo in his first, and Pliny in his second Book, will furnish us with
several Examples of this nature; some few of which, nearly resembling the
Destruction of these Cities situate in the Plain of Jordan, we have here
selected. The former Author tells us out of Posidonius, p. 40. that in
Phoenicia a certain City, situate above Sidon, was absorpt by an Earthquake.
Out of Demetrius Scepsius, that several Earthquakes have happened in Asia
Minor, by which whole Towns were devoured, and the Mountain Sipylus overthrown
under the Reign of Tantalas, and Marshes turned into standing Lakes. And this
happened at the Destruction of the Vale of Sodom, where the Lacus Asphaltites
was occasioned by the Water which there overflowed. Nor indeed could it
otherwise happen, the Soil easily giving way in marshy places. As the same
Author tells us, p. 37. Great as well as small things may be swallowed up,
since Chasms in the Earth, and the burying of Towns and Habitations, as it
happened at Bara, Bezona, and several other places, are said to be caused by
Earthquakes. Pliny in his second Book, chapter 88. testifies, that the Mountain
Epopos, a Fire on the sudden breaking out of it, was levelled to the Ground,
and a Town buried in the Deep. For the Arch, that supported the Ground,
breaking in, and the Matter underneath being wholly consumed, the Soil above
must of necessity sink, and be swallowed up in these Caverns, if they are of a
larger extent. For this reason 'twas supposed in Seneca's time that the
Mountain Aetna consumed, and sunk by degrees, because the Sailors could have
discerned it farther off in former times. See his 79th Epistle.

V. After this Territory adjoining to Jordan had thus sunk in, it must
unavoidably fall out, (as we said before) that the Waters running to this place
in so great an abundance must make a Lake of that place, which was marshy
before; as Moses informs us, Genesis 14.3. when he relates that the Forces of the
Inhabitants near Jordan met in the Valley of Siddim, which is now, says he, the
Salt Sea; by which name, as we shall hereafter observe, the Lacus Asphaltites
was called. And that this was not the only place, where a Lake was occasioned
by an Earthquake, we find from the abovementioned Passage in Strabo. Nay,
Pliny testifies that in one of the Pythecusae not only a Town was swallowed up
in the Deep, (as we have already observed) but that by another Concussion of
the Earth a Pool broke out. In the beginning of 1693. all Sicily was miserably
shaken; and not only several Towns overturned, but the City Augusta, which was
built by the Emperor Frederic in the Year 1229. was wholly swallowed up by the
Sea.

If to these Waters perpetually running into it, we add the Bitumen which at
once broke out of the Earth, and mingled with the Water, we shall have a full
Description of the Lacus Asphaltites. We have evidently shown, that all that
Country abounded with Bitumen before; and perhaps what Strabo affirms to have
happened at Eubaea, fell out here, which did not cease to feel Shakings in one
part or another, that the Earth opened in the Field of Lelantus, and vomited
forth a Flood of fiery Mud.

After this manner the Lacus Asphaltites seems to be made, and nothing can be
objected against it, unless it be that Abraham did not perceive the Earthquake,
which we say happened in this place. For Moses tells us, Genesis 19.27. that he
knew nothing of the matter, till he got up in the Morning, and went to the
Mountains; from whence he saw the Smoke arise from the Earth, as from a
Furnace. But besides that, Moses no where denies that Abraham was sensible of
this Earthquake; it might very well be, that the Trembling was very
inconsiderable, or none at all in the Neighborhood. Often small Tracts of
Ground are disturbed, as Seneca has observed, Quaest. Not. l. 6. c. 25. even
this Earthquake which has filled the City with so many dreadful Stones, did not
exceed the limits of Campania. Why should I mention that when Chalcis trembled,
Thebes stood unmolested; that when Aegium was every moment expecting to be
buried in ruins, the City Patrae, which stands so near it, felt nothing of
that Motion? That prodigious Concussion which overwhelmed two Cities, Buris and
Helice, stopped on this side of Aegium? It Is therefore a plain case, that the
Motion only goes so far, and no farther, as the Caverns and vacant spaces in
the Earth, give it leave. According to the Depth or Breadth of the Caverns
which fell in, the Motion must be heard farther or nearer. Now these Caverns
seem neither to have been very far from the Superficies of the Earth, nor
broader than the Valley which sunk in, since four Cities, with the Territories
belonging to them, were so soon swallowed up, and yet the Calamity spread no
farther.

The Memory of this strange Event was not only preserved among the Hebrews, who
afterward inhabited the neighboring Country, but was propogated among the
Heathens. Strabo indeed, l. 16. erroneously confounds this Lake with Sirbonis,
but in the other part of his relation deserves to be heard. It is a vast Lake,
the Compass of which some Persons estimate to be a thousand Furlongs, the
Length of it above two hundred, ( Josephus de Bell. Jud. l. 4. c. 26. tells us
it is 580 Furlongs in Length, and 150 in Breadth;) the Water of it is extremely
deep and heavy, upon which account diverse are of no use there; for whoever goes
into it as high as his Navil, is immediately lifted up. It is full of Bitumen,
which at uncertain Seasons boils up from the bottom, with Bubbels like hot
Water, and then the Superficies of the Lake swells, and resembles the rising of
a Hill. It emits vast quantities of smoaky Ashes that deceive the Eyesight; it
immediately rusts Silver and Brass, and in short, every thing that looks bright
and polished, except Gold alone. When their Vtensils grow rusty the Inhabitants
know that an Eruption of Bitumen will soon happen, for which reason they go in
flat-bottom'd Boats made of Reeds to gather it. Bitumen is a sort of Earth,
which being melted by the Heat spreads mightily, but with a little cold Water
is soon condensed again into a solid Body, and therefore needs Incision. --
Several other Signs convince us that in the Soil of this Country there is
actual Fire, for they show us rough Rocks burnt up near Mosais, and Caverns
wrought out in several places, the Earth full of Ashes; drops of Pitch
distilling from the Rocks, the Rivers hot, and casting forth an unsavory Smell,
and their Houses frequently thrown down; so that what the Natives of the place
relate, may very well be credited, viz. that thirteen Cities were formerly
inhabited in this Tract of Ground, the Metropolis of which, Sodom has still the
compass of sixty Furlongs visibly remaining, that by Earthquakes, together with
violent Eruptions of Fire, and hot bituminous sulphurious Water, a great Lake
was made, that the Stones took fire, that some of the Cities were swallowed up,
and others abandoned by the Inhabitants that could make their escapes.
Erastothenes, on the other hand, was of opinion, that the Country was
overwhelmed by store of subterranean Pools. We will now introduce Tacitus to
confirm what has been delivered by Strabo, who tells us in the fifth Book of
his History, chapter 6. A Lake of a mighty compass, resembling a Sea, but of a more
odious taste; and for the noisomness of the Smells that proceed from it, often
fatal to the Inhabitants: It is neither agitated by the Wind, nor does it
harbor any Fish, or Fowl accustomed to the Water. At certain seasons of the
Year it throws up Bitumen, the use of gathering which, Experience has taught,
as it has done other Arts. -- Not far from thence are Fields, which they report
to have been extremely fruitful in former times, and inhabited by large and
populous Cities, but afterward were set on fire by Thunder bolts, the
Footsteps of which Calamity are still remaining; but that the Earth, which
seems to be parched and burnt up, has wholly lost its fertility. For every
thing, whether it grows Spontaniously, or is planted by Man, whether Herb or
Flower, or arrived to full maturity, if compressed, moulders away immediately
into Ashes. Therefore as I readily grant, that some famous Cities were here
destroyed by Lightning in times past, so I suppose, that the Earth is infected
by Steams from the Lake, and the circum-ambient Air corrupted, which putrifies
the Fruits of the Earth. This Lake likewise, has been described by Diodorus
Siculus, l. 19. by Pliny, l. 5. c. 16. and by Solinus, c. 36. whom the Reader,
if he thinks fit, may consult when he pleases. We will not here examine the
particulars they relate, although we make no question, but that abundance of
false Reports have been uttered upon this Subject. We will only enquire into
the Reasons of the several Names it goes by, with all convenient brevity.

Every one knows wherefore it received the name of Asphaltites, since it so
plentifully abounds in Asphaltus, or Bitumen; and the reason, why it is
frequently called the Salt Sea in Scripture, is, because the Hebrews call all
Lakes, Seas; and because two other Lakes, viz. that of Semechon and Genesareth
receive the River Jordan, in his passage above, both which are fresh Water,
therefore this third, to be distinguished from them, was called the Salt Sea.
Otherwise the Mediterranean Sea is likewise salt; although it is certain, there is
some difference in the saltness. In succeeding times, it was called the Dead
Sea, not because the Water of it is immovable, as Justin pretends, l. 36.3.
but because, as Josephus informs us, it is (...), that is, it has no Fish in
it. The abovementioned Writers, that give a Description of this Lake, confirm
the opinion of Josephus, to whom we will add two Eyewitnesses: First,
Pausanias, who in his fifth Book expressly tells us, he saw the River Jordan,
which runs through the Lake of Tiberias, fall into another Lake, called the Dead
Sea, by whom it is consumed; and afterward adds, This Lake is void of Fish,
who turn back to their accustomed Waters, as from a manifest Danger. The Second
is, St. Jerome, who upon the 47th. Chapter of Ezekiel: If Jordan, says he,
swelled by the Rains, carries any fishes into it, they immediately die, and
float upon the surface of the fat Water.

VI. So much concerning the Lake. Now let us proceed to say something of its
Banks, and the circumjacent Country; besides what we have already related of it
by the by. Josephus, speaking of the Territory about Sodom, thus expresses
himself: Near this Lake, says he, is Sodomitis, formerly a delicious and
fertile Land, and famous for the Riches of its Cities, but now wholly burnt up.
After this he goes on in the following words; so that you would rather think, that
Tacitus, or any Pagan Author spoke, rather than Josephus. The Reports run, That
for the wickedness of the Inhabitants it was destroyed by Thunderbolts. Indeed
the remainders of the Divine Fire, and the Resemblance of five Cities, are
still to be seen; the sight of which, gives credit to the Stories that are told
of the Country about Sodom. After the same manner, Philo, toward the end of
his second Book, concerning the Life of Moses. The Monuments of that
unspeakable Destruction, are to this day shown in Syria; Ruins, Ashes,
Brimstone, Smoke, and a slender small Flame still breaking forth, certain
indications of Fire.

St. Jude, in the 7th. verse of his Epistle, seems to have his Eye upon this,
where he says, that Sodom and Gomorrah, and the neighboring Cities, are
proposed as a Spectacle, bearing the punishment of everlasting Fire. This Fire,
which for so many Ages was fed by the Bituminous Matter, and perhaps still
continues, is called (...). Thus Pliny, l. 2. c. 106. says, That the Mountain
Chimaera in Phaselis, burns Night and Day with an IMMORTAL Flame; after
Ctesias, who had used the word (...), of the same signification in Greek.
Diogenes Laertius, l. 8. 75. Thus speaks to Empedocles, who is reported to have
thrown himself headlong into Aetna.

(...) Thou have drunk Fire out of immortal Cups. Learned Men are mistaken, who
imagine, that this fire which burnt down the Cities of this famous Valley, was
therefore called (...), because it is a Figure of Eternity; or because it was
not extinguished till it had destroyed every thing; for it flamed long after
that, and both Interpretations are unnatural. Nor is that incomparable Man Dr.
Hammond, happier in his Conjecture than the rest, who is of opinion, that the
eternal Pains of Hell are here signified; as likewise in Matthew. 18.8. and
several other places of Scripture. In the first place he tells us, that Sodom
and Gomorrah, are here put for the Inhabitants of those Cities. Secondly, he
observes, that a present Punishment is meant here; since the Apostle says,
(...), they are proposed as a Spectacle, although he had used the Praeterperfect
Tense before; from whence he concludes, that we are to understand this of the
Damned in Hell, for as much as the other Fire was past and gone. However, the
Monuments of that Punishment, as we have already taken notice, still continued;
nor could the Sodomites be said (...), to be proposed as a Spectacle, qui (...)
non poterant, i. e. who could not be shown. Therefore our Interpretation is the
most simple and agreeable to the Words; which being allowed, we may still say,
that the Punishment of Cities destroyed, are still left to be seen by us.
Brocardus indeed, in his Description of the Holy Land, Part the first, chapter 7.
25. The Dead Sea, says he, is always smoking, and duskish like the mouth of
Hell, as I have beheld it with my own eyes, by reason of the noisome Vapors
that proceed from it. The Author of the Poem concerning Sodom, seems to have
thought of the same thing, for he concludes al^ with these Verses.

Hae Sodomum and Gomorum signata in scecula paena
Gentibus injustis, queis pectora dura timorem
Deservere Dei, de Coelo jura tuero
Inque unum Dominum rerum spectare docebunt.
The adjoining Country which escaped the waters of the Lacus Asphaltites, was,
as Moses calls it, Deuteronomy. 19.23. Brimstone, Salt and Combustion; that is to say,
burnt up with a sulphurous Fire, and changed into a Salt, and consequently a
barren Soil. The Holy Writers, when they would terrify Sinners with the most
horrible Punishments, are used to compare them with those of the Sodomites; see
Isaiah 13.19. and c. 34.10. Jeremiah 20.16. and c. 50.40. Lamentations 4.6.
Ezekiel 16.49. Hosea 11.8. Amos 4.11. St. Luke 17.29. St. Peter Ep. 2. c. 2.6.
They seem likewise to allude to this, or rather use Expressions borrowed from
hence, when they describe the Torments of the other World, under the
representation of eternal Fire, of Smoke ascending for ever, of a Lake burning
with Fire and Brimstone; as Revelations, c. 14. v. 10, 11. c. 21.8. Likewise
the Heathen Poets, because perhaps they looked upon these vulcano's or fiery
Mountains, to be as it were the Chimnies of Hell, feigned, that there were
Rivers of burning Brimstone in the Regions below.

VII. But to omit a farther disquisition of this matter, because it requires a
larger Volume; we shall rather choose to observe, That several circumstances of
a Fable in Ovid's Metamorphoses, l. 8. seem to derive their Original from this
History; as, 1. Jupiter and Mercury, like the two Angels in this Story, put on
human Shape, and travel among men. 2. They meet with very barbarous,
inhospitable Men, just as among the Sodomites, they showed no manner of respect
to Strangers.


Jupiter huc specie mortali, cumque parente
Venit Atlantiades positis caducifer alis,
Mill domos adiere, locum requiemque petentes.
Mill domos clausere serae.
3. Tamen una recepit. But one House at last received them; and so Lot gave a
Lodging to the Angels, who must otherwise have passed the Night in the Streets.
4. At last Jupiter and Mercury confess themselves to be Gods, and threaten to
punish the Neighborhood. So do the two Angels, Diique sumus, meritasque dabit
vicinia paenas
Impia.


5. These Deities save Baucis and Philemon, as the Angels do Lot and his
Family.

-- Vobis immunibus hujus
Esse mali dabitur --
6. Baucis and Philemon escape by leaving their House, and following the Gods
to a Mountain, after the same manner as Lot and his Daughters.

-- Modo vestrar elinquite tecta
Ac nostras comitate gradus, and in ardua montis
Ite simul.
7. The Neighbors of Baucis and Philemon are punished, their Town turned into
a Pool of standing Water, as the Valley of Siddim became a Lake.

-- Tellus habitabilis olim
Nunc celebres mergis, fulicisque palustribus undae.
8. The Scene of this surprising Event, Ovid lays ad phrygios colles, in the
Hills of Phrygia, but does not mark out the place more distinctly: Perhaps he
had somewhere read, that it happened (...), by which name, part of Phrygia is
called. Nay, the very name (...), is derived (...), from Roasting or Burning.
Therefore the Country about Sodom, may as well be meant by both Apellations, as
that Region in Asia Minor, as sufficiently appears by what has been already
said; but Ovid, according to the custom of Poets, puts down a better known
name, instead of one that was less known. We might easily make a Parallel
between that part of Phrygia, and the Country about Sodom, and show wherein
they agree, as any one will soon find out, who will attentively consider what
Strabo, l. 13. has written, (...), but we have not time to discuss this matter
more prolixly.

Although I am not of the opinion of some Learned Men, who suppose, that all the
Fables of the Grecians are derived from Histories in the Bible, changed and
corrupted: yet the concurrence of so many Circumstances, inclined me to
believe, that the History of Lot, is in some manner shadowed in the Fable of
Baucis and Philemon. We have shown in our Annotations upon Genesis c. 18. v. 1.
That something like this, might have happened in the Fable of Orion; and indeed
it is reasonable to imagine, that the Phaenicians, relating to the Greeks,
things done in the Land of Canaan, partly mingled them with some Additions of
their own; and partly might be misunderstood by the Greeks who had Vanity
enough to adorn whatever they heard, with new fictions of their own Invention;
which is the reason, that the footsteps of Truth can scarce be traced in their
Fables; although they arose from true Histories. Consult our Observations upon
chapter 9.20.

From this Conflagration of Sodom, the Author of the small Poem, De Sodoma,
pretends the Fable of Phaethon arose.

Hinc habet in falso de vero fabula famam
Solis progeniem currus optasse paternos,
Nec valuisse levem puerum froenare superbos
Ignis equos, arsisse orbem, tunc fulmine raptum
Aurigam.
But as there is no manner of likeness between this History and that Fable,
save only, that single Circumstance of Burning, one cannot affirm any thing on
this occasion. Others, with more probability, find some resembling footsteps of
this History in the Fable of Typhaeus, and therefore we will in a few words,
lay down their Opinion, with the Arguments they bring to support it, 1. The
name of (...), may be deduced from the Chaldee, Radix, Touph, which signifies
to overflow; and therefore will be the same as Tipho, i. e. one overflown;
which name well enough fits the men that were drowned in the Lacus Asphaltites.
2. This same Typhaeus, whether a Man, or a Monster, was an Enemy, both of Gods
and Men, as the Sodomites and their Neighbors were. See Homer's Hymn upon
Apollo, and Hesiod's Theogonia. 3. The beds of Typhaeus, are said by Homer, Il.
2. to be (...), that is, in Aramaea or Syria: for which, consult the
Interpreters upon Stheph. Byzant, upon the word (...). 4. Lycophron in his
Cassandra, p. 137. Ed. Steph. places the seat of his Wife in a Lake, which
seems to have a respect to the Lacus Asphaltites. 5. He was slain by Jupiter
with a Thunderbolt, which Homer, in the place above cited, and Hesiod, in his
Theogonia, describe after such a manner, that they may seem to relate to the
Conflagration of Sodom: consult the latter, from v. 840. to v. 867. 6. In the
very place where Typhaeus is said to be overcome, and killed by Jupiter, Fire
and Smoke is reported to break forth, which (as we have already observed)
agrees with the the Country about Sodom. It Is true, both the Greek and Latin
Poets have added several things to this Fable, and not knowing where to place
the (...), mentioned by Homer, strangely disagree from one another, as to that
particular especially, but agree in those Circumstances we have here taken
notice of.


VIII. Since it is most probable, that these Cities of the Plain of Jordan,
were overthrown in the same manner, as we have related it: However, some
inquisitive Reader may be still inclined to ask, whether we suppose the Ground
was burnt and subverted by Miracle, or only by the common methods of Nature.
Seneca was of opinion, that the Gods never concerned themselves in any thing of
this kind; and that the disorders of Heaven nor Earth, were occasioned by the
anger of the Deities. Those things, says he, are produced by their own Causes;
neither do they rage, because they are commanded so to do, but when they are
disturbed, it proceeds from some failing or irregularity, as it happens with
human Bodies; and then, when they chiefly seem to give an injury, they receive
one. But to us, who are ignorant of the true Cause, everything appears
frightful, and our apprehensions are increased by the rarity of them. But to
lay aside Rhetorical Figures, which only amuse and deceive ignorant People; the
thing itself, if we consider it divested of all Circumstances, does not seem to
exceed the ordinary power of Nature, as we have sufficiently demonstrated from
several Instances of Earthquakes. In a Soil, impregnated with Bitumen, which is
above, may be shaken and swallowed up with a sudden hiatus. Thunderbolts too
may fall, and set the veins of Sulphur and Bitumen on fire, which afterward
breaking out, and mingled with the Water, may in a low Valley, easily cause a
Lake full of Asphaltus. But if these things were done before the natural Causes
were in a disposition to produce this Effect, and had not happened at that
instant, unless it had been for some extraordinary Intervention of God, or his
Angels; it ought to be no less reputed a Miracle, than if every particular in
the Transaction, plainly surpassed the usual order of Nature. And that the
business happened after this manner, the two Angels dispatched by God Almighty,
upon this important occasion, and their Discourses are Arguments sufficiently
convincing. Nay, one of the Angels seems to have intimated this, who, before
the thing happened, foretold it to Abraham, as we have observed in our
Paraphrase of the 18. chapter of Genesis, and the 19. ver.

Dissertation X. Concerning the Statue of Salt.
I. The Original of the Opinion, that Lot's Wife was changed into a Pillar of
Salt, came from the Jews. II. This Opinion cannot be made out from the words of
Moses. III. The absurdity of it. IV. The Patrons of it are not to be reli'd on,
since they can bring no Reasons to support it. V. A Solution of the Arguments,
usually urged in behalf of the common Opinion. VI. That Lot's Wife either died
of fear, or else was suffocated by some pestilential Vapor. VII. That the
Fables of Niobe and Medusa, arose from such Expressions, as Moses uses in this
place, which is confirmed by the Example of the Fable of the Harpies. VIII.
Whether Hoc est corpus meum, does not resemble the Mosaical Narration, as they
have been already compared by some Persons.

I. HAving described the burning of Sodom, and the neighboring Towns, more
accurately, than the common Interpreters are used to do; I think it not amiss,
to examine the celebrated Metamorphosis of Lot's Wife; For, as we have
demonstrated in the foregoing Dissertation, that those Cities situated near
Jordan, were by an unusual divine Power, overwhelmed and buried in Ruins; so,
on the other hand, we hope we shall be able to convince every unprejudiced
Reader in this; that some persons, out of too fond a regard to Miracles, by
misunderstanding the words of the Holy Scriptures, have improved an event,
which we own to be somewhat uncommon, into a mighty Prodigy. The Jews, who were
always a people so sottishly abandoned to the belief of Miracles, that not
being content with the Truth, they trumpt up a Thousand other Legends absurd,
of which the Bible makes not the least mention, seem to have misled the
Christians into this Error; and they, by following their blind Guides with too
implicit a Resignation, imagined after the Jews, that Lot's Wife was turned
into a Pillar of Salt; though so wonderful a Change, cannot certainly be deduced
from the words of Moses. Josephus relating this History, in the first Book of
his Jewish Antiquities, chapter 12. (...), says he, (...). But Lot 's Wife in her
flight, casting her eyes perpetually back upon the City, and being too much
concerned about it, though God had expressly forbid her to do so; was turned into
a Pillar of Salt: I have beheld it my self, and it continues to this Day.
Josephus's Countrymen are of the same Opinion, and particularly the Author of
the Jerusalem Paraphrase, where we read, that Lot's Wife, because she was a
Native of Sodom, turned her head to see what became of her Father's House, and
was made a Pillar of Salt, till the time of the Resurrection. The same account
of the matter, is to be found in Jonathan.

II. Let us for a while, lay aside their Authority, of which we shall treat
hereafter; and examine Moses's words, which gave occasion to this Opinion.
Lot's Wife, says he, who followed him, looked back, Vatthebi ntsib melahh, and
became a Pillar of Salt. Now here we find two words of a doubtful
Signification, which being ill understood, were accidentally the causes of this
Error. (...) and (...).

The first of them in this place, may properly signify two things, 1. A heap,
such for instance, as were erected to preserve the Memory of any remarkable
Accident, such as Laban and Jacob raised in the Mountain Galaad, as we find in
Genesis chapter 31. Such a heap is called Mattsebah, a word of near affinity to this,
which signifies any thing that is raised up. For This reason, D. Kimchi seems
to interpret it (...) thal, and upon this consideration, perhaps, or from the
relation of those persons, who said, they had seen it, Sulpitius Severus,
supposes Lot's Wife to be turned into a heap of Stones. They were forbidden
(these are his words) to look behind them, but the Woman not regarding this
prohibition, as it is the infirmity of human Nature to long more earnestly after
forbidden things, turned back her Eyes, and is reported to have been
immediately changed into a Heap. 2. It may signify a Statue or Pillar: The LXX
Interpreters have Translated it, (...), a Pillar of Salt, St. Jerome a Statue,
and Onkelos the same. From which Ambiguity of the Words it has happened, that
some would have Lot's Wife turned into a Pillar, without the resemblance of a
feminine Shape, but others understand it to have been the Statue of a Woman,
wherein all her Liniaments were plainly to be seen, as we shall observe
hereafter.


But besides these proper Significations, the word (...) may in a figurative
Sense, be applied to signify something immovable and hard like a Pillar, or
Statue; whence the word (...), Nitsbelha in Chaldee, signify Hardness, Dan.
2.41. Nay the word (...), signifies a Garrison or Station of Soldiers, because
Sentinels continue always in the same Post, see 1 Samuel 13.3. Therefore this may
be the meaning of Moses, that Lot's Wife grew stiff, and remained there
motionless, like a Pillar or Statue; as we shall more fully prove anon. Thus in
common Conversation we are use to compare stupid Men, that are gazing at any
thing long in the same posture of Body, to Statues. Philo in his Book de
Profugis, where he interprets this History in an Allegorical manner, not
Unelogantly, uses the word (...), in a Metaphorical Sense: He says, that those
who leave the things before them, and turn their necks, (...), behind them,
(...), become* Pillars, like an inanimate and mute Stone. He has the same
Expression in his Book de Somniis, and says of a Man that neglects his Soul,
and only minds his Body, (...), he will stand like an inanimate Pillar which is
consumed of it self.

The other word (...) Melahh, besides its common signification of Salt properly
so called, has two other meanings in Scripture. Sometimes it signifies a salt
and barren Soil, like that about the Lacus Asphaltites, as we find in Moses,
Deuteronomy. 29.23. All his Land shall be Brimstone, Salt and Combustion, it shall not
be sown, nor yield Fruit, nor shall any Herb grow therein, as in the
Destruction of Sodom, etc. In other places this sort of Soil is called Melhha,
as Psalm 107.34. and the LXX Interpreters render it by (...); in which Sense,
if it is here understood, the Preposition (...) (which is frequently left out,
as Genesis 24.23. Psalm. 2.12.) is wanting, and then it will run thus, And she was
a Statue, or in other Hebrew words, they stood or remained a Statue in a
saltish Soil. Sometimes it signifies a long space of time, as in Numb. 17.19.
This shall be a Covenant of Salt, or an everlasting Covenant to thee. We meet
the same Expression, 2 Chronicles. 13.5. Now Salt seems to be a symbol of Eternity,
because things that are seasoned with it, continue incorrupt for many Years;
which perhaps is the reason why this word is used to signify duration of time.
And if this signification may be admitted, Lot's Wife may be understood to have
continued always in the Country of Sodom, or there to have been benumo'd, and
never to have returned back.

Thus we see there is nothing in Moses's words which obliges us to suppose,
that any unusual Metamorphosis happened in this case, in order to find out any
meaning in them; and yet we ought not to have recourse to this sorry shift,
unless after a diligent inquiry into the Signification of his Words, we were
convinced they could bear no other meaning: For since those Prodigies, which
are above the power of Nature, very rarely happen, in comparison of those that
may be effected by it; we ought seldom to admit of any Miracle in the
Interpretation of Scripture, unless there be an urgent occasion for it.

III. When God is pleased to work any Mirdcle, that is, something which cannot
be done according to the Rules of Nature, as they were at first established;
there is some important Reason, why the All-wise Governor of the Universe
neglects the Laws of Nature, and makes use of his infinite Prerogative; because
it is by no means consistent with his Wisdom, frequently to break that Order
for trivial Causes, which he at the Creation instituted with the highest
Reason. Now if we carefully examine this wonderful Metamorphosis of Lot's Wife,
we shall find nothing in this whole affair that seems to deserve so great a
Miracle. 'Twas enough that this undiscreet Woman was punished by Death for her
Dilatoriness; nor did the Angels threaten to inflict any thing beyond this,
save thy life, said he, and don't look behind thee, nor tarry in the Plain, but
fly to the Mountain, least thou should perish. Nor was there the least
necessity for a Miracle to destroy her, as we shall presently demonstrate.

Besides, Who can digest this absurd turning of her into Salt? where any thing
of this nature is related in Scripture, there are evident convincing Reasons,
why such and such Miracles, and no other, should be wrought. A Man of the
meanest capacity knows why Moses's Rod was changed into a Serpent, and Water
into Wine, at the Marriage in Cana. But here, if we were to resign our Faith up
blindly to the Interpreters, a strange and sudden Change is wrought for no
reason at all; for I would willingly be informed, why Lot's Wife was rather
turned into Salt, than into a Stone.

Some People pretend this was done, because the Earth itself being converted
into Salt, as Moses informs us, Deuteronomy. 29. emitted a saline Vapor, which
penerating the flesh of the Woman, she was immediately, turned into Salt. But
those that have diligently examined the nature of Salt tell us, that this
terrestrial Salt is fixed, as the Chemists express it; that is, does not spend
itself in Vapors. Nevertheless, should we grant what they so confidently
affirm, yet a human Body, though it were never so much impregnated with those
Vapors, would not on the sudden be changed into Salt. Besides, though the Earth
where Lot's Wife perished, is said to be Salt, yet it abounds in a far greater
quantity of Bitumen and Brimstone; so that if she were to be changed into some
Matter of near affinity with that Earth, she might much more conveniently have
been turned into a Fountain of Bitumen or Brimstone.

Others, in which number we find Clem. Alexandrinus, give us a mystical Reason
why she was turned into Salt. Lot's Wife, says he, who of her own accord alone
relapsed to the vices of the World, he left senseless, and made her as it were
a Stone of Salt, and commanded her to go no farther: No insipid, or
unprofitable Image, but to season and whet up those who have a Spritual
Discernment, Strom. lib. 2. p. 387. We meet with the same strain of Reasoning
in St. Austin, de Civ. Dei. lib. 16. c. 3. But any one may see how far fetched
and Oratorical this sort of Argumentation is, it may serve well enough for the
Pulpit, or a popular Harangue, but can never satisfy a Philosophical Ear,
which is not to be imposed upon by such miserable Rhetoric.

Aben Ezra is of opinion, that Lot's Wife was burnt by Fire, which had some
Salt mixed with it, so that she was as it were seasoned by that Salt; and he
endeavors to prove that Salt fell down from Heaven with the Fire, which was
likewise the sentiment of H. Grotius, from Deuteronomy. 29. v. 22. But Moses speaks
not a syllable of any Salt falling down from Heaven, neither can it be deduced
from his words, as any considering Reader will soon discover, or might know
from what has been already said. But how this burnt Soil came to be saltish, we
shall show in our Annotations upon that place of Deuteronomy. We may likewise
add to what has been mentioned above, against those Gentlemen who maintain,
that this Statue of Salt has lasted for so many thousand Years; that although it
were made of Salt, which equaled that which is sossil in hardness, yet being
exposed so long to the open Air, could not have lasted so long. The hardest
Marble could scarce have suffered the force of the Air, of heat, and cold, and
rain, and wind, without being considerably injured. They that pretend it was
preserved by a Miracle, are so accustomed to defend uncertain Miracles, by more
uncertain ones, and are so seldom convinced by the most cogent Reasons in the
World, that it is not worth the while to confute them.

Therefore since so many monstrous Absurdities stare us in the Face, if with
the generality of Mankind, we admit of a Metamorphosis here, and Moses's words
will very well allow of another meaning, it is more preferable in my Opinion, to
have recourse to that, especialy if it is more agreeable to Reason. Nay, though
the Words of the sacred Historian were wrested a little, which we have not
done, as is sufficiently evident already, and will be made more plain
hereafter. It were better to father a hard Interpretation upon them, than to
introduce him speaking Absurdities. It Is certainly much more credible, that
Moses used an improper Phrase, than that he delivered plain downright
Incongruities, and therefore a forced Interpretation would be infinitely more
tolerable, than to feign a prodigious Event, merely for the sake of expounding
two poor doubtful words at best.

IV. But we are opposed, they say, by the Authority of the ancient Jews and
Christians; some Citations out of whom we will produce, besides those we have
already brought, least any one should suppose, that we purposely suppressed or
omitted them. The Author of the Book of Wisdom, chapter 10.7. a perpetual Testimony
of Wickedness, a smoking Earth, and Plants bringing forth Fruit at
unseasonable times; compare this with the 7th. verse of St. Jude, mentioned in
the former Dissertation, a Pillar of Salt, standing for a Monument of an
unbelieving Mind. Philo likewise frequently takes notice of this Metamorphosis,
as we gather from the two above cited places out of him, to which we will add
this third out of the Allegories of the Law, lib. 2. p. 77. Several Souls, though
they are willing to repent, yet God does not permit them, but they are carried
back as by a strong Tide, like Lot's Wife, who for her love of Sodom was turned
into a Stone. The ancientest Christian who has mentioned this Charge, seems to
be Clemens in his Epistle to the Corinthians; his Wife, says he, went out along
with him, but being of a different Opinion, and not persisting in concord, was
therefore placed for a Sign, and continues a Statue of Salt to this very day.
Irenaeus, l. 4. c. 51. has the same and something more, as we shall see below:
It Is to no purpose to allege the Testimonies of those of a later standing.

Now all that can be gathered from these Testimonies, is only this, that the
Jews and ancient Christians believed this Metamorphosis of Lot's Wife, which we
don't deny; but it does not therefore follow that we are obliged to believe
them, because indeed they borrowed this Opinion from no where else but the
words of Moses misunderstood, and not from the sight of this Statue, as we
shall prove hereafter. Now as they might easily be mistaken in interpreting the
Words of Moses, as they were in many other things besides, so we are by no
means engaged to take their Words in this affair. For all the Authors that it is
possible to cite upon this occasion, lived in those times, wherein no certain*
Monuments were extant, from whence they might better discover the truth of this
Affair, than we at this great distance can do, besides the History of Moses:
Nor were the seventy Interpreters, or those that follow them, so profoundly
versed in the Hebrew Language, that 'twas not possible for 'em to mistake
Moses's meaning, as we have shown the contrary in several places of our
Commentary: and as for the Moderns, their Authority is of much less weight,
since it is a plain case, that they were furnished with no better helps to find
out the Sense of the Scriptures than we are: And lastly, the numbers of those
that are of a contrary Opinion to us, ought not to be brought as an Argument,
because after the Septuagint had established this Mistake in their Version, all
the rest blindly followed them, without even examining the matter. What one Man
has said, they are the words of a great Man, All believe and no one questions
it; and therefore if we consider the business aright, only his Authority ought
to be weighted in the Balance who first advanced this Opinion, and if that
proves upon Examination to be none of the best, as we hope we have sufficiently
evinced, then there is no reason why we should rely upon it.

V. But perhaps some may be of Opinion, that we lose time in seeking to lessen
the Authority of the Ancients, since we have not only their great Learning to
encounter, but the Testimonies of several Eyewitnesses, as Josephus for
instance, and some Moderns; by whose Authority rather then the Exposition of
Moses's words, this Opinion has found credit enough to last so many Ages. But
we are in hopes to solve this Argument with as little Difficulty as we did the
former, and if the Reader will be pleased carefully to consider what we say, we
don't doubt but he will acknowledge as much.

The Testimonies of Josephus, and all the rest, may be confuted by one single
Argument, which we shall first make use of, though we intend to examine the
matter more diligently afterward. All that pretend they have seen the Statue,
that we may for once grant that they saw something, might be deceived by the
Inhabitants of the place, who perhaps showed them a Stone, or something like
one, and then very positively affirmed it was Lot's Wife; for how could they
know whether they were told the Truth or no? Therefore they had behaved
themselves more discreetly in my opinion, if they had written that they saw a
Pillar, a Statue, or something like it, which the Inhabitants called a Statue
of Salt, but that they could not tell whether it was really so or no.

And indeed, such a Caution or Conduct was the more necessary in this Country,
because the People of it were more guilty than any other Nations, of imposing
old names upon new things, merely to deceive the lovers of Antiquity. From
Reading the Bible, and not from any Tradition of their Ancestors, they were
used to guess where every thing of Importance was done, and so showed to
Strangers who came to visit these places, the Footsteps of ancient things,
which they themselves had devised. And this is the Reason, that whenever they
happened to misunderstand the Scripture, they blunder in the situation, and
seign things that were never in rerum natura, as they do still to this very
day. Those that have turned over the Writings of St. Jerome, and some
Itineraries of the Holy Land, are no doubt on it, sensible how true this
Allegation is. But to make the matter plain, beyond any possibility of denying
it, we will produce a few Examples out of the vast number that offers itself.
St. Jerome in his Epitavium A Noble Matron of Rome, that went to visit
Palestine.
Paulae, describing her Travels through Judaea, In the Shore of Sarepta, says
he, she entered into the little Tower of Elias. Now can any Man of tolerable
Sense believe, that the Cottage where the poor Widow of Sarepta entertained
Elias formerly, should be standing so many Ages after? nor is there any more
reason to believe, that at Caesarea, The House of Cornelius the Centurion, the
little Aediculae.
Cells of Philip, and the Bedchambers of the four Virgin Prophetesses; and at
Emmaus, the House of Cleophas, were still remaining; and yet all these things
were shown to Paula with a world of Assurance. The same Lady not only saw the
Sepulcher of Christ, but likewise kissed the Stone of the Resurrection, which
the Angel removed from the door of the Monument, and with her faithful Mouth
licked the place where our Lord's Body lay. Afterward she was shown a Pillar,
supporting the portico of a Church, stained with the Blood of our Savior, to
which he was said to be bound, and whipped; and the place where the Holy Ghost
descended upon the Souls of a Hundred and twenty Believers. Then she went
forward to Bethlehem, and on the right side of the way, stood near the
Sepulcher of Rachel; having entered into Bethlehem, she visited our Savior's
Specus.
Cave, and saw the Holy Inn of the Virgin. In another part of Judea, she entered
into the Cells of Sarah, seeing the place where Isaac was born (who you must
know passed all their Lives under Tents) with the remainders of Abraham 's Oak.
Then she went into the Sepulcher of Lazarus, and beheld the Inn where Mary and
Martha dwelt. I will instance in no more, since these are sufficient to show
that credit is to be given to those People, that show every thing with that
wonderful exactness; perhaps some Persons, with whom Credulity and Faith pass
for one and the same thing, will maintain, that all these things were truly
shown to Paula, but we have all along professed, that we don't write to
Gentlemen of so voracious a Belief, who will with as much obstinacy combat
Truth and Reason, as they swallow foolish Stories with ease.

If we were to gather such sort of Stories out of the Modern Itineraries, it
would require no great trouble to collect them, since they frequently fill both
sides of the Page in most of them. Let the Reader only consult Bellonius and
Thevenot, whose Observations we have often made use of, when they describe the
Holy Places, and if he is not as heartily weary of them, as ever he was of the
most insufferable talkative Coxcomb in the World, I will give him leave to
apply my Writings to what use he pleases. I have already declared, that I don't
write (...), to unthinking Creatures, who will admit and reject whatever they
think fit, without any Reason on their side. However, I cannot forbear to
Transcribe one exceeding foolish Passage out of Bellonius, to show how prettily
these Holy Jugglers banter poor credulous Stangers out of the Bible: He tells
us, l. 2. c. 8. that among other things that are to be seen without Jerusalem,
they show in the City Wall, a triangular Stone, which they say is the very same
which the Scripture mentions, Psalm. 118. v. 22. viz. the Builders refused; I
humbly suppose there is no occasion to show how monstrously absurd this is.

Now to return to the Statue of Salt, we should not think our selves guilty of
ill Manners, should we suspect that Josephus did not see so much as the least
resemblance of a Statue, although we by no means despise that Writer, especially
when he comes to the latter part of the Jewish History, yet we would never
engage in so unsteoenable a Province, as to quit from the Imputation of being
sometimes a Fable-monger. In the first Book of his Antiquities, chapter 2. he tells
us, that Adam having foretold, that there would be a Destruction of all things,
one by Fire, and the other by Water, the Antediluvians built two Pillars, one of
Brick, and the other of Stone, and Engraved all their useful Inventions upon
each of them, that if the Brick Pillar happened to be carried away by the
Inundation, the Stone Pillar remaining, might preserve these Monuments for the
use of Posterity. He tells us after all, that this Stone Pillar was still
extant, (...), in the Land of Sirias; where this Land of Sirias lies ('it is to
be supposed, not far from the Isle of Pines) we will not here enquire, but few,
I am apt to think, will be able to prevail with themselves to believe that this
Antediluvian Pillar was standing in Josephus's time. But if this does not argue
the Fabulousness of a Writer, and his Friends allege for him, that he was
imposed upon by the Relations of other Men, let us hear him describe the
Fluvius Sabbaticus, or Sabbath River, lib. 7. c. 13. de Bello Judaico. He tells
us, that Titus, as he Traveled through Syria, saw a River worthy ones taking
notice of, which runs between Arcae and Raphonaeae, two Cities belonging to the
Kingdom of Agrippa: When it runs, it has a very plentiful and quick Stream, but
for the space of six days, as if the Fountains failed it above, it is altogether
dry; on the seventh day it has a brisk Current again, and this order it is
observed to keep. If Josephus saw the Statue of Salt no better than he did
Titus's Sabbath-River, we need not use many words to disprove and invalidate
his Testimony: See Ludolphus largely discussing this matter, with great variety
of Learning, in his Commentary upon the Aeth. Hist. l. 1. c. 8. Number. 68.

But it is pretended, that among the rest that visited these Places, and affirm
the Pillar to be still standing, and are cited for that purpose, we find
Benjamin Tudelensis, and the Lord knows who, one Bernardus Solignacus. As for
the former, he no where tells us that he beheld this Statue, for these are his
words, From the Sea of Sodom to the Statue of Salt, which was Lot 's Wife, it is
two Leagues. The flocks of Cattle lick of it, but still it grows again as
before. 'Twas never my fortune to meet the last, but what follows will
sufficiently show that he either told a Story of his own inventing, or was
deceived by others. Doubdanus, a Canon of St. Denis, who Printed an Account of
the Holy Land at Paris, 1666. informs us, what the honester Men in those
Countries think of the matter, p. 338. Some will pretend, says he, that there
is a great Stone of Salt to be seen, which they take for Lot's Wife, etc. but
the modern People cannot be persuaded that it could last so long.

If we will but hear some of them who actually Surveyed these places, and were
able to see nothing of the matter, but tell us what Stories they heard from
other People, it will soon appear what credit is to be given to these
Relations. Thus therefore Brocardus in his Description of the Holy Land, Part
I. chapter 7. 34. Segar is situated under the Mountain Engaddi, between which and
the Dead Sea, is the Pillar of Salt, into which Lot's Wife was turned. I gave
my self the fatigue of a very troublesome Journey to behold this Statue, but
was not so happy as to satisfy my Curiosity; for the Inhabitants assured me
the place was inaccessable, or that it could not be visited without apparent
danger of Death, by reason of the prodigious Beasts and Serpents that abounded
there, but especially for the Biduini that dwell upon the place, a Savage and
Inhumane sort of People. We can easily suppose that he endeavored in vain to
see the Statue of Salt, but if there was any such thing in rerum natura, it
ought to have been looked after on the other side of the Lacus Asphaltites, or
beyond the Eastern Banks of it, where Segor or Zoar stood: 'Twill not be amiss
to prove the Truth of this Assertion in a few Words. 1. There is no room for us
to doubt, but that those Mountains to which Lot was commanded to fly, were the
Mountains of Moab, because he is afterward said to have erected the Kingdom of
the Moabites there. Now every body knows, that those Mountains stood Eastwards
of the Dead Sea, and therefore Zoar where Lot rested in his way thither, was on
the other side of the Lake on the Eastern Bank of it; for it is not probable
that Lot, who was making all the have he could to the East, took his way
through the Country that stands Westwards of the Lake, and passed over Jordan.
2. In Deuteronomy 34.3. where the compass of the Land of Canaan, shown by God
to Moses, is described, after the Northern, Western, and Southern Tracts are
mentioned, it follows, the Plain of Jericho to Zoar, from whence we gather,
that this City stood to the Eastwards, over against Jericho. 3. And therefore
in after Ages it belonged to the Moabites, as appears from Isaiah 15.5. Jeremy
the 48.34. 4. For the same reason, Josephus de Bell. Jud. l. 4. c. 27. places
this City in Arabia, where he says that the Lacus Asphaltites reaches (...), as
far as Zoar, a City of Arabia. St. Jerome likewise in Loc. Hebr. places it
beyond the Dead Sea over against Jericho, The Salt Sea which is called the
Dead, or the Sea of Asphaltus, i. e. Bitumen lies between Jericho and Zoar.


Therefore Anselm the Minorite, whose words are cited by Quaresmius, in his
Elucidatio Terrae Sanctae, Tom. 2. l. 6. c. 14. was in the right when he said
as follows; Segor is situated in the Eastern Shore of this Sea, in part of
Arabia where this Statue of Salt is, into which Lot's Wife was turned; it is
very dangerous to go to see it, by reason of the Madianites dwelling
thereabouts, who spare no body. But what follows is extremely absurd, This Sea,
as it is commonly reported, sometimes swells to such a vast Degree, that the
whole Statue is covered with it, and is not to be seen; sometimes it decreases
so much, that the Breast and Knees of it may be seen. It stands in a pleasant
place between Segor and the Dead Sea: How in the name of wonder, can this be a
pleasant place, which is not only situate upon the Banks of the Lacus
Asphaltites, but sometimes buried under the Waters of it?

Let us now hear Quaresmius himself, who was Praesident and Apostolical
Commissary of the Holy Land, and Printed his Elucidation at Antwerp, Whether,
says he, this Statue is still extant I cannot determine, for I saw it not. But
some venerable old Men that came from those Parts assured me they had seen it,
by the same Token, that a piece of it being taken from it one day, they found
it restored the next, which Tertullian likewise observed, and so still
continued. The Biduini, who carry Salt to Jerusalem from the Mare Mortuum, do
likewise affirm that there is a small Chapel there. These courteous good old
Gentlemen pretended they had seen what they had only read or heard of, for it
was a venerable Report many Ages old, that this Statue was not diminished, and
the reason of such a Report was this, that they might have something to stop
the mouths of those incredulous People, who would be saying, they could not
imagine how it should last for so many Ages. And least any one should object,
that it might be a heap of Salt in that saltish Soil, such as are to be seen in
other places, they pretended there were infallible Indications to prove it a
Female Statue, supporting one Lie with another, for fear the Story should catch
cold. The Author of the Poem concerning Sodom, which is added to Tertullian's
Works, In fragilem mutata salem, stetit ipsa sepul^hrum
Ipsaque imago sibi, formam sine corpore servans
Durat ad huc etenim nuda statione sub aethram,
Nec pluviis dilapsa situ, nec diruta ventis.
Quin etiam siquis mutilaverit advena formam
Protinus ex sese suggestu vulnera complet
Dicitur and vivens alio sub corpore sexus
Munificos solito dispungere sanguine Menses.


Neither was Tertullian the Inventor of this silly Fiction, for St. Irenaeus
had it before him, as appears by the following words, lib. 4. l. 51. The Wife
remained in Sodom, not now a corruptible Flesh, but an everlasting Statue of
Salt, and through her Privities, showing her Menses after the manner of Women;
because the Church, which is the Salt of the Earth, is left in the Confines of
the Earth, suffering those things that are Human, and though whole Members are
often taken from it, yet it perseveres a Statue of Salt, which is the
Foundation of Faith, strengthening and sending the Sons to their Father. This
excellent Man was imposed upon by some monstrous Story-teller, and perhaps too
greedily swallowed what he heard, without thoroughly examining his witness's
Reputation. It has been long ago observed by some Judicious Persons, that
Orators are allowed to take some liberty in History, that they may be able to
say something fine and Elegant. Now this manner of Death for Lot's Wife, was
capable of all the Beauties of Rhetoric and Strains of Tragedy; but the common
Death as we have said is described by Moses, afforded little or no matter for
Pomp and Ornament.

This seems to be the reason, why some of our Modern Writers of Travels have
given an Account of what they never saw, not to take notice, that perhaps they
were ashamed to say, they had not seen that, which others who had been in those
Parts pretended to have seen, least the World should take them not to have made
a true use of their Travels. Christopher Furerus, a Nobleman of Germany, whose
Travels of Palestine and the neighboring Countries, were Printed at Nurimberg,
in the Year 1621. affirms, that he washed his Hands in the Lacus Asphaltites,
and found that the taste of it was very nasty, and more saltish then ever he
found; but be makes not the least mention of the Statue of Salt. Bellonius was
in the Province of Jeriche about Jordan, and describes all the Nations about
it, l. 2. c. 86. but is silent as to this wonderful Statue; whether he had
heard nothing concerning it, or was of opinion that the common Reports were
false. You Will find Thevenot does the same, if you read chapter 41. l. 2. Part I. of
his Travels into the East. Nay, Nicholas Christopher Radzivil, a Polish Prince,
who Surveyed these Places with all the exactness imaginable, I inquired, says
he, very carefully of our Arabian, and those that are well skilled in our
Country, who all of them affirmed, that nothing like it was there to be found.

To return now to the more ancient Times, we might to these Witnesses add St.
Jerome, who lived so many Years in Palestine, and took no little care to
divulge things of this Nature, and yet he never makes the least mention of this
Statue of Salt, although he takes notice of the Subversion of Sodom, of Lot, nay
even of his Wise too. Those that are acquainted with his Character, and know
what Pains he takes to show his own wit even upon the names of Places, and
other Witticisms, though never so far fetched, are no doubt on it sensible, that
he would never have lost so Glorious an opportunity as this everlasting Statue
afforded him to exercise his Talent upon; if any one had presumed to affirm,
that so remarkable a Monument was extant in his Time. In his Epitaph of Paula,
where he hunts after Mysteries from every place which she saw, or even beheld
at a distance, he lost the best opportunity of showing his Wit, that he could
have desired, if at that time this Famous Statue was to be seen. As soon as the
Sun was up, says he, she stood upon the Brow of Caphar Baracha, that is the
Town of Benediction, to which place Abraham followed the Lord; from whence she
beheld a vast Solitude, and the Ground where formerly Sodom, and Gomorrah, Adma
and Zeboim stood. She viewed the Vineyards of Balsam in Engaddi and Segor,
vitulaus conteruantem, which was formerly called Bale, and was in the Syrian
Dialect Translated into Zoar, that is, a little one. She remembered the Cave of
Lot (and why not the Statue of Salt, if it was still remaining) and shedding
Tears, admonished her Virgin Companions to abstain from Wine, the unlucky
Parent of Luxury. If the Statue of Lot's Wife had been then believed to be on
the other side of the Lacus Asphaltites, how opportunely might he have
introduced Paula, admonishing her Companions to eschew Earthly things, and not
to look back. In his Epistle to Rusticus, though he makes mention of Lot's Wife,
yet he says no more of her than that disordered by Despair, and looking behind
her, she was condemned to wear an everlasting Mark of her Infidelity. In his
Commentary upon Amos, c. 4.11. Lot, says he, was saved, though Sodom was
destroyed, losing the part and substance of his Body, by which we understand
his Wife; and yet this perpetual affecter of Allegories, says no more of her.
All which Circumstances clearly show, that in St. Jerome's time no body
believed that this Statue of Salt was then Extant.

VI. And indeed we have no Arguments to prove she was turned into a Statue;
it is far more probable, that the Woman either grew benumbed by fear, or else was
suffocated by some Bituminous or Sulphurous Vapor. When she saw her native
Country destroyed by Fire from Heaven and Earth, with a dreadful Noise, the
Ground trembling under her Feet, and she recollected in her mind the sad
Destiny that befell all her Friends and Relations, except her Husband and two
Daughters; What wonder is it if Grief and Fear so possessed her Spirits, that she
immediately expired, or at least fainted away, and no one being by to assist
her in that deliquium, died upon the spot. Plutarch in Sympos, L. 4. Qu. 2.
affirms, that several Persons have been killed merely with the fright of
Thunderbolts: Add to this, says he, the Consternation and Fear, by which
abundance of Men that suffered not the least Injury have been carried off, only
by their being too apprehensive of Death. Great numbers have been killed by
Thunder, who have not any Footsteps of being struck or burnt, because their
Soul with mere fear has flown out of their Body like a Bird. Many, as Euripides
says, have been destroyed by the very breath of Thunder, for at other times
also the Hearing is easiest affected of any of the Senses, those Disturbances
and Apprehensions that proceed from Noise, giving always the most terrible
Alarms to the Soul. Besides it has been observed, that several have been
stupefied to that degree by an Earthquake, that they have run up and down like
Persons distracted and out of their wits; which sad Accident, if it surprised
this poor Woman, as her Husband was making the best of his way to escape, it is
no Mystery that she was not able to save herself. Seneca tells us, that this
frequently happened when Campania was shaken by an Earthquake, Sen. Quaest.
Not. l. 6. c. 1. and in the 38th. Chapter of the same Book he assigns the
following Reasons for it, for if Fear, even when it is moderate and not so
general, makes Men reel up and down as if they were actually mad; what wonder
is it, that when the Terror is public, when Cities fall, when the Earth
trembles, when whole Multitudes are Buried in the Ruins, that our Minds, what
between Fear and Grief should forsake us.

It Is a hard matter not to be concerned, when we see Thousands before us are
so, and therefore the most resolute Dispositions were so disordered by Fear,
that they knew not what they did: Nay Men of the best Courage are not exempted
from Fear, and the wise Stoic was never yet to be sound, who (as the same
Philosopher expresses himself) could without any manner of concern behold the
dreadful and angry Face of Heaven when it Thunders, though the Firmament were
dissolved, and darted its Fires to the Destruction of every thing, but
especially itself. There is not, and never was such a Man in the World, that
could behold the Ground breaking under him, and be at the same time fearless
and unconcerned. And can any one therefore think it strange if we say, that
Lot's Wife, overcome by so Tragical a Spectacle, was benumbed or fainted away,
and consequently could not save herself by flight?

If any one shall Reply, that this manner of Death does not seem probable to
them, perhaps it is no absurd Conjecture, that this Woman not only cast back her
Eyes toward her native Country, but went back thither as soon as the Angels
were gone, to behold the Burning of it nearer, and so was suffocated by some
poisonous Vapor; as Pliny the Elder was, whom his Curiosity led too near the
Mountain Vesuvius. And this seems to be implied in our Blessed Savior's Words,
Luke 17.32. Where after he had said Let no Man return back, i. e. to Jerusalem,
after he was once gone out of it, the Siege of it now drawing near, he
immediately adds, Remember Lot 's Wife, who returned back perhaps to see
whether she could save any of her Household Stuff. Nor do the Angels seem to
have forbidden Lot's Wife to look back, as if God Almighty would punish her
with Death, only for casting her Eyes back, but that she might not loyter and
tarry as those Persons are used to do, who often look behind them out of Love
to the place which they leave, or are minded when a Town is destroying, to
behold at a nearer Distance what becomes of it. And the following Words, and
stay not in all the Plain, seem to have been added to oblige them to make the
greater speed; the Angels therefore advised them to hasten, because as the
Destruction increased on all sides, they might be consumed with the rest, though
they only tarried to look on, which frequently happens in such Earthquakes and
Fire, as are fed and nourished by the Nature of the Soil. Cornelius Severus, in
his Poem of Aetna says,

Ardebant arvis segetes, and millia culta
Jugera cum dominis, sylva, collesque virentes, etc.
Cunctantes vorat ignis, and undique terret avaros.
Namely, such as tarried behind to carry off their Wealth, which perhaps Lot's
Wife endeavored to do, and because she was not removed from the place where
she fell, therefore she is said to be like a Statue of Salt in that salt
Country. Nor is there any reason to urge the Emphasis, since we find the same
Expression used about Matters of less Importance. In the first of Samuel, c.
25. v. 37. the Sacred Historian speaks thus concerning Nabal, And his heart was
dead within him, and he was changed into a Stone, that is, after his Wife
Abigale had recounted to him the Danger he had escaped, by her making some
Presents to David, this foolish old Hunks, either out of Fear or Covetousness,
was so stupefied, that he seemed to be a Stone, and died within ten Days. But
although Nabal is here said to be made a Stone, yet no one will conclude from
thence, that he was actually Metamorphos'd into a Stone: So in like manner we
must not suppose Lot's Wife was a Statue of Salt, for all she is said to become
a Statue of Salt, or in Salt. The Latin Poets have used the like Expressions to
signify a mighty Amazement: Thus Ovid introduces Ariadne, who had been
abondon'd by Theseus, and left all alone in a solitary Island, expressing her
Grief and Wonder, Aut mare prospiciens in saxo frigida sedi,
Quamque lapis seeds, tam LAPIS ipsa fui.
Metam, l. 5. Matter ad auditos stupuit, ceu saxea, voces. And l. 13. speaking
of Hecuba, after she had seen Polydorus's dead Body, -- Duroque simillima saxo
Torpet --


VII. In the most ancient Histories of the Greeks, which are called (...), we
find innumerable Stories or Fables, not corrupted so much for the sake of
Lying, but because the Narrations of the ancient Inhabitants were not
understood well enough, and because their Metaphorical Expressions were
erroniously interpreted in the proper or literal Sense. We will here set down
some few Examples of it, which we hope will not be unpleasant or disagreeable
to the Reader.

They that first related the History of Niobe, who was destroyed by Grief,
dirigiusque males; i. e. was rendered stupid, or senseless, by her Misfortunes,
perhaps expressed it after such a manner as we find the Sacred Historian did in
the Story of Nabal; which after Ages, not regarding the Meaning, so understood,
as if Niobe had been really changed into a Statue of Stone. But Men of more
acute Understandings were aware that something else was formerly meant by it.
Niobe, says Tully, in his Tusc. 3. was for a reason supposed to be turned into
a Stone; because, as I imagine, she was everlastingly silent in her Grief.
Palaephatus de incred. Hist. c. 9. who ever believes a Man was made of a Stone,
or a Stone made of a Man, is a Fool. But the Reality of the Truth is this:
Niobe, after the Death of her Children, caused her own Statue to be made, and
placed it upon their Sepulcher. We might here observe by the bye, that Niobe's
Misfortune is said to have happened in Phrygia; which Country, as we have
remarked in the former Dissertation, has a great Affinity with the Valley of
Sodom, since both of them are (...), i. e. burnt. We might add too, that
Niobe's Children are reported to be buried by the Gods; which Tzetzes thus
interprets, Chil. 4. Carm. 141. These Gods are Elements, which thus interred
Her wretched Children, Earthquakes, Thunder, Floods,
Persuaded cruel Men to give them burial.
His Conjecture had been far better supported, if he had told us that they were
swallowed up by an Earthquake; at that time when Sipylus, where they lived, was
overwhelmed in ruins, as we observed before, and that People in following
times said they were buried by the Gods, because they were covered with Earth,
without any humane Labor or Assistance. We might likewise take notice, that
this Earthquake occasioned some Lakes near Sipylus to make this Misfortune of
Niobe more like the Death of Lot's Wife; but here we only regard those
figurative Expressions, from whence these Fables arose. We will only add, that
both of 'em are joined together by Clemens Alexandrinus for the likeness of
their Destruction, in Admonit. ad Gentes; p. 65. For have not all of you been
changed into Men without Sense, like some Niobe; or to speak more mystically,
like the Wife of that Hebrew, whom the Ancients called Lot?

The Story of Medusa, one of the Gorgons, seems to proceed from the same
Original. The Graecians had been informed by the Phaenicians, that in the
Atlantic Ocean, beyond a Mountain which is called (...); i. e. the Vehicle of
the Gods, an Island was discovered, the Inhabitants of which were covered all
over with Hair like Beasts, and appeared in so terrible a shape at first to
those that beheld them, that with Fear and Surprise, they were as it were
changed into Stones; which in the Phaenician Language, would be thus expressed,
and viderunt, and facti sunt in lapides; and they saw, and were made into
stones. The Greeks so understood it, as if Men by only looking upon them were
actually turned into real stones. Which is full as absurd as if the words of
Job, c. 41.19. where he describes the mighty strength of a Crocodile, and says,
that the stones of a Sling are by him turned into Stubble, should be so
wretchedly misinterpreted, as if the sacred Writer affirmed, there was a
certain Beast in the World indu'd with that wonderful Virtue, that it could
turn the stones that were thrown at him into stubble. The Phaenicians had
added, that there were several Women in that Island, which they called (...),
because perhaps they called the Island Gorgah in their own Language; which
word, by an Arabism, signifies a stony Ground, as that Island was, whence the
word Gorgith, i.e. a Woman of the Island Gorgah. The word Garagon likewise is
used by the Arabians, when Gorgon is formed. The Phaenicians had affirmed it in
their Relations, that none of these Men could be taken because they fled
toward the Mountains, and defended themselves with stones; but that they had
taken three Women, who, because they assaulted their Leaders with tooth and
nail, were killed by them, and their Skins carried to Carthage; from which
place these Daughters of Phorcy's were taken by the Grecians; one of whom
having her Head, which was covered with Snakes, cut off by Perseus, it was said
to have turned Men into stones with only looking upon it. That most Learned Man
Isaac Vossius. discovered part of this a pretty while ago, and showed that
something of truth lurked under this Fable out of Hanno the General of the
Carthaginians; who, as he tells us himself in his Periplus, had been as far as
these places, and from thence brought the Gorgon's Skin home to his own
Country. We have more particularly explained it than he has done; however, it is
a most certain Observation he made, that these Fables don't merely arise from
nothing, as elsewhere it happens, but have truth for their foundation, as we
find it verified in this instance.

Samuel Bochart has illustrated this Observation with an infinite number of
Examples in his Geographia sacra, which every one almost is acquainted with,
and therefore I will not give my self the trouble to transcribe them here. I
will only give one of my own to make it more plainly appear, that the Style of
the Oriental Writers, who always affected bold and pompous Metaphors, is not to
be expounded by our modern way of speaking, which is one of the greatest Faults
the Interpreters of them have committed. When they would find out the Meaning
of any Word or Expression, they rather consider how they would be understood if
they spoke so now, than how those People who differ no less from us in Opinion
and Fancy, than they are distant from us in relation to time or place, would
understand them.

The Fable of the Harpyes is well enough known, and we need not otherwise
expound it than by comparing it with the truth. First, To begin with the name,
(...) is the very same with the Hebrew word Arbeh, which signifies a Locust.
Secondly, One of them is called Celaeno. Now in Syriac, Solhams is a kind of a
Locust, and the Letters M and N are frequently changed, as appears by the words
Moph and Noph, the name of the City Memphis, and several other Examples.
Another of them, as we are informed by Hyginus, Fab. 14. was called Acheloe,
which is certainly derived from achal, to eat or to devour, as Salham in
Chaldee, from whence the name of the former is derived. Another's name was
Aello, which word comes from the Phaenician hahol, which signifies a Storm,
(for which see S. Bochart's Canaan, l. 1. c. 33.) because the Winds commonly
bring the Locusts. Thirdly, This is a reason why they are said to be the
Daughters of a Tempestuous Wind. Valerias Flaccus, l. 4. speaking of Celaeno,
says;

Implorat clamore patrem Typhona nefando. The Wind brought the Locusts into
Egypt, as we find in Moses, Exodus 10.13. Fourthly, They were carried away by a
contrary Wind, as appears by the 19th Verse of the same Chapter. So in the
Poets Zethes and Calais, the winged Sons of Boreas drive them away from
Phineus, that is, the Northern Winds. Fifthly, The Harpyes created a Famine in
the Country of Phineus King of Bithynia.

If they leave any thing untouched behind them, as one complains in Apollonius,
l. 2. The Locusts as they greedily devour every green thing, occasion a Famine
or Dearth where ever they come. Bochartus has abundance of things upon this
occasion, Hieroz. part 2. l. 4. in the six first Chapters. Sixthly, The Harpyes
are reported to have left a most nasty Smell behind them, as Phineus tells us
in Appollonius, in the following Verses; viz. v. 229.

It Is the most noisome Smell,
No Mortal can endure it,
Even though his Heart was fenced with Iron around it.
How patly this agrees with the Locusts, will sufficiently be demonstrated by
these words of St. Jerome in his Commentary upon Joel, chapter 2. We have beheld in
our times vast Armies of Locusts cover the Land of Judaea; which afterward,
through the Mercy of the Lord, were by a strong Gale of Wind carried into the
Sea: -- And when the Sea Shores were filled with prodigious heaps of these
Locusts that were drowned in the water, the noisome Putrefaction and Smell of
them was so hurtful, that it infected the very Air, and caused a Pestilence as
well of Beasts, as Men. It Is said, the Cossacks sometimes have vast numbers of
them, which after they are dead leave an abominable Stink behind them.
Seventhly, The Harpyes destroyed whatever they touched, as Plineas complains in
the abovementioned Verses, and so do the Locusts, as S. Bochart acquaints in
his Hieroz, p. 2. l. 4. c. 3. Eighthly, The Harpyes when they came to devour
Phineas's Meat, came with a mighty Swiftness and Noise, which Apollonius thus
describes, v. 267.

But they like some strange sudden Tempest rises,
Or like the Lightning, darting through the Skies,
Broke from the Clouds with sad affrighting Cries.
Bochartus, in the fifth Chapter of the abovementioned Book, will sufficiently
inform us, what a horrid noise the Locusts make with their Teeth, and with
their Flying. Ninthly, Phineus could not drive away the Harpyes.

These cursed Harpyes still my Tables haunt,
No way to stop their coming, or deceive them.
All rush together --
Nor can the Violence of the Locusts be avoided, as we find in Joel, chapter 2. and
the incomparable Bochart in his fourth Chapter, where he interprets the words
of Joel. Tenthly, The Harpyes ravaged Phineus's House against his Will. They
march through the City, says Joel, chapter 2.9. they climb the Houses, they creep
in at the very Windows like a Thief. In that part of Scythia which the Cossacks
now inhabit, there are such vast numbers of Locusts, that they get into their
Houses and Beds, and leap upon their Tables and Meat, that the People can
scarce sit down to Dinner without these troublesome Guests, as those that have
traveled through those Countries have testified in writing. See Monsieur
Thevenot's Collection of Travels, Part 1. in his Description of the Cossacks.
Eleventhly, The Harpyes could not be wounded, as Virgil tells us.

Invadunt socii and nova praelia tentant,
Obscaenas pelagi ferro faedare volucres
Sed neque vim plumis ullam, nec vulnera tergo,
Accipiunt --
Joel says the same of the Locusts, chapter 2.4. They rush through Darts, and are
not wounded, and indeed this swift and sudden Plague cannot be beaten away by
Arms. Twefthly, Appollonus and Valerius Flaccus tells us, that by an unusual
Anger of the Gods they were sent to Phineus; and that is the reason why the
former calls them (...), the Dogs of great Jupiter; and by the latter they are
styled deae, i. e. Goddesses.

Jam satis hac pepulesse Deas, cur tendetis ultra,
In famulas saevire Jovis, fulmina quanquam,
Aegidaque ille gerat, magnas sibi legit in iras.
And so in Joel, chapter 2.11. the Locusts are called the Army of the Lord.

This, as I imagine, sufficiently shows, that the figurative Expressions of the
Eastern People, unless they are rightly understood, may occasion great
Mistakes; and now, no one will admire that we have given another Interpretation
of the Statue of Salt, than is commonly done, and which the words at the first
sight seem to intimate.

VIII. From hence we may gather how little Foundation there is in this
Expression, and she was a Statue of Salt; as likewise in the words of our
Savior, This is my Body; to infer a real Conversion of the Bread into the Body
of Chirst; which Passage some Learned Men in France have lately too greedily
laid hold of to defend their monstrous Opinion. We shall not here prosecute the
other Differences between this Expression and the Words of Christ, even though
we acknowledged there was a real Metamorphosis of Lot's Wife; for we resolved
to meddle with no Controversies here, but thought fit to expose the Weakness of
this Argument, being thereunto led by this History.

Seeing therefore that matters are so as we have represented them, we think we
may make bold to affirm, that the common Belief of the Pillar of Salt, wholly
proceeded from misunderstanding the words of Moses, and has been obstinately
maintained by the Vanity of some, and the Credulity of others. Nor is there any
reason, as we hope we have fully demonstrated, to oppose the Consent and
Authority of the Ancients to our Opinion, which the most bigoted Patron of
them will never pretend that they are to be received blindly, and without
examination; or when they are proved upon a due search to be ill-grounded, and
contradictory to Reason, that they are to be preferred before a better. What
then? Shall I follow the footsteps of the Ancients? I will indeed follow the
beaten road, but if I can find out a nearer and plainer way; I will keep to
that. They that writ before us, are our Guides, but not our Masters. The truth
lies open for all; it is not wholly possessed as yet, but much of it is still
left for the Discovery of those that come behind us. Sen. Epist. 33.

Dissertation XI. Concerning the Coming of Shiloh.
I. The great Difficulty of this Place. II. That David is not meant by it. III.
Both Jewish and Christian Interpreters are of Opinion, that something is here
Promised, which is to cease at the comeing of the Messiah. IV. The
Interpretation of some Jews Refuted. V. Some maintain, that nothing but the
Dissolution of the Jewish Monarchy is meant in this Prediction. Reflections
upon the Whole.

I. THere is scarce any Place in the whole Bible, which has more employed the
Jewish and Christian Interpreters, than this Passage in Genesis. 1. The three
Chaldee Paraphrasts, Onkelos, Jonathan, and that of Jerusalem, with several
Rabbines of the same Opinion, whose Testimonies have been Collectd by Learned
Men, affirm, that the Remarkable Deliverer, whom by way of Excellence they
called the Messiah, was signified by the word Shilo. But a very celebrated
Rabbine, Aben Ezra by name, opposes his Countrymen, and maintains, that David
of the Tribe of Judah, and afterward King, was here meant. But although we own
that the Tribe of Judah, ever since Jacob's time, enjoyed some Prerogative of
honor above the rest; yet in the first place, neither Scepter, nor Lawgiver,
belonged more to that, than any of the other Tribes, till David was advanced to
the Throne: In the common Administration of Affairs, the other Tribes were
never concluded by their Votes, nor had they any manner of dependence upon
them, nay the Tribe of Benjamin had a King chosen out of their body before that
of Judah. And therefore it could never be said that Judah should have a Scepter
and Lawgiver, till David's Elevation to the Regal Dignity; for although it
should be allowed, yet in what sense could it be said, that the Kingdom should
remain with Judah, till the coming of him who fixed the Crown in that Tribe.

II. Some Jewish and Christian Interpreters are fully agreed, that something is
here promised to the Tribe of Judah, or to the whole body of Israel, which was
to cease at the coming of the Messiah, or a short time after. Those that
maintain the whole Republic of the Hebrews descended from Jacob to be meant
here, don't consider that Jacob foretells their Destiny in this place, to each
Tribe one after another; nor can they produce one single instance out of the
Scriptures, where the whole People of Israel are called Judah, before the
Babylonian Captivity. Neither can it be replied, that Jacob might very well
give his Posterity this name, because the Holy Ghost, who spoke out of his
Mouth, knew that the time when this Prophecy was to be fulfilled, the common
name of all the Tribes should be that of the After the Babylonian Captivity,
the whole body of Israelites that were in Palestine, were called jhudim or
Jews, because the first that returned home were chiefly of the Tribe of
Israelites. Afterward this name was given to all the rest, in whatsoever part
of the World they resided.
Jews; because, as we observed just before, Jacob only says such things as
belonged to every Tribe in particular, and does not mingle their common lot
together; and besides, if the last words of this Prophecy are to be understood
of the People of Israel in general, why should not the former be so too? and
that being once granted, how could the Interpreters say that Shilo ought to be
descended from Judah?

Therefore it necessarily follows, that something peculiar is foretold to the
Tribe of Judah in this place. The Ancients were of opinion, that the
Administration of all Affairs in the Jewish Republic was in the Tribe of
Judah, ever since the time when Jacob pronounced these words, to the coming of
our Savior. Now, it is certain, that neither before King David, nor after
Zedekiah, any one of the Tribe of Judah had the Regal Authority, as all that
are never so little conversant with sacred History will own. Therefore others
acknowledge, that there was indeed no King of the Tribe of Judah before David,
and after Zedekiah; but for all that maintain, it may truly be said that the
Jewish Republic should not be utterly dissolved before the coming of the
Messiah, because out of that Tribe the Commonwealth recovered their strength
by degrees, and preserved some sort of Government in their hands, even till the
days of Christ. But Jacob does not promise, that the Scepter should continue
with Judah, and not be wholly taken from him, till the Messiah should come, but
that it should not depart from him; which Expression plainly denotes, the
perpetual Continuation of a Kingdom, interrupted by no Calamities.

III. Some Jews are of opinion, that it is here prophesied of Judah, that the
Rod wherewith he is to be beaten, shall not depart from him; but that still one
or other shall command, and impose Laws upon him, till the coming of the
Messiah. But besides, that the particular words, which compose this Prediction,
will by no means admit of this Interpretation, it is apparently false, whither
we understand the Tribe of Judah, or the whole People of Israel, as it may
easily be proved by the History of the Old Testament, and particularly the
Reigns of David and Solomon.

We will not pursue this Argument any farther, which would furnish matter
enough for a large Volume, if it were to be examined with all that Nicety it
deserves. But the Reader may consult for his farther Satisfaction Huetius's
Demonstratio Evangelica, Prop. 9. Cap. 4. where he has set down all the
different Opinions with incredible Pains and Acuracy. To him may be added the
Pugio Fidei, p. 2. cap. 4. with the Learned Observations of Jos. de Voisin,
where the several Testimonies of the Rabbines chiefly are collected. We shall
only subjoin another Interpretation of this Prophecy, which they have not taken
notice of; and some People perhaps upon a due examination will find it to be
more agreeable not only to the Grammatical Sense of the words, but also to the
Events here predicted.

IV. Some Persons therefore believe, that Jacob promised nothing more to Judah
in this place, but that when the Regal Dignity had once honored his Tribe, it
should be translated to no other, but continue there till it was wholly
extinguished. The Maintainers of this Opinion interpret Shiloh to be the End or
Cessation of it, to wit, of the Scepter and Royal Power. Now if this were the
true Interpretation of the word, there is nothing in Jacob's Prediction which
would occasion the least difficulty: for it appears by the sacred History, that
from the time that David sat upon the Throne of Israel, the Kings descended
from him governed the Tribe of Judah without the Intervention of any other
Family, till the Kingdom of Judah was wholly dissolved. Whereas in the Kingdom
of the ten Tribes, even before it was utterly destroyed by Salmanassar, the
Regal Dignity did not stand in one, but several Tribes, according to the
different Descent of their Kings. The chief Objection that can be raised
against this Interpretation will be, that it disarms the Christians of an
Oracle, owned by the Jews themselves, whereby they have successfully proved
against the latter, that the Messiah was already come. But an Interpreter must
not always consider what the Jews will give him leave to say, or what would be
serviceable to his Cause, if it were true, but what is really consonant to the
Truth it self, no less than if there were no such People as the Jews now in the
World, or if we had never had the least Dispute with them about the coming of
the Messiah. Though the Jews were not mistaken in their Expectation of the
Messiah, yet all those places in the Old Testament, which out of their former
immoderate, and now their preposterous Desire of his coming, they have
expounded concerning him, must not therefore be affirmed to relate to him,
merely because the Jews think so. That the Rabbis have forced several Passages
in the Bible to favor the Messiah, without any reason on their side, is
sufficiently known to those that have either read them, or what the Christians
have collected out of their Writings. Therefore as it was a true Tradition of
the ancient Jews, that there should come at last a Deliverer to Israel, so any
unprejudiced Person will own that they might sometimes commit Mistakes in
expounding some Text of the O. Testament, which they supposed to relate to him.

V. This we don't say with that prospect, as if we had the Vanity to imagine
that this last Interpretation of Jacob's Prophecy ought to take place of all
other, whether already found out, or hereafter to be discovered, as being the
unquestionable meaning of this Passage: but that after the Merits of all the
other Opinions have been impartially considered, it will more plainly appear
either on which side the Truth stands, or where and by what Methods it is to be
acquired, or lastly why it cannot be found out?

Dissertation XII. In which several Obscure Texts in Genesis are explained and
illustrated.
AND God said let there, chapter 1.3.] The Hebrews commonly describe God working
all things by his Word, to denote his transcendent Power over the whole
Creation, and with what ease he does whatever he pleases. Thus the Psalmist,
Psalm 33.6. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of
them by the Breath of his Mouth: Psalm 148.5. He commanded, and they were
created. And as he creates by his Commands, so he destroys after the same
manner. He shall smite the Earth, says Isaiah, c. 11.4. with the Rod of his
Mouth, and with the Breath of his Lips he shall slay the Wicked. If there is
any Sublimity in these Expressions, as we own there is, it is to be ascribed to
the Genius of the Hebrew Language, and not to the Eloquence of Moses, as
Longinus, (...) imagined: for otherwise Moses rather uses an humble style in
his Historical Narrations, as Huetius has observed, Prop. 4. c. 2. Them. Evang.

And the Earth brought forth Grass, chapter 1.12.] This Verse is a mere Repetition
of the former, which after Moses had said and it was so, was altogether
unnecessary. But the Hebrew Writers are far from that Severity of the Atticks,
who could not endure any Superfluities. Several things are redundant in the
sacred Volumes, and others defective, which would not a little contribute to
the Perspicuity of the Sentence. However, this is not so much to be attributed
to their Writers, as to the Condition of their Language, which the most partial
Patron of it must acknowledge to be unpolished and uncultivated, though it
sometimes affects, as has been observed in the preceding Praragraph, according
to the Genius of the other Oriental Languages, a pompous and magnificent way of
Expression.

God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, chapter 2.3.] As one contrary is
best illustrated by another, it will not be mal a propos to enquire what is the
meaning of Maledicere diis, i* e. to curse a day; that so we may understand
what it is, benedicere dici, or to bless a day. Among the Hebrews that was said
to be a maledictus dies, or a cursed day, which the Greeks called (...), and
the Romans exsecrabiles, or unauspicious, by reason of some remarkable
Destruction or Calamity which had happened on that day. Thus, Jeremiah 20.14.
the Prophet to denote how wretched a Life he lived, Cursed be the day, says he,
wherein I was born: let not the day wherein my Mother bore me be blessed: That
is, let that day be reckoned ominous in all future Ages, for the Birth of an
unfortunate Child. The Roman Senate out of a servile Compliment to Nero,
decreed that Agrippina's Birthday should be reckoned among the dies nefasti,
as we find in Tacitus, Ann. 14.12. Which Custom the Romans borrowed from the
Graecians, and they from the Oriental People. Now on such a day they were
forbidden to show any public mirth, or rejoicing in memory of the unlucky
Accident whatever it was, that happened on it. Hence Job cursing the day of his
Nativity, wishes, chapter 3.7. that no joy be in it. And therefore to curse a day,
is all one as to pray that it may become execrable and ominous, and that all
Demonstrations of Gladness may be intermitted upon it; to bless a day is to
wish that it may be esteemed fortunate, and celebrated with public Rejoycings,
and a blessed day is the same with a happy, or a festival day. From these
Premises it follows, that when God is said to have blessed the seventh day, we
are to understand by that passage, Deum voluisse eum diem festem haberi, and
hilariter transigi. However, we are not to infer from this place, that Mankind
ever since the Creation of Adam, observed this day as a Festival, because Moses
when he relates the History of the earliest times, frequently takes occasion to
remind the Israelites of the Original of some Rites which he instituted; and
does not speak as Adam, or those that were before him would have done if they
had transmitted their own Actions in writing, but suits himself to the Language
and Genius of his own times. See chap. 7.2.

To see what he would call them, c. 2.19.] Here the famous Axiom of the
Rabbines takes place, Loquitur lex ut filij hominum, for God did not want the
help of Adam to give names to the Beasts. Perhaps this was not done in the
compass of one day, if as some believe, Adam viewed all the several sorts of
Animals, neither is it credible that all the Creatures in the Universe, both
wild and tame, and all the Fishes, were brought before Adam to receive their
names. In all appearance those Beasts and Fowls that are peculiar to America,
never came upon this Errand, neither will any one I believe, presume that the
Fishes quitted their Element for this purpose. We have already observed in our
Dissertation upon the Flood, that the word all is frequently applied to signify
some certain kinds, but not omnia genera, and therefore we may suppose that
with Eve's Consent Adam bestowed particular names upon some of the tamer and
most common Animals in Syria. For what occasion had Adam for Speech and Names
of things, so long as he was alone? Therefore the order to be neglected here,
as it frequently is; see chapter 1.^.5, 8, 10.

Now because this is related in a few words, we must not therefore conclude,
that it was transacted in a few hours, and therefore we lie under no necessity
to affirm with some Interpreters, that by a miraculous and extraordinary Effect
of the Divine Power all sorts of living Creatures came in troops to Adam to
have names bestowed upon them. It Is more agreeable to reason to believe that
words were invented by degrees, and that these Animals received their names as
our first Parents happened to behold them, or to talk of them.

And whatsoever Adam called every living Creature, that was the name thereof,
ibid.] The Rabbines pretend that these names were given them in the Hebrew
Tongue; but how precariously this is affirmed, we have plainly shown in our
Dissertation about the Hebrew Tongue. Perhaps Moses designed to hint in this
place that the Invention of a Language, which is of such absolute necessity to
all the affairs of humane Life, was one of the first cares of our first
Parents: or perhaps the Sovereignty of Man over the Beasts, is intimated by
this bestowing of names upon them. Whence among the Eastern People those that
had new Masters, had new names given them by them, as Joseph from Pharaoh, Genesis
41.45. Eliakim King of Judah from Pharaoh Necha, 2 Chronicles. c. 36.4. And Daniel
and his Companions, by Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 1.7. The Rabbines likewise, and
some of the Interpreters, pretend that Adam bestowed these names with great
Sagacity and Wisdom; from whence they conclude, that he was acquainted with
their different natures, as Bochart endeavors to show, Hieroz. part 1. lib. 1.
cap. 9. But that Learned Man takes it for granted all along, that Adam spoke
Hebrew, such as we find it in the holy Volumes, which as we have already
observed, is doubtful. Besides, those names are sometimes taken from something
remarkable obvious in the Animals, which any one might have discovered at first
sight. In short, most of the Reasons of the Hebrew names are supported by very
slight Conjectures, and are by no means to be obtruded as certainly true, upon
such as are well skilled in these matters: not to repeat what we said before,
that but few of the Animals had names immediately given them, but only as our
first Parents took notice of them, or knew them by frequent Experiments.

And he took one of his ribs, c. 2.21.] From this, or some such sort of a
Narration among the Orientals, Plato in Eusebius's Opinion, Praep. Evang. l.
12. c. 12. seems to have taken what he writes concerning the nature of the
first Man, in his Symposian, where he supposes that he was at first (...), both
Man and Woman growing together, and that this Animal afterward was divided
into two parts, one of which became a Man, and the other a Woman. The ancient
Rabbines reading this Passage in Plato, as they were always fond of Monsters
and Prodigies; they soon liked it, and endeavored to countenance this strange
Opinion by some places of Scripture absurdly applied, as particularly c. 12.
Male and Female he created them. Now that this Doctrine was first borrowed from
Plato, and afterward crusted over with the Authority of the Bible to recommend
it the better, we shall be soon convinced if we consider that the Rabbines had
several other Opinions of the same nature, which they took originally out of
this Philosopher, and then published them as if they had taken them out of the
Scriptures, as the notion of the Transmigration of Souls, and the like.
Therefore we have no reason to wonder, as the Learned Grotius does, that the
Rabbinical Expositions agree so well with Plato's Doctrine. Thus we see the
Christian Interpreters frequently expound the Scripture, so as to make it
support the Hypothesis of the ancient or modern Philosophers.

And were not ashamed. c. 2.25.] We use to blush when we are discovered
committing something which is in its own nature evil, and consequently
unlawful; or when we do something which is indeed lawful, but not in such a
manner or at such a time. Neither of which could be said to be here, for
neither is it immoral ^o go without Clothes, neither if it is unlawful to do so
before others, is it unlawful before ones Wife alone. It Is therefore somewhat
strange how our first Parents should afterward be ashamed of the Nakedness,
when there were no more in the World but themselves.

Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering, chapter 4.3.] Grotius thinks
this was done by no positive Command of God, but merely by the Dictates of
nature, which suggested to him, that as a conspicuous Respect was to be paid to
his Maker, so he was obliged to show it by offering those things to him which
are most esteemed by Men. Several ancient Christians and Jews were of the same
Opinion, as Outram in his Treatise De Sacrificijs, l. 1. c. 1. has shown. But
others assign the Original of Sacrifices to an express Command of God; which I
am the easier inclined to believe, because that in the beginning of the World,
after our first Parents were guilty of so notorious a Defection, Mankind in all
probability was too rude and ignorant to find out of themselves, that the
Benificence and Power of God was to be acknowledged by these external
Ceremonies. God who, (...), fed them, and was their Governor, as Plato speaks
of the Men of the Golden Age, seems to have taught them these Rites, least in
process of time they should forget their Creator.

Of the firstlings of the flock, and the fat thereof, chapter 4.4.] Since eating of
Flesh seems to have been unknown before the Flood, therefore Grotius supposes
that no Victims were sacrificed, because nihil deo sacrari solet, nisi quod in
usu sit hominum. As this reason is by no means to be rejected, so he omits
another of no less importance, which is brought from the Scarcity of Creatures.
In the beginning there were but small numbers of Oxen, Sheep and Goats, and
therefore it is scarce credible that the munificent Lord of the Universe would
have them lessened merely for his own honor, since it would be so prejudicial
to Mankind. For the same reason Triptolemeus enacted a Law. (...), that no
Animals should be hurt; (...), to worship the Gods with the fruits of the
Earth. Long after him Draco commanded the same, for which consult Porphyrius de
Abstinentia, l. 4. Varro de R. R. l. 2. c. 4. speaking of the Ox; hic socius
hominum in rustico opere, and cereres Minister. Ab hoc Antiqui manus ita
abstineri voluerunt, ut capite sanxerint, siquis occidisset. Qua in re testis
Attice, testis Attice, testis Peloponneses.

To come now to Abel's Oblation, since the Hebrew hhalab signifies Milk as well
as Fat; I should choose to render it by the former, and believe that by a common
(...), with the Hebrews, Abel brought of the firstlings of his Flock, and of
the Milk thereof, is put instead of, Abel brought of the Milk of the firstlings
of his flock. It Is credible that God would have them signify by this Rite that
the increase of all Creatures was owing to him: And perhaps for the same reason
the Egyptians offered Milk to their Deities, See Diod. Bibl. lib. 1.

A Fugitive, and a Vagabond shall thou be, chapter 4.12.] It may not be amiss here
to observe that amongst the Graecians and other People, in the earliest times
of Antiquity, Murder was punished with Banishment. Thus Medon the Brother of
Ajax was banished to Phylace.

-- (...). Far from his native Country having killed a Man] Several Examples of
this nature Feithius has collected in his Antiqu. Homer, l. 2. cap. 8. And as
the Learned Spelman has observed in the time of the Saxons, it was not punished
with Death here in England.

Shem, Ham, and Japhet, c. 5.32.] Though we read that Noah begot these three
Sons, after he was five hundred years old, yet it is not mentioned which of
them is the eldest. However, we may gather that the Rights of Primogeniture
belonged to Japhet, from Genesis 11.10. Shem was a hundred years old, and begat
Arphaxad, two years after the flood; that is, in the sixth hundred and second
year of Noah, for the Deluge fell out in the sixth hundred completely. And
therefore Shem was born to Noah when he was five hundred and two years old, and
consequently was not his first-begotten, since he began to get Children when he
was five hundred years old. And as for Ham he is expressly said, Genesis 9.24. to
be the youngest; Whence it necessarily follows, that Japhet was the eldest, who
is therefore, though by the bye, called Shem's elder Brother, Genesis 10.21.

Nevertheless, either because the Nation of the Hebrews was descended from
Shem, or because the Rights of Primogeniture were transferred to him, though
the sacred History takes no notice of it; he is both here, and sometimes below,
nominated first, as several Learned Men have imagined. And thus Abraham's Name
is mentioned before his Brother's, chap. 11.26. Jacob's before Esau, chap.
28.5. and Ephraim's before Manasseh, chap. 48.20. I wish they had informed us
why Ham the youngest is reckoned the second in order, and Japhet last though he
was the first begotten, both here and chap. 7.13. chap. 9.18. chap. 10.1. and
elsewhere. It Is certain that in his Father's Blessing, chap. 9.27. Japhet is
unquestionably preferred to Ham. But perhaps in all these Matters we are more
curious than we need; and indeed in the reckoning up of the Generations, chap.
10. Japhet is placed first, and Shem the last. After the same manner Jacob, who
is generally set before Esau, is named after him, chap. 35.29. And Jacob gave
up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people, being old and full of
days: and his Sons, Esau and Jacob buried him.

Of every clean beast thou shall take to thee, chap. 7.2.] Those Creatures seem
first to be called clean, which those that called them so, fed upon; as on the
other hand, those were called unclean, from which they abstained; for whatever
reasons they did it, it is certain there is no Cleanness or Uncleanness in the
Animals themselves, as the different use of different Nations sufficiently
testifies. After the Mosaical Law there was a twofold Cleanness and Uncleanness
in Animals; for only three sorts of clean Quadrupeds, and two of Birds, were
allowed in Sacrifices, Lev. 1, 2.14. whereas several more were permitted to be
eaten; see Levit. 11. But it is doubted whether this Distinction was known in
Noah's time, because it is highly probable that no sort of Flesh was eaten
before the Flood. Those that maintain the Affirmative, ground themselves upon
this Text. However, though God Almighty is here introduced speaking in a direct
Oration, according to the Genius of the Oriental Languages; yet it is not
manifest that he used these very terms. Perhaps he commanded Noah to take
Sevens of such Creatures as were wholesome for Food, which are here called
clean, and only pairs of those that were unwholesome. And perhaps after all,
the sacred Writer who has all along a greater regard to the Sense than the bare
words, accommodates himself to the Language of his own times.

And Noah went in and his Sons, chap. 7.7.] As Noah either had no more Children
than these before the Deluge, or if he had, they were not alive: so likewise
his Sons either had begot no Children before it happened, or else had buried
them. Whatever side the Reader chooses, it is evident from hence, that Mankind
before the Flood had not peopled many Countries. For if Noah's Family, when he
was six hundred years old, only consisted of three Sons who had no issue, we
may probably suppose that several more had not a more numerous Offspring.

Every moving thing that lives shall be meat to you, chapter 9.3.] Before the
Deluge Man had so far a right over the living Creatures, that he might make use
of their Milk, their Wool and their Skins, in case they happened to die, and
while they were alive, might employ them to draw or carry his Burdens, but was
not allowed to seed upon them. Otherwise it had been in vain to have given Noah
a Permission here to do what was lawful for him before; and besides, Moses
expressly tells us, chap. 29. that Herbs and Fruits were given to the
Antidiluvians for Meat. I shall not stay to confute some Theological or
Philosophical Conjectures which oppose this Exposition, since they cannot be
admitted without committing violence upon the Mosaical History.

And told Abraham the Hebrew, c. 14.13.] Some are of opinion that this is a
Patronymec Appellation derived from Heber, who is reckon among Abraham's
Ancestors, chapter 11.14. But the Scripture no where tells us why the Hebrews
should rather take their name from him than from any one else. It Is certain
that Abraham might with as much, nay with more pretense have been called the
Therachite or Nachorite; and we have already shown in our first Dissertation,
that what the Rabbines impudently tell us of Heber's great Piety, and his
preserving the ancient Religion and Language in his Family, is a groundless
Fiction. Therefore others suppose it is derived from the Preposition Heber,
which signifies on the other side, because Abraham was born on the other side
the Euphrates, and passed that River to come into Canaan. Of this Opinion were
the LXX. who have translated it (...), and Origin upon Matthew, (...). The same
likewise was the Judgment of St. Jerome, whose words upon the 7th Chapter of
Ezekiel are as follows; Abraham Hebraeus, i. e. (...), and peregrinus,
transitorque memoratur. Now the reason why this Appellation was not given to
the Edomites, or the other Descendants of Lot and Abraham, but only to
Abraham's Posterity by Isaac and Jacob, is, because the first was really born
beyond the Euphrates, and the second fetched him a Wife from thence, as
refusing to enter into such an Alliance with the Canaanites, whom in this
particular Jacob followed, who likewise lived a great part of his Life on the
other side of that River.

Thou shall go to thy Fathers in Peace, chapter 15.15.] This is a common
Periphrasis of Death, like these in Latin, ire ad plures, ire in communem
locum. R. Solomon concludes from hence, that Therah who was an Idolater,
repented before he died, and that his Soul went to the Mantions of the Blessed,
because it is here said, that Abraham who was a pious Man, and acceptable to
God, should go to him. But Sr. Jerome has rightly observed, that this
Expression is not to be depended upon, since the Good and Bad when they die,
are equally said to go to their Fathers. The Hebrews likewise mean the same
thing by this Phrase, to be gathered to his People; which is used concerning
Abraham, chapter 25.8. but can be urged no more than the former, since it is plain
that neither was Abraham buried with his Countrymen the Chaldeans; but
purchased himself a Monument in Canaan: Neither can his Soul be said when it
quitted his Body, to be in the same condition with that of the Chaldean
Idolaters. However, these Phrases (whatever the Signification of them might
afterward be) seem to take their Original from such like Opinion as this, viz.
that the Souls of the Dead go to some certain Recepcacles, where every Nation
and Family live apart by themselves. Ezekiel, chapter 32. v. 22. and the following
Verses, seems to allude to this Opinion, Ashur is there, and all her Company,
etc.

And he lift up his Eyes, and looked, and lo three Men stood by him, chapter 18.2.]
Some pretend that these were three Angels in humane shape; one of whom, as
being chief of the Embassy, came to Abraham, and the other two went to carry
God's Commands to Lot. But others are of Opinion, that he who is called
Jehovah, v. 13, 14, 17, 20, 22. and whom Abraham calls the Judges of the Earth,
v. 25.27. was the second Person of the holy Trinity. But as these People make
the Divinity assume a humane shape upon trivial grounds, not altogether so
becoming the Divine Majesty, so they have none of the Jews that lived in the
Apostolical times to countenance their Opinion. It Is certain, that if Abraham
did really entertain the highest God, the Exhortation of the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, chapter 13.2. is one of the coldest things in the World, Be
not forgetful to entertain Strangers, for thereby some have entertained Angels
unawares. He ought to have added, nay and God himself, which had made his
Argument much more efficacious. However, these ancient Stories of the Angels
traveling up and down the Earth in humane shapes, seem to have given occasion
to the Opinion of the Pagans, that the Gods used to visit Mankind. Thus one of
Penelope's Suitors in the Odysses, blames Antinous for striking Ulysses,
because, says he, the Gods are accustomed to travel through Towns and Cities in
the Disguise of Guests, to behold the Manners and Behavior of Mortals. See
Acts 14, 11. Now it was not the Custom of Travelers at this time to knock at
the Door, or to speak to those Persons first by whom they hoped to be
entertained: But they only stood in the Highway, waiting till they were
called, and at their departure used to receive a Viaticum from their Host, to
support them upon the Road. For in those Ages there were no Inns in the Eastern
Countries, no more than there are now a days, except a sew Kervansera's, as
they call them, for the Reception of Strangers; so that they must either lie
all night in the Streets if they came to any Town, or else lie in some Body's
House who was so kind as to receive them. A remarkable Instance of this we find
in Judges, chapter 19.15. Thus likewise among the Greeks and Romans, though in the
latter Ages they had Inns and Victualing Houses, yet formerly they had none.
Hence came the Fashion of lodging in private Houses, and hence Hospitality came
to be so much commended. Upon which Argument consult Tomasinus de Tesseris.

And Abraham there called on the name of the Lord, the everlasting God, chapter
21.33.] Perhaps the sacred Historian added this Epithet here, to distinguish
the true God, whom Abraham worshipped, from those Divinities that were
sometimes born, and were to dye at last. If Philo Byblius's Sanchoniathon was a
faithful Expositor of the Phaenician Theology, those People only owned two Gods
to be eternal, and held that the rest were generated; for after that manner
does he explain their Doctrine in Eusebius, Them. Evang. l. 1. c. 10. He teaches
that the first Principle of all things was a dark dusky Air full of Wind, or
the breath of a dusky Air, and a turbid Chaos, encompassed with Darkness: That
these were eternal, and had not an end in many Ages. And afterward relates the
Generations of the Gods, who alone were worshipped. The Grecians believed that
the Nymphs were born with Oaks, and that they died along with them; and perhaps
they borrowed this Opinion from the Oriental Nations, as they did several more.
Thus we find in Plutarch, de Oracul. Defectu, that Cleombrotus supposes those
Deities that had been the Presidents of Oracles formerly to be dead; upon which
follows the famous Story of the Death of Pan the Great, and other Relations of
that nature; by which it appears that the Nymphs and Demons, or their Gods of
the lower rank, was commonly believed to be mortal, although they were
long-lived. Therefore Abraham seems to have opposed the everlasting God, who
had no beginning, and who is capable of no end; to some such sort of an Opinion
received by the Eastern People.

And there was set Meat before him to eat, but he said, I will not eat till I
have told my Errand.] In the ancient times it was usual to receive Strangers,
and entertain them with a Repast, before they asked them any Questions. Thus
after Nestor had given a plentiful Meal to Telemachus, Odysses, l 3. and the
other had eaten as much as was sufficient, then at last the old Gentleman
thought it high time to examine him: It Is best to ask News of Strangers, says
he, (...), i. e. after they have filled their Bellies. Nay, sometimes several
days passed over their Heads, before they thought fit to lay down the occasion
of their coming. Thus Esdras and his Companions, who brought the Vessels
belonging to the Temple, staid three days in Jerusalem, before they restored
them to the Priests. Thus, Iliad. 8. Homer tells us that the King of Lycia
entertained Bellerophon for nine days successively, and that when the tenth
Morning appeared, he began to ask him Questions. Dares Phrygius speaking of
Antenon, who was sent Ambassador to Peleus, tells us, that the latter
well-comed him for the space of three days, but on the fourth enquired upon
what Message he came; Die quarto rogat eum quid venerit. After the same manner
Laban here took Abraham's Servant within doors, and set some Meat before him,
though he had no Acquaintance with him, and asked him no Questions; but the
other finding that God had directly sent him to Abraham's Relations, was in
pain till he had delivered his Errand.

Tell me I pray thee thy name, chapter 32.22.] Some Interpreters suspect that Jacob
knew his Antagonist, with whom he wrestled, to be an Angel, because he desired
him to bless him; but then this Passage makes them at a stand: for how could he
imagine to be a jot the better after he knew the Angel's name. We are desirous
to know the names of those, with whom we have any dealing, because when we once
know that, we may find out who, and what manner of Men they are, by enquiring
of those that are better acquainted with them. But since there is no
Correspondence between us and the Angels, after we know the names of two or
three of them, we know them no more than we did before. Thus Manoah, who took
the Angel that appeared to him for a Prophet, desires him to tell him his name,
and subjoins this reason for it, that when thy Sayings are come to pass, we may
do thee honor; that is, give thee all the respect that is usually paid to a
Prophet. It Is true indeed, that the Jews and the other Eastern People, talked
much of the names of Angels in the following times; but it is scarce credible
that in Jacob's days such Notions were current, nor do we find the least
footstep of them in the Bible before Daniel.

Ask me never so much Dowry and Gift, chapter 34.12.] It was the Fashion of that
Age for the Suitor to offer Presents to the young Woman's Parents, as appears
plainly by this Passage. Thus also in the Heroical times, quorum mores, says
our Author, multa Orientalibus habent similia, among the Greeks, the Son-in-law
that was to be paid his (...), to the Father of the Girl, which we learn from
several places of Homer, collected by Feithius, in his Antiquitates Homericae,
l. 2. c. II. As for instance, in the Odysses, where Vulcan is said to find Mars
in very scurvy Circumstances with his Wife, and to chain them both to their
good Behavior, he protests he will not release them, till her Father returns
every farthing of the Portion he gave him for his Harlot of a Daughter, because
she was handsome. Hence Aristotle, Polit. l 2. c. 8. relating the most ancient
Manners of the Greeks, tells us among other things, that they purchased their
Wives of one another. At this day the same is practiced by the Turks and
Persians. See Thevenot's Travels, l. 1. c. 41.

And they gave unto Jacob all the strange Gods, and all their Earrings, c.
35.4.] There were two sorts of Earrings, one of which were chiefly worn by the
Women for Ornament sake, but are not meant in this place; the other were
esteemed sacred, and the Men used to wear them as an Amulet to preserve them
from all harm. Perhaps too some figures were ingraved upon them under a certain
Constellation, after the manner of Talismans, which the Idolatrous People
fondly imagined to have great Efficacy in them. Among the Carthaginians, not
only the free men, but their very Slaves had their Ears loaded with Rings.
Plautus in Paenulo, Acts 5. sc. 2. speaking of the Punic Slaves, introduces
Milphio thus discoursing with Agorastocles; I suppose these Fellows are
troubled with no such things as Fingers,
AG. Why so? MC. Because they carry their Rings in their Ears.


These Rings hung down from the top of the Ear, as appears from St. Austin, in
whose time this Superstition still continued among some African Chrstians.
These are his words, in Epist. 73. Execranda autem superstitio ligaturarum, in
quibus etiam inaures virorum in summis ex una part auriculis suspensae
deputantur, sed ad serviendum Daemonibus adhibetur. These Rings, in his
Questions upon this place, he calls the Phylacteries of Idols. Jacob's Servants
here seem to have carried such sort of Rings in their Ears, which he commanded
them to lay aside, as being consecrated to strange Gods.

And they sat down to eat, chapter 37. v. 25.] After the manner of the Oriental
People, who used to lay a Carpet upon the Floor, and so sat down to eat, which
Custom still continues, and when they were in the Country either sat upon the
green Grass, or upon the Skin of some Beast. Among the ancient Persians, their
Kings seem to have observed the same Posture, as appears by Darius's Table,
which was so low, that when Alexander sat upon Cyrus's Throne, it served him
for a Footstool. For thus Curtius, l. 5. c. 2. tells us, that afterward he
sat in the Royal Throne, which was much too high for him, and as his Feet did
not touch the lowest Step, one of the King's Pages put a Table under them;
which a little below is said to be the same where Darius dined. Homer's Heroes
too sat at their Meat, but upon Seats.

I will go down into the Grave to my Son, chapter 37. v. 35.] In the Hebrew it is
Scholah. The LXX have rendered it (...), and the Vulgar in infernum. This word
and the ancient Translations of it, have not a little employed the Interpreters
of the Old and New Testament. We shall set down the undoubted Significations of
it as briefly as we can, and then enquire in what Sense it is here to be taken.
In the first place it signifies any place below the Superficies of the Earth,
whether made hollow by Art or Nature. Hence Isaiah metaphorically uses it to
denote a low and mean Condition, chapter 14.11. and for the same reason Jonas calls
the Fish's Belly by the same name. Secondly, it is taken for a Grave or
Sepulcher, Is. 14.15. where the King of Babylon is said to be brought down to
Hell, to the sides of the Pit; which words are there set down as Synonimes. See
likewise, Psalm 141.7. In the third place it does not so much seem to signify
the Grave, as the State of the Dead, or the Place where they are poetically
feigned to rest, and discourse together. Thus in the 14th Chapter of Isaiah,
the King of Babylon, who is expressly said, v. 19, 20. to be cast out of the
Grave, and to be denied a Burial, is yet in the ninth Verse supposed to go
Scholah to Hell, where the Dead come to meet him. Hell (Schol) from beneath is
moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming; it stirs up the Dead for thee,
even all the chief ones of the Earth; it has raised up from their Thrones all
the Kings of the Nations: All they shall speak, etc. see Ezekiel, chapter 32. And
by this word is meant not the Mansions of the happy, such as the Elysian
Fields, or the fortunate Islands, were among the Grecians, but the common
Receptacle of the Dead in general, as appears not only by the abovementioned
places, but Job, c. 2.17. chapter 10.21. and several other Passages of the Old
Testament. Now it is past dispute that it is not here to be taken in the first
Signification; so that the Question is, Whether Jacob meant the Grave, or else
the Place and State of the Dead? It cannot be pretended that he meant the
former; for how could he say, I will go down into the Grave to my Son, since he
did not believe him to be buried, but to be torn to pieces by a wild Beast?
Therefore we must understand it of the Place or State of the Dead, as the LXX
Interpreters have done, who have rendered it (...); and the Vulgar, Descendam ad
filium meum lugens in infernum. But what Sentiments Jacob had of that State or
Receptacle of the Deceased, no Circumstances out of History inform us, nor can
we safely judge of his, by our own Opinion upon that matter.

You are Spies, to see the Nakedness of the Land are you come, chapter 42.9.] This
Suspicion of Joseph was so much the more plausible, because his Brothers came
from those parts, by which alone Egypt is accessible on the side of Asia. This
is the only place, says Herodotus, l. 3. c. 5. where Egypt can be openly
entered; where he relates at large how Cambyses invaded it, and marched with
his Army this way. Consult but Ptolomy's Tables, and the matter appears plain
enough. It was on all sides secured from the hostile Incursions of the
Africans, if we may believe Diodorus Siculus, lib. 1. Bibl. by large unpassable
Deserts. The Sea which lies to the Northwards of it, is shallow and destitute
of Harbors, so that it did not fear an Invasion from that quarter: Only on the
Eastern Frontier it lay open and unguarded. For this reason Sesostris, to
secure his Pass against the Irruptions of the Syrians and Arabians, fortified
it with a Wall fifteen hundred furlongs in length, which reached from Pelusium
to Heliopolis, Diod. lib. 1. p. 52. and upon the same account perhaps it was
that Nero the Son of Psammetichus, King of Egypt, drew a Trench from the
Pelusiac Arm of the Nile, to the Gulf of Arabia, and endeavored to join the
Mediterranean to the Southern Sea.

They knew not that Joseph understood them, for he spoke unto them by an
Interpreter, chapter 42.23.] Although the Egyptian and Hebrew Language nearly
resembled one another, yet there might be that difference between them, as the
Canaanites and the Egyptians could not understand one another in ordinary
Discourse. Thus we see the French don't understand the Italians or Spaniards,
although these three Languages are derived from the Latin; and thus in the time
of the Kings, the Jews did not commonly understand the Chaldean Tongue, as
appears from 2 Kings, chapter 18. v. 26. Now it is evident from this place, that
Jacob's Sons spoke in the Canaanitish Language, unless we would rather suppose
them to speak Chaldee, and not a Tongue which was only peculiar to one Family,
as the Rabbines pretend: for then how had it been possible to have procured an
Interpreter, unless we suppose that one of Jacob's Servants had run away from
his Master, and fled into Egypt, of which we don't find the least mention.

They sat before him, the firstborn according to his Birthright, and the
youngest according to his Youth; and he took and sent Messes unto them, but
Benjamin 's Mess was five times so much as any of the rest, chapter 43. v. 33.]
Though we have no account in any Profane Authors of the Customs used by the
Ancients at their Feasts, which equal this in Antiquity, yet it may receive
some Illustration from what we find in Homer. In the first place Homer's Heroes
did not sit down promiscuously, as we do about our round Tables, but every Man
according to his Quality, or the Respect which the Master of the Feast was
minded to show him. Thus Hector upbraids Diomede when he run away, that the
Grecians honored him with a Seat and Flesh, and full Cups.

(...). The (...) here seems to be the (...), as Eustathius has remarked upon
this place, that is, the chief Seat at Table. Secondly, it is evident that in
the Heroical times they used long Tables, or perpetuae mensae, as Virgil calls
them: So that the most honorable Seat was consequently at the upper end, where
we may suppose Reuben sat, and his other Brethren below him, according to
their Age. Thirdly, as here in Moses, so we find in Homer that each of the
Guests had his equal Dividend of Meat, unless a greater Portion was bestowed
upon any one of them, to show him more Honor. For this reason, as Athenaeus
informs us, l. 11. Homer calls them (...), or equal Feasts. In short, as it
appears from the abovementioned place in Homer, where mention is made of
Diomede, that he had a larger share of Victual allowed him upon the score of
his Valor; so Joseph ordered Benjamin to be treated after this manner, honoris
causa.

The Cup whereby my Lord divineth, chap. 44.5.] The sacred Volumes no where
take notice of any Divination performed by a Cup; and what several Learned Men
have told us of the Effusion of Wine in the Jewish Sacrifices out of a Cup, is
nothing to the purpose, since it does not at all appear that they gathered any
Auguries that way. The ancient Grecians indeed made a Judgment of future
Events by the noise of the Wine poured out in honor of the Divinity, and
before their Libations prayed to the Gods to send them some auspicious Signs.
Sometimes too they threw this Wine into the Fire, and the greater the Flame
was, so much the better was the Omen. We find in 2 Samuel 23.16. that Water was
sometimes poured out unto the Lord; but the Scripture in no place informs us
that the Jews gathered any Omens from thence. And therefore as the Greeks
borrowed great part of their Religious Rites from the Egyptians, it is probable
that the latter, observed the same Method in their Libations, and that Joseph
had a respect to them here.

That you may dwell in the Land of Goshen, chapter 46.34.] It Is unquestionable that
the Land of Goshen 'was situate in the Lower Egypt, as also that it was the
first Province or Nomus, which a Traveller coming out Syria enters, since Jacob
so soon as he came thither, sent to acquaint Joseph with the news of his
Arrival. By this place it appears, that it was famous for rich Pastures,
otherwise it would never have been offered to a Company of Shepherds, as the
most convenient place in the Kingdom for them. It Is likewise certain, that this
Tract of Land was appropriated to the Egyptian Shepherds, who lived separate
from the rest of their Countrymen: For otherwise how could Joseph conclude,
that this Province would be assigned to his Brethren immediately, upon their
discovering what Occupation they followed, unless it was the Custom of that
Nation so to do? As will plainly appear by the following words.

For every Shepherd is an Abomination to the Egyptians, chapter 46.34.] Learned
Men are used to enquire upon this place the first, whether it appears by any
Testimony out of Profane Authors, that the Egyptians avoided the Company of
Shepherds? The second, for what reason they hated them? As for what regards the
former, we don't here mean all Shepherds in general, but only such as fed Sheep
or Goats. According to Herodotus, l. 2. c. 164. the Egyptians were divided
into seven Classes, Priests, Soldiers, Cow-herds, Hog-herds, Merchants,
Interpreters, and Seamen. As for the Cowherds, we no where find that the
Egyptians despised them, but the above cited Historian expressly affirms so
much of the Hog-herds, chapter 47. where he tells us, that the rest of the
Egyptians refused to have any Alliances with them. Among the Mendesians, if we
may believe him, Goat-herds lived in great reputation, because they worshipped
Goats. But these same People that looked upon it to be a heinous Sin to
sacrifice Goats, thought it no Crime to serve Sheep after that manner. The
contrary to which was observed by the Thebans, as we find in the same Author.
So far Herodotus, who is more particular in this Affair than any one else;
however, he does not seem to consist with himself, for since he makes two
different Ranks of his Hog-herds and Cow-herds, why does he not farther branch
them out into Goat-herds and Shep-herds? etc. with much more reason on his
side. Diodorus comprehends them all under the name of (...), or Pastors, but
does not acquaint us in what Credit they lived with the other Egyptians.

Now with Submission to Persons of greater Learning, I am of Opinion that as
the Egyptian Superstition varied with respect to Time and Place; so that
eating of Sheep was held unlawful in the Tanitic Kingdom in Joseph's time, and
that as the Shepherds did either really feed upon them, or at least were
suspected to do so, the rest of the Egyptians shunned their Company. Thus they
thought they contracted an Impurity if they kissed a Grecian, because the
latter made no difficulty to eat Cow's Flesh, which Animal was mightily adored
in Egypt. For this reason they could not be brought to use so much as a Knife
or a Kettle, if it came out of Greece, out of a fear that the Flesh of a Cow
might have been cut by the former, or boiled in the latter. Though we are told
by Herodotus that the Mendesians used to sacrifice, and consequently to eat
Sheep; yet at the same time he informs us, that the Thebans, who had a much
greater Authority in the Country, abstained from it: and Diodorus, lib. 1. p.
99. reckons Sheep among those Creatures from which the Egyptians abstained.
Besides those private Reasons which the Priests assigned for this Abstinence,
he says the following ones were used to be given, viz. that Sheep brought forth
Young twice a year, that they clothed Mankind with their Wool, and nourished
them with Milk and Cheese. And therefore since several of the Egyptians either
for these, or some other Reasons, abstained from Sheeps Flesh, what wonder is
it if they expressed an utter Aversion to those Men whom they knew, or else
suspected to feed upon it, if they shunned their Conversion, and obliged to live
by themselves in a particular Tract of their Country? Indeed some Learned Men
doubt whether we can discover any certain Tokens of Idolatry in Egypt so early
as the days of Joseph, but what they pretend they can no where find; this Moses
expressly teaches us, Exodus 8.26. and the Israelites became infected with
Idolatry in Egypt, as Ezekiel lays it to their charge, chapter 20. v. 7, 8.

And Joseph placed his father and his brethren in the land of Rameses, chapter
46.11.] Here cannot be signified that City, which is said, Ex. 1.11. to be
built long after the Death of Joseph by the Israelites; nor indeed had these
People, who lived under Tents and removed from one Place to another, any
occasion for a City at first: Therefore others understand it to be part of the
Country of Goshen. The Conjecture of the learned Sir John Marsham seems to be
the best grounded, who supposes it to be the Name of a King, and used in the
Genitive Case. For Diodorus tells us, that the third part of all Egypt belonged
to the King, and therefore it is all one as if Moses had said, that part of the
Lands belonging to the Crown was granted to Jacob and his Family. The
abovementioned ingenious Author has proved out of Syncellus, that Ramesses
Tubaetes reigned at that time in Egypt, upon Saecul, VII.

Dissertation XIII. Concerning the Passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea.
I. The Occasion of this Dissertation. II. The Division thereof. III. An
Explication of the Words of Moses, and an Enquiry into the Time when the Wind,
which divided the Sea, began to blow, that the Israelites might go over the Sea
in a short time. IV. That the Wind increased the Reflux of the Sea toward the
Ocean, and divided not the Waters, so as to heap them up on both sides, as it is
commonly believed. How easily this could be done. V. That the Wind, which drove
the Waters toward the Ocean, was a North Wind. VI. That Josephus understood it
so, when he compared the Passage of the Israelites with Alexander's Passage
through the shores of the Sea of Pamphylia; to which he might have added a
noble Exploit of P. Scipio. VII. This Opinion is confirmed by the Circumstances
of the Death of the Egyptians. VIII. The Memory of that Passage, preserved
among the Itchthyophagi. A Tale out of Paulus Orosius. IX. That the Passage of
the Israelites was a true Miracle. X. The Conclusion.

I. MEN are so fond of Prodigies, as to believe often without any Reason, that
God altered the ordinary Course of Nature; of which I have given a pregnant
Instance, in my Dissertation concerning the Statue of Salt. Though such an
Opinion ought not to be approved, because it fills the Minds of Men with a
superstitious Credulity, exposes the Sacred History to the Contempt and
Laughter of Profane Men, and makes them disbelieve true Miracles and
Prodigies; yet we ought to bear with those who entertain it, because it they
add something to the Scripture, they take nothing from it; and because their
Opinion arises from a Mind inclined to ascribe whatever is Great and Wonderful
to the Divine Power. But those who put a false Interpretation upon true and
manifest Miracles, and dare ascribe every thing to the ordinary Course of
Nature, cannot be endured, for they came by this Opinion out of Obstinacy and
Pride, which Vices allow them not to admire any thing, or believe any that is
unusual and extraordinary. It may be said further, that because they dare not
openly deny some Facts grounded upon very good Reasons, and undeniable
Testimonies, they endeavor to undermine the belief of them, whilst they can
hardly confess, that any thing happens above the ordinary Course of Nature.

Omitting for the present what may be said concerning Prodigies and Miracles in
general, I shall endeavor to vindicate one of them from the Cavils of some
Men, by giving a clear Explication of it. I mean the Passage of the Israelites
through the Red Sea upon the dry Ground, as Moses relates it, Exodus 14. Those
who affirm, that all this happened according to the ordinary Course of Nature,
say, that Moses, who knew that Country well, observed the time of the Tide, and
that the Sea retiring back, as it is wont to do, he might easily go from one
Shore to another upon the dry ground; and that being a Cunning Man, he vented
among the ignorant Multitude, as a Prodigy what happened according to the
ordinary Laws of Nature. Were it not so, say they, the Egyptians had not gone
boldly into the Sea as as well as the Israelites; and they had not been so bold
as to follow them, if they had seen the Sea divided by a Miracle, lest he who
had divided the Waters of the Sea, only for the sake of the Israelites, should
bring them back into their Channel, to destroy the Egyptians. They add, That
perhaps the Wind favored by chance, the Design of Moses, and wonderfully
increased the Reflux of the Sea, as the Writer of that History intimates, when
he observes, that The Lord caused the Sea to go back by a strong Wind.

II. It Is not my business at present, to vindicate the veracity of Moses; it
will be sufficient to show, that their Assertion is contrary to his Words; for
these Men are so confident of their Ability as to think, that they can maintain
their Opinion by the very words of the Scripture. Wherefore I shall first
explain the words of Moses, and before I show how far the Power of God was
concerned in this matter, I'llenquire into what could be done by the Power of
Second Causes; and then I Will show what what God himself did toward it, and
what was done by the Second Causes; Lastly, I shall answer the Objections of
our Adversaries.

III. God speaks thus to Moses, Exodus 14.16. But lift up thy Rod, and stretch
out thine hand over the Sea, and divide it: and the children of Israel shall go
on dry ground through the midst of the Sea. It appears from Verse 20, 21. That
Moses received those orders toward the Evening. Then Moses obeying God's
Orders, smote the Sea, but it was not presently divided; for thus we find Verse
21. And Moses stretched out his hand over the Sea, and the Lord caused the Sea
to go back by a strong Wind all the Night, and made the Sea dry Land, and the
Waters were divided. When therefore Moses smote the Sea, there arose a strong
Wind, which divided the Waters by degrees; for Moses himself says, that the
Wind drove back the Waters of the Sea all that Night, that is, almost all the
Night; for the Egyptians were already gone into the Sea, in pursuit of the
Israelites, in the Morning Watch, as he says V. 24.

It Is well known, that the Hebrews divided the Night into three Watches; which
being so, and seeing the Sacred History tells us, that the Sea returned in the
Morning-watch; it is likely, that the Wind blew almost 12 Hours together, from
Sunsetting to Sunrising: for the Israelites departed a little after the
Equinox of the Spring. If we knew in what Watch of the Day or Night the Sea
covered the Shores, or retired from them, we might explain this matter more
accurately. But seeing the Sea Ebs and Flows in twelve Hours, it is likely, that
it began to go back in the beginning of the Night, and that the Reflux was
hastened and increased by a strong Wind: but the next Tide was slower, the same
Wind blowing still, and keeping back the Waves for some time; during which
interval of time, the Israelites went through the dry Channel of the Sea-Let us
suppose, for Example, that the Sea being returned to the South, was to flow
again toward the North, about the beginning of the Second Watch, if there had
been no Wind; the Sea might have gone back, before the Second Watch, by reason
of the Violence of the Wind, and not have returned to the Northern Shores of
the Red Sea but some Hours later; so that the Israelites might go over during
the whole Second Watch; that is, during four Hours at least. Indeed they were
already gone through the Sea, before the Morning-watch, in which all the
Egyptians went into the Channel and were Drowned.

Now that we may understand how so many Thousands of Men might go through the
Red Sea in so short a time, we ought to consider two things; First, that the
extremity of that Gulf is very narrow, as it is granted by all those, who wrote
about it, and not above two Miles broad. It was therefore no difficult thing
for the Israelites, though they were so numerous, to go a great pace through
the Channel of the Sea in a few Hours, which otherwise could not be understood,
if it was broader. From whence also it follows, that the Sea going back toward
the South, leaves not only the Shores dry, but its very Channel, because of the
narrowness of the place, unless it be deeper in some places. I think there is
no need I should prove, that the Israelites went through it at the further end
of the Gulf, seeing it plainly appears that they did, from the situation of
the place in which they encamped, as it is described Exodus 14.2.

Secondly, It ought to be observed, that there was no need the Israelites
should run away in Battle array, and in a long File. A great space having been
dried by the Wind, they might go over in a large Front, as the Egyptians tried
to do it after them; for the whole Army of the Egyptians had not been drowned,
if few of them had gone together, seeing those that were beyond, had been at a
great distance from those that were in the Front. But all the Egyptians were
drowned, not one excepted; from whence it is manifest, that they went into the
Channel of the Sea in a large Front.

IV. But I must consider more carefully the strength of the Wind which blew
upon the Sea, Exodus 14.29. The Children of Israel, says Moses, walked upon dry
Land in the midst of the Sea, and the Waters were a Wall unto them, on their
right hand and on their left. Which words ought not to be taken in a literal
sense, nor those which we find Exodus 15.8. With the blast of thy Nostrils the
Waters were gathered together: the Floods stood upright as an heap, and the
depths were congealed in the heart of the Sea. Who sees not that this is a
Figurative Speech? For 1. God blows not with his Nostrils, nor did Moses
believe he did, who teaches every where, that God has no humane shape, 2.
There is a great difference between a Heap of Corn and a bulk of Ice; nor could
the driving of the Waters into the Ocean be compared to both, but in a
Figurative sense, from whence it appears, that neither of them can be
understood in a proper sense. 3. Had the Waters been congealed on both sides,
there had been no need of a Strong Wind blowing all that Night, to uphold its
Weight; for from the time the Water was divided, and congealed on both sides,
it could not return into the middle Channel, but by the melting of the Ice.
In like manner; the Water might be said to be as as a Wall unto the
Israelites, because they could not go through it, on the Right hand, or on the
Left; nor does any thing hinder, but there might be some Water on their Left
Hand, in deep Pits, though the greatest part of it was removed to the Right Hand,
by the Ebbing of the Sea, and the Ford through which they went was left dry.
Thus Nahum 3.8. the Sea is said to be a wall to the City of No. Art thou better
says the Prophet, than populous No, that was situate among the Rivers, that had
the waters round about it, whose rampart was the Sea, and her wall was from the
Sea.

I think therefore, that such was the Division of the Waters of the Red Sea,
that when the Wind, which increased its Ebbing, had driven all the Waters,
except that which remained in deep Pits, from the further end of the Gulf
toward its Mouth, there appeared a large Ford over against the Israelites,
through which they went to the opposite Shore; which could the more easily
happen, because that Sea being full of Fords, when there happens a greater
Reflux then ordinarily, those Fords are left dry; though as I shall show
hereafter, the Wind which God raised, drove the Sea farther then ever it was
before, or has been since, that we know of.

Most of those, who described that Sea, say that it is Fordable. They also say
that it has a violent Ebbing and Flowing. P. Belonius Observe. Book II. chapter 67.
Speaking of a Town called now Tor, says, That it is Situated on a high place,
for the Sea swells sometimes so much, that it overflows the Fields, and
surrounds the Town with its Waters. Nor can it be otherwise in a Narrow
Straight, especially when it reaches from South to North; for the Sea flows
from the South, through a Narrow Passage with great violence, and having no room
to Expatiate, it must needs be high: on the contrary when it Ebbs, it must of
necessity leave many Fords empty, and the extremity of the Golph almost dry.

However a place out of Psalm 136. v. 13. may be objected against my
Hypothesis. There it is said, That God divided the Red Sea into Parts: which
words seem to imply that the Waters were so divided by the Wind, as to be
driven on the right hand and on the left. But they might be said to be divided
into Parts, if the Water remained on both sides, though it was not heaped up by
the strength of the Wind; for the Water, which returned toward the South, was
separated from that which remained in the Northern Pits: Which Water left in
those Pits, may be called a Part, because it was separated from the rest of the
Water by the violence of the Wind.

We read in the Annals of Geneva, that in the Year MCCCCXC. the South Wind blew
with so great a Violence, that the Water of the Rhone, (a most swift River,)
flowing from the Leman Lake to the South, stood still a quarter of an Hour. In
like manner the Wind might increase the Motion of the Ebbing Sea, and stop its
Impetuosity when it flowed again. It was observed in Holland, in the Year
MDCLXXII. that the Ebbing of the Sea lasted Twelve Hours, which hindered the
Descent of the English: whether this was the Effect of the Wind, or some other
cause, is not well known. Why therefore could not the Ebbing of the Red Sea
last longer than it usually did, through the Divine Will, and return Later to
the same Shores?

V. Having thus explained the Words of Moses which concern the thing itself, it
will not be needless to enquire from what part of Heaven the Wind blew. The
Lord, says Moses, caused the Sea to go back by a strong East Wind all that
night, as our Translation renders it. But I am of Opinion the Hebrew word Kadim
cannot here signify an East Wind, because such a Wind was fitter to drive the
Floods to the Shore, wherein the Israelites were, than to divide the. Waters;
unless we suppose that it blew only on a certain part of the Sea, so as to
hinder the Waters from running in the middle. But who can apprehend how so many
thousands of Men could, I will not say, stand in the Channel of the Sea, but go
through it in so short a time, whilst so violent a Whirlwind blew in their Faces?

I should think therefore that the Word Kadim denotes not that part of Heaven
from whence this Wind blew, but a Violent Wind, from whencesoever it blew. Nor
did Moses add the word strong, because the Wind called Kadim is not commonly a
violent one; but because the Wind, which drove the Waters of the Red Sea
toward the Ocean, was extremely violent. The word Kadim signifies a violent
Wind, Psalm. 48.8. Ezech. 27.26. Job 27.21 Jer. 18.17. Isa. 27.8. Jon. 4.8. we
may therefore understand by the word Kadim a North Wind. Nor could any other
Wind open a passage to the Israelites through the Fords of the Sea, as I have
showed.

VI. The thing it self favors my opinion, as we have seen, and no strong
Argument can be brought against it from the words of Moses. Some therefore will
perhaps endeavor to confute it some other way, Viz. by accusing it of Novelty.
But I may shelter my self under the Authority of Josephus, who seems to have
had the like thoughts, when he compared the Passage of the Israelites with
Alexander's March through the Sea of Pamphylia, in these words, Book II. toward
the End: No Body will admire that strange Story, that Men, who lived many Ages
ago, and were free from malice found a way to escape, even through the Sea,
whether God would have it so, or whether it happened by chance; seeing the Sea
of Pamphylia gave way to Alexander King of Macedonia, who lived not long ago,
and opened a Passage to him, when he had no other, when God designed to destroy
the Empire of the Persians. I shall not enquire whether those Two Events may be
compared in every thing: it is false that Alexander had no other way, and they
differ in other things: But however it appears from those words that Josephus
believe, not without reason, that Alexander's Passage was like that of the
Israelites in this, Viz. in his going through the Sea, when the Wind turned,
which he could not do, whilst it blew. I shall here set down the words of
Arrianus, who relates the thing thus, Book I. He lead those who were with him
through the Sea all along the Shore. No Body can go that way, but when the
North Wind blows; but if the South Wind blows hard, none can go through the
Shore. It happened then, not without the Will of God (as he, and those that
were with him said) that a violent South Wind turned into the North, and so he
had a quick and easy Passage. It appears from those words of Arrianus, who
relates the thing, as Josephus understood it, that this latter Historian had
the same thoughts as I have concerning the Passage of the Israelites through the
Red Sea.

Josephus might also have added out of Livy Book XXVI. Chapter 45. if he knew it,
what that Historian says concerning the taking of New Carthage by P. Scipio
Africanus, to stop thereby the Mouth of the Romans, who denied the Truth of the
History of the Hebrews. The Words of Livy run thus: As soon as he was told the
Sea Ebbed, he lead his Army to it, because he heard from some Fisher Men, who
had been there in some light Boats, and were gone through the Fords, when their
Boats stuck, that he might easily go to the Wall of the Town a foot. It was
about the middle of the day, and besides the Water was going back according to
its ordinary Ebbing, a violent North Wind arose blowing the same way the Sea
Ebbed, which so laid open the Fords, that in some places the Water came only to
the Belly, and in other places scarce to the Knee. Scipio having carefully
observed this, and ascribing it as a Prodigy to the Protection of the Gods, who
opened a new way for the Romans through the Sea, he commanded his Soldiers to
follow Neptune as their Guide. But neither Scipio nor Alexander could know that
the North Wind would blow, when it was necessary for them: And seeing the
Providence of God ruled the Actions of the Heathens, not only those of the
Hebrews, nothing hinders but he might sometimes designedly help Natural Causes
on their behalf.

VII. It appears also from the Death of the Egyptians, that the Sea was
divided, as I have said. First, Moses says, that when the Israelites went into
the Sea, The Egyptians pursued and went in after them, in the Nightime, to
the midst of the Sea, even all Pharaoh's Horses, his Chariots, and Horsemen,
Exodus 14.23. The Egyptians believed that the Israelites took hold of the
Opportunity of an Ebbing, which was greater than it used to be; and that
therefore they ought presently to pursue them, least the Passage should be
stopped by the return of the Waters. Though the Egyptians were transported with
anger, yet, had they suspected that it was a Prodigy, they had certainly never
been so mad as to go into the Channel of the Sea; and they might have seen that
it was undoubtedly a Miracle, were it not that they might with some likelihood
ascribe the thing to an Extraordinary Reflux.

When the whole Army of the Egyptians came into the Sea, and the Israelites got
to the opposite Shore, that is, in the Third Watch of the Night, as we learn
from what follows, Moses was commanded to smite the Sea, which being done,
Exodus 14.27. The Sea returned to its strength, when the morning appeared. Which
seems not to have happened by degrees, but God made use of an extraordinary
South Wind, which brought back with a great violence and in a very short time
the Waves, which stood still by the strength of the North Wind. This we learn
from Moses's Song, Exodus 15.10. Thou did blow with thy Wind, the Sea covered
them: They sank as lead in the mighty Waters, etc. If the Waters were congealed
and heaped up on both sides, what need was there of a Wind, to make them return
to their place? As they stood up only by the Will of God; they might return
into their Channel by the same Will, provided God would have recalled the
Efficacy of his Power; for they had dropped down by their weight like melted Ice.

Lest the Egyptians should avoid by flying the violence of the Reflux, besides
the South Wind by which it was hastened, Moses says, That God Troubled the Host
of the Egyptians, and took off their Chariot-wheels, that they drove them
heavily, Exodus 14.24, 25. That we may the better understand this, we must
remember that the Army of the Egyptians was made up only of Chariots and
Horsemen. For Pharaoh brought with him no Infantry, to overtake more easily
the Israelites, nor did he want any, seeing he might easily rout an unarmed
People only with his Chariots and Horsemen. Besides the March of the Horsemen
and Chariots was made slower by a secret Efficacy of the Divine Power, Three
things might make that Passage more difficult to the Egyptians than to the
Israelites.

1. There might be in some Places abundance of Mires too deep to drive Chariots
and Horses through them without great trouble; whereas Men a Foot might easily
get over them, especially the Israelites, who were used to wander with their
Flocks in the Marshes of Egypt. Though the Bottom of the Sea is not the same
every where, yet no Body will wonder, that I say there might be here and there
some Miry Places in a Space, that was some Miles Broad, a little while after
the Sea left it. 2. If there were no Mires in some places there was abundance
of deep Sand, in which Wheels will sink deeply, and through which Horses can go
but slowly. Diodorus Siculus says Book III. There is a vast quantity of Dirt
and Sand in that Sea, and that the Floods sometimes carry so much Sand about
the Ships that Sail in it, that they stick fast in the Ground. That Sand
hindered without doubt the Chariots and Horses from going fast. If it be
objected that Moses says several times that the Israelites went through the Sea
as through a Dry Land; I answer, It ought not to be so understood, as if the
Channel of the Sea had not been so much as moist and dirty. The Land is said to
be Dry, because there was no Waves upon it, and it is opposed not to Moistness
but to Water, as Genesis 1.9. And God said, let the Waters under the Heaven be
gathered together unto one place, and let the Dry Land appear -- and God called
the Dry Land Earth. See also Chap. 8.13. Philo therefore laid too great a
stress upon that Word, when he said that the Isrelites went through the Sea as
through a way paved with Stones; for, (as he goes on) the Sand grew hard, and
made one solid Body. Miracles have been often invented, (to explain some Words
of Scripture upon which they put too literal a Sense) of which the Holy Writers
never so much as dreamed. 3. The Bottom of the Sea being uneven, and full of
Rocks and See Theophras. Hist. of Plants. Book. IV. chapter 8.
Shrubs, could not give a Free passage to the Chariots. Nay, 'twas almost
impossible for those, who drived the Chariots, and hastened to pursue the
Israelites in the Night time, and then to make their escape to the Egyptian
Shores, not to encumber and hinder one another, and even to overturn their
Chariots, and break the Wheels against the Rocks. Now some Chariots overturned
or broke, were sufficient to disturb the whole Army, and it could go but
slowly, whilst their Ranks were broke, and every Horseman endeavored to go
faster then another. This Moses seems to teach us in the words I have quoted.
All which things I have mentioned, did without doubt hinder the march of the
Horse and Chariots.
When the Israelites saw this, besides they perhaps observed that the Wind was
turned, knowing that the Sea would presently flow in, they began to think more
seriously of making their escape. Then at last they perceived, that the God of
the Israelites was not less Powerful in the Sea, then he had been in Egypt. So
that condemning their rashness, they turned back, and made haste to the
Egyptian Shore; but the Waves breaking upon them they were Drowned. Josephus
not only says, that the Water of the Sea was driven on the Egyptians by the
Wind, but also, that there arose at the same time a violent Storm, which
perhaps he learned from the Egyptian Priests of his time. The Egyptians added,
that their Ancestors were forced to come home, and leave off pursuing the
Israelites, by reason of the Storms, as it appears from Justin, Book 26. Chapter 2.
But Moses says, that they all Perished in the Sea, and that not one of them
escaped to bring the News of their Calamity. From whence one may observe by the
bye, that Josephus omitted that part of the Tradition of the Egyptians, because
it was contrary to the History of Moses; but willingly alleged, according to
his Custom, that part which was not inconsistent with it.

VIII. If the Histories of Manetho, and of some others, who wrote the
Antiquities of the Egyptians were extant, we might perhaps find in them several
Footsteps of the Truth, which Josephus, who made use of them did not see.
Indeed it is certain, as several Learned Men have observed, that in the
Fragments which he has preserved to us, there are many things which he
understood not well. There is something in Strabo, Book XVI. which seems to
belong to the passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea, though he says it
happened in a Neighboring Country. A wonderful and extraordinary thing, says
that Author, is reported to have happened in the Shore between Tire and
Ptolemais. It Is said, That the Inhabibants of Ptolemais, having engaged in a
battle with General Sarpedon; and being put to flight, were overwhelmed as they
fled, by the Sea coming upon them as a Tide; and that some were carried into
the Sea, and others left dead in some low Places. Afterward, when the Sea
Ebbed, their Bodies were found lying promiscuously among dead Fishes. What
happened in the Red Sea, was transferred to the Shoars of Tire, and disguised
with false Circumstances. The word Sarpedon was also falsely accounted a Proper
Name; for Sar-Phadon in Hebrew, signifies the Head of Deliverance, or of those
who are Delivered, which Encomium suits Moses very well. Diodorus Siculus heard
the Trogloditae report a like thing. It Is reported, says he, by the
Ichthyaphagi, who live near that Sea, as they have it from their Ancestors,
that there having been a GREAT REFLUX, the whole Channel of the Gulf was dried
up, and looked Green: And when the Earth had been seen at the bottom, a violent
Flowing came in of a sudden, and restored the Channel to its former State.
Which Words describe the thing well enough, as I have showed that it happened.

Indeed, if the Ichthyophagi said nothing else, they were more modest than some
Christians, who having made themselves Masters of those places, have corrupted
every thing with abundance of feigned Tales; an Example of which we find in
Orosius. Book I. Chapter 10. There remains still, says he, some certain Monuments
of that event. For the Track of the Chariots and Wheels may be seen, not only
in the shore, but also at the bottom, as far as the sight can reach, and if it
be confounded, either by chance or out of curiosity, it is of a sudden divinely
restored to its former state, by the Winds and Waves; that whosoever learns not
to fear God, by applying himself to Religion, which he knows may be terrified
by an ancient Example of God's Anger.

IX. I have hitherto sufficiently showed, how God opened a passage for the
Israelites through the Red Sea; but I have not showed yet what was done by the
ordinary Laws of Nature, and what by an extraordinary effect of the Divine
Power: What happens after the latter manner, is called a Miracle in the Style
of Christians, but Events of the former kind go not by that Name. Again, There
are two sorts of things which God does above the order of Nature; some are
such, as cannot be ascribed to natural Causes, as things are now: For Example,
If a body heavier than another goes not below it, as if an Iron thrown into the
Water sinks not, if a humane Body remains in the midst of Flames without being
hurt in the least, and the like. Others being considered in themselves, might
be looked upon as the Effects of natural Causes, such are an extraordinary Wind,
and Reflux of the Sea. Natural Causes may produce them, and often do it: But if
God does those things and the like, by an Act of his Will, without using
natural Causes, and without expecting the Order he established from the
beginning of the World; then, I say, what was not a Miracle by its Nature, is
rightly called so. If God by his special Will raises a Wind, when no Wind had
risen by the ordinary Course of Nature, and drives the Waves much farther than
they used to go, when the Reflux had not been greater than it used to be by the
ordinary Laws of Nature, those things are called Miracles, and are really so.

There might be therefore Miracles of both sorts in what happened to the Red
Sea. Perhaps the North Wind had not blown, if God had not raised it, and caused
the South Wind to cease. Perhaps the strength of that Wind was so great by the
Will of God, that no Natural Wind could have removed the Sea so far. The same
may be said of the Reflux: Perhaps the Sea had not returned back when it did,
if God had not removed it, nor would it, by its natural Ebbing, have gone back
so far as to leave a Passage Large enough for so many Thousands of Men.

This therefore must be granted to us, even by obstinate Men, that there might
be some Miracles properly so called in that Event; provided the thing happened,
as it is related, which I think I may now take for granted. But it will be
asked, how shall we know that those things happn'd, not by Natural Causes, but
by an Extraordinary Effect of God's Power? In answer to which, I say, First,
that the Extraordinary strenth of the Wind, and the Reflux which was so great,
that perhaps the like was never seen, show the Power of God in them. Secondly,
if nothing Extraordinary happened, the Egyptians had no reason to rejoice, nor
the Israelites to be Terrified, when they saw themselves shut up between the
Sea and the Mountains, for they might escape by expecting the Reflux of the
Sea; nor is it likely that so many Thousands of Men knew nothing of the Nature
of the Ocean, from which their former Habitation was but a few days journey
distant. Lastly, it was also a Miracle in this respect, Viz. Because Moses, who
could expect nothing else but an Ordinary Reflux, foretold the Israelites that
the Egyptians should perish, but that they themselves should escape without any
damage. Fear ye not, says he, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord,
which he will show to you to day: for the Egyptians, whom ye have seen to day,
ye shall see them again no more, for ever. Could any Humane Prudence foresee
that, and that there would be a place in the Channel left dry, and so large,
that so many Thousands of Men might go through it in few Hours without any
danger; and that the Egyptians should be so blinded as to follow the Israelits,
thinking there was nothing Extraordinary in the matter? If it be said, that God
revealed this to Moses, we have what we desire, for the very Revelation will be
a great Miracle. When a Miracle is foretold, before it happens, it is a most
certain Criterium of such a Miracle; for from thence it may be evidently
inferred, that God bears a Special Love to Him, whom he thus forewarns; and
that an Extraordinary thing happened, which could not be known if God had not
been pleased to fortel it.

Indeed if an Event, which is not manifestly above the Power of Nature, were
not foretold, it could not be said, after it has happened, to be most
certainly a Miracle wrought in the behalf of those, to whom it has been
beneficial. For who sees not that a prudent Man may suddenly make use of an
unexpected Event though it hapens not in his behalf? Wherefore though the Wind had
not turned without a Miracle, when Alexander passed at the foot of Mount
Climax, yet he could not boast of it as of a special favor of the Deity, for
how could he show that God has done it in his behalf? He went thither to see
whether he could go that way, designing either to stay sometime till that way
might be passable, or to lead his Army another way. This Strabo Book XIV.
intimates clearly enough; There is a straight of the Sea near Phaselis, says
he, through which Alexander led his Army. For there is a Mountain called Climax,
which lies near the Sea of Pamphylia, and leaves a narrow passage in the Shore,
which is Dry when the Sea is Calm, so that Travelers may go through it, but when
the Sea flows in, it is for the greatest part covered with Water. The way through
the Mountain goes a great way about, and is difficult: They go through the Shore
in fair Weather. Then he adds, Alexander happened to be there in Stormy
Weather, and because he relied much on Fortune, he sat out before the Waves,
were calmed, and so he and his Army marched all the day in the Waters to the
Belly.

From whence it clearly appears that Alexander boldly made use of that
opportunity, which had been more convenient, if he had not been so hasty; and
therefore if he boasted that God had opened a way for his Army, 'twas a mere
Stratagem he used to encourage his Soldiers. Which perhaps was the reason why
Alexander himself made no mention of any Miracle wrought in his behalf, in his
Epistles, wherein be spoke of that Expedition, as we learn from Plutarch in his
Life. His March through Pamphylia, says he, has been a Subject which many
Historians have treated Eloquently to raise admiration, and swell their Style,
as if the Sea had gone back by the Will of God -- But Alexander himself in his
Epistles mentions no Miracle, and only says, that having set out from Phaselis,
he went through Mount Climax.

From whence it appears, how great a difference there is between the Passage of
Alexander through the Shore of the Sea of Pamphilia, and the Passage of the
Israelites through the Red Sea, not to say that Alexander might have gone another
way, Viz. through the Mountain, whereas the Israelites could not go through the
Mountains. The approach of the Soldiers of Publius Scipio to the Wall of
Carthage does not less differ from the Passage of the Israelites; and though that
Cunning Man ascribed it as a Miracle to the Gods, to be more cheerfully obeyed
by his Soldiers; yet he durst not assure them that the Town would be certainly
taken, and if that Stratagem of his had not well succeeded, his vain
undertaking had not been perhaps so much as mentioned in History.

X. I think I have sufficiently cleared both the History of the Passage of the
Israelites through the Red Sea, and what Josephus says concerning it; whom I have
not alleged, as if I relied much upon his Authority, in things of that nature;
but because some Learned Men, whose Authority ought not to be slighted in the
Commonwealth of Learning, are more moved with his Testimony than with
Arguments. They and their like Object sometimes the Novelty of an Opinion,
which they read no where else, as if it were a certain sign of Falsehood, and
cannot rest contented without the Testimony of an Ancient Author. But I have
especially endeavored to satisfy those, to whom too great a Love of Prodigies
and wonders of some Mean and Imprudent Interpreters has given occasion to
doubt of the Truth of some Ancient Histories. For I have often observed that
the Doubts of some Men, who are no Fools, arise from their judging of very
Ancient Histories, not after a careful Examination, but according to the common
opinion of those with whom they live. Which is certainly very unjust; for can
any thing be more repugnant to Justice and Equity than for a Man to give his
Verdict, not as the Cause, which he ought to know perfectly, requires, but as
he, that pleads that cause, defends it. If any one thinks I have not well
pleaded the Cause I took in hand, I shall be glad to be better informed, and as
willing to hear another as if I had never thought of, nor writ on this Subject.

FINIS.

