The Innocent VINDICATED FROM THE Falsehoods and Slanders Of Certain
Certificates Sent from America on behalf of Samuel Jenings, and made public
by J. P. in Old England.

By Daniel Leeds.

He that hides Hatred with Lying Lips, and he that utters a Slander is a
Fool, Prove. 10.18. Printed in the Year 1695.

THough my Lot be fallen in a Scribbling Contentious Age, which makes many
things of weight and substance slighted, (which was ready to deter me from
writing) yet I find it my Duty, according to my capacity, to detect Falsehoods
and Slanders covered with a profession of Truth, of which sort, the Book of
Certificates published by John Pennington, is plentifully stored. But it is not
my intent to make Reply to the particular Accusations the said Penington brings
against G. K. he being more capable to answer himself, if he thinks it worth
his while to waste Ink and Paper about it; for truly I think the man would have
wanted matter to make up his Book, if he had not repeated the same things over
and over again, and his being so hard put to his shifts to revile G. K. (not
daring to accuse him a Doctrine, though there lies the main pinch) that the chief
part of what he writes against G. K. he takes o^^ of S. Jenings Book, who is G
K's adversary, concluding (I conceive) that because his brother S. Jewings
alleges this, that and the other thing against G. K. that therefore it must
needs be infallibly true, and that must be a sufficient proof against G. K. in
time of need; and while he blames G. K. for unfair managing Controversy, he
cannot see how unfair himself is in this, and in several other things, both
falsely asserting and misrepresenting G. K's words: But the morning of the great
discovering Day is dawned wherein all shall be laid open, and no man shall
hinder it.

But to the Certificates my intent is to speak, and chiefly to that sent from a
Monthly Meeting at Burlington the 6 t. 6 m. 1694. which comprehends most of the
rest, I shall first show how it was obtained (as I had it as well from some
that signed it, as from others which refused to sign it) and next, I shall show
how it is stuffed full of Lies and Slanders, that the impartial Reader may see
how they sly to Lies for a Refuge, and to Slanders for Revenge.

When News came from England that S. Jenings was beset in London, by reason of
his and his Brethrens Actions at Philadelphia coming out in print, Ann, the
Wife of S. J. made application first to some Members of Chesterfield Meeting,
and obtained a Certificate to relieve her Husband in that distress, for which I
blame her not. Then J. Wilsford and Fr. Devonport, two of that Meeting, came to
the Meeting at Burlington, to propogate the business there. And having framed a
Certificate, it was read in the Meeting, and some readily signed it, but some
others, (more willing to see with their own Eyes) made some scruple; and one or
two, it seems, questioned the truth of what was written about D. Leeds, which
scruple Fr. Devonport took off, by saying, That he had heard D. Leeds say, That
he has not ^^ia Unity with the Quakers since he came into the ^^^try [which is
a Lie, as shall be shown anon] Others refused wholly to set hand to it, and
showed their Reasons, which I could insert, but for brevity's sake omit; at
last it appeared one third of the Meeting did not sign to it, which looked a
little odd to those that had signed it; whereupon they resolved upon this
Expedient, viz. to write it over again, and for one man to sign it in the Name
of the Meeting, and so bring in all those to be guilty of signing, that had
refused [A notable way to force a Vnity] and for this purpose they made use of
James Marshall, that it might look with a fairer face, and laid aside their
Clerk (for that time) because (as J. Wilsford said) he was given to drinking
and Company keeping. But the Certificate being completed, F. Devonport hasted
with it next morning down the River, to send it for England, ^here being
printed, and returned hither again, is now come under consideration; which
before they endeavored to prevent me and others of: For, I having an account,
as aforesaid, went to their next Monthly Meeting for a Copy of the Judgment
they had drawn up against me, and sent to England, wherein (I told them) I
understood I was defamed. They answered, They had not defamed me, nor wrote any
untruth of me. To which I replied, If you have not wronged me, I hope you will
be the more willing to do me justice, in granting me a Copy; I Will pay for the
writing of it, etc. These and many more words passed, but at last the result
was [having none of their Ministers there] That I could have no answer till
next Meeting. I went again next Meeting, but no Copy could I obtain, and J.
Wilsford gave me an answer in these words, viz. G. Keith, und a Company of you
have printed and exprosed us so shamefully to the World, until you condemn
that, thou, shall have no Copy by my Consent. To which I replied, People,
behold your Preacher! he preaches, Revenge is his Christian Doctrine, he will
not do Justice, because others have done unjustly, as he alleges. With that,
two of the Meeting rose up, and faced me with a fierce Countenance, mixed part
with Revenge, and part with Scorn, uttering bitter words, and one of them I
remember rendered me a Jesuit. And this was all the Justice I could obtain
from them.

But the Certificate being printed in England, as aforesaid, and returned to
America having missed the hands of S. Jenings, so that he could not keep them
up from the Persons concerned, as he did his own Lying Book, called, The state
of the Case, etc.) one of these Books of Certificates is come to my hands. And
the first thing I note is, They allege Peter Boss makes a great Noise with his
Queries and Witnesses to prove them. To which I say, The Noise was so little,
before S. Jenings arrested him (and so made the Noise himself that very few of
that Meeting heard it much less in other parts; and although they resent it so
hethens a Crime in P. Boss for querying with S.J. whether those Reports were
true, or not, yet we see the twelve men of the Jury (those of them his own
Brethren) could not find it so much as a Slander, so little was the wrong done
by P. B. and had it not been for a Law made by a pattern from New England (as
VV. Byles told me) that makes it finable to speak slightingly of Magistrates,
the Jury must have cleared P. Boss in the case. And then what become^ of this
heinous Crime of murdering a man's Reputation, as S. J. calls it?

2dly, They accuse P. Boss of prejudice against S. J. ever since the Meeting
gave Judgment against him in the case of a difference between him and his
Neighbor.

Ass. As to the Meeting giving Judgment against P. B. I know to be false, being
present at the Meeting when the thing was debated; but if his Enemies since
have got a Judgment into the Meeting Book about that difference, be it to them
that did it.

3dly, They allege, he flattered, persuaded and queried with People, to make
up those bundles of stuff, meaning the Queries. But I believe this is not true,
for these Reasons, 1st. P. Boss is known to all that know him, to be no
flatterer, but a man plain and blunt, and truly for this reason I find my self
the more concerned in his Vindication, because I even hated flattery. 2dly,
There was no need of his flattering or persuading; for it is known to all the
Meetings, and all hereabouts, that most of those Reports concerning S. Jenings
were frequent about the Country long before P. B. queried concerning the truth
of them.

4ly, They accuse P. B. of being rude, wicked and cruel to his Maidservant,
because he could not obtain his Will. This must needs be a base Slander at
least; for, 1st, they insinuate hereby, as if he would have lain with her;
which though 'twas said, she had reported some such thing, yet being examined,
news was brought that she denied it: And I remember that I then took it as the
general sense of the Meeting, that she endeavored to make her Master weary of
her, to be set free, or change her service; a thing very desirable to most that
come Servants from England to these parts. 2dly, They do not in the least
declare wherein he was rude, wicked and cruel, as they ought to have done: if
they had been just to him: They say in their Chesterfield Certificate, That
their well-beloved Brother S J. was just to all men; Why then are they not just
to P. Boss, and tell wherein he was rude, wicked and cruel, and yet S. Jenings
be just to all, though it appears by their own Certificates to clear him, That
he be at a Man Servant till he broke a Cane, and whi^^ a Maid Servant in her
Bed, see p. 32 and 42. I say, could this be just in S. Jenings, as they say, He
was just to all, p. 19. and yet he rude wicked and cruel in P. Boss in beating
his Maid, If he did so. Reader, pray consider from what Fountain this
Burlington Certificate spring. Well might a third part of the Meeting refuse to
sign it.

And lastly, To render him yet more Odious, if possible, they say, If Friends
and soebr People did but know how reproachful his Life and Conversation has
been amongst us, etc.

Now I demand of these Enemies of P. Boss, to show wherein his Life and
Conversation is so reproachful: Is he a Blasphemer, or Thief, or Knave, or
Whoremonger, or Adulterer? Is he a Drunkard, an Extortioner, a Lascivious or a
Proud Person? Nay, is he a quarrelsom or ill Neighbor? Next time you print
pray be so just as to tell us, and the world wherein his Conversation is so
reproachful. But herein you manifest (to the judicious) your Spirit of
Prejudice and Revenge; for (it seems) it is sufficient for you to call a man
wicked, and of a reproachful Life, and leave it to others to show wherein he is
so. We are informed, and that by one of your own Friends of the Ministry, which
came lately out of England, That S. J. when last in England, made search and
enquiry of P. B's Conversation while he dwelt in England, and doubt not but if
he had found any thing against him, it would freely have come forth in print.
But finding not particular matters against him in England not America, they will
venture to brand him for a Person of a reproachsal Life: The Burlington
Certificate says it, and therefore it must be so. Now I would have none to
think that I justify P. Boss as a man free from failings, no more than my
self, S. Jenings, etc. for truly we have little cause, if rightly considered,
to ^^veigh one against another, being all of one lump of Corruption, and the
Grave will soon equal us all; but for a [pretended] whole Meeting to grate so
upon a Man in print, endeavoring to destroy his Reputation, as a Man, without
declaring matter of Fact, is so far short of common humanity, that it is
intollerably abusive; and to do him the same justice they did me, in denying
him a Copy when demanded.

The next thing in course is about S. J's riding a Horse-race with J. Slocum,
and being drunk. Now, this I say, I do not believe S.J. will be drunk; for I
know he has a stronger Head to bear drink, than to be diguised by it, unless by
chance. And if S. J. be wronged in this case, who is to blame? not P. Boss, but
W. Biddle, ^un. for I know several Persons that I can give credit to, that
affirm, they had that report from W. B's own Mouth; therefore let the saddle be
laid upon the right Horse. But one thing by the way, I have been credibly
informed, that some or one of S.J's Friends went with J. Slocum before a
Magistrate in East-Jarsey, to get him declare the truth of the matter upon his
Attestation, but the Magistrate refused to attest J. Slocum, alleging, it was
probable he might be drunk also. Now if this be true, I account it great
discretion in the Magistrate.

2dly, They say, the third Query is proved a Lie, by a Certificate from the
Person concerned, and this is my Neighbor John Antrum, poor man! I am really
sorry for him, because I think no means no body harm; but to say, by what
instruments or means he was so weak to be drawn by, to deny the truth, and give
under his hand, that he had no right to Land there, I shall omit at this time;
but this I must say, that all or most of his Neighbors know, that he then
declared, that he had a right to the Land, and that S. J. had surveyed it from
him, and was in an extreme passion about it, as soon as he heard of it; and I
having been the former Surveyor, he came to me to ease himself, expecting I
could help him; knowing that I knew his right there, he having before told me
of his intention about taking it up; but I let him know it was out of my power
to do any thing in that kind, being out of Office; but he expressed himself in
great trouble about it, to me and my Wife, calling the Surveyor Knave, and
said, I pray God keep me in my right Senses, S. Jenings has done right
Taylor-like, that takes a piece of one man's Garment, and a piece of another,
to make one for himself; for I hear (said he) he has surveyed, Matthews Meadow
too; These were his words, with many more, not only to me and my Wife, but to
several others at other times and places So that the Reader, may very well see,
that Peter Bos^ is not the Liar or raiser of that Report. And if the rest of
the Certificate signers have done like my Neighbor J. Antrum, they have made a
poor hand on it, that after so many years feeding upon Sermons from Meeting to
Meeting, they at last are left so hungry to eat their own words; but it is no
wonder, for their Ministers have done it also, to our certain knowledge. And
though many People know not how to judge, or what to believe, as to these things,
yet surely they are not hid from Almighty God, who will judge righteously.

3dly, To the fourth Query, they say, That that Witness has for many Tears been
a prejudiced Person, and declared he has not had unity with the Quakers since
he came into the Country.

Now Observe, They do not in the least mention wherein the Evidence I have
given may be suspected [its enough belike they say it] and yet to invalidate my
Evidence, they insinuate to the world in print, That my evidence is not to be
taken notice of, because (they say) I am prejudiced; which is an indirect
declaring me perjured, because what I there evidenced, was upon my solemn
Attestation before Authority: I am apt to believe that if such a man as S. J.
had the like thing as this against me, he might improve it to my cost. Does not
such actions as these render their Meeting; rather Seditious than Religious,
thus to meet together to defame men in print, by rendering them unfit to give
Evidence, without having matter of Fact to charge them with, muchless to prove
against them?

But as to the Charge it self, That I am prejudiced, I do not only hope it is
not true, but have and do pray to God that it may not be true, however, I
believe my self to be at least as clear as those that affirm it of me. But that
I have declared my self to have no Unity with the Quakers since I came into the
Country, I know to be a Lie; and in short I Will declare the matter from which
Francis Devenport draws that Consequence, viz. after I had been four years in
the Country, I was at a Monthly Meeting at the House of John Woolstone in
Burlington, where the Meeting seemed in two parties, W. Peachy, W. Cooper, and
others contending violently against T. Olive, etc. about the way or method ot
exhorting Offenders, and I perfectly remember T. Olive's words were these, If
any one have it in their heart from the Lord to go to an Offender, let them go
in Gods Name, I am one with them; but for the Meeting to send Persons, I am
against: This passage I once told F. Devenport accidentally, and withal told
him, I was one with T. O. in that thing, and am still of the same mind; and
this thing F. Devenport has kept, it seems, as a Weapon under his smooth Coat,
near ten Years, to strike me with at this opportunity. So here the Reader may
see where their Unity stands. Yet as I know no Disunity I had with the Quakers
^is^ then, so unless he can prove T. Olive, and those of his side then [ viz.
D. W. J. W. and others] no Quakers, he cannot say but I had Unity them T. Olive
was a man whom I always loved, and have often said, That 'twas my belief no man
had better kept his Integrity that came into these parts, than T. O. had done;
and do believe the Quakers and he had Unity, notwithstanding his dissent from
some in that point. And therefore F. Devenport ought not to have let prejudice
so rule his Reason as to have witnessed to a Lie against me, upon this
Consequence. But I suppose F. D's word will pass amongst more than mine;
Solomon says, Favor is not to men of Knowledge. and F. D. in one main point
declares himself true to his Brethren, and therefore must needs merit their
Unity, viz. to hide his Religion under a Bushel as long as he lives; for he has
declared, That no man shall know his Faith, but by his Works; so that the
Pharisees of Old may stand in competition with him, for they were very just
men, as to the outward. And thus he can at once kick the Command of the Apostle
out at the Church Door, viz. 1 Pet. 3.15. Sanctify the Lord God in your
hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a
reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear.

And as to S. Jenings surveving of R. Matthews Meadow, his answer to it, in
Book, called, state of the case, etc. he has both abused me and his own
knowledge, in calling what I evidenced, An idle story, and yet neither does nor
can say, the story is not true; and how can that which is true, be idle? for
the substance of what I declare upon my Attestation, is, That he surveyed that
Meadow (by Simon Charles) which is not denied, but owned by him; in short, the
judicious Reader may early see, that S. Jenings his Answer is onl^ a crafty
Shuffle, even such as a plain honest Quaker would blash at; for I appeal to S.
J. himself, That suppose the survey of his own Meadow (which lies off from his
Plantation too) were by a mistake or neglect (in the Recorder) wrong or short
recorded, whether he would not count it unjust in any that should, take that
advantage to take away his Meadow, and thereby ruin his Plantation? Here lies
the plain honesty of the case.

And whereas S. J. tells Elias Far, in his Letter printed with the
Certificates, That all the Meadow was not pretended to be for Matthews. But I
say, that is a mistake, at least, in S. J. for there was no more Meadow in that
place, but what was surveyed and recorded to Matthews seven years before, which
Meadow terminated in a small run of water at the lower and, where grew some
Bushes, and there is a marked Tree or two still to be seen, only the Bushes being
burnt root and branch, it shows like Meadow further; but the number of Acres
would have determined the matter, which was to be 25. our Law allowing so to
500 Acres of Land. And this was all that was wanting in the wording the survey,
which if that had been, (which it seems was by some means omitted) the survey
had been perfect. And therefore if it be printed over never so often, Sam.
Jenings is to blame for meddling with that Meadow, especially the Owner being
absent, and also, inasmuch as I told him how the case stood, showed him the
Meadow, and also a Copy of the Record, when he was about to survey said Meadow,
and would have dissuaded him from it, as he knows. But to return to the matter.

In the Burlington Certificate they tell of a Warrant they have by them,
insinuating as if J. Skeen took a course at Law with S. Jenings, for saying,
Thou pitiful Whip-jack, I despise thee; for that is the thing cited in the Book
of the Trials, page 30. which we say is false; and therefore if they look
again, they will find it their mistake, nay, a sly insinuation to make the World
believe that J. S. took a course at Law S. J. for calling him Ill Names. We
grant there was a VVarrant written, but 'twas about their difference concerning
the Road to Burlington, when they were stopped, and there had like to have b^^^
Mischief done; and I heard the VVarrant was never executed; but this was for
Actions and Threats, as being Unhorsed, and the like, and it was not J. Skeen,
but his Wife that complained, being filled with fear of Mischief, S. Jenings
having ordered his Son and Servants to stop any of J. Skeens family coming that
way, (and that he himself would Unhorse them, if he met him, viz. J. S) and had
endeavored it with Forks, etc. and broke the Bottles of Rum that J. S 's Son
was carrying to the Reapers: and it is to be noted also, That some of that
Meeting were greatly dissatisfied with S. Jenings behavior in that affair, and
resolved to bring it up in the Meeting, before S. J. removed to Philadelphia;
but when the time came, his greatness was such as they had not courage to do
it. But to say, their differences were quickly ended, is but daubing; for I
know that at the next Monthly Meeting after J.S 's Death, some of S. J 's
Friends were for putting the matter, on against the Widow, and I well remember
one in the Meeting answered, Let the Widow alone, poor Wom^n, she has
Exercise enough for the loss of her Husband; and so that matter was no more
meddled with. And if they mean it was quickly ended, because it could be
continued no longer, by reason of J. S's Death, I suppose they are in the right.

And whereas they tell of Henry Beck and and J. Smith, two of the Evidences,
getting young Women with Child, they ought also to have been just to these
men, and let the world know that the Young Women were their espoused Wives,
that they got with Child: They still are wanting in that excellent Virtue which
they say S. Jenings has, To be just to all men; for they have not been just to
these two, but do, as much as in them lies, to defame well-meaning men, and
render them Odious: what though they were overtaken with that Infirmity in
their Youth, must they therefore be rendered to the World in print, as unfit
for Evidences, when neither the Law of God nor Man does now condemn them:
Surely if Sam. Jenings be just to all men, as they say, needs no such Rubbish
to defend him.

Again, they say of J. Bainbridge, That he has been a Drunkard, Fighter,
Quarreller, Rude and Wicked. I say, I know not but the Man has been so; and if
he be mended now, does that offend them? pray which of us have not been wicked
in one respect or other? but it seems their buness is not encourage men in
turning from evil, but to render them Odious for the evil they have done: O!
what a woeful case are we in, if God should deal so by us! Now Jo. Bainbridge
denis that ever he called his Mother Jezabel, as they affirm, and says, They
cannot prove it, they have belyed him in that; and that his Mother le^^ the
Country, and went to England for such behavior in him, is utterly false.

Then as what is said of James Silver, in the Certificate they declare, that he
said, it was extorted from him, (meaning his Evidence in the Book of the
Trials) never thinking it should b^ put in print. These last words, (never
thinking it should be put in print) he owns he said, but says, the other is
false, he never said it was extorted from him; for he says, That when they
asked him concerning the Truth of what he declared, his answer was, Ay, it is
all true, and a great deal more; but he did not think when he spoke it, that it
should have been printed, he was sorry for that. And that it is true that he
gave them that answer, the best Friend of mine going by the House of T. G. in
Burlington, heard him speak the same words to those that were interrogating
him, who told it to me the same day; and therefore I am fully persuaded of that
being another Falsehood; also, I believe the man knew not the meaning of the
word extort. And although Benj. Moore calls it a great Lie in that Ja. Silver
says, his Master Jenings took him by the Throat, yet to my knowledge Benjamin
himself has formerly declared such like words, as that his Master griped him by
the Coll^r, and other Complaints he has made, which I have met with at
Neighbors Houses. But one thing I observed, which in the defense of Ja. Silver
I shall relate, viz. That on a time when S. Jenings was going to England, the
said B. M. came to his House to make up some Accounts with him, or the like,
and I saw S J. give his old Servant Benjamin a very good Leather Garment or
two, and it is observable, that B. Moore never after that has been heard to
give his Master a hard word, for which I do not blame him; but truly when men
say and unsay, and so make mischief among their Neighbors, I judge them to
blame for that; for I take it to be an argument of being void of Conscience.

Lastly, I find among the Certificates, That Benj. More, jun. charges Joh.
Silver and J. Smith of stealing Oats, Powder, Shot, Wool, Eggs, and the like;
but I leave them to answer for themselves, that are defamed by it; for I judge
it a Defamation, if true, because it is divulged many years out of time; and
though it be like the bundles of stuff in the rest of the Certificates, yet I
should be loath any man should have the like advantage against me, as they have
against the said B. M. if he dare own it especially, unless I had potent
partial Friends, but it is enough for me to have such Enemies.

By this time I hope my old Friends will no more judge others for making up
bundles of stuff, and raking up Dirt; for if they do, they certainly condemn
themselves, as much as ever men did, as he that reads impartially must
acknowledge. And I desire they would take notice of this, That I have not used
that method against them [but what a Defender cannot avoid] to take up what
failings I could against them, it is not my way, I scorn it; I know we are all
subject to weaknesses of the flesh, so that I have not been curious (since I
had the understanding of a man) about Tithe, Mint, Annis and Cummin, or the
skirts of Religion, and therefore have been judged by some, a loose Person; but
it is the weightier matters of Religion that I have been and am concerned for,
and chiefly the Faith and Merits of our Lord Jesus of Nazareth, so that when I
hear him denied, slighted or undervalued, then a Zeal arises in me, and I
cannot be silent; I mean, that Jesus for whom the holy Apostles and blessed
Martyrs suffered; they did not suffer for owning or denying the Light within
them (which yet is a Leader unto him) but they suffered for professing him that
was born of the Virgin Mary to be Christ the Son of God, even that same Jesus
whom the Jews slew and hanged on a Tree (and they could not say nor hang the
Light there) yea, the very same that they slew and hanged on a Tree, that God
has now exalted: it was he they suffered for, and it is he that I hope for
Salvation by, and pray that he will enable me to obey his Precepts.

D. L.

A Postscript by another Hand.
WEre it not but that I know how to spend my precious Time better, could fill a
vollumn to show the Per^^rsions and Falsehoods of Sam Jenings, Thomas Elwood an^
J. Penington, in their late Pamphlets against G. Keith, etc. but there being
some Reply made to the two first by G. K. and the above short answer to the
latter, I shall at present only detect two or three Falsehoods in S. J's book,
called, The state of the case, etc. and so conclude.

In the first place I observe, that both Sam. Jenings, Thomas Elwood and John
Penington being hard beset to clear their Friends from the Errors charged and
proved against them, they endeavor to invalidate the Evidences of honest men,
S. J. p. 7. says, These two Witnesses were much at the Devotion of G. R. and
his creatures to use as he pleased. Which I charge upon Sam. Jenings as a
wicked Lie, and demand of him to show wherein these two Witnesses were G. K's
Creatures, to used as he pleased.

In the next place I find his Brother Elwood to follow his steps, and in his
book called, A further discovery, p. 25. says, Those 2 Witnesses, who were both
known to be strong in party with G. K. and great Adversaries to W. S. But I
would ask T.E. how he knows they were strong in party with G.K.? and wherein it
appeared they were great Adversaries to W. S.? Had there then been any
difference, controversy or party taking, whereby these Witnesses had shown
themselves strong in party with G. K. and great Adversaries to W. Stockdale? I
say, Nay, and T. E. has therein uttered a great Falsehood. And I advise him next
time to have more ground for what he asserts than S. J. bare say-so. But this
way I find they take to discredit G. K's evidences: its a new trick they have
found out (and, true or false, will be believed by some) for nothing was
alleged against them at the time they gave evidence, but on the contrary T.
Loyd said then, of one of them, he might be counted among the Elders, etc. But
he not running with the stream, his Veracity now must be questioned concerning
what he did evidence four years ago.

They having thus endeavored by Lies and Falsehoods to discredit G. K 's
evidences, let us hear how S. J. multiplyes the Evidences against G. K. viz. T.
Fitzwater having charged G. K. with denying the sufficiency of the Light, he
brings only W. Stockdale as an evidence to prove it, but Sam. Jenings in his
state of the case, p. 3. says, T. Fitzwater brought W. Stockdale and W. Meaning
to evidence to the truth of his charge. But as we know T. F. never pretended to
bring W. Meaning as an evidence, so nor is there any such person in these
parts, therefore forgery in S. J. to make two where there is but one.

Then again, whereas G. K. had occasionally related how S. J. in a Monthly
Meeting called one of his fellew Members Non-sensical Puppy, to wipe off this,
he says, p. 41. when he met with it in print, he made enquiry, and heard it was
spoken by one T. Tress, an odd sort of a singular man, etc. But here it may be
observed, That S. J. is not just in this Relation, for it was not only T.
Tress, but R. Ward also, that did then, and do now evidence to the truth
thereof. But I suppose S. J. thought it best to mention but one evidence, that
the matter related against him, might seem the more probable to he false. So
where only One Evidence is brought against G. K. he will forge another to make up
two, that the charge against G. K. may seem true, as p. 3. but where Two
evidences are against himself, he will relate only One of them, to make the
charge seem not true, see p. 41. Behold, ye Signers of Chesterfield
Certificate, this is him ye call your well-beloved Friend, who was just to all
men! will ye say he is just in this matter before related? I suppose not. Well
might he be ashamed to let his Book go publicly abroad, here in America, where
so many knew it to be made up chiefly of Lies, Perversions and Forgeries, and
therefore it was great Policy in him to keep his books up, and not let one of
them be seen by those that were abused therein. But now they are come to hand
another way, and his Clandestine way of spreading them is to no purpose. And it
now lies upon him to vindicate his said book, and make a just Reply to G.K's
Answer to him: Some of the Persons abused by his Book, have demanded a public
Conference, where they offer to detect his Falsehoods; but this I find he evades.

There is one passage more which I cannot well pass by without detecting the
notorious Falsehood thereof, and that is in page 24. of S. J.'s Book, where he
insinuates, That G.K. grati^^ his hearers by telling them of a preaching Quaker
in Maryland, That got another man's Wife with Child, which they could not
discern by the Light within: and of another being carried out of a Ta^^house
drunk. I shall say no more in answer to these, but that we charge them on S. J.
as notorious Falsehoods, and defy the whole world to make good that ever G. K.
uttered such expressions in his Preaching. And S. J. might be ashamed to fill
his Book with such lying stuff. But T. Elwood has in great part followed S. J.
footsteps, and taken many things upon his credit, else surely he would not
have uttered so many Falsehoods and Perversions, which we think to detect
shortly.

FINIS.

