To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
The true Copy of M. John Dee his Petition to the kings most excellent
Majesty, exhibited: Anno 1604. Iunij 5. at Greenewich.
IN most humble and lamentable manner beseeches your Royal Majesty, your
Highness most distressed Servant, John Dee: That, as, by the grace and
providence of the Almighty, you are our King, our earthly Supreme Head, and
Judge: So it may please your sacred Majesty, either in your own royal
presence and hearing; Or, of the Lords of your Majesty's most honorable privy
Counsel: Or, of the present assembled Parliament States, to cause your
Highness said Servant, to be tried and cleared of that horrible and damnable,
and to him, most grievous and dammageable Sclaunder: generally, and for these
many years last past, in this Kingdom raised, and continued, by report, and
Print, against him: Namely, That he is, or has bin a Coniurer, or Caller, or
Invocator of devils: Upon which most ungodly, and false report, so boldly,
constantly, and impudently avouched: yea, and uncontrolled, and hitherto
unpunished, for so many years, continuing: (Albeit, your Majesty's said
Suppliant, has published in Print, diverse his earnest Apologies, against it)
yet some impudent and malicious foreign enemy, or English traitor to the
flourishing State and Honor of this Kingdom, has in Print ( Anno 1592. 7.
Ianuarij) affirmed your Majesty's said Suppliant, to be the Coniurer belonging
to the most Honorable Privy Counsel, of your Majesty's most famous last
Predecessor, ( Queen Elizabeth) So that, seeing the said abominable
Sclaunder, is become so highly heinous, and disgraceful, that it pretends
great discredit, and disliking to be had, also, of the said most Honorable
Lords, of your Majesty's privy Counsel (as to use any Coniurers advise: and
your said Suppliant to be the man.) It, therefore, seems, (upon diverse
respects,) to be very needful, due and speedy Order, to be taken herein: by
your Majesty's wisdom, and Supreme Authority: (by one, of the three foresaid
means, or any other,) to have your Highness said Suppliant, to be tried, in
the premises: Who offers himself willingly, to the punishment of Death:
(yea, either to be stoned to death: or to be buried quick: or to be burned
unmercifully) If by any due, true, and just means, the said name of Coniurer,
or Caller, or Invocator of Devils, or damned Spirits, can be proved, to have
been, or to be, duly or justly reported of him, or attributed unto him: Yea,
(good, and gracious King) If any one, of all the great number, of the very
strange and frivolous fables, or histories reported and told of him (as to have
been of his doing) were True: as they have been told, or reasonably caused
any wondering among, or to, the many headed Multitude, or to any other,
whosoever, else. And, then, your Highness said Suppliant, (upon his said
Justification, and Clearing, made herein,) will conceive great and undoubted
hope, that your Majesty will, soon after, more willingly, have Princely
regard of redressing, of your Highness said Suppliant his farther griefs, and
hindrances; no longer, of him, possibly to be endured: So long, has his utter
undoing, by little and little, been most unjustly, compassed. The Almighty
and most merciful God, always direct, your Majesty's royal heart, in his
ways of Justice and Mercy, as is to him, most acceptable: and make your
Majesty to be the most blessed and Triumphant Monarch, that ever this Brytish
Empire, enjoyed.

Amen.

