Answers to the particulars proponed by His Majesty's Commissionar.
HAving seriously considered with our selves that nothing in this world is so
precious, and ought to be so dear unto us as our Religion that the diseases of
this Kirk after long toleration did threaten no less then her own ruin, and
expiring of the truth of Religion at last. And that a free general Assembly
was the ordinary remedy appointed by divine authority; and blessed by divine
providence in other Kirks, and after a special manner in the Kirk of Scotland;
We have often and earnestly supplicated for the same; and have labored to
remove what was objected, or what we could conceive to be any hinderance to
the obtaining of our desire, like as we have now for the same good end
resolved to return this Answer to the particulars proponed to be performed by
us before an Assembly be indicted.

The particulars proponed are either matters Ecclesiastic or civil:
Ecclesiastic or kirk matters are, the first concerning Ministers deposed or
suspended by the presbyteries, since the first of Februar last without warrant
of the Ordinar, that they be reponed to their own places. The second,
concerning Moderators of presbytrys deposed since the forsaid day to be
reponed, and all Moderators appointed by the said presbyteries without warrant
forsaid to desist from executing the office of Moderator. The third, anent
Ministers admitted since the day forsaid, that they desist from exercising the
function of the Ministry in that place to which they had been admitted,
These three particulars do concern the power, duty and particular facts or
faults of presbyteries, wherein we have no power to judge and determine
whether they have lawfully proceeded or not, far less can we urge or command
them to altar or recall what they have determined or done, in the suspending,
deposing or admitting of Ministers or Moderators: they being properly subject
to the superior Assemblies of the Kirk, and in this case and condition of the
Kirk, to the general Assembly, where if they shall not after trial justify
their proceedings from the good warrants of Scripture, reason, and of the acts
and practices of the Kirk, they ought sustain their own deserved censure. And
since upon the one side there be many complaints, against the prelates for their
usurpation over Presbyteries in the like particulars: And on the other side
there be such complaints of the doings and disorders of presbyteries to the
offense of the Prelates, We trust that his Majesty's Commissionar will not
esteem this to be an hinderance of the indiction of a general Assembly: but
rather a powerful and principal motive with speed to conveene the same, as
the proper judicatorie for determining such dangerous and universal
differences of the Kirk. Neither do we hear that any Minsters are deposed:
but some only suspended during this interim, till a general Assembly for their
erroneous doctrine and flagitious life: So that it were most offensive to God,
disgraceful to Religion, and scandalous to the people to repone them to their
places, till they be tried and censured. And concerning Moderators none of them
(as we understand) are deposed, but some only changed, which is very ordinary
in this Kirk.

The fourth, anent the reparing of Parochiners to their own Kirks, and that
Elders assist their Minister in the discipline of the Kirk ought to be
cognosced and judged by the particular Presbytery, to which the Parochiners
and elders are subject, since the cause may be in the Ministers no less then
the parochiners add elders And incase they sinde no redress there, to ascend
till they come to a general Assembly, the want whereof makes disorders to be
multiplied both in presby^^ries and paroches.

To the sixth, that Ministers wait upon their own Kirks; and that none of
them come to the assembly or place where the same is kept: but such as shall
be chosen Commissionars from pr^sbyteries.

We answer, that none are to come to the place of the assembly, but such as
are either allowed by commission, or other-wise have such interest as they can
approve to his Majesty's Commissionar, and the Assembly conveened.

To the seventh, anent the appointing of Moderators of presbyteries to be
Commissionars to the general assembly: only constant Moderatours who ceased
long since, were found in the assembly 1606. (which yet was never reputed by
this Kirk to be a lawful national assembly) to be necessary members of a
general assembly. And if both the Moderators. Who if they be necessary
members need not to be chosen, and the chosen Commissionars repare to the
assembly: the Assembly it self can judge best of the members where-of it ought
to be constitute.

To the nynth, that no laick whatsoever meddle with the choosing of
Commissionars for the presbyteries, and no Minister without his own
presbytery: We say that according to the order of the Kirk none but Ministers
and Elders of Kirks ought to have voice in choosing Commissionars for
presbyteries: And that no Minister or Elder ought to have voice in election,
but in his own presbytery.

The rest of the particulars are civil matters, as the fifth, anent the paying
of the rents and stipends of Bishops and Ministers: Concerning which we can
say no further but that the Laws are patent for them as others his Majest^es
subjects. And that the general assembly ought not to be delayed upon any
complaint of that kind.

The eight, requiring that Bishops and other Ministers may be secured in their
persons: We think so reasonable, that we will promise every one of us for
our own parts they shall suffer no violence from us, and shall hinder others so
far as we may, and if any trouble them otherwise, or make them any kind of
molestation in that attendance, except by order of Law^s the parties are justly
punishable according to the degrie of their faule as other subjects are.

To the tenth, concerning the dissolving of all convocations and meetings and
the peaceablenesse of the Country. These meetings being kept for no other
end, but for consul^ing about lawful remedies against such pressing grievances
as threaten the desolation of the Kirk and State, cannot be dissolved till the
evils be removed. And we trust that nothing in these our meetings has escaped
us which earrseth in it the smallest appearance of unduetifulnesse, or which
may seem to tend to the breach of the common peace; But although our
adversaries have herein calumniated us, yet we have always so behaved our
selves as beseemed his Majesty's most humble and loyal subjects, petitioning
his Majesty for a legal redress of our just grievances.

To the last, concerning the Covenant: the Commissioner his G. having many
times and most instantly pressed us with that point. We did first by invincible
reasons make manifest that we could not without sinning against God and our
consciences; and without wrong done to this national Kirk, and the posterity,
rescinde or alter the same. And thereafter did at length clear the same of all
unlawful combination against authority by our last Supplication and
declaration, which his Majesty's Commissionar accepted as the most ready and
powerful of all other means which could come within the compass of our
thoughts to give his Majesty satisfaction. The Subscription of this our
Confession of Faith and Covenant, being an act so evidently tending to the
glory of God, the Kings honor, and happiness of the Kingdom. And having
already proven so comfortable to us in the inward of our hearts: It is our
ardent and constant desire, and hearty with that both his Majesty, and all
his good Subjects may be partakers of the same comfort: Like as we find our
selves bound by conscience and by the Covenant it self to persuade all his
Majesty's good Subjects to join with us for the good of Religion, his
Majesty's honor, and the quietness of the Kingdom, which being modestly used
by us without pressing or threatening of the meanest, we hope shall never give
his Majesty the least cause of discontent.

Seeing therefore according to our power and interest we are most willing to
remove all hindrances, that things may be carried in a peaceable manner
worthy of our profession and Covenant, do aim at nothing but the good of the
Kingdom, and preservation of the Kirk, which by consumption and combustion is
like to be desperately diseased, except remedy some way be speedily provided;
and delight to use no other means but such as are legal, and have been
ordinary in this Kirk since the reformation, We are confident that without
further delay for preventing of greater evils and miseries than we can
express, Our just desires shall be granted; So shall we be encouraged in the
peace of our souls still to pray for his Majesty all increase of true honor
and happiness.

FINIS.

