THE ENGLISH LAWYER.

DESCRIBING A Method for the managing of the Laws of this Land.

And expressing the best qualities requisite in the Student Practizer Judges
and Fathers
of the same.

Written by the Reverend and Learned Sir JOHN DODERIDGE Knight, one of the
Justices of the Kings Bench, lately deceased.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of I. MORE Esquire. MDCXXXI.

The Printers to the READER.
THE later part of this Volume was heretofore obscurely printed by an imperfect
Copy from a then unknown Author, under the Title of The Lawyers light: We
now reimprint it in fair light, by the Authors own Copy, written (for the
most part) with his own hand; we vouch his name and entitle it, as he
himself did, The English Lawyer: The other part hereof, which was not formerly
printed, we now also put forth according to the Authors own Copy, and place
it, as he did, in the foremost rank; There are other parts also (which are
expressed on the next leaf) requisite to the making up of the whole intended
work; but because they are not made, or not found as yet, they can be but
desired until some happy hand shall either find or finish the rest of this
good work, whose worth will recommend it self upon the reading.

This Whole Treatise is divided into three Parts.
The first concerning the Student: And that also divided into three distinct
Sections.

THE first Section contains a disquisition with what Natural gifts and
faculties the Student of the Law ought to be furnished withal.

The second Section contains what acquired Qualities are required in the
Student as well touching the Virtues intellectual, and the liberal Sciences,
wherein the Student should be informed; and other Knowledges necessary for the
rectifying of his understanding, as also touching the Moral virtues for
direction of his Conversation.

The third Section contains the best manner and Method that may be used for
the most delightful and most useful study of Law, and whereby most profit may
be gotten in profoundnesse of Judgment in the knowledge of our English Laws.

The second Treatise touching the Counselor or Practizer of the Laws, is also
subdivided into three principal Parts or Sections.

THe First concerns his Private Counsel given at home in his Chamber to his
Client, which is one part of his duty Consulendo, by way of Counsel.

The Second Part or Section concerns the drawing of Assurances and
Conveiances, which are of sundry sorts; which is his duty Cavendo, by way of
Caution.

The Third Part or Section concerns his Pleadings for his Client; And that is
threefold: In point of Law: In Argument of Demurrers: In matter of fact, as in
giving or delivering of Evidence. And the Patronage of Causes in Courts of
equity: all which are his duties Agendo, by way of public Action.

In the Third Treatise concerning a Judge, are contained these particulars, in
two general parts divided: first, his Preparation in his person, Secondly, his
Practice.

IN his Preparation, or consideration of his Person, the qualities required in
an upright Judge are these: first, that he be Religious, according to the
Counsel of Iethro unto Moses, Provide men fearing God. 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Exodus
18.21.22.23.

Secondly, They ought to be men of Courage. Provide thee among all the People
men of Courage. Deuteronomy. 1.17.

Thirdly, They ought to be men of Integrity, Just men, dealing truly: They
shall be just, if first they hate Covetousness, so will they not be corrupted,
For rewards and gifts do blind the eyes of the wise; Exodus 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.19.
Ecclus. 20.28. 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Secondly, if they have no respect of persons.
Lev. 19.15. Deuteronomy. 1.17. 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Thirdly, if they be free from passions
and perturbations of the mind, as anger, favor, desire of revenge, etc.

Fourthly, Judges ought to be wife, men able to discern circumstances, and to
foreknow the mischiefs and inconveniences that may ensue of inconsiderate
Judgments. Deuteronomy. 1.13.

Fifthly, Judges ought to be learned, especially in the Laws, Be ye learned
that judge the earth.

The Second Part, which is the Practice of the Judge, generally considered is
twofold, first either Sedentary, in the Court wherein he sits: or Itinerate,
in the Circuit wherein he rides.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap: 1 OF Nature, of Art, of Exercise. Page 1 Chap: 2 Of sharpness of wit
and judgment. Page 4 Chap: 3. Of Memory. Page 12 Chap: 4. Of ready speech.
Page 24 Chap: 5. That liberal Arts are requisite in a Lawyer. Page 27 Sundry
Objections answered. Chap: 6. That skill in the Latin tongue and the four
parts of Grammar is requisite in a Lawyer. Page 39 And sundry objections
answered. Chap: 7. Of Logic, the necessity thereof in a Lawyer proved. Page
55 By testimonies of Heathen and Divine Authors. By reasons drawn from the
most parts of Logic, as, from the consideration Of derivations of words. Of
definitions and descriptions. Of divisions. With instances out of the common
Laws. As also from the consideration Of oppesites. Of Negatives. Of priority.
Of the whole and his parts. Of the four causes, material, formal, efficient,
final. Exemplified with insta^ces out of the Laws, being parts of Logic
furthering the knowledge of definition and division. By places out of Law
Books where the use of Logic has either been required, admitted, or
practiced.
THE ENGLISH LAWYER.
CAP. I.
FOrasmuch as the Exercise of all such as enterprise the Profession, and do
intermeddle with the Knowledge of the Laws of this Realm, consists, 1,
either in the obtaining, study, or specusation thereof. 2, Or in the practice,
prosecution, or direction. 3, Or in the full and final decision and
determination of causes therein called into question: behoovefull it were (as
me seems) for such as have already entertained a love to that faculty, and
covet to contemplate with their inward eye the express and perfect Image of an
English Lawyer, to view each of these in their particular charge and duty, and
therewithal to consider what things were requisite, and what course were most
convenient to be holden for the better and more full accomplishment of that
which is, and must be expected. And as the persons whom our speech concerns,
and whose charge we have here briefly touched, are three in number, The
Student, the Practizer, and the Judge: (For as touching the Pronothory or
Clark, and the Attorney, they are rather Ministers to follow others, then
Managers to direct:) So will the matters incident to every of their duties
yield us a threefold Treatise, and give us large scope of Discourse in the
prosecuting of such things as are requisite and incident unto the same.

And first as touching the Student, and his speculative search of our English
Laws (which is his endeavor and study) as it is in order foremost, and by Nature
the ground of the proceedings of both the other, being that indeed without the
which the rest cannot subfist. Reason in this point requires, that due
consideration, and careful forethought should be had for the obtaining and
trial of those things which are esteemed as Viatica necessaria, needful
implements behoovefull in the person of him that shall undertake to deal
therewith. Authors which have written Institutions for the better information
and direction of the learner, have required at the hands of such their Auditors
and followers as were to be instructed; these three things, Nature, Art, and
Exercise or Use, each of which they would so have, and indeed so ought to be
linked to other, that seldom has bin found perfection in any one person in
whom all these three have not bin conjoined: For Nature (though of her self
excellent) yet without Art or Exercise is as the Gold in the dross, or as the
precious stone taken out of the bowels of the earth, rude, and unpolished: Art
without Nature, bare, barren, and defective (as being indeed nothing else but
an observation of Nature) And both without Exercise, void of fruit: Nature
resembles the soil; Art or Method whereby we are directed, the Husbandman;
Precepts or Institutions in the Science which we mean to profess, are as the
seeds, which industry and exercise do bring unto growth, ripenes and
perfection: so that Sane Beatus, dijsque acceptus est, cui Deus ista omnia
tribuit. But sithence that division which consists of two parts is holden most
Artficiall, all these three (as me seems) may aptly be drawn and reduced
into two original Branches. Qualities wherewith it is convenient our Student
should be adorned before his intended enterprise attempted, and with the which
he might be ready furnished to set upon the same.

In the former we shall include Nature and such other habiliments as shall be
required for the full furnishing and adorning thereof.

In the latter, Art, Exercise, and adherents unto the same.

Concerning therefore the consideration of those former qualities that are to
be before had, and obtained, Philosophers led by the rule of reason have
distinguished the transitory gifts that God has bestowed on us in this life,
to be either Bona animi, bona corporis, or bona fortunae. Qualities either
resident in us, inherent in us, concern either our minds or our bodies, which
good gifts of our minds are either Natural given by God unto us, without our
labor bred together with us, and within us from our Cradles, growing and
increasing with our age, as first sharpness, pregnancy, and dexterity of wit:
Secondly, Sound and exquisite memory: Thirdly, ready, copious, and sweet
deliverie of our words. gotten and gained by long industry and travel, grown
to a perfect habit, either first illuminating our knowledges, as the Sciences
Liberal, and other the speculative virtues of the mind: Or else secondly
directing our lives and conversations as the virtues Moral reposed in our
wills.

CAP. II.
TO discourse therefore of these particulars (I mean principally the gifts of
the mind) in such order as is before specified. The first and chiefest
Natural gift is sharpness, and dexterity of wit, the excellency whereof
surpassing all praise, needs no commendation, being the thing indeed without
which nothing can be thoroughly fifted as it should be, or sufficiently set
forth as it ought: but to speak more particularly thereof, and for the purpose
in hand, none can well deny that do consider the depth of knowledge reposed
in the Laws of this Realm: none I say can deny, which do consider how many
cases of much conformity, and resemblance do daily happen, wherein
nevertheless dexterity of wit upon some circumstance of matter, espieth a
difference: None can deny, which do consider that many in the Patronage and
defense of causes, are oftentimes pressed upon the sudden, presently to reply
to the adversaries unexpected objections, (which effect Promptness and
readiness of wit only works:) but that the excellency and dexterity thereof
were almost alone sufficient to make a ready and pressed Lawyer; for it behooveth
the Lawyer with a quick conceit to comprehend the cause of his Client once
opened, thoroughly to understand the drifts of his Adversaries reasons at the
first urged, readily both to invent, and fitly to apply his provided proofs
and arguments to the point in question: all which are the effects of an
excellent wit, and with the which we do so much desire our learned Lawyer
should be adorned.

The consideration therefore of wit, or of the light of humane understanding
which Almighty God has given unto man, whereby he excels all other living
creatures, may be considered of us by the view of two several faculties, or
sundry operations of our mind; Apprehension, Judgment (not that the mind is
diverse, or manifold, but that these are the diverse affections, and proper
passions of one and the self same cause.) The first is the quick, Ingenij
acumen. The other (before called Judgment) is the faculty whereby we do as it
were give sentence of the thing conceived, Sharpness; So from the other, which
is Judgment, in like manner follows (the proper quality wherewith it is
invested) Soundness; of which it is evident (to speak briefly) that the one
is the sharpnes of conceit, the other is the soundness of conceit; resembling
and alluding to that Philosophical distinction, Intellectus agens, and
intellectus passibilis, scu possibilis. And as these operations of the mind
are in duty several; so are they for the most part sunderly and severally
distributed by God unto men; not that the one can be wholly, and alone without
the other, but that the excellency of the one is seldom settled, and contained
in one person with the excellency of the other, whereof daily observation may
yield abundant examples.

The Judgment of Plato touching his two Disciples, Aristotle and Theophrastus,
was grounded upon the diversity of their natural gifts, in this respect the
one surmounted in sharpness of understanding, namely Aristotle; The other
(though that way inferior) yet every way comparable in sharpness of Judgment.

There lived at one time in the Commonweal of Athens two notable Orators,
Demosthenes and Demades: the one through his care, premeditation, and
soundness of Judgment, by speech to please the humor of the people, was a
man renowned. The other, namely Demades for his quickness of wit, and ready
utterance upon the sudden, most excellent.

There were likewise wont to come into the Counsel Chamber of the said City,
at one the selfsame season, two famous Counfellors, Aristides for his sound
counsel greatly esteemed, and Themistocles for his sharp and witty policies
highly regarded. At one time there were in the field two famous Captains, each
against other in a quarrel, which concerned either the flourishing, or the
downfall of both their States and Commonweals, Hannibal the Carthaginian, and
Quint us Fabius Maximus the Roman, in which their conflicts the Carthaginian
was not more commended for inventing a Stratagem, wherein he excelled, then was
the Roman reverenced for staid and advised Judgment in preventing the same,
wherein he surpassed: The one of them was not more wilely, then the other wary;
But thus much of the Heathen. In the Church of God, and as concerning the
writings of ancient Latin Doctors, there is found in the style of Augustine an
excellent and peculiar sharpness: In the books of Ambrose and Jerome a plain,
full, and familiar soundness, and Bernard adds to both a delectable
sweetness. Among the Schoolmen, who racked reason as far as it would reach,
one man in one age for his sharpness of wit was called Subtilis Doctor; and
another near the same time for his soundness of Judgment, Doctor Angelicus.
But to come to the Laws of the Land, and to exe^plifie our discourse in our
own faculty (purposely refraining to speak or publish the excellent gifts of
many famous men now living in this profession) let us call to our
considerations two notable Ornaments of one Bench or Court, of one time, of
reverend remembrance, and now both deceased, Sr Anthony Brown, and Sr James
Dyer Knights: both having been Chief in their places of Justice. In the one
did shine an incomparable sharpness of wit, and in the other was found in a
manner an irrefragrable soundness of Judgment. But to leave examples, and to
descend to a subdivision, we are to note, that sharpness of wit is again
observed by two properties, that is to say, Quickness of capacity, and
readiness of discourse, for Ingenij acumen non solum concipit, sed discutit.
And yet these qualities are likewise by God oftentimes sunderly disposed; for
some men there are which can of themselves soon conceive any difficulty by
others proposed in speech or writing; but they are not also endowed with the
narall gift of promptness of discourse and argument; And, some others on the
contrary are excellently gifted for Oratory or discussion, but defective, and
come far short of others in the former property, I mean, in mental
conception.

And yet though a Student of the Law be by nature unfurnished with these gifts
of the mind aforesaid, he must not be disheartened, but rather encouraged;
which encouragement may take good ground;

First, upon consideration with himself, that seldom is seen such excellency
of quick capacity in any one person unmated with the blemish of ranging
lightness and instabilitie: That the more fertile the soil is, the more prone
it is to bear and bring forth (without painful manurance) unprofitable, and
sometime most noisome weeds; that as wax is apt to receive whatsoever
impression, so is it apt easily again to loose it, and to be new framed into
whatsoever fashion; where on the contrary part the form which is engraven in
Marble is as hardly worn out as it was with much labor imprinted: for quick
wits (says one) are apt to take, unapt to keep, soon hot, soon cold, more
apt to enter speedily, then able to pierce far, like edges of sharp tools,
soon turned; For we may find true by experience, that among a number of
quick wits in youth, few be found in the end either very fortunate for
themselves, or very profitable to serve the Commonwealth; such was Hermogenes
the Rhetoritian, who (as it is written) being in manner a Child but eighteen
years old, compiled an excellent Treatise of Rhetorique savouring more of
Judgment then is commonly found in that age; but afterward attaining to the
years of 28. he became madd and utterly forgot all things.

Secondly, the minds of Students are encouraged, and their wits consequetly
increased, as well by due commendation given them for their good endeavor, as
also by commemoration of the utility, profit, and excellency of the things they
covet to obtain. Touching the first of these well says Aristotle,
Adolescentiam gloriae studio duci. Wherefore to be short, and to speak of this
in a word, what a spur Praise is to prick forth the mind in every good
attempt, is seen and perceived even in bruit beasts. The Hound hunteth best
when he is encouraged with the cry of the Huntsman; that Hawk is made more
eager to pursue her prey, to whom the Faulkner has used to impart some part of
the prey taken: But what course or tenor ought to be holden herein, Plutarch
gives good instruction: Cum exultant animi, reprehensionibus ad pudorem
redigantur; cum dejecti sunt, rursus laudibus erigantur.

Touching the second, which is the commemoration of the thing coveted: true it
is, that the consideration of the excellency thereof is a most wonderful
provocation to set forwards the due means with all industry which serve for
the obtaining of the same, which for as much as in the tract we have in hand,
is the exact knowledge of the Law, a brief narration of the necessity and
utility thereof is able sufficiently to vanquish all tediousness of study, and
all irksomenesse to be endured and borne in the obtaining thereof: So that
although (by the way, and nothing out of the way) apt occasion be here offered
to speak in the commendation of the Law, surpassing all praise that my poor
ability can bestow upon it, yet let it suffice somewhat to have said herein,
and nevertheless no more than another has spoken in the like kind many
hundred years ago; Iurisprudentia sine. controversia, and magna est, and late
patet, and ad multos pertinet, and summo in honor semper fuit, and clarissimi
Cives ei studio, and semper praefuerunt, and etiam hodie praesunt.

CAP. III.
THe next natural gift to be considered of, is Soundness of Memory, which is
the receptacle wherein is reposed and laid up whatsoever things the
Understanding has apprehended and judged worthy of receipt or entertainment:
for what does it profit with great labor, dexterity, and industry to get
together, when the thing gotten is not carefully kept and preserved, but
loosely let go, or negligently lost? What booteth it to read much, which is
weariness to the flesh; to meditate often, which is a burden to the mind; to
learn daily with increase of knowledge, when as the matter learned is to
seek, at that time especially when we have most need of the use thereof? Memory
therefore is the Chest of an inestimable treasure, given from God for the
preservation of all kind of knowledge: it is as Plutarch says, the
storehouse of all our understanding; and as Plato says, Matter Musarum, the
Mother of the Muses: as Aristotle says, it is the guide of our experience, and
the groundwork of all our wisdom, for that fore-passed experiences called
to remembrance do engender advised circumspection, and are able to direct all
our future achievements through the consideration of forepassed events. Tully
says it is Signatarum rerum in mente vestigium, the character of things
imprinted in our mind. S. Augustine (as it seems) ravished with the
contemplation of this wonderful faculty, uses these words thereof, Omnia
recipit recolenda cum opus est, and retractanda grandis memoriae recessus, ac
nescio quid secreti, atque ineffabilis sinus ejus, cum omnia suis quaeque
foribus intrant adeam, and in eam reponuntur: Memory is a storehouse
infinitely capable, and can never be overfilled, wherein by the most cunning
Work-master of Nature are hoorded up all kinds of acts and accidents that
either the outward senses have perceived, or the inward understanding
conceived; wherein things of like kind and quality, as in a large treasury,
are orderly composed and laid up together by themselves in certain, sure, and
seposed cells, from thence tob e drawn and deduced wheresoever fit and apt
occasion is offered; which Art of Memory does manifest by this or the like
instances ensuing: for when we do call to mind any one particular, the same
so remembered does for the most part bring to light his like, so that we do
remember the one by the commemoration oftentimes of the other: of the which one
has written very well in this manner; In memoriaomnia ita collocata and
ordinata sunt, ut unumquodque separatim, and cuncta confertim, and singula
ordinatim exposcere and digerere valeamus. The truth is, that some things there
are which we can remember casily and with great facility, some other things
with more difficulty, as hoorded up in the bottom of that Chest, and do
require more search (as the rumaging of wares in the bulk of a ship) to be
unladen and brought to light; some things do offer themselves, and some other
things after long seeking are hardly found: And thus much may here suffice to
have been written concerning the effects of humane Memory.

But for the better and deeper discovery of the nature thereof, (for then we
shall the better address our selves to the use of Memory, when we do truly
comprehend the kinds, causes, and nature of the same) we are to conceive that
the learned who have written hereof have observed a double faculty of Memory;
the one concerning things comprehended by the outward senses, and therefore
called by them Memory Sensative: The other concerning things conceived by the
Understanding and Power of wit, and therefore called Intellective Memory. The
first, namely Sensative Memory is common to Man and many other living
Creatures, resulting from the sense: Hence it is that the Horse knows and
remembers theway wherein he has been of ten travailed, veiled, many times
better then his Rider; The Dog after many years absence can call to memory his
Master, and by fawning upon him renew his old acquaintance: The fowls of the
air, how far so ever they fly can readily return to their Nests, by Memory
of the place where their young are reposed: The Be can resort to his own
Hive, and in the Hive to his proper hole; and the little Ant retire to her
Den whence she first issued, neither forgoing nor forgetting it at her
return, with innumerable occurrences of like nature, all which are effected by
the Art and operation of Memory Sensative.

Memory Intellective follows the use of reason and therefore is found in no
other Creature then Man, which is endued with the faculty of reason. And
whether, and in what manner this kind of Memory does differ from the
Understanding it self, I do remit to the Philosophers, to the contemplation
of whose learned discourses I do commit the curious desire of the Reader that
seeks farther satisfaction herein.

But to proceed: as there is a twofold Memory, Sensative and Intellective, as
has been said, so is there also a double operation of the Memory
Intellective: The one is called Actus memorandi, the other Actus reminiscendi.
The first of these is the representation of things past, as if they were still
present, representing the Image of things forepassed in the same manner as if
they were now actually and really present. Actus reminiscendi is as it were
akinde of discourse of Memory; for as before was said of understanding, that
there is one operation to conceive and comprehend, and another operation to
infer, collect and discourse thereupon, and to draw conclusions from a thing
conceived to another thing concealed, and to extract out of things known the
knowledge of things unknown, so is it likewise in these operations of Memory,
the one does remember the other, viz. Actus reminiscendi, out of one thing
remembered discovers another thing in manner lost and forgotten: so that the
one draws the other as the several linkes of a Chain draw and depend one
upon another: Examples will make it manifest. If a man do relate unto me a
matter done in time forepassed in his and my presence, and with our privities,
if I do remember the same, and thereby do acknowledge the thing to be true,
for that the same is now represented unto me by the Act of Memory, as if it
were really present, this is called Actus memorandi: But if I have forgotten
it, and he bring me in mind of it by quickening and reviving my Memory by the
circumstances of time, place, company, or such like other occurrences, and by
that means at length I come to repair that decay of Memory, this is called
Actus reminiscendi; so that the last mentioned operation may aptly be called
the Discourse of Memory.

The objects of Memory are things passed, Objects of Memory.
as aristotle recounteth, Memoria est rerum praeteritarum. And as hope is of
things to come, sense and understanding of things that are present; so Memory
is employed and works upon things past: And thus much shortly by the way of a
Philosophical discourse (rudi Minerva) touching Memory.

Nour that out of these things thus known we may make some use for the better
establishing and increase of the students Memory, and to teach as it were a
true Art Memorative, not out of foreign precepts, or by the help of
Imaginary places, but out of the nature of Memory it self, which may be
tanquam vivida praecepta; I shall exhibit to your consideration some few
remarkable circumstances, and so much the rather, by how much the more this
faculty (although excellent in it self) yet is the sooner lost, and with the
loss thereof, it makes all our studies but lost labors. For true it it is,
and too true which Seneca affirms, speaking of Memory, Res est ex omnibus
partibus animi maxim delicata, and fragilis, in quam primum senectus incurrit:
The most delicate and frail part of our Mind, the which old Age does first
assault. And as Pliny says, Nec quicquam aque fragile in hominum vita,
morborum and casus injurias, atque etiam metus sentiens; Nothing so fading in
all Man's life, subject to decay by the injuries of sickness, chances and
fears: therefore for the better accomplishment of our intended purposes; let
us first consider the instrument or organ, which the qualities or faculties of
the mind or soul do work withal in this life, which is the body; for the
body is vehiculum animae, the chariot, wagon, or ship of the soul, if not the
sepulcher thereof, as Plato affirmed, (...), and the aptness of the instrument
is a great furtherance to the sacility of the workmanship, and to the beauty of
the work. Man's body being composed of elementall qualities requires in the
perfection thereof a temperature of humors, which also consists in the
temperate disposition of heat and moisture, for that in humido, and calido
consistit vita, and hereby it is made a more apt instrument and organ for the
operation of the powers of the soul, and so consequently of Memory, natural
moisture must not abound as in children, whose memory is therefore in tender
years most commonly not of the best. And again, natural moisture must not on
the other side be almost in a manner exhausted, as in old men, whose Memory is
therefore worn, but it must hold the golden mean, for fluide things are apt
to receive but cannot long retain any impression, by reason of overmuch
moisture, which makes the impression loose, and at length utterly lost; And
aride and drythings can receive no impression for want of moisture, the one
receives but retains not, the other receives not at all; wherefore as this
golden mean must be preserved in the temperature of moisture, so must it be
held indifferent between cold and heat, nothing so hurtful to Memory as
overmuch cold, nothing more harmful to Memory then overmuch heat, the which
how to mitigate in the disposition of the body I leave to Physicians by
medicine and diet; a^nd therefore I resort to precepts agreeable and
correspondent to the nature of Memory without medicine.

First therefore, whosoever desires to remember that science, faculty or
proposition which he learneth or reads, let him be well assured that he
first thoroughly understand and apprehend the same with some kind of delight,
for no man did ever remember that perfectly, which he understood not
thoroughly; in as much as the well understanding is the Character, and seal of
the thing understood, which the Memory receives imprinted in her. Things are
then said to be thoroughly understood, when the effects are known by their
cause, tum enim scimus, cum per causas cognoscimus, as says aristotle; or when
the cause is known by the effects, when the reasons thereof are thoroughly
apprehended, and the consequents truly discerned, namely, when the judicial
part of our understanding rests satisfied, and gives a sentence within our
self, that it does fully comprehend. This perfect understanding must be
joined (as I said) with delight, which dilateth the vital spirits, and
quickneth Memory; whereas things conceived in contrary passions can hardly be
retained long through the perturbations occasioned thereby.

Understanding with delight is drawn from the excellency of the knowledge
apprchended, from the rareness, strangeness, or else of the good conformity
and coherence thereof, with other things, or out of a natural inclination we
have thereunto; For it is true, Quae magna aestimamus magis memoriae infigimus,
therefore first covet to understand well and with delight, and you shall
remember the better.

The next precept is, Aristotle affirms that meditatio confirmat memoriam,
and hence springs the Proverb, that it has been seldom seen that ever an
old man forgot that place where he had hidden his gold, for where our treasure
is, there is our heart and meditation also.

The third consideration is to use and keep a method, Bracton out of the same
transumed, Divisio sive partitio triplicem operatur effectum; primo enim animum
legentis incitat, secundo mentem intelligentiae praeparat, and tertio memoriam
artificiose reformat.

The fourth consideration or precept is, Plurimis intentus minus est ad singula
sensus.

The fifth precept is daily to exercise memory, Quintilian has very well noted
of Memory, that Nihil aeque augetur cura, vel negligentia intercidit; Nothing
is so much increased by diligence and care had thereof as Memory, and then the
same nothing sooner lost by negligence thereof. As touching a true use hereof,
we are to consider a distinction of things to be remembered; for either we do
desire to remember the matter or substance only which in all kind of learning
is to be observed, or else we also desire to commit to Memory the frame and
compact of the words also, as when we do covet a penned Oration, set Sermon or
Speech.

As touching the first, as the morning is a fit time to study, so is it also to
commit matters of substance to Memory; for as the Memory is said to be Musarum
Matter, so is Aurora Musarum amica, for then are our bodies discharged of all
superfluous burdens that may hinder our studies and meditations, and our
spirits are more quick after their received rest.

As concerning the second, many do not unfruitfully commit their penned
orations, set speeches, labored Sermons, and such like which they covet
verbally to pronounce, to Memory in the evening, being silent and quiet, and to
give it harbor and lodging with them overnight, that they may more readily
recount the same in the morning. And thus much touching these few, short, easy
and familiar precepts. and observations touching that operation which we have
called Actus Memorandi.

Now as touching the other called Actus reminiscendi, the same is incited by
diverse circumstances, as of the place, whereof Aristotle says, a locis
videntur reminisci aliquando; So likewise of the persons, times, the meanner of
doing, or as some other memorable accidents subject to the sense, not ordinary
or accustomed, do occasion: for things strange and unfrequented are best held
in Memory, because they were first received of the Memory with admiration, as a
new welcome guest into an Inn or lodging, about the entertainment and good
usage of whom there is ordinarily most care and industry bestowed and
conferred; And therefore no doubt, and upon this reason, those things which
children do first apprehend with an admiration and delight, they do retain
best and hold when they come to age. To these considerations there are those
which do add the precepts of Art Memorative, so often treated of by such as
have written of Oratory, by appointing certain places, conceived and imagined
unto themselves, which being carefully disposed in convenient order, they do
fix thereupon those things which they would remember in apprehension, and by
consideration thereof do call to mind such forepassed matters in due and
direct order, and so with much facility do and can recount the same, upon
which places so in their imagination fixed and apt for the matter in hand, it
behooveth that they cast their careful consideration and frequent meditation.

CAP. IIII.
THe third gift given from God by the course of nature unto Mankind, wherewith
the Student of the Laws ought to be adorned, is a prompt and ready delivery by
way of speech, of those things which are conceived in the mind, which is as it
were the hand that does communicate the former gifts spoken of, and participate
unto others; and is that which the excellent Roman Orator affirms to be
been constitutae Civitatis quasi Alumna quaedam, I mean not an elaborate
curiosity of words, or an affectation of phrase, which is practiced by none,
and wherewith none are moved, but such as are of vulgar judgment. But that I
mean which the same Author commends, Ea dicendi facultas quae est plena
dignitatis, grandis verbis, sapiens sententijs, accommodata causae, genere toto
gravis: for of him that is adorned therewith says he, hujus enim est in dando
consilio de maximis rebus cum dignitate explicata sententia, ejusdem etiam
languentis populi incitatio and effrenati moderatio: That kind of eloquence
which is full of dignity, ever worth hearing, in speech pure without
affectation, sententious and discreet, apt, answerable and agreeable to the
matter in hand, and throughout beautified with gravity: Of this required
quality let us also consider some advertisements (as we have done of the
former).

Eloquution does consist of three things, first, Eloquntion.
of the voice as the instrument, 2, the words that are the subject; 3, the
manner of doing, which is the form of delivery. In the voice are required two
principal qualities, soundness and sweetness: this thing the same Orator
expresses thus, Cum orationis judicem vocem habeamus, in voce autem duo
sequamur, ut clara sit, ut suavis sit, utrumque omnino a natura petendum est,
verum alterum exercitatio augebit, alterum imitatio praeesse loquentium and
leviter: litterae neque oppressae sint ne aut obscurum, neque nimium expressae
ut putidum: In the words two things are required, purity and property;

First purity, that is, non solumrusticam asperitatem, sed etiam peregrinam
insolentiam fugere discamus, that we may learn to eschew not only forlorn
rusticity, but all new affected outlandish vanity.

Secondly, property, that is,

In the third,

Our speech is made perspicuous if our words and sentences be not doubtful in
the compositio^, if they be free from Amphibology and ambiguous reference, if
they be clear of idle Tautology and vain repetition, if our periods and
clauses be not over long, nor interlaced with too many Parentheses; Lastly, if
the copiousnesse and superabundance of words unnecessary hinder not the
apprehension of the hearer, a sault whereinto many fall, that nevertheless do
think they do exceeding well.

Secondly, ne materiam superet opus, for as it is vain to overguilde excellent
Marble with gold, so gold beseems not every material; And many things shall
and must pass the Lawyers pen and speech, which are facundiae (...) capacia
cum sint tantum comenta doceri. And having thus much said of these three gifts
which proceed from God by the gift of nature, I will conclude with that saying
of Tully which does comprehend all three, Aniini and ingenij celeres ^idem
motus esse debent, qui ad excogitandum acuti, ad explicandum ornandumque sint
uberes, and ad memori^^ ^^r^ and diuturni.

CAP. V.
THus with as convenient brevitie and perspicuity as I could have I declared
those natural abilities that I wish him that shall undertake the study of the
Law to be furnished withal. There does now farther remain a consideration of
those qualities that are acquired by industry, and not ingrafted by nature,
wherewith it will (doublesse) be behoovfull also, that our student should be
adorned, Those acquired qualities whereof I speak, are of two sorts, some of
them perfecting our understanding, and enriching our knowledge, and others
rectifying our wills, and directing our behaviors and manners. Of the first
kind are the Virtues Intellectual. Of the second sort are the Virtues Moral.

First of all therefore let us speak in order of those Intellectual Virtues;
And let us a little fall into dispute, whether any other knowledge be needful
for a Lawyer, save only that of his self profession, I mean the knowledge of
the Law; And if there be any of those intellectual endowments necessary, Then,
which and how many of them are needful, and in what sense, measure and
understanding they be conceived and adjudged so to be behoovefull.

Some men there are which think that a Lawyer should not need much to be
troubled with any other learning then that which is their own, Ob. prima.
whose reasons and motives thereunto, let us propose and thoroughly weigh and
examine the same, so that as well such as are of the one part, as of the
contrary, may be thereby the better called into consideration.

Their first reason is drawn from experience; Ra. prima ab experientia.
for it has often happened and appeared in every age (say they) that there have
been many excellent Lawyers within this land, of deep judgment, great
understanding, profound knowledge in their profession, of ready and apt
eloquution, and yet no scholars at all; utterly ignorant of any other
additionall erudition, then their homebred natural gifts. These men have been
famous in their times, have undergone great affairs, as well in the Courts of
our Sovereigns, as in the Tribunalls, wherein they have been worthily placed,
and also generally in the greatest business of the Kingdom and Common wealth;
so that the number of these men from time to time have not been few. Therefore
if the knowledge of the Law may be gotten without other learning, what need
then to bestow time in the obtaining of those Arts, when as the Grammar School
yields as apt Plants for this profession, as the University.

Secondly, Ra. seenuda a subjecto juris.
they say that the knowledge of the Law is affirmed to be Rerum divinarum
humanarumque Scientia, it dorh contain the knowledge of all divine and humane
things; and therefore he that has obtained that knowledge, has therein
comprised, included, and contained all other knowledges, and need not to busy
himself farther with the search of any other, as having obtained the knowledge
of the Law, which is truly styled The Science of Sciences; for the knowledge of
the Law is as large, and as ample as the material subject, and the matters and
causes whereof it treats, whereof contention or strife may grow, orupon which
they may be grounded: for the end and final scope of the Law is, ut sopiantur
jurgia; so ample is this subject, as all those things whereof men may have
property or possession, or whereupon or concerning which injuries and wrongs
may be offered or inferred.

Thirdly, they say that we should consider, Ra. tertia ducitur a diuturnitate
juris.
that Ars est longa, vit a brevis, the study of the Law is, multorum annorum
opus, it is the work of many years, the attaining whereof will waste the
greatest part of the verdour and vigor of our youth, and therefore the sooner
we do apply our selves unto the study of the Law, it will be the better for
our ease; for in a long journey, he that has found out the shortest way, with
much ease and in less time comes to his journeyes end. And to conclude with
the Orators words; Is autem concludatur in ijs quae sunt in usu Civitatum
vulgari ac forensi, remotisque caeteris studijs quamvis ea sint ampla atque
praclara. In hoc une opere (ut ita dicam) noctes atque dies urgeatur, (What he
says of his Orator, these men apply to the student of our Law) Let therefore
our student of the Law be concluded and compassed within the bounds of his own
profession, and exercised in things of vulgar and ordinary use in civil
causes, and all other foreign studies being relinquished, let him be night
and day employed in this sole work. These and the like are the allegations and
arguments of those men that remove the knowledge of all foreign Arts and
Sciences liberal from the student of the Law.

But, what of the other part may be said, what reason may be produced and
verified, and how these objections may be answered, let us observe; leaving all
other particular enforcement to their proper and peculiar places.

First therefore, Resp. ad primano object.
that is very true which has been affirmed, Many excellent men there have
been, that by their gifts alone which nature has bestowed upon them without
other addition of Art or learning, have attained to a profound and deep
knowledge of the Laws of this land. But to conclude thereof, that all other
men may be so exquisite by their example without farther help and furniture
then their own, were much like to him that would affirm, because some men by
their strength have travailed a long journey on foot, therefore no other man
for that purpose should need the help of an horse; But if those men of such
natural vigor in their foot-journey had led (as the Proverbiall speech is)
their horse in their hand, that is, had been assisted with the helps of other
learning, they had been much more excelsent, and attained that knowledge with
more facility and certainty, for their gold oar coming out of their natural
Mine, and of their home-brood, was not sufficiently cleared of his dross;
Their speeches have wanted perspicuity and brevity, their arguments although
deeply learned and full of excellent matter, yet have oftentimes been tedious,
confused and perplexed, and their opinions wavering and unsettled, and could not
neatly, and expeditely deliver themselves; because some men are by nature
skillful Prainters, Carvers, or excellent in any manual occupation (as some
there are) therefore none should Apprentices to those trades were a wonderful
absurd allegation: Men are musical by nature, many have good voices which Art
cannot yield, therefore artificall Music (which is the perfection of the
natural) should be banished, were a strange illatio^? Although a man may go
alone, yet he were unwise to refuse the help of a staff where occasion
required the use, and opportunity offered it self. It has been said by us in
the former part where occasion was offered, that Art truly used is the
perfection of nature; Art has also natural grounds, and was invented for
Natures furtherance; For man's wisdom devised means out of frequent use and
long experience, to ripen natures operations, by precepts; and precepts laid
together have ingendered Arts. Men naturally can number, yet they have devised
many ways, by cipher, by Counters, and by other forms to assist nature, and
to deal with sundry forms by the exercise of Arithmeticke, the Art of
numbering, and to bring to pass strange effects far beyond the ability, nay to
the marvel and astonishment of men only helped by the power of nature. Surely
sometimes such circumstances have happened (if not often) to those men of such
excellent gifts natural without other learning, wherein they have for want of
good literature so much been misled, that they have at unawares bewrayed
themselves, ignorant even in trivial things, and exposed themselves to no
small scorn and obloquy.

This has been anciently observed, and is obvious every day: but because I
will lance no new sore, I will set down what the Roman Orator observed,
speaking of such natural excellent men of his time, let me therefore use his
words; Quid ergo hoc fieri turpius aut dici potest, quam qui hanc personam
susceperit ut amicorum controversias causasque tueatur, laborantibus succurrat,
aegris mediatur, afflictos excitet, it a labi, ut alijs miserandus, alijs
irridendus esse videatur. What can be more unseemly either to be done, or to
be spoken, the^ that he which sustaineth and has taken upon him that person,
as to defend the causes and controversies of his friends, to succor the
oppressed, to relieve the grieved, to raise the afflicted (which are the
properties as well belonging to the Lawyer, as to the Orator) so much in small
and trivial things to err and be deceived, that some should hold him worthy
to be pitied, and others make him the subject of dirision; And hence is it
that in our own times so far this matter has been urged, that in scorn
some have called the crew of unlearned Lawyers, Doctum quoddam genus indoctorum
hominum: But to return that reproach from whence it sprang, to the honor of
the study of our Laws be it spoken, that the Profession of our Laws has now,
and formerly has had great numbers of students that have had as long, and as
ample institution in those sciences called liberal, as any of the^. And if I
might remember old Originalls from the time of the Norman Conquest, until the
latter days of King Henry the third, as well the Judges itinerate through the
Counties, as those that were sedentarie in the Kings high Courts of Justice
(which then for the most part followed his person) were men excellently skilled
in all general good learning, as do witness the works of that worthy Judge
Henry de Bracton, Henry de Bracton, Io: Britton Bish. of Hereford, Martin de
Patchull Deane of Paul's.
and John Britton sometimes a learned Bishop of Hereford, skillful in the Laws
of this Realm, who writ a treatise by commandment, and writ of King Edward
the first, as an Institution to the study of the laws of this Realm, serving
that time. So also was Martyn de Patchull sometimes Deane of Paul's in London,
of whom the said Bracton makes honorable mention, together with diverse other
noted men of rare learning, not only in the Laws of this Realm, but in all
foreign knowledge fit for their places. And these men exercised judicial
functions in the Temporal Courts of this Realm, whereof our records being and
vetustatis and veritatis vestigia, the lively representations of time and
truth, and reputed the Treasures of the Kingdom, do yield plentiful
restimony. What should I farther commemorate the names, and revive the memories
of our worthy Ancestors, Herle, Bereford, Thorpe, Finden, Belknapp tempore R.
Ed. 3.
Herle, Bereford, Thorpe, Finden, Belknap, flourishing in the victorious times
of King Edward the third? Whose deep, short, subtle, pithy and learned
Law-arguments; argue moreover thus much, that they were sufficiently furnished
in that Schoole-learning, which in those times was in most esteem. Let me not
here forget or passe-over in silence those excellent Judges in the reign of
King Henry the sixth, Newton, Prisott, Fortescue, Newton, Prisot, Fortescue,
tempore H. 6.
which man last named, was first Chauncellor to the Prince, and after chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, and was excellently learned in Divinity,
Philosophy, Law both Ecclesiastical, and the Laws of this Realm, as the
little Treatise written by him in the praise of our Laws, in the Latin
tongue, and some other Manuscripts I have seen of his work of a higher
subject, do evidently declare. But I will repress my self, resting in this
place upon that which now is already spoken, leaving other particularities
until we come to determine of other peculiar Sciences.

To the second objection it may well be affirmed, Resp. ad sec. ob.
that the knowledge of the Law is truly styled, Rerum divinarum humanarumque
Scientia; and worthily imputed to be the Science of Sciences; and that therein
lies hid the knowledge almost of every other learned science: But yet I pray
consider, that those foreign knowledges, are not inherent or inbred in the
Laws, but rather as a borrowed light not found there, but brought thither, and
learned elsewhere by them that have adorned and polished the studies of the
Laws. For since the material subject of the Law is so ample (as indeed it is)
containing all things that may be controverted. The study of the Laws then
must of necessity stretch out her hand, and crave to be helped and assisted
almost of all other Sciences Therefore this objection may well be inverted
against them that do urge the same, and proves rather that the Professor of
the Laws should be furnished with the knowledge of all good literature of most
of the Sciences liberal; for if a man may observe the use of those sciences to
lie hidden in the Law, who then may better use them or observe them, then he
which is already surnished with them. And if the knowledge of the Law, do
receive ornament by those eruditions (as I think no man can deny) it shall be
very expedient and well befitting the student of the Laws, to have first
familiarity and acquaintance with them, and to be instructed in the same.

But it may be objected, that the Lawyer shall not need the knowledge of those
Arts himself, but when opportunity shall be offered, and when question shall
arise, wherein the Lawyer shall stand in need of resolution of any of those
Sciences, he may confer, and be informed by the Professors of the same, to
his good satisfaction, although himself be not expert therein. Many times
there have been (and may be hereafter) Appeals of Mayme brought by such
parties as in private fight and otherwise by violence have received maime, that
is, mutilation and loss of a member of his body ferviceable for offense or
defense against those parties that so have hurt them, and many times question
and debate arises, whether the hurt so received, be to be adjudged a Maime,
yea or no? So that the Judges are oftentimes enforced to confer with
Chyrurgians for their suffrage and resolution; will you therefore require your
Judges, Professors and students of the Law to be also Surgeons, or skillful in
the Art of Chyrurgery? that were altogether uncomely.

This objection is easily answered and avoided, Resp.
for first there is a great difference in this respect between manual. Arts
and occupations wrought by the dexterity of the hand, and those that are
sciences and virtues intellectual adorning the Mind, as are the Liberal.

The Laws of this Realm do appoint no other trial of a Maime, Mayme.
then the view of the Judge, for a Mayme is such as for the most part is
visible and subject unto sens; And therefore if upon some doubt or occasion
conceived, by reason of the view, the Judges do desire the conference of
expert Chyrurgians for the better satisfaction of their conscience. This is no
matter of necessity to import the Judges, but matter of discretion only, in
not being too precipitate, but rather mature in their judgment, as they ought;
and to show themselves rather willing to go onward with others, then to run
alone of themselves. And herein the Judges are not tied to the opinion of the
Chyrurgian, otherwise then he finds the same to be conformable and grounded
upon such good and apparent reason as may yield full satisfaction and
contentment: But when the question shall be moved which. shall require informatio^
of any learned science which is gotten by discourse of reason; Although in
those cases the laudable courses have ever been in our Courts of Justice, to
hear the Professors of those sciences to dispute and debate the matter
controverted before our Tribunal and judgment seats, yet no man can deny, but
it is better to draw one draught out of the pure fountain it self, then to
quench out thirst out of derived streams, for Dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur
aqua. For in every Science which does depend upon discourse of reason, there
are many fundamental Maxims and Principalls not to be changed in any future
resolution, but rather to be received as guides to direct, which at the first
will seem harsh to such as have not been inured unto them, and therefore it
were perilous to the Judge and Professor of the Laws, and he shall not be
able either to receive to himself, or to give to others satisfaction, except
he can by his proper knowledge discern of the controversy. For we surely
know Non ex relatis aliorum, sed cum per causas cognoscimus, and if we have
knowledge in those sciences our selves, we shall the better apprehend and
understand the reasons of those matters so disclosed by debate: And thus I
leave the second objection.

To the third, Resp adtertiam Object.
last, and maine objection, this may be produced for an answer, that though
true it be Vita brevis est, ars longa, our life is short and full of
calamities, and learning is a long time in getting, yet may we not in respect
of short life shut up all our endeavors for fear of an end; for therefore the
Period of our life is sealed up from man's knowledge, first for that we should
be always ready when we are called hence; Secondly, for that the fear of a
known death should not daunt or interrupt our endeavors; Likewise the verdure
of our younger years is best employed and spent in obtaining of those sciences,
for then are we most apt thereunto. And as the study and practice of Moral
Philosophy (as Art does witness) is not fittest for men over young; so likewise
the study of the Law which has his foundation in Moral Philosophy (both
having one end general, namely, the rectifying of our manners) does require
some maturity of years, and not to be set upon by infants in years,
judgment, and carriage. And so likewise shall we find in a long journey, that
the fairest way is better although so me what farther about, then a shorter
rough way, hard to find and difficult to keep; and in the end also to answer
that close or upshot drawn from Tullies Orator; I would you should likewise
remember for conclusion of this question that which he affirms, Non enim
Causidicum nescio quem, nec proclamatorem aut rabulam hoc sermon nostro
conquirimus, sed eum virum qui primum sit ejus Artis Antistes, etc. We seek
not hereby to institute I know not what manner of vulgar professor of the
Laws, no common blatterer or temerist, but that man which may prove in the end
an excellent and chief Pillar, prop and Ornament of his profession.

CAP. VI.
HAving hitherunto proceeded in the general, The necessity of the Latin
Tongue in a Student of the Law.
it shall be now requisite to descend to particulars. And fitst of all to
consider, whether the knowledge of the Latin Tongue, and the use of Grammar,
tending to the obtaining of the same, be necessary for a Lawyer: not proposing
it by way of doubt, question, or difficulty, that it should need any large
dispute, but by way of manifestation and disquisitio^ only; for there is no
man (as I suppose) that can or will deny, but that the knowledge of the Latin
tongue is right necessary for our English Lawyer: which may be, made apparent
by many evident and eminent arguments and allegations, easily to be produced
for that purpose.

First of all, Ra. prima.
many of our old Statutes, and ancient positive Laws were written and formed
in the Latin tongue, and so do still rest and remain in our Records and
Books; as that Act called Magna Charta, Magna Charta.
The great Charter of England, great indeed, not in respect of moulde, but
matter, not great in quantity, but in weight and worth: Containing many the
fundamental points of our Laws, bought with the blood of our Nobility and
English Ancestors, in those troublesome times of King John, and Henry his
son. And although many of the Constitutions contained in that Charter, first
introduced in part by King Henry the first, (then called for his learning Henry
le beu Clarke, Hen. 1.
) coming in and putting by his elder brother Robert of Normandy, and as it
were by restitution and renovation of the old Laws of Edward the Confessor
King before the Conquest, and in tract of time sought to be enfringed, yet
nevertheless not without trouble it was afterward again both revived and
enlarged first by another Charter of King John, and lastly by King Henry the
third his son in Parliament established, and sundry times afterward by
succeeding Parliaments, also confirmed and commanded to be put in due execution.

In like manner these several Laws of note, Stat. Marton 20. H. 3.
Marlebridge Gloneester.
as the Statute made at Marton Abbey in Surrey: That also made at Marlebridge,
that likewise at Gloucester, and sundry others were all originally framed in
the Latin tongue in the reign of the said Henry the third: Also the Acts made
in the first, Westminster. 1. Westminster. 2. Westminster. 3.
certain in the second, and the Acts made in the third Parliaments all holden
at Westminster in the reign of that victorious and renowued Prince King Edward
after the Conquest surnamed the first, compiled by Parliament for the good
government of this Kingdom, were written also in the Latin tongue.

Secondly, Treatises of Law in the Latin Tongue. Ra. Glanvill. Ended his days
at Ptolomais in the holy Land.
many learned Writers have composed diverse excellent Treatises of the Laws of
this Realm, in the Latin tongue, as namely, that ancient Treatise composed by
Ranulphus de Glanvilla, a learned Judge of this Land, who is said to have gone
in person with King Richard the first into the holy Land, and to have ended his
days at Ptolomais then called Acon or Acres a Maritine Town of that Country.

I will here adjoyne the learned Treatise (and as the times then stood) I might
well call and affirm the eloquent Treatise of the Common Laws framed by Henry
de Bracton a most learned Judge of this Land, Hen. de Bracton.
living in the latter and of the reign of King Henry the third, and in the
entrance of King Edward the first his regiment: This Treatise is replenished
with many excellent sentences, fitly and aptly composed in Latin; and by the
reading of this worthy work, the student shall truly understand not only the
conformity our National Laws then had with the Civil, Cannon, or
Ecclesiastical Laws, but also shall well perceive what the Common Law of this
our Country was before the making of diverse Statutes which have altered the
same, whereby great light may be had, and a great help obtained for the
better understanding and true interpretation of the same.

Likewise, there is a learned Treatise composed by a learned yet unknown
Author whiles he was a Prisoner in the Fleet, and therefore the said work or
tract is called Fleta, Fleta.
in the time as it seems of King Edward the first, and although there do now
remain but a few Manuscript copies thereof, as having been never imprinted,
yet is it worthy to see the light, and for the furtherance of the studentof the
Laws to be divulged, and this also was written in the Latin tongue: I might
remember two Treatises, the greater, and the lesser, gathered by Radulphus de
Hingham, Ra. Hingha^.
sometime Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, whose monument yet remains in
the Cathedral Church, of Saint Paul in London, and written in Latin, but in
corrupt language as the times then afforded.

But passing over many other in silence, I will conclude with that little
Treatise made de laudibus legum Angliae, in praise and commendations of the
Laws of this Land by comparison with the foreign Laws of some other
Countries devised and written in the Latin tongue by that sincere and most
learned Judge, Sir John Fortescue Knight, Io. Fortescue.
thereby to incite by many arguments the Prince, son and heir to King Henry
the sixth, to the knowledge of the Laws of this Country: it seems by many
passages of this Treatise, that the same was contrived in the Kingdom of
France, during such time as the Queen with her said son the Prince remained
there to solicit aid for her husband. This Author at the writing of this
Treatise was as it seems Chauncellor to the Prince, and afterward Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench: This little work is well worthy the perusal,
plentifully showing the learning of the Author in Divinity, Philosophy, and
other good literature, besides the knowledge of the Laws of this Realm, a man
I say who for the fidelity he bare to his Master, tasted of the tempest then
stirred in the end of his time, having had both his rising and his ruin in
that fatal fall of his Lord.

Thirdly, Writs ought to be framed in true and congruous Latin.
all the forms of writs are and ought to be framed in the Latin tongue, and
if they do contain false Latin, they are abateable, and to be defeited, and
the party plaintiff who pursued the same, shall be driven to purchase a better
writ, and to begin a new. For the better understanding whereof, let me observe
something of the nature of Writs.

A Writ is the commandment of the King, Definition of a Writ.
formed in Latin, directed either to some Minister of his Courts; or sometime
to the party Defendant, at the pursuit of the Plaintiff, for the better
administration of Justice. This Description concerns all manner of writs,
which as touching their form, are short and brief; and therefore in Latin are
called Brevia, in French Briefes for their shortness in English Writs, The
Etimologie.
for that they are Mandates in writing. The latin Etymology of the name,
Bracton yields thus: Brevia dicuntur (per modum Regula juris) quia rem quae
est and intentionem Petentis brevitur enarrat: And yet ought they not through
brevity to be obscure, but clear and in a compendious manner to comprehend
the matter therein contained: They ought to be formed in words, proper and
perspicuous, free of ambiguity, no preposterous order, no doubtful reference,
no idle repetition, no omission of needful matter, and ought to be formed in
apt, true, and congruous Latin.

Writs are in sundry manners divided, Division.
(1) sometime in respect of their matter; (2) sometime in respect of their
form; (3) sometime in repect of the efficient cause; (4) and sometime again
in respect of their final cause.

In respect of their matter, all Writs are of three kinds, that is, (1)
Original, (2) Mean Process, (3) Judicial.

An Original Writ is the Commandment of the King, Defin: An original Writ,
quid?
formed in Latin, issuing out of the Chauncery, sealed with the great Seal of
England, containing the cause of suite directed to a Minister of the Court to
compel the defendant to appear and answer at a day prefixed for the return
thereof.

The Original Writ is the foundation of the suit, Etimology.
and therefore is called original, for that it is the first writ sued forth at
the beginning of the suit, to bring the defendant in Court to answer.

In respect of their matter, Divisio in materiam and formam.
they are divided thus; They are either (1) Real, (2) Personal, (3) Mixed, or
(4) neither, as the Appeal.

In respect of their form, they are either of a settled and composed form, and
therefore called formata: or without a settled form, but do vary according to
the circumstance of the cause, and called by Bracton, Brevia Magistralia; the
other Brevia de cursu.

In respect of their efficient cause all these Original Writs do issue, as
has been said, Cause efficiens.
out of the Chancery, which is the shop and forge wherein for the most part
they are framed. The Magisteriall Briefes, because they vary with the case,
require a Masters hand to compose them in respect of skill. But the other De
cursu, Writs of course, because they have a settled form prescribed in an
ancient book therefore called the Register of Writs, and vary not but in
mutatis mutandis: they are written by a society of Clerks of the Chancery
called therefore Cursitors: Cursitors, unde dicitur.
But I purpose not here to make a full and liberal discourse of writs, this
alone may suffice in this place, and for the matter in hand.

Fourthly, it is manifest, that all the returns of Writs, all manner of
proceedings, all Counts or Declarations of the Plaintiffes or Demaundants, all
Pleas, defendes or exceptions of the Defendants or Tennants, either to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, or to abate the writ, or in bar of the Action all
replications thereunto by the Plaintiff and demandant, all rejoynders or
surrejoynders, all issues taken, all verdicts, demurrers, continuances and
entries of the judgments of the Court in sundry forms, according to the
several nature of the writs and actions in controversy: Likewise all the
proceedings in criminal causes and Pleas of the Crown which concern life or
member by way of indictment or presentment, the Arraignment, Trial, and
Judgments thereupon had, are entered, written, and engrossed in the Latin
tongue; And therefore without the knowledge of this language, the student of
the Laws, the Practizer, and the Judge must of necessity walk thorough a vale
of darkness and palpable ignorance in the superlative.

By this which has been already affirmed may easily be conceived, that
Grammar being the first Liberal Sciences is very behoovfull and needful for a
Lawyer, as by sundry instances may be made manifest in every part thereof.
Grammar has been divided into these four parts; Orthographia, Etymologia,
Syntaxis, and Prosodia.

In Orthographie, Orthogra. phia.
which concerns true writing, we are taught that from the knitting together of
Letters are made sillables, of sillables significative words. These words are
twofold, Primitive, which were composed at the first to denote and signify
this or that thing, and words derivatives drawn from those Primitives, which
in writing ought to contain the radical letters of those Primitives, that
thereby may be discovered and discerned ithe root and of spring from whence
they were drawn and deduced.

First therefore, as touching letters and syllables, sometime a letter is
omitted which makes the word written, no latin at all,

In a Scine fac: the writ was abated for want of a letter, for the writ was ex
insinatione, 24. E. 3.7.
which is no latin, whereas it should have been ex insinuatione. So in a
precipe quod reddat, the words were precipe quod reddat haeri; 41. E. 3.21.
where it wanted a syllable and should have been haeredi, and this writ was
abated. And sometimes for placing one letter for another, as in a writ of
waste, the same was ad destrictionem, whereas it should have been ad
destructionem. So likewise an Indictment of Burglary was avoided, for that it
was Burgaliter, Cook 2 part. lib. 3.
whereas it should have been burglariter, although no perfect, yet allowed
Lawyers Latin, and an artificial word, a word of Art.

The second was of Grammar called Etimologia, Etimologia.
has two parts, for it does not only concern the derivation of words, but
also the forming of words in all the principle parts of speech, as of the
Nounes, Pronounes, Participles, in number, case, gender, termination,
declination, and such like; but also of verbs in declination, mood, tense,
number, person, and such like, and in these things also the Laws of this
Realm require congruity to be observed, according to the rules of Grammar.
The writ was hos breve, where it should have been hoc breve, and therefore was
abated, and could not be amended; one case for another.

In a Precipe quod reddat, the writ was quas, where it should have been quod,
one gender for another, and therefore was abated. In a writ of Iuris vtrum, 12.
H. 4.10. Fitz n. br. 466.
the writ was sit where it should have been sint, one number for another, with
diverse others, such like examples.

The third part of Grammar is Syntaxis or Composition of speech, Syntaxis.
and has these parts (1) the conformity between the verb and the casual
word; (2) between the substantive and the adjective; (3) between the
Antecedent and the Relative which part has sundry examples in the Law, and
would be tedious to remember.

These things notwithstanding, Ob. prima.
there do remain certain objections to be cleared; for first it may be
objected that in the Courts of Justice, the Clerks in the entering and enrolling
of their Records, form up their words in a short kind of writing by certain
abreviations, by which are known the words intended; And therefore in this
course which is most usual there can be but a slender observation of true
Orthography.

To this I answer, Resp.
that among all the Cursitors and Prothonotories, and all other Clerks in our
Courts, there is observed a brief and short kind of writing for the better
dispatch of an infinite mass of business in that kind, and heap of writings
which they termly undergo, yet the same is not voluntary, or at pleasure, or
as every man will or shall devise, fashion, or frame unto himself, but such
only vulgar, and well known both among themselves, as all other that
intermeddle therewith, which tract of time has made familiar from age to age
by expert observation. 4. H. 6.16.
And here may I remember that almost every of our Courts of Justice has his
several set form of handwriting, as the Chancery hand, conveyed in a fair
form of letter, little inferior to the print; and the Court hand somewhat
distinguished in form of letters from the ordinary secrerary or set hand used
among the vulgar, which our Ancestors at first invented, and ever since to
great purpose have practiced, thereby giving the greater impression, so that it
may remain legible to posterity many hundred years, as by our ancient
Records, and many Monuments of Antiquity yet remaining of ancient occurrences
before the Norman Conquest is evidently declared.

Secondly may be objected, Ob. seounder.
that since the time that the Latin tongue was vulgarly used among the Romans,
and other the Nations, that they subdued to that Empire (for they much
endeavored the propagation of their language) sundry new things have been
invented, whereof those ancient people had either no intelligence, or no use,
and therefore where such things do occur, there do want words proper and
peculier in the Latin tongue to denote the same, and men must of necessity be
enforced either to use barbarous words far from the purity of the Latin
speech, or to invent new to express their meaning.

For satisfaction and full declaration whereof, Resp.
we are to consider that usually in course of Law sour kind of words are
carried under the color of latin in Law proceedings; as first, the true native
and proper latin word if they be found for the present purpose, whereof our
Judges have ever been careful, Coke lib. 10. fol. 133.
as by their sundry conferences with Grammarians, and men learned concerning
thetrue and natural signification of Latin words almost every was extant in
our books do declare.

Secondly, there are words of Art in the laws, as in other faculties.

And thirdly, certain other words drawn from the ancient Idiome and language
of our predecessors, the former Inhabitants of this Land, vulgarly and
sufficiently known, which receiving latin forms pass in our Laws, as
felonia, felonice, Murdrum, Burglaria, Warrantia, Esnitia, pars mulier, pro
sobole ex legitima uxore nata, with many others of like derivation, as
mesuadgium for an house, toftum for a decayed house, gardinum for a garden,
bruera for furse or heath, maromium for timber, ^^stardus, for nothus, a base
borne child, and the like.

And fourthly, for new invented things not known to the Ancients, new words
likewise have had their original, as Bombardum or tormentum for a gunne,
Pulvis tormentarius, for gunpowder, Stapedia for a stirrup, velvettum for
velvet, and many of such like making, whereunto for better understanding we do
permit the English usual words to be adjoined in our latin pleadings.

Lastly, Obaertia.
there remains this scruple, where it has been affirmed, that there is much
respect had of the true propriety of latin words, it seems nothing less,
for these for^^s are conceived in a base style far removed from purity of
speech so that the professors of Law within this land can challenge no great
commendation in this kind.

To this is answered, Resp.
that the Laws of this Land neither do, nor desire to affect Eloquence in the
Latin tongue, for we have no use of the speech thereof in our arguments, for
as much as the Statute made 36. E. 3. cap. 15. 36. E. 3.1^.
has ordained that all pleadings, and all arguments and disputations of Law
should thenceforth be performed in the English tongue, whereas formerly as it
seems it was put in ure in the French, remaining until that time, as a badge
of the Norman Captivity, whereof there is now no use but in the arraigning of
an Assize, and an Appeal, and such French Arguments as are used for exercise
in the Houses, and Societies of Court and Chancery. Nevertheless the former
usage has still remained, that is, that all proceedings Judicial should be
entered and enrolled in the Latin tongue, so that the Latin serves to convey
to posterity our Memorialls and Records, and not our debate and speech: The
Antiquity whereof, whether it first grew in respect of the use thereof,
retained among all Nations subject to that Empire upon like occasion even unto
this day; or whether for the Majesty of that language wherein all Arts of
literature are still promulged, or whether it may be reached unto the Roman
Conquest of this Land, who long held it under their government, and reduced
many parts thereof into Provinces, endeavoring (as their manner was) to
propagate their language as largely as their Empire; or whether it happened in
respect our Ancestors the Brittons with good affection embraced that language,
as Tacitus reports, I do surcease in this place to determine.

But for farther satisfaction in this point, the Entries and enrollments of our
Writs, Pleas, and all other our Law proceedings are neither base, abject, or
horrid, as has been imported; for our Original Writs of set form are from
ancient memory, have ever been preserved in the book called the Register,
from the which our Clerks may not swerve, to avoid the infinite variety of
forms which might otherwise ensue, and were first conceived and devised in as
proper Latin, as the times wherein they were first invented, and the matter it
self was able to bear. And as touching the other mentioned proceedings
entered in the Latin tongue, although not eloquent, yet satis laudato forensi
stilo, as in any other Kingdom perspicuous and significant.

Let not the same therefore be a blemish to our Laws, which has invaded
almost all other Sciences; for what horrid and incompt words has Logic and
Phiolsophy endured, introduced by their Dunces devices, as Ens, entitas,
quidditas, causalitas, with a multitude of others impertinent to be remembered?
with what improper terms and barbarous speeches have the Schoolmen daubed
Divinity? What has been in this kind brought in upon the pure and clear
fountains of the Digests of the Civil Laws? which being compiled out of
sundry most excelent sentences, drawn out of the works and passages of the
ancient Roman Lawyers, do retain the same purity and conformity of a clean
and neat style, as though all had been penned by one man; and yet are in a
manner defiled by the Feudary Tenurist writers of the middle age in their
Glosses and Commentaries, as those learned Lawyers of this latter age Alciatus,
Budaeus, Cujacius, and the rest have undergone an Herculean labor to cleanse
the same.

But to conclude this matter; the Students of our Laws, and the professors
thereof may well defend themselves by the testimony and authority of the best
Writers in this behalf: For first of all Aristotle himself gives warrant,
Arist. in Catego. Relationis.
Quod nova vocabula sunt facienda cum ad res explicandas nullae suppetunt
voces: And herein they may be bold to stand to the judgment of Tully himself
who affirms, Omne quod de re bona dilucide dicitur, mihi praeclare dici
videtur: istiusmodi autem res dicere ornate velle, puerile est; plane autem and
perspicue posse docti and intelligentis est viri. And I know no cause why we
may not say the same of our Lawyer which he affirms in that Book of the
Philosopher, Philosophum si afferat eloquentiam non esse aspernendum, si non
habeat non esse ab eo admodum flagitandum, dum tamen complectatur verbis quod
vult, and dicat plane ut intelligatur. And so let me say, if our Lawyer or
Pronotorie in drawing up his pleadings can use a good phrase and pure Latin, I
will never blame him, if not, I will not expect it at his hands, so that that
which he has drawn be congrue, plain, famiiar, sensible, and easy to be
understood.

Thus have we produced two of the best Authors for our defense, the one for
wit and knowledge the worlds wonder; The other for eloquent and excellent
speech in his native language the chiefest ornament. It shall suffice to
conclude with a sentence of a Christian Father inferior in humane learning to
neither of them, whose speech because it is excellently to the purpose, I
cannot let pass; Bonorum ingeniorum insignis est indoles, in verbis verum
amare non verba; Quid enim prodest clavis aurea, si, quod volumus aperire, non
potest? aut quid obest lignea, si hoc potest? quando nihil quaerimus nisi
patere quod clausum est? It is an excellent Argument of the best wits, not to
hunt count and filed words, but in words to embrace the truth, for what
profits a Golden key, if it cannot open, and what hurt is it to use a wodden
key, if it will open, when there is no other end of both, but to open that
which was shut.

CAP. VII.
THe next succeeding Science Liberal is Logic, Logic.
and therefore order does require we should here also make inquiry whether
the Art of Logic be necessary for the attaining to the knowledge of the Law.
The question has been diversely debated by sundry of Aristotle's Interpreters,
and such as have written of that Science both touching the peculiar instance or
Hypothesis; as also more at large in the general Thesis, namely, whether
Logic be necessary for the better obtaining of other learned Sciences. In
handling of this debate, we will hold our former proposed course, and first of
all let us object against the necessity thereof.

Experience is a sure foundation: Ra. prima.
many excellent Lawyers both in the civil Laws of the Empire, the Cannon
Laws of the Church, and the Common Laws of the Land have not been skillful
in Logic, and therefore Logic is not necessary for the knowledge of the
Laws.

Law Arguments are deduced more from authority then reason, Ra. seeunda.
for the English Lawyer in arguments requires most the strength of Cases apt
to the purpose, and Presidents of former time, then discourse of reason; and
therefore Logic which respects only the inference and discourse of reason,
is not so needful for a Lawyer.

The Laws deal with particular in stances, Ra. tertia.
and individual Cases, where the sundry circumstances accompanying the fact,
make manifest difference, inter aequum and iniquum; justum and injustum;
whereas Logic deals not with universalities abstracted from the
particulars, and exempt from their circumstances, and therefore Logic not
necessary for a Lawyer.

A great part of Logic does treat of Propositions, Ra. quarta.
and the framing of Syllogismes, but the Lawyer does not argue syllogistically,
and therefore needs no Logic.

Man is a living creature, Ra. quinta.
by nature reasonable, and can by the gift of nature alone, apprehend,
understand, infer, collect, discourse, reason, prove, disprove, order, and
dispose things conceived, and truly judge of them; and therefore where these
things are by nature, what necessity is there to learn them by Art? for sicut
pupillae inest visus, it a animae Intellectus; Arist. 1. Ethic. cap. 6. And
again the same writer, homines a natura Dialecticos and Rhetoricos esse;
Aristot. 1. Rhet. ad Theodoctum, and 1. Elenchorum. Every faculty and
discipline of it self has a distinct and peculiar manner of proceeding, and
therefore a special Logic must be framed for the study of the Law if any be
necessary at all, for the general Logic will not suffice.

The full handling of this question will give occasion of a large discourse,
and incite us to set out and declare the principal parts of Logic, and the
true use thereof in the knowledge of the Laws; wherefore lest our speech
through multiplicity of matter might be confuse, we will hold this order:

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Then handling that part of Logic which concerns Method,

Then we shall consider the state of this maine question according to the
different opinions of such as have written thereof.

And lastly,

As touching the first of these; Ra. prima.
although Logic was not brought to perfection in Platoes time, yet is the
same greatly commended by him in some places of his works, as in Phardro and
Parminide. In Phaedro after some use of Logical division expressed, Socrates
falls into a wonderful commendation of Logic. Iamblicus in his Epistle to
Sopratus affirms, That nulla scientia Philosophiae absque Dialectica ratione
compararipotest.

How necessary the use of Logic is for the obtaining of other knowledges of
other sciences, is made known by explicating the parts thereof in diverse
passages by Aristotle himself as 1. Poster. cap. 2. 1. Topic. cap. 2. and in
Elenchis sophisticis, cap. 3. and in sundry other places of his works, and in
4. Metaph. textu 8. he shows, that the ancient Philosophers fell into many
errors through the ignorance of Logic.

Marcus Tullius Cicero the great Roman Orator in many places of his works
extolleth the necessity and use of Logic. In his Tusculane Questions thus,
That it is the Art quae rem definit, genera dispertit, sequentia adjungit,
perfecta concludi^, vera and falsa dijudicat, ex qua cum summa utilitas existit
ad res ponderandas, tum maxim ingenua dilectatio and digna sapientia: Logic
is an Art that defines and sets forth the nature of things, it divides the
general into its particular parts, it shows the necessary coherence and
dependancy of the consequent deduced from the antecedent, it discerns
between truth and falsehood, out of which arises as well an excellent
profitable use in the search of things, as also an ingenuous delight a worthy
wisdom.

In his Book de Finibus, he calls Logic the ^^le of knowledge, Quae quasi
delapsa de cal^ sit ad cognitionem omnium, ad quam omnia judicia rerum
dirigantur: qua servata, nunquam ullius oratione victi, sententia desistamus: A
rule of knowledge I say sent or slidden down from heaven for the obtaining of
the knowledge of all things, by which all judgments are directed, and which
rule being truly observed, we can never by whatsoever powerful speech of any,
be vanquished or diverted from apprehended truth, and a settled judgment. To
the like effect he affirms by the example of Servius Sulpitius a famous
Roman Lawyer who was Iuris consultorum eloquentissimus, and eloquentium Iuris
consultissimus; That Logic is an Art Quae docet rem universam tribuere, in
parts, latentem explicare definiendo, obscuram explanare interpretando,
ambiguum, primum videre, deinde distinguere, postremo habere regulam qua vera
and falsa dijudicarentur, and quae (quibus propositis) essent, quaeque non
essent consequentia. He says, That this Sulpitius; Ad ea quae confuse ab
alijs aut responsa aut actasunt, diserte and respondisse and egisse; quod is ad
juris civilis cognitionem Dialecticam omnium artium maximam quasi lucem
attulerat.

Thus much out of the ancient Heathen; Let us now descend unto the Fathers of
the Church: Origin in his second Homily upon Exodus has these words, Eruditio
ista (speaking of Logic) ad omnem pervenit sensum, and per eam quisque
meditatus and fotus, ad divinorum intelligentiam paratior venit.

Clemens Alexandrinus thus, Dialectica velut manuducit ad veram aeternamque
scientiam, and ad cognitionem supremae veritatis.

Saint Jerome thus; Vere quicquid perversorum dogmatum est, and putatur esse
robustum in terrena sapientia, hoc Dialecticae art subvertitur, and instar
incendij in cinerem favillasque dissolvitur.

Saint Augustine is also evident in many places as li. 2. de ordine. Ad
religionis Christianae cognitionem nemo aspirare dehet sine Dialectica. And
again, lib. 2. de Doctrina Christiana: Disputationis disciplina, ad omnia
genera quaestionum, quae in literis sanctis sunt penetranda and dissolvenda
plurimum valet! tantum ibi cavendum est, libido rixandi, and puerilis quaedam
ostentatio decipiendi. And in sundry other parts of his works, as lib. 1.
contra Crescomum Grammaticum; and lib. 3. contra Academ: And he has defined
Logic to be Ars artium, Scientia scientiarum, qua aperta omnes aliae
aperiuntur, and qua clausa, omnes aliae clauduntur.

By these Fathers of the Church, it may appear how needful they held Logic
to be for the knowledge of Divinity.

The Interpretors of Aristotle, and the Writers of latter time pleno intonant
ore.

Avicenna in his Treatise of Logic, Cap. 2. Natura and prima inchoatio
hominis, non fuit sufficiens ad verum cognoscendum, fuit ergo opus aliqua art.
per quam, modum procedendi in cognitione haberemus, ut tali modo perspecto,
postea ad rerum speculationem accederemus, haec autem ars fuit Logica, seu
Dialectica, quae modum universalem tradit, rem quamlibet speculando.

Aquinas says it is, Scientia rationalis, actuum rationis directiva.

Albertus magnus likewise: Logica est quae a Phantasiis, quae videntur and non
sunt, liberat; errores damnat, falsitates ostendit, and lumen rectum in omni
opere contemplationis praebet.

I will conclude with that which Barth. Kickerman: has in Gym. Logico, lib. 1.
Logic says he, amongst other things promises, Tria maxima bona, Veritatem,
perspicuitatem, and ordinem, quibus nihile est in humanis rebus, aut sublimius,
aut pulchrius.

But it will here be objected, Ob.
That I have strayed from the question, which is, whether Logic be necessary
for the obtaining of the knowledge of the Law?

To the which I answer; Resp.
That otherwise those Writers have labored in vain, who have published the
Art of Logic adapted for the Civil and Common Laws, some in part as the
Topics, or places of invention legal; as Tullij Topica, ad Trebatium a Roman
Lawyer: Claudius Cantiuncula, Nicholaus Everarde, in their books entitled
Topica legalia, Hottaman and others.

And some others the Precepts of the whole Art, as Christopherus
Hegendorphinus, Johannes Thomas Fregius: Petrus Gambraeus, and others, as
Apellus, Bellonus, Oldendorpius, Nevisanus, Grammara, etc. And how the same
shall be needful to the Common Law; That which we are further to declare will
better manifest.

Concerning the Third proposed matter, These may be the reasons following to
prove Logic necessary or at least behoovfull to the study of the Law.

The Art of Logic is the Art of reasoning, Ra. prima.
Ars argumentandi, as one of the properties thereof, teaching to find out truth
by argument and disputation. But the Common Law of this Land (which is often
styled in our Books by the name of common reason) is deduced from principles
evident and known, for the decision of such things as are drawn into doubt,
and are unknown. The precepts thereof are taught by Logic in the books of
Demonstration and Topicke parts of the Art of Logic; and therefore is Logic
necessary for the obtaining of the knowledge of the Law, especially for that
all points debated or controverted in our Law, are either matters in fact, and
so triable by a lury: or doubts in law, determinable by disputation and
argument.

Again, Ra. secunda.
Logic teaches a man to collect the Axioms, principles, grounds and rules
observed in that Art which he studieth, and being so collected aptly to dispose
the same, which yields diversity of matter, and ready furniture for
disputation: but those things are very necessary to be observed in the study of
the Law, therefore is Logic a very necessary science for the obtaining
thereof in this respect.

Our Lawyer in his Law-arguments, Ra. tertia.
the better to demonstrate and strengthen his opinion is driven not only to
define or describe the thing disputed of, but to divide the same into parts, to
distinguish the diverse significations of the words, but also to search and
indigate the difference of matters and cases proposed: all which the Art of
Logic professes to teach; and therefore Logic is necessary.

Every man in his Argument ought to covet to be understood of them that hear
him; Rae. quarta.
for to what end else should he speak.

But a man is best understood when in obscure matter he does propose first, the
most general propositions, of easy apprehension, and out of them deduce
others, and so to combine and knit all together, as all the parts in orderly
disposition may cohere, of which result those three excellent things, Brevity,
Perspicuity, and Verity, all which Logic promises; and therefore is Logic
necessary.

When a doubtful question is proposed, Ra. quinta.
the truth is found out by Argument, debate, and discourse of reason on both
parts, as in all our law-arguments appeateth; and therefore such debate and
conflict of reason is said to be the flayle whereby the corn is severed from
the stubble, truth is tried from falsehood (for there can be but one truth;) and
therefore when there is diversity of opinion, the truth can rest only but of
one part, and the others must be deceived through the deceit of a faulty form
of their manner of reasoning.

But Logic teaches a man to know the falacies of deceiptfull and imperfect
Arguments, and to resolve them into better forms, or to disclose their
imperfection; Ergo,

Every Artificer is made more expedite when he is furnished with apt
instruments prepared to his hand, Ra sixta.
Sed sciendi instrumenta sunt formae discerendi. The Instruments of knowledge
are the forms of discourse; therefore our understanding which is the
Artificer, is made more ready, when it has right and fit grounds of argument
reduced and prepared, which Logic provideth, Ergo;

To obtain the knowledge of any Science two things are required, Ra. septima.
first, the certain dependency and coherence of the parts of the matter to be
known, and secondly, the aptness of the instrument whereby we do apprehend
and know the same. The first of these does result on the necessary consequence,
that is, between the causes and their effects; the latter depends of the
knowledge of that discourse of reason and argument which is used in the
apprehension of Science, and gives satisfaction and assuredness of truth to
the learner. And these things does Logic minister unto us; Ergo.

It is the saying of Aristotle, Ra. octav.
Scire arbitramur cum cognoscimus rem ex sua causa, and quod aliter se habere
non potest. Then we are assured to know when the effect is known by his true
cause, whose consequence cannot sail: but these things we learn by those
Arguments which we call Demonstrations, which Logic informs us in. And
therefore Aristotle truly observed, 2. Metaph. cap. 3. Est impedimentum ad
scientias capessandas non prius tenere modum sciendi. Where his Commentator
Averois, and the most of his Interpreters do understand per modum sciendi, the
Art of Logic.

These things considered and laid together, it will not be hard or difficult,
to answer the Reasons shortly of the opposite part.

As to the first: Experience indeed is a sure soundation, Resp. ad primam
object.
and many excellent Lawyers have been without Logic: But yet if Logic had
been joined to their Law, they would have been better strengthened in their
knowledge, and more perspicuous in the delivery thereof.

To the second: Resp. ad sec. ob.
Law-arguments are often drawn out of Authorities: but Authorities prove two
manner of ways; 1, sometime directly, and then is Authority called an
inartificiall Argument: 2, but most commonly, by inference and consequence,
which Logic directs.

To the third: Laws deal with particular Cases, Resp. ad t^rtiam Object.
Logic with universal Precepts. But when particular Causes are brought to
argument, they are drawn to more general Theses and Propositions.

To the fourth: Resp. ad quar Object.
it is true that the Lawyer does not argue syllogistically concise, and yet
many times with a Syllogism at large.

To the fifth Objection: Reason is natural, but yet it is polished by Art, and
therefore best by the Art of Reason, which is Logic:

It rests now then, Res. ad quint. object.
that we examine Logic by his parts, and try the use, utilitie, or
necessity thereof by examples out of our Laws.

Amongst sundry definitions or descriptions of Logic, Logica quid?
this is one vulgarly received, Dialectica est recte definiendi, dividendi, and
argumentandi ars: An Art teaching the true means of right Definition,
Division, and Argument. We will distinguish therefore these into parts, and
speak first and formerly of Definition.

But before we define what Definition is, Definitio quid?
because there is an ambiguitie, and duplicitie of the signification thereof,
we should first distinguish the same. There is therefore Duplex Definitio. 1,
Nominis: 2, Rei. Definitio Nominis est qua vocis significatio explicatur. The
reason is added; Sunt enim verba notae aut signa rerum. And this also is
twofold: The first called commonly Etimologie, of the Greek words (...) and
(...): whereby is imparted the property, weight, and signification, or Emphasis
of the word: and the reasons drawn therefrom are called in our books,
Arguments, ex vi verbi. Thus Tully in his Topickes, and the Latins after him,
have called Notations, a notatione; Or, Etimologia quid?
Etimologie est cum vox ex suae origin explicatur.

The second kind is called Antilexis; cum vox ignotior vel obscurior voce
notiore vel clariore idem significante declaratur. And of both these we have
plentiful examples.

Etimologies of the first kind, which are most effectual, are diversely
deduced; sometimes from the matter, sometimes from the scope or end, sometimes
from the effect, sometimes from the properties, sometimes from the object, and
sometimes from the opposite.

From the scope or end we have sundry examples; 9 and 10. Eliz 267. b. n. Dyer.
as a College is in Latin called Collegium, a cohabitatione, and quia simul
colliguntur.

So likewise we call him an Executor of a last Will and Testament, Com. Pl.
2.280. b.
of executing and performing the will of the dead; not that he always does
so, but that in respect of his power and duty he is bound so to do.

So a Judgment or Sentence of a Court is called Iuditium quasi Iuris dictum,
The final saying, Coke lib. 10.42. a.
judgment and doom of the Law. For that every Judgment is taken and received
for law, until it be reversed for error; for that is the scope and end of the
Law.

Likewise a Preband is called Praebenda, Coke lib. 3. fo. 75.
a praebendo auxilium and consilium Episcopo: for to that end were Prebends
ordained in Cathedral Churches, that the Prebendaries thereof should be
Assistants and of Counsel to the Bishop in his Episcopal function.

Likewise says Bracton, Rex dicitur a regendo, Lib. 3. cap. 9. Lib. 1. cap. 8.
Bracton.
non a regnando.

And the French word Verdict used in our Law for the resolution of those that
are impanelled to try matters in fact, est quasi vere dictum, as the saying of
truth; and so to be received without contradiction until it be defeated by an
attaint.

Sometimes Etimologies are drawn from the effect or operation: whereof Bracton
says well, Bract. lib. 3. cap. 1.
That an Action or Suit in law may well be called an Action, quum agitur de
injuria: for it is a complaint of an injury received.

So Damnum, Coke li. 10. ca. 116.117.
Damage (says one) is derived a demendo, cum diminutione res deterior fit.

A Confirmation is so called, Littl. con. cas. 520.
as Littleton affirms, and idem est quod firmum facere, of the operation it
has to make stable or firm a former Grant.

So is a Surrender, 14. H. 7.
Quia sursum'redditio, and of the two French words suise and render, or
yielding up of an estate again to the Lessor or his assignee to the immediate
Reversion from which it was derived.

To like purpose a Writ is called in Latin Breve, and in French a Brief,
Bract. 112.413.
for the brevitie of it, and for that, (as Bracton says) rem quae est and
intentione^ petentis breviter enarrat.

So, a Fine, whereby lands or inheritances are conveyed in Courts of Record by
concord and agreement of the parties, in respect of their operation, scope, and
strength to make peace, and settle the Inheritance: Glanvil.
Of which Glanvil the most ancient writer now extant of our Law, gives an
intimation when he writes, Dicitur talis concordia finalis, quia finem
imponit negotio, adeo ut neutra pars litigantium ab eo poterit recedere. Which
is also affirmed by the Statute of 21. 21. Ed. 1.
Ed. 1. de finibus levandis, where the words are, Quia Fines in curia nostra
levati, finem litibus debent imponere: and idco Fines dicuntur maxim.

So we say that the foundation of a College, Coke li. 10. fo. 26.
Hospital, or such like is called fundatio, quasi fundi datio, vel fundamenti
locatio.

Likewise a Villeine, a man of servile or base degree is called in our Law in
Latin servus; for as Bracton says, dicitur servus a servando, non a
serviendo, Bracton li. 1. ca. 60. pa. 3.
antiquitus enim solent Principes captivos vendere, and ideo eos servare and
non occidere. And in English we call him Villeine a villa, from a Country
Farm, whereunto they were deputed to do service, as our Villeines regardant
to Manors were, as old Records and Authors affirm, glebae ascriptitiae, tied
to the Turfe: Or rather of the word vilis of his condition vile and base. And
the woman Villeine as Littleton says, is called a Neefe, quasi nativa: The
making free of both which, or their Infranchisment, is called in Latin,
Manumissio, a manu mittere, quod idem est quod vel extra manum aut potestatem
ponere vel dimittere; For manus in the Law Metaphorically signifies either
power or possession, alluding to the old Ceremony used in the infranchisment
of Bondmen, whereof Isiodorus speaks, manumitti servus dicebatur, cum Dominus
ejus, aut caput ejusdem servi, aut aliud membrum tenens, dicebat, Hunc hominem
liberu^ esse volo, and remittebat eum e manu. The ancient form and Ceremony
thereof among our Ancestors the Saxons was in this manner: Si quis velit servum
suum liberum facere, Lambert. APXAIONOMIA. fo. 126.
tradat eum vicecomiti per manum dextram in pleno Comitatu, and quietum illum
clamare debet a jugo servitutis suae per manumissionem, and ostendat ei liber
as portas and vias, and tradat ei libera arma, scilicet lanceam and gladium and
deinde liber homo efficitur.

So the word Remitter, which is an ancient term of the Law as Littleton says
of the word ( mitter, or rather of the French word remitter to restore) and
imports a restitution of possession unto a man's ancient right. Litt. li. 3.
cap. 12. Remitter. P. Com. 139. ca. P. Weston.


Likewise Mortmaine which is a gift of Land of other hereditaments to a
Corporation, which has a perpetual succession, and therefore never like to
return to the Lord by Escheat or Donor by Reverter. And therefore as one
says, it seems to be taken into a dead or dying man's hand which holds fast
whatsoever it claspeth. Or as the Frudists affirm; Pol. Virgil. lib. 17.
In mortuam manum vocarunt, quod res sic datae tanquam mortuae, usui illorum
mortalium in perpetuum ademptae essent: or else as another of the contrary:
Hottomanus de verbis Feudalibus.
Quia possessio quasi immortalis est, quia nunquam heredem, vel successorem,
vel possessorem habere desinit.

So we call a Rent paid yearly for Land or other things Redditus, a reddendo,
because it is yearly yielded or restored for the Lands, etc. Or rather as some
will a redeundo, because it does return to the Lessor or Donor for the issues
and profits of the Land: And in English it is called a Rent of the French word
Rentor to rate or Assesse at a price. Coke lib. 10. f. 28. a.


As concerning these Derivations or Etymologies drawn from the final cause or
effect, I was not minded curiously to distinguish, for that in these things
which do depend of humane Acts, wherein the final cause and effect is all
one; for that the operation is attempted and achieved for the effects sake.

But to proceed; Sometimes also Etymologies are drawn from the form or manner
of doing or working.

So we call a Common, to be a right whereby we take some kind of profit in the
land, or soil, or inheritance of another, together in Common with the Owner or
others, which Bracton expresses by way of Etymology thus: Bract. lib. 4. c.
33. f. 223.13. H. 8.16. a.
Comunia ex virtute vocabuli componitur ex una and cum (and subintelligitur
alio) Quia comunia est in alieno and una cum alio and in fundo proprio, quia
nemini seruit suus fundus proprius.

Likewise we call certain Lands Copyholds of the form and manner of Tenure,
because the Tennants thereof do hold the same per copiam rotuli Curiae Domini,
they have no other evidence or writing of their Tenure; but the Copy of the
roll of the Lords Court.

But of these we have said sufficient, let us now speak of the other kind
which is called Antilexis, when an obscure word is explained by another more
familiar or better known: This is performed when an English word is expounded
by a Latin word, or in any other language from whence the word was first
derived.

As administration of goods of an Intestate is said to be ordinatio seu
dispositio, 1. Lamberts Justice li. 1. ca. 17.22. b. Ass. pla. 6. P. 6.
Eliz. Dyer. 166. b.

An Assault upon a man's person by another, is so called of the Latin word
assultus and does import the offer of any hurtful blow or fearful speech.

An arrest is said to be the restraint of a man's liberty by power or color of
a lawful Warrant, derived as some think from the French word arrester to
stay, Lamb. Justice. li. 1. cap. 16.
or else far fetched from the Greek word (...) a Decree or sentence of the
Court.

So nomen a noscendo, quia notitiam fcit, whereupon says Bracton, Bract lib.
4. ca. 20. f. 188.
Ideo imposita sunt nomina ut demonstrent voluntatem dicentis, and utimur not
is in vocis ministerio. So that we may easily observe; That many of these of
this latter kind are mere Dorivations, 17. E. 4. so. 2.
as Contract a contrahendo, Deodand, quasi Deo dandum, id est, id est, in
eleemosynas erogandum, Divortiu^ a divertando, Duress ex duritia, of straight
imprisonment or hard entreaty. Larceny, id est, latrocinium, homicidium ab
homine and cadio. Lamb. Just. Bract. lib. 3.120. b.
Parapherna, id est, praeter dotem, and signifies mundum muliebrem: Peace a
vocabulo latino Pax: Lamb. Justice, lib. 1. cap. 2. f. 67.

A Court of Pypowder, a Court belonging and incident to Markets and faires, 12.
E. 4.9. Lamb. de curijs.
to yield Justice to the buyers and sellers coming thither, which because they
are most frequented in Summer, the word was given of the dusty feet of the
comers.

A Presentment which is presented by an Inquest containing some crime or
neusance, whereof they had to enquire, is derived of the French word, presenter.

Records are so said of the verb Recordor to remember, Lamb. Just. lib. 1. ca.
13.
because they are Remembrances, and vetustatis and veritatis vestigia, the
lively representations both of former time and truth: Reversion of the word
Reverterr, or as terra revertens. Coke lib. 2. fo. 5.


An estate Tail, of the French word tailer, to docke, or cut, limit or appoint
in certainty, Littl. l. 1. c. 2.
and many such like, whereon I need not to insist.

Sometime the Derivation of the word is deduced from some ancient word in old
time used although now antiquated and grown out of use, and yet nevertheless
such as gives light to the present knowledge of the word, as Constable an
ancient Officer of this Kingdom, Lamb. de Constables.
derived of two old Saxon words, Kinning which signifies King, and stable,
stability, cyng.
as the stabilitie of the King and Kingdom; So the word Farm in one
signification imports Lands, or other inheritances, holden for a yearly rent,
quasi feormian, Feormian.
which is an old Saxon word, signifying to feed, or render victual; for that
in ancient time they rendered victual for the most part, and not money. Lambert
in Archion^mia


So warrantisure, of the old word which signifies to defend or acquit, for so
says Bracton, Warrantizare nihil aliud est quam defendere, Bracton li. 5. fo.
350. b. Paragraph. 2.
and acquietare tenentem, qui warrentum vocavit in seisina sua.

So Gavellkinde, a custom whereby every son or heir male inheriteth a
portion alike in his Ancestors estate, and is derived of two old Saxon words
gife eal cyn, that is, given to all the kin; gife call cyn.
Quasi omnibus cognatione proximis data hereditas.

So Guilda Mercatoria, Lam. Arch. Coke li. 10. fo. 30.
an ancient word found in old Charters and monuments, and signifies
contuberrimum: or a Corporation of Merchants.

So Steward derived of two old words, Steed and Ward, Coke lib. 9. fo. 45.
and is as much to say, as a man appointed in my steed or place.

So the word Wythernam, yet much in use, drawn from two old and ontworne Saxon
words Wither, pythorn;er and Nam. Lam. Arch.
alterum, and Nam, pignus; quasi alter a pignoris oblatio.

Sometimes Derivations are made of some old words, whereof the use from which
the Derivation was made, is now utterly changed, as socagiu^, id est, servitium
socae, id est, carucae, for that the word soca was used for a plough. But this
service was after by general consent of Lord and Tenant, redeemed by payment
of a yearly rent, and yet the signification remaining still, as Land given to
plough the Lords Land, although the use of that service be abrogated; except
upon Creation of the Tenure, it should be reserved and so renewed.

So says one, the houses of the devoted religious were called Monasteria, of
the solitude or solitary life there led, which in latter days was nothing
less, Clandius Cautiun. de lo. legal.
Quia pleraque monasterianil minus sunt quaem solitudines.

Sundry other Derivations there are, which are but only allusions strained and
framed by the wit and industry of man, rather then from the native
signification of the word, and therefore of less regard and moment, as
testamentum, quasi testatio mentis, first devised by Servius Sulpitius the old
Roman Lawyer, Aul. Gelius lib. 6. ca. 12.
and used in our books, although impeached by Aulus Gellius in that age, or
shortly after as a strain of wit, and not out of any true denomination of the
word.

So likewise of that strain is agreamentum, Com. Fogoss. 17. Bract. lib. 1.
ca. 3.
which one would frame as aggregatio mentium.

So aequitas, quasi aequalitas, quiae est rerum convenientia, qua in paribus
causis paria desiderat jura and omnia been coaequiperat.

So have they derived selony, Lambert. Coke l. 4.124 Lam. Just. l 1 ca. 20.
Coke li. 4.37.
quasi felleo animo factum; so another deriveth Robbery of the word robe. And
another terra, a terendo, quia vomere teritur, and many such like, with the
which I will not meddle.

There rests a few words of the use of these Etymologres, Notations, and
allusions, and so an end.

Etymologies if they be rightly used and frawne from the final cause or from
the effect, do not only yield an Argument of good consequence, but also offer
much illustration and delight; And therefore it is well observed by one, Clau.
Camiuneula. de loc. legal.
That Etymologia est resolutio vocis in verum and proprium effectu^, and verbi
veritatem notificat, and obid, eam Cicero veriloquium appellat: And hence grew
among the Graecians that usual speech of the which Isiodore speaks, (...) to
learn aright it is principally necessary to search out the signification of the
word.

First therefore, we are for the right use of them to observe; That these
derivations are not to be observed in every word; For there are and must be in
every language many primitives which have their native significations according
to the imposers pleasure, for that of the Poet is to purpose; Multarenascentur,
quae nunc cecidere, cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, si volet usus,
Quem penes ar bitriu^ est, and mos and norma loquendi.


They are Derivative words which out of compositon may bear interpretations.

Secondly, Clau. Cant.
and therefore says one, Etymologia usum habet necessarium, quoties
interpretatione res de qua quaeritur eget.

Thirdly, non abhorrentes ab ipso vocabulo, sed a sono vocis provenientes: not
harshly or hardly drawn or wrung out, but answerable to the sound o fhte word,
and application to the sense.

It is not my purpose to set forth here when arguments and reasons drawn from
Etymologies, do hold their consequence, and when not, for therein the student
of the Law must be formerly instructed by the Precepts of the Art of Logic;
for this place will not permit the same, lest I should treat of Arguments
before I come to Argument. But let me not here forget that Etymologies are most
used by the Authors of our Laws in their Treatises and Tracts which are of
Simplicis Thematis.

Having done with the derivation of words, we come now to the explication of
the nature of the thing by definition.

Definition it self is thus defined, Definitio quid?
Definitio est oration, quae quid sit, de quo agitur, ostendit brevissime. It is
a Proposition which does express the nature of the thing shortly. Aristo. 1.
Post. 2. Post. c. 10.
And therefore Aristotle says aptly, (...): or as in another place to the like
effect: Definitio est oration, quae quid est significans. And therefore it is
truly said of another, That Fons totius explicationis est vera Definitio;
nullus enim rem melius noscere videtur, quam qui quid eam sit aperte possit
explicare. Kickerns.
A true Definition is the fountain of explication: for no man knows any
thing better then he which can aptly and briefly express the nature thereof,
and what it is.

Of Definitions there by two kinds: the one perfect and absolute; the other
less perfect. The perfect Definition is that which does consist Ex proximo
genere, and vera differentia; Genus whereof is a living creature mortal; which
our English tougue cannot well express in one word, as it is by the Latin
word Animal. But because this word is general to many other living creatures
besides, endued with sense, therefore that perfect difference, endued with
reason, rationale, is adjoined, whereby man is distinguished from all other
things. For although Angels be endued with reason, yet are they not animalia,
and there is nothing which may be called animal rationale but man alone. This
rule I here remember, Quod genus and differentia ex Pradicamento sumantur.

But these things I leave to the Logicke-schoole: And for that our dull
understanding can hardly discern the true essential difference of things, we
are driven, and especially in accidental matters, to express by their
properties, parts, causes, or accidents; which a Logical writer has well
conceived in these words, Cum certum sit, hominem internas rerum formas
perfect non cognoscere, ideo loco differentiarum seu formarum, propria
accidentia tanquam, scilicet, senfibus viciniora in definitione sumimus.
Another in this manner, Nuuiuorei majori laboramus inopia quam differentiarum.
And another, Laboramus plerumque vel maxim omnibus e rebus verarum
differentiarum penuria, quaeque hic ut in rebus caeteris pro veris habeamus,
quae proxime veris videntur accedere. Therefore the imperfect Definition, which
is called a description; is thus set forth:

Definitio imperfecta est definiti per terminos minus essentiales explicatio.
Of this there are, as some do teach, these kinds; Causalis, Partialis, and
Accidentalis. Others somewhat more fully thus, Imperfect a definitio sive
descriptio, est principalis vel minus principalis. Principalis, definitum
explicat genere and accidentibus, vel causis, vel effectibus proprijs, vel
partibus. And therefore that which is given of them ex causis, is called
causans, and is nothing else but Oration rei proprias causas manifestans: so
that they do affirm, That such descriptions are causall, and given per
materiam and formam to be essential.

Descriptio, or Definitio minus principalis, which is, ex accidentibus, and
therefore called accidentalis, est definiti ex mere conting entibus terminis,
vel etiam externis explicatio, sive generis accurata assignatione. And here I
think it not amiss to observe some rules for good definition or description.
And therefore.

First, every good definition or description ought to contain two principal
parts: 1, That which is general, and therefore called Genus, wherein the thing
defined has community with other things: And 2, that which may more
particularly express the nature thereof, to distinguish the thing defined from
all other things loco differentiae. And therefore says Tully ad Trebatum, Sic
veteres praecipiunt, cum sumpser is ea quae sunt rei quam definire velis cum
alijs commania, usque eo persequi dum proprium efficiatur, quod nullam in aliam
rem transferri potest. Another sets the same down in this manner: Primo
quaerendum est Genus, deinde dividendum donec tandem veniatur ad eam orationem
quae cum definito convenit.

Some men there are, which though they extol the true definition (where it may
be had) before the description, as it deserves; yet hold they the description
more familiar, and apter to teach, then the former, whereof Lodovicus Vives
writes thus; The perfect Definition (says he) Verior quidem est, sed tamen
obscurior: hinc fit, ut essentiales definitiones parum doceant mentem hominis
non exact docti, cui quidem long ^tilior fuerit descriptio ab externis
accidentibus, quae sensu possint percipi. And again, essentiales, and
exactissimae definitiones parum nos docent, and idcirco apud authors bonos
sunt rarae. For (says one) Desinitio essentiam, descriptio intelligentiam rei
claudit.

Authors have given certain rules also appliable to both these kinds, which I
may not let pass: because in this place they stand (as I conceive) to good
purpose. Whereof the first is thus: Removeri debet a definitione omnis
ambiguitas, and omnis obscuritas, quae fit duabus causis: primo, ex
translatione Tropi, and Metaphora: secundo, ex insolentia vocis, omnis vox
inusitata est obscura. To this effect has Aristotle these words, Oportet eum
qui definit, maxim omnium clarissima interpretatione uti: siquidem cognoscendi
and intelligendi causa traditur. Wherefore the first rule as you see, Arist.
Top. 6. ca. 1.
ut clarior sit definitio, and debet dari per notiora: for that Definitio
prolata sensui discentis notior and magis obvia esse debet.

The second rule is, That every good Definition debet reciprocari cum definito,
it ought to be reciprocal and convertible with the thing defined or described.
For the better understanding whereof, it is to be observed, that every thing
needs not a definition or description: for particular and individual things
subject to sense, need no definition or description: for that Definitio debet
esse de universalibus. 9. Metaph. ca. 6.
And hereupon Aristotle affirms, Omne quod definitur est species. And
although there be five universalities or Praedicables as they term them, as
Genus, Species, Differentia, Proprium, and Accidens, yet are there but four
Pradicata Topica, for species is the thing defined, and wherein, and whereby
the rest are verified. And again, Definitio est de rebus compositis a natura
and finitis.

The third rule is as a consequent of the former, Nihil habeat superfluum aut
diminutum Definitio: for if the definition or description be convertible, and
reciprocal with the thing defined, or described (as it ought) it cannot have
either superfluity or defect; this Precept I thought necessary in this place,
because the student might be the better informed to frame his Definition or
description.

Let me here say a word of the efficacy and use of definitions and
descriptions; And after shall I endeavor to yield some examples out of our
Laws: A Definition is said to be one of the Instruments of knowledge, and that
two manner of ways; Primo in ordine ad definitum, whereby the thing defined or
described is known, not by discourse of reason but in a manner by
contemplation intuitive, resembling the Angels knowledge; and therefore it is
said well by a Writer, Definitio est intuitiva cognitio; Kickerm. Arist. 8.
Topic. ca. 3.
And hence it is that Aristotle so highly in many places of his works
commends the same Difficilis est omnis disputatio, nisi id de quo ea
instituitur recte ab initio defineatur. And again in the same place, Omnis
quaestio de qua disputare difficile est vel definitionem requirit, vel
distinctionem nomine. And in the fourth book of his Physickes, Text. 31.
Arist. sets forth the effect of a Definition, Quod per eam omnia dubia solvi
possint and debeant.

Whereupon one writer grows so confident that he thinks, that out of a full
definition of a Marriage, and of an Oath, all controversies concerning either of
them may be fully decided; these be his words: Hujus utilitatis duo exempla
sunt valde conspicua, Strigellius.
unum in doctrina de conjugio, alterum in disputatione de juramento, omnes
quaestiones de his materijs facilius and certius possunt explicari. And
therefore Tully in his Offices would have every orderly treatise a definitione
proficisci. De officijs lib. 1.


Secondly, a Definition is an Instrument of knowledge, In ordine ad
demonstrationem, ad sciendam conclusionem, Sungletius l. 2. lo. in prooem.
hoc est, ad proprietatem demonstrandam passionem de subjecto. But of this more
hereafter, when we shall speak of Arguments necessary, which are called
Demonstrations.

Let us now exemplify what we have said, by instances drawn out of the Common
Laws of this Land.

If I would define or describe a Feoffment, I must first seek out a General
or Genus; Feoffment, quid?
as thus, A Feoffment is a conveyance, but because there be sundry other
conveyances, I must proceed further to distinguish the same from all other
conveyances; and therefore I add and say, A Feoffment is a conveyance which
passes an estate in Fee-simple by Livery of Seisin; And hereby I have
distinguished it from all conveyances of record, and conveyances that inure by
way of grant; But because likewise Leases for life are likewise passed by
Livery of seisin; and likewise a gift in Tail, passes by Livery and seisin, I
have added the last complement and full difference in these words, in fee
simple. Wherefore in every feoffment two things are of necessary regard; First,
that it is performed by Livery of seisin. And secondly, that it passes an
estate in Fee simple: for Lands given in tail and executed by a Livery, we do
not call a Feoffment, but a gift in Tail.

If I should define or describe a fine, Fine, quid?
whereby Lands, and other hereditaments are conveyed, I would thus describe the
same.

A fine is a conveyance of Record by Concord between the parties upon license
obtained in a suit depending between them in the Kings Court of Common Pleas.
Where a Conveyance is the General or Genus, The words (of Record) make a
difference from other conveyances passed in the Country in Pais. And because
there are also some other Conveyances of Record, there is added further the
essential difference, which is the form of a Fine, namely, the concord upon
license obtained; for otherwise such concord cannot be admitted in an action
depending between them: for without Action, there can be no Fine, which action
or suit, must concern Lands or Hereditaments, whereof the fine is levied, or
upon an action of Covenant to levy such fine; And this suite must be
depending: And next of all is added the Kings Court, for such fines as by
Custom may be levied in Courts of ancient Demesne, or the like if any be, are
not true fines, but similitudinary only.

Lastly is added the Kings Court of Common Pleas, for that in ancient times,
before the Court of Common Pleas was erected, fines were levied, (as among the
old Records thereof appears) in any of the Kings great Courts of Law; But
after the erection of the said Court, because fines are levied upon Original
Writs that are Common Pleas, and therefore only to be dealt withal in that
Court, fines are and ought to be levied in that Court only.

I may describe a fine shorter thus out of Glanvills words;

Finis est amicablilis compositio and finalis Concordia, ex licentia terminans
loquelas motos in Curia: for his very words are these: Contingit autem
aliquando loquelas motas in Curia Domini Regis per amicablilem compositionem
and finalem Concordiam terminari, sed ex licentia Regis vel ejus Iusticiariorum.

These like Concords have been in use in the Civil Laws, and are called by
them Transactions; whereof they say thus, Transactiones sunt de eis quae in
controversia sunt, a lite futura aut pendente ad certam compositionem
reducuntur, dando aliquid vel accipiendo.

Or shorter thus; Transactio est de re dubia and lite ancipite ne dum ad finem
ducta, non gratuita pactio.

Where note that it may well be said nongratuita Pactio, because in the end of
the concord of the fine, which is the form thereof, there is contained a
certain sum o money under this form, Et pro hoc fine habendo, etc. I. S.
the cognizee dedit 20. li. sterlinguorum. So likewise there is money paid unto
the King which is called the Kings Silver, pro licentia concordandi.

Thus much have I add out of the Civil Law, That the Student might as well in
this, as in many other Titles of the Law observe the great conformity that is
between the Common Law of the Land, and the Civil Law of the Empire.

If I should define Homage, I may say, Homagium quid?
That Homage is a service corporal of most reverence done by the Tenant unto
his Lord, whereby he does acknowledge himself to become his man, and to do
him all earthly honor.

Where Service is the Genus, or most general word, limited by the word
corporal, to distinguish from other services not corporal, for, that it is to
be done by the Tenant himself in person and by none other to the Lord: All
those words that follow in the said description are added in stead of the
difference drawn from the form and manner of the performance of the said
Service.

Bracton has a larger description hereof, taken from the effects proceeding on
both sides, thus; Homagium est Iuris vinculum, quo quis tenetur and astringitur
ad warrantizanduns, defendendum, and acquietandum tenentem suum in sesina sua,
versus omnes per certum servitium in donatione nominatum and expressum, and
etia^ vice versa; Quo tenens re obligatur and astringitur ad fidem domino suo
servandum, and servitium debitum faciendum. And after sets down the form
and manner of doing thereof. The Feudists in the Civil Law, do render it
shorter thus, Homagium seu hominium (haec enim vox communior est) est venerat
io (si vim verbistricte consideramus) cum se eo nomine hominem, id est,
Cliente^ ipsius fore profitetur.

if likewise I should yield a general description of an estate in Dower,
Estate in Dower, quid?
which might agree to all the several kinds of Dower by Littleton, I would
describe it thus:

An estate in Dower is an estate of Freehold during the life of a lawful wife,
appointed out of an inheritance whereof she is dowable, which estate begins
upon and after the death of her husband for her maintenance.

The General of this description is an estate of Freehold during the life of a
lawful wife. There is added, appointed, for that an estate in dower is
appointed two manner of ways;

It is said moreover, lawful wife, for except the wife be a lawful wife, and
the marriage a lawful marriage, Dower cannot be had, for the estate in Dower is
in regard of the marriage.

The second way, That Dower is appointed, 2. Way.
is by act of the party, and that is, either at the marriage at the Church
door, when they come to be married, and therefore called Dower ad ostium
Ecclesiae; or by consent of the Father, or other Ancestor of the husband, and
therefore commonly called Dower ex assensu Patris, etc. But both these Dowers
are almost worn out of use.

These words (afterthe death of her husband, for her maintenance,) do contain
the sinall cause and purpose wherefore it was put in use.

Dower by the course of the common Law, which is the most usual kind of
Dower, may in this manner be described.

An estate in Dower by the course of the Common Law, is an estate of Freehold
for the life of a lawful wife, of the third part of all those inheritances
dowable, whereof the husband was feised of an estate of inheritance, during the
Coverture, given by the Law to be complete after the death of the husband, for
her maintenance.

This description is drawn from all the causes: the Material cause is set
forth unto us by the persons; the husband and wife, the form is the estate of
freehold for the life of the lawful wife. The efficient causes are, The Act of
the Law, and likewise the seisin of the husband during the Coverture; and
lastly, to be complete after the death of her husband; And the final cause in
these words, for her maintenance.

So that by lawful marriage the estate in Dower has commencement by the seisin
of the husband during the Coverture it has his progression; and by the death
of the husband his consummation, and accomplishment, whreeof ensue the three
maine bars to be pleaded by the Tenant of the land in a writ of dower. 3.
Bars.


The first against the marriage, ne vnques loyalment accoople, which plea is
triable by the Ordinary.

Against the Seisin, ne unques seize, etc. tryable by a Jury.

And against the consummation,

Although the Civil Law do call that Portion which is brought by the wife, or
given with the wife in marriage (which we commonly call the marriage portion)
Dos, her Dower: And they call the estate in Dower, Donatio propter nuptias, yet
have they this agreement or conformity, quod neuter sine matrimonio esse potest.

And because we have had occasion to skpeake of marriage, let us here define or
describle the same, Bract. lib. 4. f. 298. b. Lib. 5. f. 420.
Bracton out of the Common Law thus describes it, Matrimonium est conjunctio
viri and mulier is individuam vitae consuetudinem retinens.

Britton thus: Matrimony est affemblie, de home and de feme, Brittion 246.
a lour deux volunts, per jointure de St. Eglise, per demurrer ensemble come un
chair a touts lour vies sans espoier de departure.

The Civil Law has it in this manner: Institu. de Patria: Potest.
Matrimonium est divini and humani juris communicatio, inter virum and
faemina^^, individuam vitae consuetudinem continens.

The definition of Marriage which Strigellius so much commends, whereby all
the difficulties that fall in debate concerning Marriage, may be (as he
thinks) cetermined, is in this manner conceived.

Conjugium est unius maris and unius foeminae, Kickerm.
legitima and indissolubilis copulatio, a Deo instituta in Paradiso, ut
intelligamus Deum esse castum and castitatis amantem, ut ei in castitate
serviamus, and ut hoc modo and non aliter propagetur genus humanum.

A Rent may be thus described: Rent. quid?
A rent is a Revenue issuing out of lands or other manual hereditaments, and
wherewith the same is charged for a time of continuance.

So that the genus is Revenue, and the material subject that supporteth the
charge, is manual hereditaments, as land and such like, for out of no other
hereditament can a rent be properly reserved or granted: and the peculiar
difference is wherewith the same is charged, for a Rent is a charge, and
wheresoever the land be conveyed, tranfit cum suo onere, it goes with his
charge.

So that a certain sum of money, or other things valuable (for a rent may
be reserved or granted of other things than money) are the matter de qua;
Land, or other manual hereditaments the matter ex qua, or extra quam: The
reservation or the grant, the efficient cause: The final cause might also have
been expressed, but when the definition is otherwise plain, it needs not.

The Civil Law by this word Redditus, Le. 5.. non possim. ff. de rebus ^orum.
or Reditus, understands generally Quicquid ex re aliqua obvenit aut redit.

And because a Rent service has his original by way of reservation, let us
here see what a Reservation is.

A Reservation is an agreement between the Lord and Tenant, Reservation quid?
or the Lessor and Lessee, that the Lord or Lessor shall receive at times
appointed a certain sum of money or other thing appointed to be paid for
the thing demised or granted. Com. Browning 140. b. 35. H. 8.57. a


A Relief, Relief quid?
called in Latin Releviu^; The Feudists describe or define thus: Releviu^
dicitur honorariu^, quod novus vassallus Patrono introitus causa largitur,
quasi morte alterius vassalli, vel alio quo casu feudum ceciderit quod jam a
novo sublevetur, veteres introitum appellabant.

Of a Relief Bracton has these words, Bracton. lib. 2 fo. 83.
Oportet statim quod tenementum, quod fuit in manibus antecessorum, and
haereditas quae jacens fuit per eorum decessum relevetur in manus haeredum, and
propter talem relevationem facienda erit ab haeredibus quaedam praestatio quae
dicitur Relevium. Out of which words of his, a description of a relief may
thus be framed:

Relevium est quaedam Praestatio, facta ab haeredibus post mortem antecessoris
ad relevandam haereditatem per eorum mortem jacentem.

Where he seems to use haereditas jacens for land, etc. descended to the
heir before his entry, as the Civilians likewise take the same. Judgment quid?


A Judgment is the determination of a cause in controversy by a person
thereunto appointed.

This Description is general, and comprehends all manner of Judgments
whatsoever: The Civilians do thus render the same: Iudicium est actus
legitimus, quo Iudex de causa proposita cognoscit, and secundum aequum and
bonum pronunciat. Wherein they note to be three degrees: First, the Cognizance
or power to judge. Secondly, that this Judgment be public or published.
Thirdly, that it be just and right. This connection they yield to be thus;
Siquidem in nullo controversiarum genere prodest causam differri ad Iudicem,
nisi cognoscatur de ea, sic nihil profuerit esse cognitum nisi pronuncietur;
denique, pronunciatum inutile erit nisi ex bono and aequo procedat.

There are sundry kinds of Judgments, sometimes diversified in respect of
place, sometimes in respect of the person that judges, sometime in respect of
the manner of proceeding. In respect of the place, as in a Court of Justice,
and then every Judgment is said to be the Act of the Court: sometimes
Judgment given out of Court, as upon the voluntary submission of the parties
in controversy, as an award or arbitriment: with the descriptions of which I
will end this part of our discourse touching Definitions and Descriptions.

An Arbitriment, which is also called an award, Arbitriment quid?
is a Judgment or Determination which one or more do make at the request of
two parties at the least, for or concerning debt, trespass, or other
controversy had between the said parties.

The Civil Law yields it thus: Arbitrium est arbitri sententia, five
Iudicium inter controvertentes, privato concensu, non antem publica
interveniente authoritate.

But to the intent the Student may know how to collect a definition or
description of any legal part or title out of his books of Report, I will
leave him here a description of an Award or Arbitriment, where every part is
drawn and deduced out of sundry Law Cases here and there seattred, which I
have gathered as sundry dispersed stones into one building.

An Arbitriment is a Judgment, 8. E. 4.1. a. 8. E. 4.10. a. 21. E. 4.39. a.
given by such person or persons as are elected by the parties to the
controversies, 9. E. 4.43. b. 16. E. 4.9. a. for the pacifying of the said
controversy, 8. E. 4.10. a. 19. H. 6.37. b. Askew; according to the comprimise
and submission, 19. E. 4.1. a. and agreeable to reason and good conscience.

All which words composing the said description, are deduced and drawn out of
the books cited, and only by me laid together, and what is done here
concerning an Arbitriment (of which hereafter I shall make a larger discourse)
may be likewise performed in sundry other Titles.

There rests an Objection to be removed; Ob.
it is said by the ancient Roman Lawyer Iabolenus, Omnis desinitio in Iure
Civili periculosa est, parum est enim ut non subverti possit: To define in Law
is dissicult, and the sundry circumstances of things be so many, and so full of
variety, as the definition or description is happily made if it stand or
remain unimpeached.

To this I give answer, Resp.
That all this is in a manner true; but let us remember, Difficilia quae
pulchra, and use so much the more care and diligence in the composition of the
same. Albeit the Interpretors do understand him to mean by a Definition in
that place, no other thing than a Rule or Ground in Law, yet nevertheless both
are necessarily attempted and performed sufficiently: For otherwise the
knowledge of the Law would be but an incertaine, inconstant, and tumultuary
knowledge (if that may be called knowledge at all, but grounded upon wavering
opinions,) but the knowledge of the Law is not such, as shall be evidently made
manifest when we come to dispute, whether the Law may be reduced into a method
or no.

Thus much of Definitions and Descriptions, there follows in order the
consideration of Divisions.

Some there are which to avoid confusion because they conceit the word
Division to contain several significations not reducible under an univocall
head, Divisio, quid
they have therefore even divided Division it self, in bringing in the
consideration of the name into his sundry significations, which they call
divisio nominis, and which they describe thus:

Divisio nominis est oration qua vox in sua significata distinguitur.

But because that were somewhat improper, and that more fit place will be found
hereafter in the second part of this Treatise to handle the same, I will deal
only with those Divisions that are of the thing, Divisionis rei, Divisions of
material parts.

Divisio rei, and totius per parts resolutio, and it is either Principalis,
vel minus Principalis.

Principalis est qua totum proprie and principaliter dividitur; and est vel
generis in species, quae est divisio totius universalis, vel est totius
essentialis, in suas parts essentiales, ut homo dividitur in corpus and
animam; vel est divisio totius integralis, in suas parts integrales. So that
of this kind of division as you see there are three sorts.

Divisio generis est qua genus dividitur in suas species: Divisio totius
subordinantis.

And so Ius, as it signifies the law, is divided by Bracton in Publicum and
Privatum, and of this kind of division we have examples in the Law; as
Littleton when he divides an estate of Inheritance into an estate of Fee
Simple, and an Estate Tail: when he divides an estate of Freehold into an
estate of Inheritance, or an estate for life: So likewise he divides an estate
for life, either for the life of the party, Ou pur auter vie: an estate for
life of the party is either by act of Law, as that of Tenant in Dower, Tenant
by the Courtesy, and Tenant apres possibility of issue extinct.

By act of the party, general estate for life, which has his original by
Demise and limitation of the party.

Of this kind of division speaks Melancton.

Divisio, generis in species est omnium praestantissima and in omnibus artibus
communissima.

And here some do require Cum differentiae exactae haberi possint per duas
tantum dividatur, quae (...) dicitur.

And of this also they have made these three observations: 1. Placuit omnem
divisionem duabus differentiis e diverso positis perfici deberi. 2. Vt it a
repugnent istae differentiae ut nequaquam in idem convenire possint. 3.
Postremo, ut quicquid in genere continetur, id totum differentiae explicent.


Of this (...) so much extolled by Ramus, and too curiously observed by his
followers, occasion was taken by Aristotle out of Plato as it seems, and
appears, lib. 1. De partibus animalium, cap. 2. and 3.

But as touching the same I am of his mind which affirms, Nobis sicut primum
esset, and voto forsitan optandum, ut legitimis duabus differentiis
dividerimus; ita proximum erit ut quibuscunque duabus (tamen sin minus
poterimus duabus,) at quot cunque poterimus dividamus, dummodo universam ejus
quod dividitur complectamur latitudinem: And although it be true that
Peripatetici semper dicotumiam probarunt, tamen non (...) and absolute, sed
(...), and therefore we may not be tied or restrained to make our division
always of two parts; but where that cannot conveniently be brought to pass,
we may divide into so many parts as the nature of the thing shall require. And
therefore Littleton in his division of Rents, divides them into three kinds; a
Rent Service, a Rent Charge, a Rent Secke, which is very good and sufficient.

And so of a Warranty, where he divides every Warranty either into a Lineall
Warranty, a Collateral Warranty, or a Warranty commencing by disseisiin.

So likewise every estate in Dower is either by the Law, which is the general
Custom of the Realm, and is of the third part; or else by the peculiar
custom of the place, as of the moity in Gavelkinde, or more or less as the
custom of the place shall warrant: or else thirdly, by assignation of the
party, and that is twofold, either by the husband himself, ad ostium
Ecclesiae, or else by the Ancestor, as Ex assensu patris; or, De la pluis
beale, etc.

So likewise we divide the Material Church or Temple, the place appointed for
divine Service into three kinds; a Church Cathedral, which is the seat of the
Bishop, and his Chair: secondly, a Church Collegiate or Conventuall: and
thirdly, a Church Parochial.

So likewise we divide Tithes in this manner: all Tithes are either Pradiall,
Personal, or Mixed.

So a division of four or more parts is to be admitted, if the nature of the
thing divided do so require: as Littleton imports in this division of
Actions.

All Actions are either real Actions, Personal actions or mixed actions; and
this Division is ordinary and almost every where in our Books. Littleton
seems to add a fourth member, when he says, that when a man releaseth all
actions, Real, Personal, and mixed, that this is no Bar in an Appeal, and
yet a release of all actions suffices; he intimates thereby that there is an
Action, neither Real, Personal or Mixed, and yet an Action, as the Appeal, an
Action of Revenge.

And herein I would not wish; That for Dicotumy sake, the Student should frame
Divisions of his own head, and labor to reduce them ad btmembrem Divisionem,
as some have done; But accept rather those that are approved of Authors, and
generally received in that Art. And herein let me observe by the way that
Dicotumia or the twofold division, Si pariat multas subdivisiones, intellectui
and memoriae aggerendas est vitiosa.

Likewise (...) vbi alterum membrum est positivum, alterum negativum, non est
bona.

In hac divisionis specie observandum est, ne id quod secundum magis and minus
dividitur, in species dividi arbitremur.

And thus much de divisione totius universalis.

Divisio totius essentialis est qua totum essentiale in suas parts dividitur,
ut in materiam and formam, and dicitur divisio totius coordinati.

Divisio totius integri est qua aliquid in sua membra, seu parts integrales
dividitur, and dicitur Partitio; Et est nihil aliud quam membrorum quae ad
integritatem totius requiruntur, enumeratio: As when we do divide a house into
the soil whereon it stands, and the edifice and structure thereof.

So the Author of the Dialogues between the Doctor and the Student divides
the Law in general into the Law of Nature, the Law of Nations, the Law of God,
the Law of particular Kingdoms, as the Civil Law, the Law of this Land.

So also have the Civilia^s divided their law thus; Ius Civil est quod legibus
Plebiscitis, Senatus consultis, Principum placitis, Magistratuum Edict is
Responfisque, Prudentium constat.

So do we likewise divide the Law of England into the Common Law, and Statute
Law.

So we distinguish and divide a Manor into Demesnes and services.

And a Rectory into Glebe and Tithes.

We are now come to the second Principal Branch which is of the less
principal Divisions.

Divisio minus Principalis, est qua dividitur totum improprie dictum, ut 1.
Causa per suos effectus, 2. Effectus per suas causas, 3. Subjectum per sua
accidentia, 4. Accidentia per sua subjecta, 5. accidentia per accidentia, 6.
res per sua objecta, adjuncta, 7. quando, per circumstantias loci, temporis.

We often make Divisions in the Law by the causes, Common.
as Bracton does divide a Common thus by the causes: First material, as of
those profits whereof Common may be had; as Common of Estovers, to burn in
their houses; Common of Pasture, for feed for their Cattle; Common to dig in
the soil of another; scilicet, fodiendo, ut lapides, cretam, arenam, turbam,
id est, Common of Turbary and such like; and likewise there is a Common of
fishing called Common of Piscary.

In respect of the form and manner, how a Common is divided, thus; Every
Common is either, Common appendant, Common appertenant, Common per case de
vicinage, or Common in gross.

In respect of the efficient cause, a Common is divided thus, as all Commons
are either by prescription, or else by grant: Commons by prescription are such
as Antiquity of time, and long continuance have produced, as Common Appendant,
Common per case de vicinage.

Commons that have had their original by the grant of the Parties are either
so granted as that the same is restrained to the beasts pasturing such lands;
And so it may be called a Common appertenant, although improperly by Grant; or
else a Common in gross, and that in such liberty or manner of restraint of
benefit as pleases the Grantor to bestow.

In respect of the circumstance of time, some Commons are for all times of the
year, some others for a certain time only.

In respect of the place, some Commons are in the Waste of the Lord, or by
especial grant through all his Land, or in his several, or ubicunque averia
sua iverint.

In Common of Pasture Bracton considers these things; either the word pasture
is taken largely, de omni quod edi poterit, vel pasci, large sumpto vocabulo,
ut si quis habeat in alicujus terra communiam pasturae, scilicet, herbagij,
Pessonij, sive glandis, aut nucum, aut quicquid suo nomine Pessonig continetur,
item foliorum and frondium.

So I may divide Conditions annexed to Contracts, or to estates in this manner.

All Conditions are either conditions in fact, Conditions.
or in Law; Conditions in fact are either expressed in words, and so created by
words conditional, or else they are employed, namely, conditions by implication.

Conditions expressed are either possible or impossible to be performed, and
then are those conditions void in Law, for, nemo tenetur ad impossibilia; All
possible conditions are such as may be either against the Law, and that either
against the Common Law, and then not only the Condition, but the whole
Contract is void; But if it be only contrary to a Statute Law which may be
dispensed wiathll, then the Condition stands good; and the party bound
thereby is likewise bound to procure a dispensation, and make himself able to
perform the same.

A Condition lawful is either subsequent, or precedent; subsequent Conditions
annexed to estates, do either upon performance enlarge the same, or upon
breach diminish or make void the same.

Conditions repugant are such as are limited, repugnant to the premises, as
land given in Feesimple by a common person upon a condition that he, nor his
heirs should alien. This is a repugnant Condition to the amplenesse of the
estate, and therefore void.

In like manner I might divide a Custom by the causes, Custom.
as the internal causes are the matter and form; The material parts may be
the persons whom the custom concerns; The place and proceedings in Courts of
Justice; For every Court of Justice has his Customs and courses of
proceedings sometime different from others.

In respect of their form, they are either general throughout all the Realm,
and so do they constitute that part of the Common Law which is grounded upon
the general Custom of the Realm.

Or else they are particular Customs to certain places, of the which Bracton
says thus; Habent Anglici plurima de consuetudine, quae non habent ex lege,
sicut in diversis Comitatibus, Civitatibus, Burgis and Villis, ubi semper erit
inquirendum, quae sit loci illius consuetudo, and qualiter utantur consuetudine.

Every special Custom, as touching the form thereof, because it binds as a
Law, and is as a peculiar Law of the place, has two things considerable,
First, the place; secondly, the manner and use of it. As concerning the place,
every particular custom ought to be bounded within the compass of particular
places, as sometime through a whole County or the greatest part thereof, as
Gavell kind in Kent: or within a City, Borough or Town, as Borough English:
For a particular custom cannot be at large in places uplandish.

Secondly, as touching the form and manner of use of it, it ought to be
reasonable and agreeable to common right without absurdity, Littl. l. c. 14. E.
3. f. Bar. 277. 42. E. 3. f. avowry 66. 14. H. 4. f. avow. 60. 2. H. 4.24. b.
5. H. 7.9.
for the which a particular reason may be yielded and given.

Hence ensues, That it ought to be without prejudice to any, and not to be
injust in it self, 42. E. 3. f. avow. 66. 35. H. 6.29. b. Fitzh. Custom 2.

Secondly, it ought to be certain, 13. E. 3. f. dum fuit infra aetatem. 3. 22.
H. 6.46.47.

Thirdly, it ought to be alleged in the affirmative; for a negative Allegation
is not perfect, 8. H. 6.4. a.

Efficient causes of a Custom are two; long vi temporis usus, That is,
commencement without notice of the original when it begun, which they utter in
these words; Temps don't Memory ne court as Littleton speaks; and secondly,
continuance without notable interruption: 8. H. 6.4. b. 22. E. 4.8. b. 35. H.
6. f. Custom 2. 13. E. 3. f. Praescript, 40. 21. H. 7.20. a. b.

The final cause is the effect, that it binds like a Law, for, in things of
this nature, the final cause and the effect are all one: hereof Bracton
speaks, Consuetudo quando pro lege observatur in partibus ubi fuerit more
utentium approbata est vicem legis obtinet. And again, Longaevi temporis usus,
non est vilis authoritas, Bracton lib. 1. cap. 3. f. 2. Hence is it said, That
a custom ought to be compulsary, 42. E. 3. f. Avow. 665. 5. H 7.9.

I will here add something out of the Civil and Cannon Laws touching a
Custom, whereby the Student may observe the conformity of both studies, and
conjoyne them if he list together; that one of them may assist, give light, and
ornament unto the other.

First, where it was said, That a General Custom is a parcel of the Laws of
the Realm; They likewise affirm, that Consuetudo generalis facit jus commune;
Clem. Fin. de aetate and qualita: And again, Consuetudo tanti temporis cujus
initium non continetur in hominum memoria, habet vim Privilegij Imperialis Le::
ductus aquae de aqua quotidiana.

Again, Consuetudo est jus moribus (id est) assiduis actibus introductum. C.
Consue. i. Distinctio, voluntas Populi rebus ipsis and factis declarata.
Tacitus concensus omnium. Le. de quibus: ff. de legibus. Tacita civium
Conventio. Ius scripto non comprehensum.

For the effect thereof, Consuetudo legem imitatur ex non scriptis Institutis,
de Iure naturali gentium and Civili: Legem imitari dixit, id est, tantundem
praestare and quasi legem repraesentare Aldobe: ibid.

Consuetudinis vero officium est primo ut confirmet, deinde ut interpretetur
scriptam legem si obscura sit: in Le: minime Paulus, and Calistratus in leg. de
interpretatione, ff. de legibus: with diverse like, too long here to make
repetition.

Sundry other examples of division might be produced out of the Laws of this
Reame, which argue the necessary and frequent use of Division; but to omit them
lest I should be too tedious, and to leave the student to his own industrious
Collection, I will commemorate and insert here some few precepts to be observed
in the making of an useful division, and after show the benefit of this
knowledge, and so relinquish the same.

The precepts therefore may be drawn into two heads; The first in respect of
the thing to be divided, namely, divisum or dividendum; The second in respect
of membra dividentia the parts dividing.

As touching the things to be divided, it is to be observed, that Division is
not always necessary; for some things are so entire as they cannot be divided,
as unitas, for if it be divided, it is no more unity, but multiplicity.

So instance which is neither time past, nor time to come, but only the moment
of time present, unto the which the parts of time past and future, are
conjoined.

Many things in their nature are entire in the consideration of our Laws, for
Entierty is that quod in parts dividi non potest, I mean the division of
totius integralis, not totius universalis. And therefore Entierties are of two
kinds; First, some are such as by nature suffer no division, as the things
before spoken of, Unity, Instance, Corporal service, of which it is said, ea
quae in parts dividi non possunt, solida a singulis haeredibus debentur, as
fealty and such like services, of which nevertheless some certain ones are
appointed by Statute, 2. E. 2. f. avo. 179.
to avoid trouble, to be performed by the eldest coheire, for the rest as
Homage.

Other things are said to be entire, which although they may be divided into
parts by their nature, that is, their nature and essence is not repugnant to a
Division, yet the Law will permit no division of them by the act of the party,
although by act in Law they do abide Division, and such is a Rent Charge, a
Warranty, a Condition, etc.

As touching the parts dividing, or membra dividentia, Membra dividentia
convenient cum toto and sunt toti adaquata, ita ut omnia membra simul sumpta
sunt suo diviso aequalia, and quod nihil contineatur sub diviso quod non sub
aliquo membro, nec aliquod membrum quod non sit sub diviso.

The second rule is, Quod membra dividentia sunt a se invicem disjuncta,
diversa, contradivisa and non subalterna, id est, quod unum in altero non
contineatur.

The third precept is, Quod singula membra per se sumpta sunt inferiora diviso,
contained within the amplitude of the thing divided, the parts being taken
singularly and alone.

The fourth rule is, proxima and immediata, next and immediate under that which
is divided, and not fetched afar off, Arist. 2. Post. cap. 5. and 14.
which precept is taken out of Aristotle, 2. Post. ca. 5. and 14.

The fifth rule is, Divisio instruatur membris quam per naturam fieri potest
paucissimis: The reason whereof is assigned thus, Cum divisio rei manifestandae
gratia inventa sit, si multa contineret membra fastidium potius and
obscuritatem quam cognitionem pararet. And therefore it is Plato his Precept in
his Politico, Non est tutum, o amice, in minutissima redigere. And therefore
Seneca said well, Simile est confuso quicquid in pulverem usque sectum fuerit,
nam ut maxima comprehendere, ita in minima deducere difficile est.

The sixth and last precept is, Quod membra dividentia quendam ordinem inter se
habeant, and quod divisio omni ambiguitate and obscuritate vacet.

And thus much concerning the Precepts of artificial Division may suffice.

As touching the use of Division, Plato in his Dialogues, Phedrus and Sophista,
falls into a large praise thereof, and in the person of Socrates affirms,
Si nactus fuerit Ducem qui recte partiri sciat se ipsius tanquam Dei vestigia
sequuturu^ esse. Whereof also Quintilian has these words, Vt vascula or is
angusti respuunt superfluam humoris copiam, tamen paulatim instillando
replentur, sic distributio si in parts, accipiuntur facilius, ut cibus mansus,
citius ac facilius digeritur.

Boethius in his book which he wrote de divisione, thus speaks, Scientia
dividendi omnibus studiosis magnum fructum adfert, ut quae facit ut res clare a
nobis tractari queat.

In a word, the utilities thereof may be reduced thus, Arist. 2. Post. Com. 74.
Primo, quod faciat ad rei cognitionem distinctam and evolatam: Secundo, quod
prosit ad praedicata essentialia vaenanda, id est, ad investigandum genus and
differentiam: Tertio, ad recte ordinandas and methodice disponendas disciplinas.

Another has these words, Divisio perfecta est principium intelligendi and
constituendi rerum and disciplinarum methodos.

But to leave these Philosophers, and to behold what the Civil Lawyers affirm
thereof, and amongst much this may suffice, Per divisionem materia melius
intelligitur and facilius capitur: Le. 1. juncta gloss. ff. de dolo malo. And
again, Est autem divisio innumerabilis quasi materiae brevis compositio quae
ad multa facit: Gloss. Instit. oblig.. Olim autem in verbo divisio.

But to let these also to pass, I will conclude with that of Bracton, although
mentioned before, Lib. 1. cap. 1. Divisio sive partitio animum legentis
incitat, mentem intelligentiae praeparat, and memoriam artificiose reformat.

Thus having in this manner ended with Definition or Description, and with
Division in such a summary fashion as I conceived most convenient for the
capacity of the Student, and especially how to inform him to make use of these
parts as well in the study of the Law, as in any other his studies, leaving the
exact knowledge thereof unto the Logic School: I thought it good here to
advertise you, that there may be nevertheless observed of this which has
been said concerning the premises, That the knowledge of Definition,
Description, and Division, do presuppose the knowledge of the five Predicables
handled by Porphyries Institution to Aristotle's Organon, for whatsoever is
properly defined, described, or divided, is species, as has been already
said. And the true parts of every perfect Definition are genus and differentia;
and of Description, Genus vel aliquod loco generis, Differentia vel aliquod
loco differentiae, Proprium and Accidens tanquam parts descriptionis dicuntur.

Likewise is presupposed the knowledge of the Antepredicaments: for, Aequivocum
or Analogon denoting words of many significations, cannot be defined or
described so standing, but must first be distinguished into their sundry
significations, Vt certum sit id quod definiatur aut describatur: For nothing
indeed may be defined or described, but that which is univocum.

Also by the knowledge had de nominativis, the thing is known in concreto as
well as in abstracto: which is very necessary in Descriptions, and many times
in use: As Littleton in the first Chapter of his Book, in his Treatise of Fee
simple. But because he writes a book of Tenures, which is the chief drift of
that book, he thought it better to tell you who was a Tenant in Fee simple,
than to describe the state alone; for in so doing it was more suitable and
answerable to his Treatise in hand, namely, of Tenures and their incidents
rather to deal with the Tenant than the estate, yet so as that thereby the
estate is likewise sufficiently known. The like he performed in the rest of
his Chapters, as of Tenant in Tail, Tenant in Dower, Tenant for Life, and the
rest. Also the knowledge of the Predicaments and Post-predicaments is likewise
presupposed. And as touching the Predicaments it is evident that the genus or
differentia of every thing defined, described or divided, are to be sought in
their proper and peculiar Predicaments.

As concerning the Post-predicaments, how many they are in number, and how many
are needful for this knowledge, may well be made manifest by some examples,
and the use of them in the Laws.

Aristotle makes four kinds of Opposites; first, those that are relative
opposita, as the husband and the wife, the father and the son, the master and
the servant, 32. H. 8.3. Dyer.
of which consists the estate Oeconomicall of every family and household. So
likewise the King and his Subjects, the Magistrate and the People, 4. El.
2.22.1. Dyer.
of which consists the estate Political of the Kingdom and Commonwealth.
So also the Lord and his Tenant, in whom anciently stood the strength of the
Estate: the Lessor and Lessee, Grauntor and Grauntee, Feoffor and Feoffee,
Bargainor and Bargainee, Conisor and Conisee, Recoveror and Tenont against whom
the recovery was had, and such like, in whom and between whom all Conveyances
and Contracts have their being. So likewise in suits real the Demaundant and
the Tenant, in suits personal and mixed the Plaintiff and the Defendant, in an
Assize the Plaintiff and Tenant; Actor and Reus in criminal causes: between
which persons all suits and proceedings in Law are determined.

These are all relative opposita, and have reference each to other; as one man
cannot be properly Plaintiff and Defendant in one and the self fame action; or
Actor and Reus, except in some special causes only, as where Interpleader may
be admitted, as in a Writ of Detinue, where Garnishment is required, 3. H.
6.18. 20. H. 6.28. 20. H. 6.29. 22. H. 6.45. a
there the Defendant is become Actor against the Garnishee.

So in a Quare impedit, where the Defendant makes Title to have a Writ to the
Bishop, the Defendant is become as Actor.

In a Replevin upon an Avowry made, 3. H. 6.18. a. 22. H. 6.45. a 22. E. 4 10. a
the Avowant is become Actor.

So in a Quod ei deforceat, the Demandant or Plaintiff shall defend his estate
against such recovery as shall be pleaded against him and become Defendant, and
may vouch, Ac si esset tenens in priori brevi, by the Statute of Westminster. 2.

Some resemblance of this is found in the Civil Laws, where it is said, Actor
in tribus istis judicigs, familiae oriscundae, communi dividendo, and finium
Regundarum, intelligitur, qui ad judicium provocat. Le. 13.14. ff. de Iudicigs.
li. 2. 3. and Lex. 44. 5. ff. familiae hieresus. l. 11. infine. ff. de
Iurisdict. Le. 20. fimium regundarum. Le. 37. in fine. ff. de obligationibus
and actionibus.

TRhe second kind of opposites are those which are contraria, media, and some
have their media; and of those that have their media, Com. 467. Com. 247.
some are by participation, and some by negation, which the Logic School
teaches more at large.

The third kind of Opposites are those that are privative opposita, from the
privation to the habit: Villeine and Free are privatives; Com. 397. a.
in prison and at large are privativa.

The fourth and last kind of Opposites are those which in Propositions and
Clausesare contradicentia, the one Affirmative and the other Negative;

Also the Law of England being more precise in the form of pleading than any
other foreign Law, to the intent the issue and point that comes to be tried
in matters of fact might be evident and clear to a Jury, does require that all
affirmative pleading in Bar or defense, to make it the more perspicuous
affirmative, should be averred, that is, an offer made of clear proofs.

Of Negatives in the Law there are two kinds, as first, mere negations, of
which we commonly say, Negativum nihil implicat: and there are also
Propositions negative, which do imply an affirmative, and those we call
Negative pregnants, which we do refuse in all issues of trials by Jurors,
except in some cases, where the necessity of the cause does require the same.

So moreover, Modi prioris and Modi simul, which Aristotle also handles as
Post-predicaments, are worthy consideration: For the better understanding
whereof, note that Aristotle affirms that Prius quatuor modis dicitur.

Primo, id quod secundum tempus est prius, id est, prius tempore: So the law of
Nature preceded the law of Nations, and the law of Nations preceded the law of
every peculiar people, and so the Common Law of this Land preceded the Statute
Law, which as occasion was offered, in every Kings reign had his original. So
in the making of a Deed, there is writing, sealing, and delivery: the writing
goes before sealing, and the sealing before delivery.

Secundo, aliquid est prius ordine Naturae. There are many things which are
simul tempore, where nevertheless there is a Priority and Posteriority in
Nature. As when Tenant for Life does surrender to the Grauntee of the
Reversion, not having attorned to him before, in respect of time the included
Attornament and Surrender come together, and are wrought at one instant, and
yet the Attornament is first in Nature, and precedeth the Surrender: For the
Attornement employed does first settle the Reversion in the Grauntee, before the
Surrender can take place.

So if Lessee for years and he in the reversion in Fee do join in a
Feoffement to a stranger, it is first the surrender of Lessee for years, and
after the Feoffement of him in the Reversion in Nature and operation in Law;
and they both are yet performed in respect of time simul and semel.

If a man by his last Will and Testament in the former part thereof, devise
Lands deviseable, holden in Socage to I.S. in Fee, and afterward in the latter
part of the same will, devises a rent out of the same land to Io: No: in fee,
and dies, by the Devisors death, the whole Testament will take effect at one
time But: the Law shall adjudge it first a devise of the rent, and after a
devise of the land; for in course of nature he that grants rent out of land,
ought to be owner of the land, and so devise the rent, and not first devise
away the land, and after devise the rent; That were no good conformity.

Tertio, secundum ordinem Prius dicitur; Bracton says, Bract. 188.35 H. 6.13.
b. Bract. 316. f. 400.
there ought to be ordinata dispositio, and this is Bonum ordinis, the good of
order; Ordo est cujuslibet rei suo loco concinna digestio.

Fourthly and lastly, aliquid dicitur prius honor, quod melius est and
honorabilius est, id prius est, and this is called Prius dignitate, as a
mesuage precedeth in dignity land arable, and land arable pasture; the whole is
more then the parts, the husband precedeth the wife, 3. H. 6.33. 4. H. 6.3.
and so must be placed in all Writs and pleadings.

Aristotle according to the opinion of former Philosophers, having set down
these four kinds of Priorities, adds of his own invention a fifth, Quae
convertuntur secundum essendi consequentiam, and quod alteri quomodo libet
causa est prius natura possit. But this seems to be but a species of Prius
natura spoken of before.

So also is it de modis simul, for it appears by that which has been said,
that quaedam are simul tempore, quorum generatio est in eodem tempore, neutrum
enim eorum neque prius, neque posterius est tempore.

Quaedam sunt simul natura, as are all Relativa and Correlativa, all those that
are relative opposita. Again, they are thirdly also simul natura, which are
species ejusdem generis; But of this I will surcease, and speak only of some
few things that remain, which further the knowledge of Definition and Division.

For as much as Division is totius in parts distributio, it shall be
necessary to consider the nature of the whole, totum est quod ex partibus
constat. And some there are which have divided the consideration of the whole
into these parts; There is totum universale, Coke lib. 11.50. a.
totum essentiale, totum integrale, totum in quantitate, totumin modo, totum in
loco, totum in tempore.

But for these latter four, since they do undergo nomen totius improperly,
and are used to draw reasons in Topicall inventions, and not useful to
Divisions, I let them pass, and shall therefore retain only the usual
consideration of the three former.

Totum universale is that quod in species subjectivs dividi potest, Rent is
divided into a Rent-service, a rent Charge, and a rent Secke.

An estate of Inheritance divided into an estate of Fee simple, and an estate
in Tail so that Inheritance is totum universale.

Totum essentiale is when the whole is divided into the matter and form, Sic
itaque materia and forma hic induunt rationem partium; As Man is divided into
these essential parts, the body and soul, and of this kind we have no great
use in the Law.

The third is totum integrale, totum universale in suas species is Logical or
Metaphysicall: The Division of totum essentiale in suas parts essentiales is
Natural; The Division of totum integrale in suas parts is in manner
Artificial or Mechanical; And this difference there is between totum
essentiale, and totum integrale, ut si una pars essentialis desit, totum non
potest dici mutilum sed plane abolitum: Et ut priores duae Divisiones sumuntur
ex substantia; Ita haec Divisio totius integralis sumitur ex quantitate: And
therefore totum integrale is twofold, the one I may call totum integrale
continuum, and the other totum integrale discretum, even as quantity it self
is divided.

Totum continuum est perfect dictum, Quia ex partibus substantialibus and
quantis per se unitis constat; estque vel homogeneum, vel heterogeneum;
homogeneum est quod ex partibus idem nomen cum toto habentibus constat, as all
parts of water are water, all parts of bone are bone, all parts of flesh is
flesh, every yeard of a piece of cloth is cloth. 1. R. 3. fo. 3.


Heterogeneum est quod constate ex partibus diver si nominis a toto, ut corpus
humanum constans ex capite, thorace, cord, pedibus etc. and ex his partibus
quaedam sunt Principales, sine quibus totum non potest manner incolume, ita
parts humani corporis constituuntur a medicis cerebrum, 2 R. 3.2. b.
cor and epur: minus Principales quae abesse possunt sine totius interitu, ut
manus, pes, etc.

Totum discretum est totum imperfecte dictum, and constat ex aggregatione
partium, vel substantialium, vel accidentaliu^, ex qua aggregatione non oritur
totum per se unum; ut in substa^tialibus, acervus lapidum, grex ovium, etc. And
of these we have some few examples in the Law, as the Cart and Oxen or Horses
drawing the same, may all be distrained, and the distress not excessive,
because they all make but one total: 8. H. 4.16. Brook distr. 55.
And so in a Deodand may all be forfeit, because they make but one total,
moving to the death. So likewise a Corporation may be called totum integrale
discretum ob aggregatum, quod ex mult is personis aggregatis constat. 20. E.
4.3. Broo. distr. 89.12. H. 8.13. b.

Totum discretum accidentale, sive ex partibus accidentalibus constans, est
quod improprie and plane accidentaliter totum dicitur; and est cum 1, causatum
ex suis causis dividitur; 2, cum subjectum per sua accidentia; 3. cum accidens
per sua subjecta; 4, cum accidens per sua accidentia dividitur. And here I
leave, for I shun to be over tedious or curious in these things, for that my
endeavor is rather diligently to try the use, then curiously to enquire the
Art.

Because we have formerly both defined and divided by the causes, it shall be
necessary to say something of them.

There be four causes of every thing, the material, the formal, and the
efficient, and fourthly, the final cause, whereof two are essential as it
were, and enter into the composition, as the material and formal, and the two
other are the external, the efficient, and the final cause.

The material cause they have divided into three kinds, although improperly,
yet for use sufficiently, Materialis causa.
as materia ex qua, materia in qua, and materia circa quam.

Materia ex qua may be thus defined, materia est quae cum forma constitutit
rem, and this regarded as well in things substantial, as accidental, and then
has it also two kinds, materia permanens, which remains in the things
constituted,

Or materia transiens,

In accidental things such as are most Titles or matters of the Law, there is
the like composition of matter and form, as by example hereafter is many
particular things will be made manifest, as in all your Inheritances or
hereditaments, corporal compound.

And of this kind of material cause, Materia ex qua, there is another
Division; for it is either materia remota or propinqua, remote, as a garment of
woollen cloth has woll to be the remote or mediate cause, and woollen cloth for
the propinque and immediate cause.

Materia in qua, and materia circa quam, are causes improper and seen in
accidental things; as materia in qua est subjectum, and materia circa quam est
objectum.

Form or the formal cause is said to be causa unde formatum pendet, Formalis.
and is either substantial, as the soul of man, whereby he consists, is
the form of man, for as Plato said Anima cujusque est quisque, and this cause
is thus described, forma est quae dat esse rei, and it is also remota or
propinqua.

The accidental form insubstances is the outer shape and figure of things,
which for want of the true knowledge of the inward, we be often compelled to
use.

The accidental form in accidents is Essentia, as forma Reip: est ordo and
unio inter Magistratum and subditos certis legibus sancita, whereof result the
sundry kinds of Common Wealths.

There rests the consideration of the efficient and final causes.

Causa efficiens est, a qua primo incepit motus and operatio; of these
efficient causes some do precede the work, and some do effect the work;
Causes efficient which do precede the work. are impulsive causes; the first
instigation which move the undertaking of the work: So Cicero pro Milone,
Maxima illecebra peccandi impunitatis spes; A great impulsive cause of offense
is the hope to escape unpunished.

So Salust makes the immoderate desire of rule and vain glory to be
oftentimes the impulsive cause of war, libidinem dominandi causam belli
habent, and maximam gloriam in maximo imperio ponunt. These be internal
impulsive causes; there are also external; so liberality and beneficence is a
great external impulsive cause of benevolence; Qui liberalitate utuntur
benevolentiam sibi conciliant: Cic. lib. 2. d^ Finibus.
So truth speaking is sometimes an impulsive cause of hatred, flattery of
friends, veritas odium parit, obsequium amicos.

Causes that effect the work, are those that are active to perfore the work;
Those that are agents in the work are, 1, the necessary or sole cause, 2, the
sufficient cause, which also may be sole, but not of necessity required; 3, the
coadjivant cause, and fourthly, the isntrumental cause.

Necessaria causa ea vocatur a qua ita procedit effectus, ut non possit posita
causa non procedere effectus, nec ab alia causa talis effectus possit
provenire.

So God was the efficient cause, and sole cause in creating of the world; And
so the Sun is the sole efficient necessary cause of the day by his light in
our Hemispher effecting the same.

The efficient cause which is called the sufficient is that cause which is able
alone to produce the work; former. As fire is the cause of heat, and sufficient
alone to produce heat; and yet heat does not always proceed from the fire, but
from the Sun, from exercise, and sundry other means, so that fire is not
necessary and alone required to bring forth heat.

Coadjuvant causes are those that work to the producing of the effect, but
together with some other cause, which is more principal in the operation; So
in the obtaining of a victory by battle, the General is not the sole cause,
but there do concur the Captains, Centurions, Soldiers, and such like; as
Cicero in his Oration pro Marcello, in societatem victoriae cum Caesare venisse
Duces, Centuriones, Milites. So Afranius the Poet speaks of Wisdom, usus me
genuit, Matter peperit Memoria.

The isntrumental causes are the instruments used in the work, Instrumentales
causae (says one) sunt organa per quae est efficax causa Principalis, as
Books are the isntrumental causes of learning and militum instrumenta sunt
arma, to which may be adjoined that cause which they call causa sine qua non,
as Medium in visione.

Causes that follow the work, are called Conservant causes, Polibius yields
this example, Duo sunt quibus omnis Resp: servatur, in hosts fortitudo and
domi concordia. So in another example, Seneca, Melius beneficijs Imperium
custoditur quam armis.

And of all these efficient causes as touching the manenr of the working, some
are causes mediate, or removed, and some are immediate and propinque.

This may suffice briefly for the knowledge of the nature of the efficient
cause, if we add a word of the accidental cause, namely, an accident that
happens not intended, but casually intervenient, and yields further ance to
the effect: Sic piscatio fuit causa fortuita, and per accidents, piscatoribus
Milesiis, qurei tripodis inveniendi. And so Cicero lib. 3. de natura Deorum:
Phaedro Iasoni profuit hostis, Cic. l. 3. de natura Deo rum.
qui gladio quo eum petere volebat, vomicamejus apperuit, quam Medici sanare
non poterant. And so we see that in the Law a casual chance is the cause of
the death of man, although perpetrated by the act of another.

There follows the last and final cause, Finalis.
and it is that cause Cujus gratia efficiens agit, and it is the fruition of
the work, and therefore finis est ipse usus rei, and oftentimes differs not
from the effect it self, revera, sed ratione finis. Finis, says Aristotle,
esT primus in intention, and ultimus in executione: The first thing intended,
and the last thing effected.

The power of the end or final cause is twofold, it is first impulsive to the
work; secondly, directive to the means, and therefore it is often called
Causa causarum.

In respect of his impulsive power it may be one re with the essicient,
impulsive, inward cause; and it is the same which directs the means, and
gives name to the action, as Bracton speaks; Intentio tua, and affectio tua
nomen imponit operi tuo. And again, Toll voluntatem, and omnis actus erit
indifferens. And therefore in as much as the final cause directs the means,
Non faciamus malum, ut inde eveniat bonum.

Cicero most excellently, lib. 2. de natura Deorum, expresses notably the
final causes of all things: Omnia aliorum sunt causa generata, ut fruges atque
fructus quos terra gignit, animant ium causa; animantes autem hominum, ut Equus
vehendi causa, Bos arandi, venandi and custodiendi Canis, ipse autem Homo ortus
est ad mundum contemplandum and imitandum. And again the same Author; 1. Offic.
Homines hominum causa generati, ut ipsi inter se alij alijs prodesse possint.
Likewise the same Author does excellently express the end of government:
Moderatori Reip. beata Civium vita proposita est, ut ea nimirum opibus firma,
copijs locuples, gloria ampla, virtute honesta sit. Of one and the self same
thing there may be many final causes, Vnde quidam sunt Principales and ultimi,
and alij intermedij, qui quodam modo ad ultimum conducunt.

Thus much may suffice in the consideration of the causes, and of these things
that have been affirmed, The Student may be instructed sufficiently to
undergo the first Logical Exercise, whcih is Tractatio simplicis Thematis,
and exercise of wonderful use in the true obtaining of the knowledge (...) the
Law, and is able to furnish him with copy of matter for Argument in every Case,
and upon every sudden occasion, and wherein those things which we have spoken
of the causes may be abundantly exemplified.

There rests then nothing but to show the manner how it may be performed, and
to set foth some examples in the Law of the same: But before I depart from this
discourse of the causes, for the better explanation of that which has been
said touching the same, we will add some examples and instances drawn out of
the Volumes of the Laws, and out of the Arguments of Cases debated, that
thereby our Student may the better understand the use thereof.

Therefore first of all touching that material cause, Ex qua res constituitur,

So a Manor which is Quiddam totum compositum corporale, consists of
Demesnes and Services; A Manor.
and the Demesnes do contain, land, meadowe, pasture, wood, etc. and the
services do import not only the rent payable, but the corporal service and
attendancy of the Tenants thereof.

So a Monastery, site, house, Monastery. 38. E. 3.21. a Com. 168. b.
and also the lands and possessions belonging thereunto, is included in the
general name Monastery, because those import the matter ex qua consistit.

So the matter of a Park is land enclosed, 5. E. 4.28. a. Ardun. 10. H. 7.6.
a. 10 H. 7.30. a
and the Derre; for the Dear are held as parcel of the Park.

Of corporal things the matter is also corporal and visible, and are subject
to manual tradition and delivery; Rent.
as the matter of a Rent is a sum of money, or other corporal thing payable,
reserved or granted, as Rent-Corne, and such like.

The matter of Tithes are things annually produced by way of increase. Tithes.


The matter of an Herriot or Mortuary is the best beast of the owner. Herriot.


The matter of a Corporation consists in the bodies natural of the person or
persons of which it is combined; Corporation.
Vide 21. E. 4 56. a 63. a. 68. a.
who although they be framed into a politic consideration of perdurance and
succession, yet is there in that consideration a respect also had of the body
natural.

Of things incorporeall considered by the Law, the matter or material cause is
that which is put into the definition loco generis, in lieu of the general:
for true it is that Genus in desinitione vel descriptione supplet vicem
materiae, differentia vero formae.

So we may say that the material of a Fee Simple, Fee.
and also of an Estate Tail, is an inheritance, because inheritance is the
genus in the definition or description of both of them.

The matter of Homage is a corporal service. Homage. Warranty.


The matter of Warranty is a Covenant real, whereby the party which made it
stands bound to defend the thing warranted by him, or to yield in value. The
Law.


The matter of the Law of England generally taken, ex qua constituitur, is the
law of Nature, the law of God, the general Customs of the Realm, Maxims
drawn out of the Law of Nature, as the Principles of Reason, primarily or
secondarily deduced, Constitutions and Acts of Parliament. Materia circa quam,
on which it works, are lites and contentiones, casEs of debate daily coming
into question touching persons, possessions, and injuries done by word or act.

In a contract of Sale, Sale.
the material causes are the things sold, and the price agreed upon; the form
is the manner of the contract, absolute or conditional, perpetual or
temporary; the efficient causes, the parties contracting, the buyer and the
seller; the end or final cause is to transfer property from the one to the
other, to supply each others indigence: the matter ex qua, is either permament
or transient, as has been said: The consideration whereof yields in the Law
this fruitful distinction: For if a man take wrongfully the material which
was mine, and is permanent, not adding any other thing thereunto, than the
form only by alteration thereof, such thing so newly formed by an exterior
form, notwithstanding still remains mine, (as some have held opinion) and
may be seized again by me, and I may take it out of his possession as mine
own: But they say, if he add some other matter thereunto, as of another man's
leather does make shoes or boots, or of my cloth makes garments, adding to
the accomplishment thereof of his own, he has thereby altered the property,
so that the first owner cannot seize the thing so composed, but is driven to
his action to recover his remedy; howbeit by the judgment of the Court in a
case of that nature depending, it has been determined that the first owner
might seize the same, notwithstanding such addition. But if the thing be
transitory in his nature by the change, as if one take my corn or meal, and
makes thereof bread, I cannot in that case seize the bread, because as the
Civil Law speaks, Haec species facta ex materia aliena, in pristinam formam
reduci non potest, ergo ci a quo est facta cedit.

So some have said, that if a man take my barley, and make thereof malt, because
it is changed into another nature the barley cannot be seized by me. But the
sure Rule is, Regula.
That where the material wrongfully taken away could not at first before any
alteration be seized, for that it could not be distinguished from other things
of that kind, as corn, money, and such like; there those things cannot be
scised by the former owner, because the property of those things cannot be
distinguished. For if my money be wrongfully taken away, and he that takes it
do make plate thereof, or do convert my plate into money, I cannot seize the
same, for that money is undistinguishable from other money of that coin.

If a Butcher take wrongfully my Ox, and does kill it, and bring it into the
Market to be sold, I may not seize upon the flesh, for it cannot be known
from others of that kind: 12. H. 8.9. b. 10. a.
Bur if it be found hanging in the skin, where the mark may appear, I may
seize the same, although when it was taken from me it had life, and now is dead.

So if a man cut down my Tree, and square it into a beam of timber, I may
seize the same, for he has neither altered the nature thereof, nor added any
thing but exterior form thereunto. But if he lay the beam of timber into the
building of a house, I may not seize the same, for being so set it is become
parcel of the house, and so in supposition of Law after a sort altered in his
nature.

Again, by consideration of the nature of the matter or material causes of
things, the law does frame sundry differences; as if I deliver unto one a piece
of cloth of twenty yards together to keep, and restore it unto me when it shall
be demanded, and the party will cut it into several yards and pieces of cloth,
he has not altered the matter thereof, nor diminished the quantity, and yet
if he tender the same unto me I am not bound to accept thereof, but may recover
my damages for that wrong so offered unto me; for although in matter and
substance it be the same, yet it is altered in form, and impaired in the use.

So if he take my piece of plate, 18. E. 4.23. a. b. Wrecke.
and break it into pieces, etc.

Likewise the Statute made in the time of King Edward the first concerning
Wrecks, has ordained that if a Ship be wrecked, if any living thing therein
escape alive, it shall not be adjudged; but that the Merchandise therein be
viewed and preserved for the owner, if he come to challenge the same within a
year and a day. But what if in such case the Merchandise be victual, as fresh
fish; or fruit, as Orenges and such like, as will not last incorrupt by the
space of a year, if the Sheriff in such case should sell those goods within
the year, and be ready to yield the money to the owner, has he offended that
law? Certainly no: for the consideration of the nature and matter of those
things in such case causes the said law to be interpreted contrary to the
letter of the law: For the letter of the law commands a preservation, and in
this case the Sheriff has done contrary, Pl. Com. 465 466. a.
for he has sold, and yet nevertheless has justly executed that law.

Thus you see that the consideration of the matter or material causes whereof
the things controverted do consist, has great use in the decision of law.

Materia in qua is only subjectum accidentium, and therefore considerable in
accidents only, which subsist in their proper subjects, as Knowledge in the
Understanding; the Virtues moral in the Will of man; health, strength, and
agility in the Body: And as Materia in qua is said to be subjectum, so is
Materia circa quam, objectum, both which are somewhat improperly attributed to
the material cause, and are both so evident as I pass them over.

In consideration of a Monastery, Monastery.
the matter in qua, or subject of that Title, is the persons whereof that
Corporation consists; as the Abbot and his Monks, that is, his Covent; The
Prior and his Cofreers; The matter circa quam is comprised in their possessions.

In an Arbitrament (of which I shall speak more hereafter) the matter in qua
are the parties at strife, Arbitrament.
circa quam the thing whereof the controversy rises, real or personal: The
material cause ex qua is most eminent, and most eminent to be found in things
corporeal, having of themselves substance; and in things incorporate, that
which is loco gener is in descriptione, in both which as there is genus
propinquum, and genus remotum, so is there materia remota, and materia
propinqua.

As a Fine whereby lands or hereditaments are conveyed, is said to be a
concord, Fine.
for the entry thereof is, Est concordia talis; but this is genus remotum, or
materia remota: for an Arbitrament is also a Concord, a Contract is a Concord:
but to say it is a concord of Record, is to add genus propinquum. And thus
much touching the material cause.

As touching the formal cause, The formal cause exemplified.
it is either as has been said, substantial or accidental: The formal
substantial cause in things of life, is that which is the fountain of life
and motion: In things which are without life, that are simple and uncompound;
it limiteth their bounds, and is the cause of their being: In things that are
compou^d it is the convenient knitting and union of the parts. The formal
cause enters the definition or description loco differentiae, bringing and
adding particularity unto the general, until it does fulfill a perfect
definition or description, and therefore as one says well, dicitur forma a
formando: Differentia vero quia differ facit. The form is said to be Modus
quidam materiae, quo sibi contingat, ut hujus vel illius specieie capiat nomen:
And forma dat esse rei, and that esse is nothing else but existentia formae in
materia, eaque plus affert ad essentiam rei quam materia, est enim ipsamet
essentia aut certe praecipua pars essentiae.

In the Commentaries of Mr. Plowden in the Lord Zouches case, Claim.
a claim is thus described; A Claim is a Challenge by a man made of the
property or ownership of a thing which he has not in possession, but is
detained from him, where the genus is Challenge, but to express what manner of
Challenge, there is added this difference, namely, of the property and
ownership of a thing detained, which is loco formae: So three of the causes are
comprehended in that definition or descritpion: The material cause de qua,
viz. a Challenge, circaquam, of things detained: The formal cause the property
of ownership, the efficient cause by a man wronged, only there wants the
final cause which is twofold, 1, to manifest that property, 2, to reduce the
same property back again to him for whom the claim is made.

In 28. Cond. of Oblig.
H. 8.17. a. Dyer. The Condition of an Obligation is thus described: The
Condition of an Obligation is an assent of the obligee in defeasance of an
obligation made for the advantage of the obligor, where the matter thereof is
an assent, the form a defeasance, the efficient cause the obligor and obligee,
the sinall cause the advantage of the Obligor.

A Contract is an agreement between parties concerning goods or lands for money
or other recompense, Contract. Dr. Stu. c. 24. fo. 103. a.
where the general matter ex qua is the agreement, which is clriesly respected
in contracts: the matter circa quam, Com Browning and Beston. 141. a.
concerning goods or lands: the form or difference, for money or other
recompense, for that makes it a contract; for the want of recompense causes
it to be but nudum pactum, unde non oritur actio. The causes efficient, Com.
141.
the parties contracting; The final cause Bracton does notably express,
Bract. lib. 3.8.2. f. 100.
Inventae sunt hujusmodi stipulationes and obligationes ad hoc, ut unusquisque
habeat, and sibi acquirat quod suum interest.

In the Reports of my Lord Dyer, 16. El. 336. Consideration
b. n. 34. a. A Consideration is thus described; A Consideration is a cause or
occasion meritorious requiring mutual recompense in fact or in Law: where the
matter is an occasion meritorious, the form mutual recompense, etc. not to
trouble our selves over long in this kind.

Secondly, in consideration of the formal cause there is to be observed, That
when division or distribution is made ex causis, those divisions which doc
proceed of the formal cause are most essential, whereof I shall show some few
instances or examples.

Commons being divided according to their material causes, are either Commons
of pasture, Commons.
Commons Estovers, Common of Turbary, etc. But being divided according to their
formal causes; all Commons are either Appendant, Appurtenant, or in gross.

If you distribute Conditions according to their material causes, Conditions.
or things whereof they are, then we say they are conditions real, which are
annexed to the estates; There are also conditions personal, annexed to
personal contracts, as to Obligations of all kinds, promises, covenants, and
other contracts: But being divided according to their form, There we may say,
that all conditions are either possible or impossible: and impossible
conditions are void in Law: All possible conditions are either lawful or
unlawful; and unlawful conditions do make the contract also void, whereas
impossible conditions are only void themselves, but the contract stands
single: all lawful conditions are either precedent or subsequent, and all
those conditions which are annexed to estates, are either by way of increase of
estates, or by way of defeasance of estates.

All considerations are either executed with a recompense past, Consider.
or else executory with a recompense after to be made and performed; And this
Division is ex causa formali.

In as much as the form gives the essence, it was said of Vlpian the Roman
Lawyer, out of the rules of Logic, That mutata forma prope interimitur
substantiarei: For so in the former examples we see, that if a man take my
Barley and make Malt thereof, it cannot be seized by the former Owner; and yet
neither matter, quantity nor outward form is lost, but it is become a thing of
another nature and use, because the inward form (to speak as Moral
Philosophers) whereof depends the use, is changed; for Moral Philosophy does
not so curiously observe the natural causes as Natural Philosophy; but
according as to the information of manners: So if a man of any piece of cloth
which he had to keep containing 20. yards in one whole piece, will cut the
same into 20. several yards and pieces; The matter nor the quantity is not
changed, and yet if he will restore the same pieces, it is not lawful
restitution, neither am I bound to receive it.

If a man possessed of 20. packes of Wool, by his last will and Testament
devise and bequeath all the said Wool unto 1. Style, and after the Testator
co^verteth the same wool into cloth and dies possessed of the same cloth. 1:
Style the Devisee of the Wool shall not have by Law the cloth made of that
Woll, for that the form of the Wool is changed, notwithstanding the matter
does remain, and it is turned to a thing of another nature; and the making of
the said Wool into cloth by the Testator himself is a countermand of the said
last will and Testament. So it is also of things incident, as if the principal
thing whereunto another thing is incident, appendant or belonging, be changed
in nature, the incident is lost and altered: As if a man have a dwelling house
whereunto there is a Common of Estovers belonging (which is wood for firing to
be burnt in that house) if this house by casualty of fire or tempest be burned
or blown down, or taken down, and a new be built in another place near, or
in another form, the Common of Estovers is lost, and not to be used in this
new house, for this is not the former house, but another house unto which the
said Estovers cannot belong; but if the said first house were not wholly pulled
down but repaired, or if another new house be built upon the same foundation,
and in the same form with the former; The Common of Estovers remains with
the new house, for that in judgment of Law is the same house: and such
building being upon the former foundation is but a reparation.

But here a difference is to be observed, that if the thing incident do not
belong to the principal thing, as it is in nature a special thing, but in the
general; then although the said principal thing be altered in specie, the
general remaining, the thing incident shall remain to such general: As if a
man have a water-corn-mill, unto the which he has a Mill-leat or watercourse
belonging coming thorough the land of another man unto the said Mill. Now if
he change the nature of the said Corne-mill, unto a fulling-mill, or e
converso, wherein both form and final cause, namely the use is altered; it
has been much disputed in our time, whether the said watercourse did
lawfully belong unto the said fulling-mill, as it did when it was a Corne-mill?
for the owner of the land where thorough the said stream did run, and
diverted the said watercourse, pretending that he might lawfully do the same,
for that the owner of the Mill had changed the nature of the Mill; and the
prescription to have the said watercourse is thereby altered: But it was
adjudged that the said water course did still belong and remain, and so ought
unto the fulling-mill, as it had formerly done unto the Corne-mill, for that it
did not belong unto the Corne-mill, as specially unto a Corne-mill, but it did
belong unto it generally as unto a mill going or driven with water, and not
otherwise.

And thus much may suffice for the consideration of the formal cause, as it is
the essential and substantial cause.

The Law also considers accidental forms, for the Law prescribes a form
in all abjurations; so likewise the Law prescribes a form how homage shall
be made by the Tenant unto the Lord: And so likewise of Fealty, both which
Littleton does express: The Law prescribes the form how Battle in a writ
of right, and in an Appeal shall be waged and performed: So likewise the
Ecclesiastical Laws prescribe forms of Consecrations of Churches, Chappells,
etc. of Parsons, Orders, Institutions, Inductions, and such like.

All Laws do retain some formalities which may not be altered, as in the
Common Laws of this Realm, we have our forms of Writs, Pleadings, Entries of
judgments, and sundry other forms and ceremonies ordained, which without
great and urgent causes cannot be altered.

These outward forms are nothing else, as one describes, then modi quidam
rebus agendis praescripti, or as another describes, Ordinatae series rem ad
substantiam deducentes: And concerning these outward forms and solemnities,
these rules are observed and prescribed; 1, formae praefinitae omissio reddit
actum invallidum: Procurator, Cod: de Procuratore. Le: diligenter in Princip:
ff. de mandatis. And again, Qui formam praetermittit jam aliud facere videtur:
And thus much concerning the formal cause.

As touching the efficient cause; The efficient cause exemplified.
the impulsive inward causes of all crimes are commonly these, spes lucri,
impunitatis, vindictae, malitiae, odij, etc. The outward, the accessory before
the fact, which is the abettor and instigator thereunto.

The sufficient and necessary cause of a Cortract is casent of parties,
Contract.
for in Contracts the consent is chiefly to be regarded, as has been said.

And in Marriage Consensus, Marriage.
and non Concubitus matrimonium facit: C: Nutias, de Regulis Iuris. And as
Bracton, lib. 1. ca. 5. ff. 7. alleges, fit per mutuam utriusque voluntatem.

In the work there are both principal and coadjuvant causes: Appropriato^.
In an Appropriation of a Church the efficient causes are, The Ordinary, the
Patron, and the King, and they ought to agree in the act, and sunt Actores
hujus fabulae: The Ordinary, inferior or supreme, for he is the principal
Agent therein, because he has the spiritual jurisdiction; And the Act of the
Appropriation is a thing spiritual: And the Ordinary says, Com. 498.
appropriamus, consolidamus, and unimus, as the principal Actor in the cause:
The Ordinary may be termed therefore the principal efficient cause, and the
other the coadjuvant cause. These the Pope in ancient times as supreme Ordinary
then permitted, used to do; and these as supreme Ordinary may the King do,
but always with the consent of the Patron, who is a coadjuvant efficient
cause: the formal cause is the consolidation of the Incumbency and Patronage
into one person capable of spiritual charge: and the final cause to make a
perpetual Incumbency.

The efficient causes of an Acts of Parliament, Act of Parliament.
are the assent of the three Estates; namely, first of the King; secondly, of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal; and thirdly, of the Commons; and each
without the other cannot perfect this work; and yet until the Royal assent it
is but as an Embrio in ventre matris, 4. H. 7.9. b. Com. 79. a. and by the
Royal Assent coming last, it takes life and vigor.

Writing, sealing, and delivery, Deed. Com. 108. b. 22. H. 6.45. b 1. H. 6.4.
b. 2. E. 4.3. b.
are the efficient causes of a Deed, all must concur, and each without other
is fruitless; but the complementall act which comes last of all is the
delivery, and thereby the Deed receives his perfection.

If diverse come together to do a murder, Murder.
although one alone do give the wound whereby death ensues, yet are they all
which are present and consenting to the act, Principals and efficient causes of
this murder; he that strikes is the principal agent, and the rest
coadjuvant: and yet although one gave the stroke, yet shall it be adjudged in
law the stroke of every of them, given by him which gave it, as for himself,
and given of the others by him as their minister and instrument, and yet all
equal in degree as principals, and not accessaries: Com. 98. a.
and yet as you see not equal in degree as efficient causes.

If a man and a woman be present, Ravishment.
with purpose that the man shall by violence carnally know the body of another
woman there also present, against her will, and the man does the fact in the
presence of the other woman, she that was so present, as well as the man, shall
be a Principal Ravisher; the one, viz. the man, the cause agent, and the other
coadjuvant: and so one woman may be a principal to the ravishment of another.

Livery and seisin is the isntrumental efficient cause of the conveyance of a
Freehold estate in land, Casual.
and sufficient alone to perform the same, and yet is it not the sole cause,
for it may be conveyed by other means, as by fine, bargain and sale, by
devise, and otherwise.

There is also an efficient cause casual: Casual.
As if a man intend to do an unlawful act, and in doing thereof another hurt
ensues, not intended, but by chance, clean beyond all expectation or defire,
yet shall he be said the author of that act not intended, so happening by
chance, that did the first act.

This may suffice to exemplify the cause efficient: The final cause
exemplified.
There rests the final cause, of the which I will show some examples, as I
have done in the rest. Many arguments are drawn from the final cause, and of
much use in the law.

The end and final cause of the law generally taken, as Bracton well
affirms, is this, Finis legis est ut sopiantur jurgia, and vitia
propulsentur, and ut in regno conservetur pax and justitia. Bracton li. 2. cap.
2.

The final cause of an action is, as likewise the same Bracton affirms, Vt
non liceat unicuique se sine Iudicio vindicare, and quod sibi ablatum est per
Iudicem reposcat.

The final cause why also the same ought to be by writ, is, Quod sine brevi
non debet quis experire in Iudicio, nec mutari potest petentis intentio vel
modus petendi. Brac. 102. a. Le. de Procura. Attorney.


The end why Attorneyes are permitted in Court, or a man to answer by Baily in
an Assize, or to pursue or defend by Guardian, is, Vt qui rebus suis superesse
vel nolunt vel non possunt, per alios possint vel agere vel convenire.

The final cause why an Attorney is required to a Grant, is that the Tenant
may know to whom he ought to be attendant to pay his rent, 31. H. 8. b
Attornem. 60 2. E. 6. d. At. 45.
or to do his service, so that where there is no attendancy required, there
needs no attornement.

The final scope and end of the Averment of a Pleading, Averment.
is to reduce matter traversable to a clear and certain issue: and therefore
if the matter pleadable be not answerable or issuable, there needs no
Averment. 36. H. 6.17. b.

The final cause why Wardship was ordained, Wardship.
is, Vt qui per aetatem se ipsos defendere nequeant, ab aliis defendantur.. Est
autem. Institu. de tutela. Agreeably says Bracton, Quosdam oportet esse sub
tutela and cura aliorum; eo quod se ipsos regere non norunt.

The end why writings were made between men in their contracts, Bract. lib. 2.
cap. 16. b. Le. 4. ff. de pignatoribus. Livery.
was as the same Bracton alleges, Fiunt aliquando donationes in scriptis,
sicut in chartis ob perpetuam memoriam, propter brevem hominum vitam, and ut
facilius probari possit donatio.

So the cause why Livery and Seisin was ordained in the Law, and first
invented, was because it is a thing notorious, that the people might take
knowledge of the passing of estate of most account, and be the more able to try
the same when they should happen to be impanneled on a Jury for that purpose.

It would be over tedious to heap up more examples, which almost are evident
in every Title concerning this matter.

As we do consider the end of things at the Common Law, so also in Statute
Laws the end and scope that the makers of such Laws aimed at, is of special
regard in the interpretation of those Laws, and often considered by the
Judges, unto whom power of interpretation and exposition of those Laws is
given; as upon perusal of sundry cases grounded upon Statute learning will
most evidently appear.

It often happens that the final causes of things are more than one, and
sometimes many, and some of them subalterne each to other, and sometimes
distinct, whereof ensues this exception to the general rule, Sublata causa
tollitur effectus: For if there be diverse final causes, although the one be
taken away, yet the effect remains, if one of the causes do remain: As for
example, The final causes of marriage are three, Generatio Prolis, Conservatio
Domus, Solatio Vitae: and although hope of issue be taken away, Marriage.
yet the marriage subsisteth firm.

The final causes of Arbitriments and Awards are alleged principally to be
two; first, Arbitriment 19. H. 6.37. b Nedham. 8. E. 4.10. a Laken. 8. E. 4.12.
a. Yelverton.
every Arbitriment is ordained to make a final determination, and to appease
the variances, strifes, and debates between the parties reforred unto them.

Secondly, 6. H. 4.6. a. Hanford. 4. H. 9.17. b. Weston. 10. H. 7.4. a. Aid.
17. E. 3.47. a 21. H. 6.37. b
by the diverse allegations of the parties, to certainty: and every of these
ought to concur in every good award.

So likewise our Books do generally affirm, That in Actions where Aid is
grantable to the Tenant or Defendant, that the same is done for two causes; the
one for feebleness of estate of him that prays Aid; secondly, for the loss
or detriment that may come to him of whom the Aid is prayed.

So the final causes why aid is granted of the King upon prayer thereof, are
these, 2. H. 7.8. a. 4. H. 6.18. b. 9. H. 6.2. a. 3. 22. E. 4.21. a
Quisque auxilium petit a Rege, oportes quod sit per cartam Regis, de dono aut
concessione rei petitae, juxta effectum Statuti de B^^amis. Secundo, Vel aliter
propter salvationem reversionis Regis, vel alicujus tituli sui, Tertio, Vel
aliter propter debilitatem status sui. Quarto, Vel ubi Rex habere possit
detrimentum: And any of these suffice to grant the Aid. Confirmation


The final causes wherefore a confirmation is behoovfull, are set out by
Bracton to be these: Quando donatio sit tantum bona pro tempore, Bract. l. 2.
fol. 58.
and potest confirmari ab haeredibus, vel alijs qui jus postea habent. Secundo,
Vel quando nunquam absolute fuit status bonus, sed talis qui potuit evacuari.
Tertio, Vel cum quis rem alienam dederit, confirmatio requirenda fuit very
Possessoris seu Domini.

There are three final causes of a Warranty of lands, Warranty.
etc. First, Voucher to recover in value, when the Tenant of the Land is
impleaded by a stranger: secondly, Rebutter, to repress the party and his
heirs that made the Warranty, if they should chance to sue: and the third,
Warrantia Chartae, by the Judgment; in which Writ the lands shall be bound to
a Recovery in value, pro loco and tempore.

As it was said at the beginning, that the end is always the first thing in
intention, and the last in execution, so are there things destinated to their
end, and once being applied thereunto do alter their nature and become of
another consideration: As in a former proposed example; If a man cut down my
Timber Tree, and square it of purpose to make a beam for a house, I that am
the true owner may seize the same, notwithstanding it be framed for the
building. But if it be laid in the building, it may not be seized by the
owner, although the building be not perfected: for now it becomes parcel of
the house or building, as has appeared in the former example. But if a man
prepare all materials for building upon his land, and is ready to build
therewith, but dies before it be erected, those materials shall go unto the
Executor or Administrator, and not unto the Heir, who should have had them had
they been laid in the building, because they were destinata tantum, quae pro
factis non habentur.

The final cause in all humane actions is of singular regard, for that all
things attempted by men have their end; and the utility of the thing is
measured by the end thereof; wherefore it is said well by one, Vtile ex fine
colligimus; quicquid enim utile est, id alicujus rei consequendae causa utile
oportet esse. In laud etiam and vituperatione finem respicimus, cum mult is in
rebus non tam referat quid facias, quam ob causam facias, ita ut factum ex fine
laudetur vel vituperetur, and homo recte dicitur potissimam causarum omnium
esse finem: And whereof we say vulgarly, Exitus acta probat, finis non pugna
coronat. And many times the name and denomination of a thing is drawn from the
final cause; Fine.
as a Fine used for the assurance of land, dicitur finis, quia finem litibus
imponit.

Sometimes the Laws regard the beginning of anact, Origo rerum attendenda est;
sometimes the media or means to attaining it; and sometimes the end for which
it is achieved: To enter into discourse whereof in this place would be
impertinent: and therefore by way of Law-examples thus much to have said of the
causes shall suffice.

And thus much touching the reasons drawn from sundry parts of the Art of
Logic, proving the necessity, or at least the utility thereof in the studies
of the Laws of this Realm. Now rests that we propound some places out of
the books of our Reports of our Common Law decisions and determinations of
Cases, where the use of Logic has either been required or admitted and
practiced. And although this be evident in the most notable arguments at large
in the books of the Law, where sundry reasons drawn from Logical invention
and Topicke places do abundantly appear to every one which will or can
observe the same; yet in this place I will produce those instances wherein the
same are either named and expressed, or admitted and apparently practiced.

Where it is discoursed in the Reports of Sir Edward Coke, which Acts of
Parliament are general, which are special; I find observed these words,
Statuta generalia, and generale dicitur a genere, speciale dicitur a specie;
And which are genus, species, and individuum; know ye that Spiritualty is
genus, a Bishopric or Deanary, etc. are species, and the Bishopric of
Norwich, the Deanary of Norwich, etc. are individua; sic dicta, quia in parts
dividi nequeant: And out of that deduceth he to your understanding what Acts
of Parliament are general, and which are special. So there you see two of the
most eminent Predicables remembered, Genus and Species, and unto them annexed
the Individuum, whereof the Species is affirmed.

In 11. H. 7.23. a. Debt per Obligat.
An Action of debt was brought upon an obligation, where the obligation was
endorsed, upon this condition, that if the defendant did make such estate to
the plaintiff of certain lands before such a Feast, as the counsel of the
plaintiff should advise, then the Obligation should be void, the defendant
pleaded, quod consilium querentis, non dedit ei advisamentum, before the said
Feast; now whether this plea is sufficient or no, or whether he should say,
nullum consilium dedit advisamentum, or that consilium nullum dedit
advisamentum; for it seemed that those words consilium non dedit advisamentum,
were not general enough, of which opinion there was Bryan; so that admit that
the plaintiff had four men of his counsel, and two of them gave counsel, and
two of them not; here consilium non dedit advisamentum is true, eo quod duo non
dederunt, but that nullum consilium dedit advisamentum, is false apparently, In
that case when two of them had given their advise; where he shows that
universalis negativa, and particularis negativa may stand together, for proof
whereof he cites the Sophisters verse, Prae contradic, prae contrar, prae
postque subalter:

Accidents may be considered in abstracto, as they are without subject, Coke
lib. 10. fo. 31.
and in their own nature of themselves; And also they may be considered in
concreto, as they reside and subsist in their proper subject, and these are
Logical terms, and yet used in the Law.

Although the Common Lawyers of this Realm using a continued speech, and non
concisis argumentis, yet do they observe very often the forms of Arguments used
in the Schools, as Sillogismes, Enthimemes, Inductions, Examples, Sorites,
Dilemata, etc. as may be proved by sundry instances: And first of Sillogismes.

In Shellies case the third point or question of the case on the part of the
plaintiff, was reduced by them that argued of that side into a Sillogisme thus;

That which originally vested in the heir and was not in the Ancestor vested
in the heir by purchase,

But the use (spoken of in that case) vested in Richard Shelly (who was brother
and heir and was never vested in Edward Shelly the Ancestor,

Ergo,

The use vested in Richard Shelly by purchase.

A man brought an action of trespass against the Executors of his Ancestors,
20. H. 7. b.
for taking up and carrying away of a Furnace which was fixed and annexed to the
Freehold with mortar, and it was held by three of the Judges, Read, Fisher, and
Kingsmill, that the Action would lie, and that the taking away thereof was
wrongful, and their reason is there by the Reporter reduced to a Sillogisme;
in this manner:

Those things which cannot be forfeited by Outlawry in a personal Action,
Major.
nor be attached in an Assise, nor distreyned for rent, those things the
Executor cannot have,

But a Furnace fixed, Miuor.
a table fixed in the ground with poasts, or a pale set in the ground, or
bedsted of timber fixed to the ground, doors or windows, or such like fixed
to the ground or freehold, cannot be forfeited, nor attached, nor distreyned;

Ergo,

The Executors shall not have such things. Con:


Many reasons are proposed in the case of the Postnati, and Arguments framed
and composed Sillogistically in Calvin's case, as thus;

Every one that is an Alien by birth, Calvin could never have been at any time
an enemy by any accident, ergo, he cannot be an Alien by birth.

Whosoever are borne under one natural legiance, Calvin was borne under one
natural legiance, and obedience due by the law of Nature to one Sovereign,
Ergo, He is a natural borne subject.

Whosoever is borne under the Kings power and protection is no Alien; Calvin
was borne under the Kings power and protection, Ergo;

Every stranger borne must at the time of his birth be amicus, inimicus, but
Calvin at his birth could not be inimicus, because he was subditus (and amicus
properly he cannot be called, for that is proper to an Alien friend that is in
league; So Scotia where he was borne cannot properly be called solum amici,
Ergo,

Calvin is no Stranger borne.

Whatsoever is due by the law of Nature cannot be altered; but legiance and
obedience of the subject to the Sovereign is due by the law of nature, ergo,
it cannot be altered.

Whosoever at his birth cannot be an Alien to the King of England cannot be an
Alien to any of his Subjects of England: Calvin at his birth could not be an
Alien to the King of England, Ergo, He could be no Alien to any of the
subjects of England. Coke li. 7.24. b. 25. a.

And thus much may suffice for example only to point out the continual and
frequent use of Sillogisticall dispure in our pleadings and Law-Arguments.

I will next proceed to treat of the choice and election of Propositions and
Principles; and likewise to exemplify the same by sundry examples out of the
books of the Common Law, whereby our Student may be the better furnished and
adapted with matter fit for Argumentation.

Methodus studendi.
ARistotle in the first book of his Topickes, expressing the means whereby in
every faculty or science intellectual resting upon discourse of reason, men
might abound in matter apt for argumentation, and might be furnished with copy
of reason fit for the proof or disproofe of things called into debate, in such
the sciences by them professed, expresses a fourefold observation.

1. Arist. Top. li. 1. cap 12, 13, 14.
Quarum una (as he says) est in propositionibus eligendis. 2 Altera, in
distinguendo quot modis quicquid dicatur. 3 Tertia, in differentijs
inveniendis. 4 Quarta, in similitudinis cognitione and scientia.
All which are notable instruments of knowledge, greatly profitable, yea
necessary for the obtaining of all such sciences as do depend upon reason: and
so consequently much availeable to to be observed in the study of the Laws of
this Land, which are grounded upon the depth of reason, and invested oftentimes
by the name of reason in our Reported Cases, and ruled Authorities of the same.
11. H. 7.24. b. 13. H. 7.23. b. Com. Colth. 270. b. Com. Brown. 140. b. 27. H.
8.10. a. Montague.

Of which four principles purposing (for direction of study) to say somewhat
in order as they are before proposed, it is to be considered, that the first of
them being propositionum electio, contains the election, choice, observation,
and collection of all received principles, propositions, sentences, assertions,
axioms, and reasons, importing either certainty of truth, or likelihood of
probability. Wherein first Aristotle gives precepts to collect them, and then
after gives counsel so to digest them, as that they may at all times be ready
for our use: Wherefore hereof intending an ample discourse, it shall be
requisite to follow the ordinary and best method by definition, division, and
the due speculation of their causes, whereby may be manifested what they are,
of how many kinds they are, the diverse manner of collection of them; and
lastly, the end, scope, and use whereunto they tend, and the profit ensuing by
observation of the^.

That first therefore the names by which in our Law they have usually been
called might be made manifest before their nature be discovered; (primo enim
de nomine conveniat) it may with little labor easily appear, that sundry are
the titles or names given in the Volumes of Reports, and other Writings of the
Law unto such propositions, as do remain as reasons of resolved cases.

Sometimes they have been called grounds; Grounds.
So in the 30. H. 8.44. Dyer n. 30. it is said, est une auter ground in tenure
in Chief. s. Il doet este immediate del Roy; et il convient commencer, et prend
son original creation per le Roy mesme, et per null de ses subjects. So likewise
speaks Read. 5. Hen. 7.23. Vide 12. H. 7.13 a. Davers. Com. 121. b. Stamford.
Maxims.
b. Est bone Ground in Trespass, discontinuance verse unest discontinuance verse
touts, with infinite such other.

Sometimes they have been called Maxims, for so says Fortescue in the 34.
Hen. 6.33. a. Est un Maxim en nostre Ley, Que in chescun action personal, le
Nonsute del un sera le Nonsute de ambideux, fore prise in tiels cases que sont
except per statute.

Likewise says Knightley, 29. Hen. 8.38. a. Dyer numero 51. Est une Maxim,
Que un action sera touts faits conceive ou le plus meliour trial, et notice del
fait poit este conus; et specialment lou de tort est personal, with diverse such
like.

Sometimes they are called Principles, Principles.
for so in the 8. Hen. 7.4. a. it is said, that it is un Common Principle, que
Terre (s. Estate de frank tenant) ne passans Livery de seisin.

Likewise says: Sanders in the Com. Colthurets Case, 28. b. Il ad este tenus
come Principle, Vide Com. 345. a.
Que quand un fait Livery de seisin que son Livery sera pris plus fort verse luy.

Sometimes they have been called Eruditions. Eruditions. Vide 14. H. 8 28. a.
Pollard 24. H. 8.40. Dyer. nu. 66.
In such sort says Keble, in 11. Hen 7.15. a. Ceo ad este un erudition, Que le
party navera Capias ad satisfaciendum, mes ou Capias gist in l'original. And
some in 29. Hen. 8.40. a. Dyer numero 66. says Justices Il est une Common
Erudition, 3. E. 4.7. a. Lit. Vide 33. H. 6.54. a. 44. E. 3.34. b. Laws
pofitive.
Que in cel County lou le tort commence, l'action sera port.

Moreover, sometimes for their firmness they have been called Laws Positive,
for so speaks Belknap, 2. Rich. 2. Fitzh. Account 45. Il est ley positive,
Que home navera damages in breve d'accompt.

Sometimes they are invested by the title of Law it self; Laws.
for in such manner it is said, Tempore Ed. 1. Fitzh. Grant. 41. Lex est,
cuicunque aliquis quid concedit, concedere videtur, and id sine quo res esse
non potuit. And so Bracton says, 9. Hen. 6.59. b. Iay prise pur ley, Que si
home plede un plec and preigne un protestation; et puis son plee est trove
encounter luy, Vide 9. H. 4.59. b. Paston.
il naver unque advantage de son protestation. Of which manner speech there are
manifold examples.

So that be they named Grounds, Maxims, Principles, Eruditions, Laws
Positive, Laws, Rules or Propositions, or by whatsoever other name they be
called, let us now seek the nature of them by their Definitions.

Paulus the ancient Roman Lawyer thus defines a Principle or Rule of Law: Li.
1. F. de Reg. Iuris.
Regula Iuris, rem quae est, breviter enarrat, etc.

If we do respect the original thereof together with the effect it yields;
Com. Colth. 27.
Morgan in the Comme^taries of Plawden, thus defines it: A maxim is the
foundation of Law, and the conclusion of reason: for reason is the efficient
cause thereof, and Law is the effect that flows therefrom.

Such of the Civilians as in the description of a rule of Law, do only
respect the manner of the collecting of them from particular cases or
circumstances, do thus affirm; Prateus de Reg. Iuris. lib. 6. Ioach. Hopp. de
Iuris art. 371. a.
Regula juris est multorum specialium per generalem conclusionem brevis
comprehensio. Or as Ioachimus Hopperus in his first book De juris art, though
disagreeing in words, yet one in sense with the form; Regulae juris sunt
quaedam conjectiones tantum, and breviaria ex pluribus speciebus in unum per
commune aliquod collecta. Another of them, in this manner; Sim. Shard. Lexic.
Iuris Regul.
Regula est sententia generalis, quae ex plurium legum mente a jurisconsultis
notata atque animadversa, paucis verbis summam carum consentionem and tanquam
harmoniam complectitur.

Matthew. Gribaldus in his first book de ratione studij, Matthew. Gribald. l. 1.
c. 7. de ratione studij Iuris.
cap. 7. says, Regulae juris nihil aliud sunt quam breves and compendiosae
sententiae, ex pervagatis definitionibus perstrictae, quo and minori labor
discantur, and sacilius diutiusque memoria teneantur.

But binding our selves to no prescript rules of Art, for the better
understanding of the same, we may describe a rule or ground of Law thus:

A Rule or Principle of the Law of England, Definition.
is a Conclusion either of the Law of Nature, or derived from some general
custom used within the Realm, containing in a short sum the reason and
direction of many particular and special occurrences.

Notes collected out of Authors.
REgula juris est plurium compendiosa narratio, Paulus lib. ff. de reg. Iuris.
and quasi causae conjectio.

Nec absimile est quod Grammatici dicunt, eam esse multorum similium
collectionem.

In summa autem est, Ant. Masae de exercitio Iurispr. lib. 1.
ac si quis, praedictis cum verbis Archid. did. 3. and Reg. conjunctis, ita
diceret, Quod Regula sit compendiosa definitio; seu cum Quintiliano, Universal
vel perpetuale praeceptum diversarum rerum, quasi sub una eademque causa
cadentium universalitatem complectens.

Est Regula nihil aliud quam plurium rerum and specierum in unam quasi summam
conjectio. Ioach. Hopp. de Iuris art. l. 2. fo. 469. a.


As touching the Division thereof, we shall better observe how many principles
and grounds there be by the due consideration of their causes from whence they
spring.

All causes of every thing are either internal or external.

Internal are, the causes Material, or Formal.

External are, the causes Efficient and Final.

De Causis.
Non solum ea quae insita sunt causae dicuntur, Arist. 11. Met. c. 4. To. 23.
sed etiam ea quae extrinsecus sumuntur, ut id quod motum affert and efficiens
est.

Causarum quatuor sunt genera. Arist. l. 2. Them. c. 11. To. 11.


Vnum est forma atque essentia rei.

Alterum est in quo inest necessitudo non absoluta, sed ex adjunctione; si alia
quaedam sint, haec esse necesse est.

Tertium genus est id in quo inest rei efficiendae vis primaria.

Quartum est finis cujus causa aliquid fit.

Nam ad interrogationem factam per verba, Ant. Masae de exercitio
Iurisperitorum l. 1. p. 38. b.
propter quid sit aliquid, nihil aliud unquam respondetur, quam aliqua ex
dictis quatuor causis: Inter quas tamen, finis est potissima, and quasi aliarum
causa: Materia enim non esset causa, nisi haberet formam; and forma itidem nisi
ab agente introduceretur; Agens quoque non ageret nisi moveretur a fine; finis
autem ipse immobilis permanet: Est ergo primum movens, and prima causa, etc.

Material cause.
As touching the Material cause, matter, or subject wherein these grounds are
conversant, the same are all those things whereof debate may rise between
parties judicially: which are as well divine as humane. Insomuch as Iuris
prudentia, Bract. lib. 1. cap. 4.. 4.
or the knowledge of the Law, is Divinarum humarumque rerum scientia. And hence
proceeds it, that all Grounds or Rules of the Law of England in respect of
their matter which they do concern are either such as are not restrained to
any onproper or peculiar title of the Law, but as occasi, on serves, are
applyable unto every part, title, or tractate of the Law, as by the view and
due consideration of examples following may be made manifest; All which, being
either conclusions of natural Reason, or drawn and derived from the same, do
not only serve as directions and Principles of the Law, but are likewise as
Positions and Axioms to be observed throughout all man's life and conversation;
having their original from those Arts that are necessary and behoovfull for
maintenance of humane society.

Grounds borrowed out of Logic.
And first of all concerning the Art of Logic; from thence the learned of our
Laws have received many principles, as well out of that part which concerns
the Invention of Arguments, as of that which teaches the disposing, framing,
and the judgment of the same.

From the first part these may serve for example.
Idem non potest esse agens and patiens. 14 H. 8.31. b 28. H. 8.10. b n. 37.
Dyer. Com. 213. b. Com. 323. b. 9 H. 7.24. a. Com. 161. a.
Omne majus continet in se suum minus. Magis dignum trahit ad se minus dignum.
In praesentiamajoris cessat minus. Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per
pauciora? Turpis est pars quae cum toto non convenit. With many other such
like, etc.
From the Judicial parts of Logic, these and diverse others.
Qui negat confuse, negat confuse and distributive. 2. R. 3.7. a.


But how that saying may be understood, and in what sense it may be intended
true, and in what not, peruse the case of 4. H. 7.8. a. touching the travers of
a suggestion of breach of the peace: where although the said Rule be not
mentioned, yet the meaning thereof, by the case there debated is partly made
manifest. Moreover, Brian borrows the Sophisters verse, and makes it a
Ground to try whether an issue tendered be an express Negative or no, in 11.
H. 7.23. a.

Prae contradic: post contra. Praepostque subalter.

This likewise is derived thence, Negativum nihil implicat.

Out of Natural Philosophy, these, with diverse others, are deducted, that
follow.
VIs unita fortior. Com. 307. a. Com. 72. b. Com. 268. a. Com. 294. a. 8. E.
4.10. a.
Est naturae vis maxima. Vltra posse non est esse. Sublata causa tollitur
effectus. Vltra scire non est posse. With many other of like quality.
Grounds borrowed out of Moral Philosophy;
FRom whence, as from a Fountain, all Laws do flow; we do observe these few
following for an example; as, Qui sentit commodum, Com. 244. a. 14. H. 8.6. a.
Com. 501. a. 13 H. 8.16. a 14 H. 8.16. a 14. H. 8.8. a. Com. 160. b. Com. 370.
b.
sentire debet and onus. Volenti non fit injuria. Sit utere tuo, ut alienum non
laedas. Fraus and dolus nemini patrocinatur. Agentes and consentientes pari
poena plectuntur. Summum Ius summa Injuria. Vix ulla lex fieri potest quae
omnibus commoda sit: sed si majori parti prospiciat, utilis est. A vero non
delinabit Iustus. Com. 48. b.
Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris. With many more such like.


Grounds borrowed out of the Civil Law.
OVt of the Civil Laws there are also very many Axioms and Rules, which are
likewise borrowed and usually frequented in our Law. For since all Laws are
derived from the law of Nature, and do concur and agree in the principles of
Nature and Reason: And since the Civil Laws, being the Laws of the Empire,
do bewray the great wisdom whereby the Roman estate, in the time it most
flourished, was governed: Since likewise the Law of this Land has always
followed best and most approved Reason (which is also a type of humane wisdom)
it does ensue of necessity, that great conformity must be between them. Which
conformity may be made apparent partly by these (among some thousand Axioms and
Conclusions of Reason) following.

Qui tacit conscntire videtur. Com. 357. b 5. H. 3.222.
Vigilantibus and non dormientibus Iura subveniunt. Quod initio non valet,
tractu temporis non convalescit. Quando duo Iura in uno concurrunt, Com. 168 a.
aequum est ac si esset in duobus. In aequali jure, melior est conditio
possidentis. Com. 296. b. Com. 336. b.
Optima Legum Interpres est Consuetudo. Frustra Legis auxilium petet, qui in
Legem peccat. Ignorantia facti excusat. 14. H. 1.27. b. Modus Legem dat
donationi. Com. 251. a. Com. 162. b. 1. H. 3.33. b.
Non est regula quin fallat. Modus and conventio vincunt Legem.
With others in manner infinite, written and published in the Latin tongue.

In the French also many other grounds there are in our Law, to be found
agreeable in sense and meaning to such as are frequent and usual in the Civil
Laws, L. verum. tempus: ff. pro hoc. L. seeds de rescript. L. bona fides ff.
de Reg. Iuris.
and there published in the Latin tongue, whereof also these following may
serve for example.

Null prendra benefit de son tort demesne. Nemo ex dolo suo proprio relevetur
aut auxiliu^ capiet Homo ne sera double charge pro une mesme duty. Bona fides
non patitur idem ab eodem bis exigi.
Auxy mult auctorities and voies que home ad a fair un fait, auxy mult
auctorities and voies ad cesty a qui le fait est fait a ceo dessolver. 1. Hen.
7.16. a.

Nihil est magis rationi consentaneum quam eodem modo unum quodque dissolvere
quo conflatum est. L. nihil: ff. de Regul. Iuris. 13. H. 8.16. a in fine.


Le Common wealth sera prefer devant private wealth.

Vtilitas publica privatorum commodis ante-ferenda. L. 1.. fin. and cap. tol.

Le ley in chescun act adrespect al comencement. Com. 260. a. Halls case. Com.
259. b. Halls case.


Origo rerum attendenda.

Imagination de mente de fair tort, sans le act fait, nest punishable in
nostre Ley.

Affectus non punitur nisi sequatur effectus. Com. 160. b. Throgm. case.
Prateus lib. 3. c. 4.

Intent direct done plus tossed quam parols.

Proferentis intentio and voluntas, magis quam verborum locutio examinetur.
Prat. lib. 3. cap. 3.

Quant diverse chooses sont fait a un mesme instant, Com. 504. b.
and l'un ne poet prender effect sans l'auter; le common ley adjudger ceo de
preceder and ensuer, que aptment doet preceder and ensuer in feasant l'entent
des parties deprender effect.

Vbi in Instrumento reperitur plures actus successive fuisse celebratos, semper
fingitur ille actus praecessisse qui reddit actum validum. Nicholai Everard
Topica Iuris loco 1.

Non attento ordine verborum, talis ordo presumitur qualis debet esse.

With many others to like purpose, if place did permit, or cause did require to
observe the same: Yea many times when as no Ground or Rule is expressed in our
Law, but that we may only collect Cases concurrent upon some Conformity of
Reason: We shall find in the Civil Laws a proposition or rule which shall
most aptly and most fitly express the same Reason in such shortness of
speech, as nothing shall seem more sufficient in that respect. And unto the
which Propositions such as are or may be framed by us in the French, cannot in
excellency be worthily compared.

Grounds borrowed out of the Canon Law.
As touching the Canon Law. Forasmuch as the studies both of the same and of
the Civil Law, are in sort conjoined by the professors of both, what may be
said of the one, in this respect, may be verified of the other: Which as well
by veiw of the title De Regulis Iuris in Sexto Decretalium, as also in diverse
other titles of the same Law, especially in such as are most usual for matters
of debate in this Realm, as are those of Excommunication, Marriage, Divorce,
Legacies, Tithes, and such like, will at large appear.

Grounds derived from Use, Custom, and Conversation of Men.
Finally, many Grounds and Rules of the Laws of this Realm are derived from
Common use, Custom, and Conversation among men, Collected out of the general
disposition, nature, and condition of humane kind: Which Grounds are of two
natures; The one observed out of humane actions, the other out of usual and
ordinary speech.

Principia externa proprie vocamus ea quae in Communi hominum vita versantur
and ab experientibus and prudentibus animadvertuntur. Ioh. Hopper: de Iuris
art.

Haec non tam ex ipsa hominis natura quam foris advenium, debentque non ex
mente hominis aut animo, sed ex Communibus vitae moribus longo usu and
tractatione colligi. Ibidem. Haec sunt igitur illa quae dico externa Principia,
quae ex communibus vitae usibus and moribus diligenter in historia observatis
decerpuntur, quaeque non tam ornine describi, and Liter is mandari, quam longa
tractatione colligi, and per manus tradi possunt. Ibidem.

Of the first sort are these, and such like following.

Home est tenus destre prochein a soy mesme. Com. 545. a. Paramour. Manxel. 6.
a. b. Com. 261. a. Halls case. 8. H. 6.19. b. Per Martin.


Le inclination de touts homes est de fair ou parler chooses pour leur gain,
and nient pour leur perde: Et de ceuxque violent gabber, de gabber pur
advantage.

Est le property de nature de preserver luy mesme.

Quant home est party, il ne poet esse Judge indifferent a luy mesme.

With many other of like quality, which the intendment of the Law deriveth and
collecteth out of the usual condition, nature, and quality of things upon the
probability and likelihood of occurrences often or for the most part happening
and falling out.

Axioms or Propositions of the second sort, Proverbiall Grounds. Proverbium
vulgo interpretatur probatum verbum, cum dicatur quasi Commune omnium verbum.
Proverbia vero citata, instar jurium haberi traditum est. L. solent. ff. de
officio Procurat. Sim. Shardus Lexicon Iuris. Com. 280. a. Com. 173. a. Com.
18. b. 29. Eliz. 356. a. 14 H. 8.23 a
are drawn from the phrase of speech, and deduced from the ordinary manner of
Conference by talk among men most usual in all places, As are the common and
ordinary Proverbs and proverbiall Assertions, and such like; the which, as
well by reason of their ordinary and often use in talk; as also for their
probability and likelihood of truth have been sometime used as Axioms,
Principles, and Grounds of the Law; and are to be found confirmed with many
Cases, having been used as reasons in the same: Whereof these few ensuing may
serve for example.

Da tua dum tua sunt; post mortem, tunc tua non sunt. Qui ambulat intenebris,
nescit quo vadit. Necessitas non habet Legem. As good never the whit, as never
the better. Let him that is cold blow the coal. One to beat the bush, and
another to take the birds.
With many other such like speeches, which although they are of small moment,
being every where ordinary; yet nevertheless for the perspicuity and
plainness, they have heretofore, at some times, in Law arguments been used,
and fitly applied in debate of Cases (although not ad probandum, yet ad
illustrandum) and so likewise may at any time hereafter, upon like occasion
offered, without blame be frequented.

Although these general Positions, Maxims and Rules proposed, and such like,
cannot be properly reduced (as aforesaid) under any one peculiar title of the
Law, extant in any Abridgement, Table, or directorie; yet nevertheless may
they be brought under general titles or common places, to be framed of
purpose, as hereafter in place more convenient shall be declared.

And thus much therefore of general Grounds or Maxims.

Now follows to speak of such as are to be reduced under one particular
title, Maxims appliable only to one title.
tractate, or matter of the Law, serving to no other use, but only do
concern the said special matter, and cannot be transferred thence, neither
may properly serve any other then their native place, unto the which they are
wholly and alonely to be referred: As for example,

Under Grants these.

Quando aliquis quid concedit, T. E. 1. Fitz. Grants. 36. Ass. p. 3.
and id etiam concedere videtur, sine quo res concessa esse non potest.

Grant sera prise plus fort verse le Grauntour, etc.

Under Contracts these and such like.

Ex nudo pacto non oritur actio. Com. 5. a. Com. 302. a. Com. 305. a. Com. 321.
a.

Contract ne poit estre, 17. Ed. 4.1. a.
si ne soit que chescun partic soit agree.

Under Prerogative, these and such others.

Nullum tempus occurrit Regi. Com. 243. a. 261. a. 321. a.

Le Roy^^^ auxy un Prerogative en le form de brefs port per luy, Vide 18. Ed.
3.2. a.
different de ceaux que common person ad, etc.

Under Deeds these.

Fiunt aliquando Donationes in scriptis, Bract. li. 2. c. 16. f. 33. b. 14. H.
8.22. b Brudnel. Vid. Lit. 183 21. H. 7.37. b.
sicut in chartis, ad perpetuam memoriam, propter brevem hominum vitam, and ut
facilius probari possit Donatio.

Chooses incident que per lour mesme ne poient estre grant sans fait, uncore ils
passeront oue le principal a qui sont incident sans fait. With diverse other in
every title of the Law of like effect.

These special Grounds are of diverse sorts: The diverse kinds of Grounds which
do conceme one title.
for some concern the very nature and essence of the title: some the
consequents and incidents annexed thereunto. Those which do concern the
nature of the thing, do flow from some of the causes thereof, as the
Material; the Formal, the Efficient, or the Final. Some from the general
notion; others from the special difference; and some do proceed from the
effect. Those which do proceed of the consequents, concern either the
Incidents inherent and inseparable, or the adjuncts, and such like.

Which grounds so drawn, if they be orderly disposed with all their
subdivisions, and particular Rules, and the same furnished with apt cases, will
make a perfect and exact treatise of such matter as concerns that title,
resembling those treatises compiled, by Littleton, Parkins, Stanford, of the
Pleas of the Crown, and others of like form.

Arbitrament.
But in this place not intending to combine any such Grounds as do concern one
title or matter, or thereof to endeavor to draw a type of any perfect
treatise, it shall be sufficient at this present, for example only, to
express that which is here meant, by the disposing of some few Grounds of the
title of Arbitrament, according to the observation above mentioned, that
thereby might be conceived, how such like Grounds concerning one title or
matter do flow from the causes and consequents of that title, whereunto they
are applied; and that a coherency of them might be both found and orderly
framed for the more certain obtaining of knowledge in observing this, or the
like course to this hereafter following.

First although we find not an Arbitrament to be defined in any report of our
Laws; yet nevertheless Rastall in the small treatise of the Terms of the
Law, thereof yields this description,

Arbitrament est un award, Arbitreme^t, quid?
determination, ou judgment, quel pleusieurs font al request de deux parties
al meins, pur, and sur ascun dett, trespass, ou auter controversy ewe perenter
les dits parties. But more artificially it may be described out of the Civil
Law thus:

Arbitrium est Arbitri sententia sive Iudicium inter controvertentes; privato
consensu, non autem publica interveniente authoritate, datum.

Out of the books of Reports of the Laws of this Land this full description
may be drawn.

An Award is a judgment 8. E. 4.1. 8. Ed. 4.10. a. 21. Ed. 4.39. a. given by
such person or persons as are elected by the parties unto the controversy, 9.
Ed. 4.43. b. Fairfax. 16. Ed. 4.9. a. for the ending and pacifying the said
controversy. 8. Ed. 4.10. a 19. Hen. 6.37. b. Askewe. according to the
comprimise and submission. 19. Edw. 4.1. a. and agreeable to reason and good
conscience. 19. Hen. 6.37. a.

Touching the Etymology or notation of the names thereof, it seems to be
called an Arbitrament, The Etymology.
because the Judges elected therein, Ex boni viri Arbitrio. Ex libero Arbritrio
suo, of his own accord. Agarder, which signifies to decide or judge. Loveday,
for the quiet and tranquillity that should ensue thereof, and for the ending of
the cause which is wrought thereby.

The Material cause whereabout it is conversant, The Material cause.
is the controversy, which

1, First, may be either action, suit, quarrel, ordemand; and the

2 Second that, concerning duty or demand, either personal, real or mixed, or
every of them.

The Formal cause is, the form and manner of the Award, The formal cause.
or the yielding up of their judgment, according to reason, intent and good
meaning.

The Immediate efficient cause, The efficie^t cause.
is the Arbitrator or Arbitrators.

The Mediate efficient cause, is the comprimise or submission, and the parties
at variance, being also parties to the submission. Wherefore for the more
brevitie we will discourse of every of these last recited, when we shall
discover the power of the Arbitrator.

The final cause, The final cause.
is both to appease

1, First, the debate and variance so risen between the parties, and
compromitted; and also to reduce

2, Secondly, that which was before uncertain, unto a certainty.

So that by these you see, that those five things which are found to be
incident to every Award, viz.

1 First, matter de controversy. 2 Submission. 3 Parties al submission. 4
Arbitrators, and 5 Render sur del Judgment, spoken of in 4 Eliz. Dyer 217. a.
are here reduced into a methodicall consideration of the causes of every Award,
seeing indeed, they and no other are the very causes of the same.
The genus or general notion of the former description, Genus.
is, Differentia.
that it is a Judgment.

The special difference whereby it is distinguished from other Judgments, and
expressed in the said description, is, that it is given by Judges elected by
the parties, and not by coertion of the Law.

The effect is, The effect.
when it concerns any payment of money, to alter, change, transire in rem
judicatam, and thereupon to give action for the sum awarded.

If it do determine any collateral or other matter than payment of money to
be made or done,

The Adjunct, The Adiunct.
is the performance thereof and the manner how, which whether the Award be
performed or not, it makes nothing to the nature and substance of the Award it
self. But nevertheless such performance of the Award is a requisite
consequent annexed to the consideration of the nature of an Award.

These, the general causes of an Award, thus considered; next follows the
consideration of the grounds that flow from every of them.

From the Material cause which is the controversy, Material cause.
these Grounds or Rules are deduced.

In Real matters, que concern frank tenement, Real Matters
Arbitrament ne lia, le title, ne done ceo. 14. Henr. 4.19. a.

In matters of Realty, which concern freehold, an Arbitrament does neither
give title, nor bind the right.

In Real Actions, Real Actions. Mixed Actions.
un Arbitrament nest plee.

In Mixed Actions, Arbitrament nest plee: Si non que le Comprimise soit per
fait. 19. Hen. 6.37. b. Newton.

In Personal Actions sur personal torts, Personal Actions.
Arbitrament est plee, coment que le submission ne soit per fait. 14. H. 4.24.
b. Ravish guard.

In controversy concernant le property de Real chattels, Real Chattels
un Arbitrament transfer property de ceo accordant al agard. 21. H. 7.29. b.

In Chattels personal, Personal Chattells.
Arbitrament transfer property.

In Personal duty ground sur specialtie, Personal duty.
Arbitrament nest availeable. 3. H. 4.1. b. 8. H. 5.3. b.

In Controversy ground sur matter de Record, Matters de Record.
Arbitrament ne sera regard. 6. H. 4.6. a. 8. Hen. 5.3. b. 4. H. 6.17. b.

Arbitrament doet este de duty nient certain. Duty in certain.
6. Hen. 4.6. a. 2. Hen. 5. Fitzh. 23.4. Hen. 6.17. b. 10 Hen. 7.4. a.

Controversy de dett solement, ne poet este mise en Arbitrament. 45. E. 3.16.
a. 2. H. 5. Fitzh. Arbitrament 23.8. H. 5.3. b. 4. H. 6.17. b. 10. H. 7.4. a.

In Contract de dett oue auter chose mise en comprimise Arbitrament sera bone.
Dett.
2. H. 6. Fitzh. Arbitrament 23.4. H. 6.17. b. 10. H. 7.4. a.

Dett sur Contract sans specialtie, Dett.
per le resolution de ascuns liver poet este mise en Arbitrament. 45. E. 3.16.
a. 6. H. 4.6. a. 4. H. 6.18. a.

These with diverse other grounds, do proceed, as we have said, from the
Material Cause or controversy.

There rests now to speak of such as do proceed from the Formal Cause.
Formal Cause.


Every Award, as touching the form thereof, ought to have these four
qualities.

1. First, that it be not a thing impossible to be performed by the parties. 2.
Secondly, that it do not ordain matter unlawful to be done. 3. Thirdly, that
the same Award agree with reason and good meaning. 4. Fourthly, that it be
sensible, full, and perfect in understanding.
As touching the first.
1. Arbitrament ne doet este de chose ou matter impossible. Impossible.
8. E. 4.1. b. Moyle. 8. E. 4.10. a. Yelverton. 19. E. 4.1. a. Neele. 9. H.
7.16. b. Keble.

2. Arbitrament ne doit este de chose encounter ley. Encounter Ley.
19. Edw. 4.1. a. Neele. 21. Ed. 4. b. Bridge. 9. Hen. 7.16. a. b. Keble.

3. Arbitrament ne doet estre unreasonable. Unreasonable.
46. E. 3.16. a. 43. E. 3.17. b. 2. H. 5.2. a. 17. E. 4.5. b. 9. H. 7 10. b.
Keble. 46. E. 3.17. b. 21. E. 4.40. a. 10. H. 4. Fitzh. Arbitrament.

This Ground last remembered, being general, contains therein many special
Rules under it; whereof some do follow.

Arbitrament doet este tiel que les parties poient performer sans le assistance
de ascunes auters queux ils ne poient compel a ceo fair and performer.
Satisfaction sans assistance des auters.
8. Edw. 4.2. a. Illingworth. 17. Edw. 4.15. b. 18. Edw. 4.23. a. Catesby. 19.
E. 4.1. b. Brian.

Mes si les parties ont mean per le ley a compeller tiels estrangers a ceo
performer, Assistance des auters.
le Agard est assetts bone. 17. E. 4.5. b.

Arbitrament que le party fair un judicial Act est bone, coment que il ne
poiet ceo perform sans assistance del Court. Judicial Act.
19. H. 6.38. a. Past. Nonsuite. 19. E. 4.1. b. Brian. fine. 12. E. 4.8. a.
Retraxit. 22. E. 4.38. a. Retraxit. 5. H. 7.22. a. b. Discon. etc.

Chascun Arbitrament que ne import satisfaction del tort que est mise in
comprimise, Satisfaction.
nest bone. 43. E. 3.28. b. Finchd. 46. E. 3.17. b. 2. H. 5.2. a. 45. E. 3.16.
a. 19. H. 6.38. a. Past. 22. H. 6.39. a. Port. 30. Hen. 6. Fitzherbert
Arbitrament. 27. 9. E. 4.44. a. Chock. 9. H. 7.16. b. 12. H. 7.15. a.

This Ground is also general: Wherefore it shall be expedient to divide it by
the particular circumstances of cases unto more especial propositions,
together with their several exceptions to be set down in manner following.

Arbitrament in tiel manner, Redeliuerie des biens.
que pur ceo que un des parties ad les chattels del auter, que il eux
redelivera, ceo nest satisfaction. 45. E. 3.16. a. Kirton. 2. Hen. 5.2. a. 12.
H. 7.15. a.

Mes si sur le delivery des biens, Redeliuerie des biens.
cesty a que sont deliver poet aver ascun benefit, per tiel delivery in
satisfaction del tort, donque est le Arbitrament bone. 2. H. 5.2. a. 14. H.
4.14. b. 12. H. 7.15. a. Part del Chose.


Arbitrament que un party avera un party del chose comprimise, and sur que le
controversy fait, and l'auter party est void. 45. E. 3.16. a. 10. Hen. 4.
Fitzh. Arbitrament 19.

Arbitrament que le party payera part de sa dett, Part del Chose. Plus que il
doit.
est void. 45. E. 3.16. a.

Arbitrament sur matter de dett, sils agard que le parties endebted payera plus
que il doit in recompense del dit dett ceo est void. 9. H. 7.16. b. Keble.

Arbitrament que cesty que est suppose daver fait trespass, faira de ceo son
Ley, and sur ceo sera discharge, Gager de Ley
nest satisfaction al auter, and pur ceo nest bone. 46. Ed. 3.17. b.

Arbitrament que in satisfaction del tort que les parties entermariont, ceo
nest bone agard; car nest satisfaction. Entermariage.
9. E. 4.44. a. Chock.

Arbitrament que un des parties que est in arrerages in account accomptera al
auter, ceo nest satisfaction. Accomptera
30. H. 6. Fitzh. Arbitrament 27.

Arbitrament que les parties fera act a tiel jour, Iour pass.
and devant que le agard est perfect, le jour est pass tiel agard nest bone.
8. E. 4.11. a. 8. E. 4.22. a.

Arbitrament que refer le feasance del chose ou auter matter a tiel chose que
nest in Rerum natura; Non in Rerum Natura.
tiel arbitrament est void. 21. E. 4.40. a. 9. Ed. 4.44. a. 39. H. 6.10. a.

Having thus showed the Circumstances of certain Arbitrements, which have
been taken to be against reason, sounding to no satisfaction, and therefore
void: Now rests to be showed certain circumstances, in Arbitrements
agreeable unto reason, and imparting satisfaction, Reasonable.
and therefore deemed good.

Arbitrament doet este equal in respect d'ambideux parties, Equal.
and l'un come l'auter sera lie a ceo. 7. H. 6.41. a. Strange. 19. H. 6.38. a.
Newton. 20. H. 6.19. a. Newton. 39. H. 6.12. a. Moyle.

Lou diverse d'une parties and d'auter eux submit al agard, Enter ascuns des
Parties.
and le Arbitrament est, que l'une de l'une party payera a un auter de l'auter
party tant, sans rien parler des auters; ceo est bone agard, pur ceo que poet
este que le auters naveront cause daver ascun chose. 22. E. 4.25. b.

Arbitrament pur ceo que les torts fait per les parties chescun al auter sont
equal que ils seront quit chescun verse lauter; Quitt.
ceo est bone agard. 19. H. 7.37. b. Newton. 20. H. 6.19. a. Newton. 21. H. 6.
Fitz. Arbit. 9.

Arbitrament que une des parties sera quit verse lauter, Quitt.
and que cesty auter payera ou faira tant pur ceo que son trespass fut le
greinder, est bon agard. 10. H. 6.4. a. 20. H. 6.19. a. Newton.

Arbitrament que l'une done al auter quart de vine, Petit Recompense.
ou tiel petit recompense pur satisfaction del tort, est bone agard, 43. E.
3.33. a. 45. E. 3.19. b Belknap. 9. E 4.44. a. Nedham.

Si le Arbitrament soit, Greinder value que le tort.
que un des parties payera greinder sum in value que le tort est que il ad
fait, uncore le agard est bone, and ceo gist in discretion des Arbitrators, 8,
E, 4, 21, Chock.

Arbitrament, Release.
que chescun release al auter, est bone, 9, E, 4, 44, b, Danby.

Arbitrament que l'une release tout son droit in tiel terre, Release.
est bone satisfaction: Si cesty a que le release sera fait soit in possession
del terre, etc. Et ceo appiert per le agard, 9, E, 4, 44, b. 21, E, 4, 40, b.

Arbitrament que l'une party done al auter tiel chose, Doner ceo que il and.
coment que le party and tiel chose, uncore est le agardbone, and il doit
provide ceo, 19, E, 4, 1, a, Neele. 9, Henr: 7, 16, a.

Arbitrament bone in part, and void in part, 19, E, Bone in part
4, 1, a.

Arbitrators poient ordain act deste fait in lour agard pur le melieur
security del performance de ceo, Security del Agard.
come obligation, 8, H, 6, 18, b, Newton. 19, H, 4, 1, a, Chock.

Chescune Arbitrament doet este plain and certain en sense, 8, E, 4, 11, a,
Pigot. Certain.


Arbitrament est chose entier, 18, E, 4, 23, a, Brian. Entier.


Thus much touching the Matter and Form of Arbitrements and the Axioms,
Grounds and Rules deduced from the same: Wherein we have not expressed every
Rule that might be found in the books, or collected thence, tending hereunto:
Neither are those Axioms or Propositions here put down, furnished with all
those cases that might be thereunto applied: For, not intending to express the
type of any treatise of this title, but only a methodicall Abstract or
Directory, that which is here exemplified in part may be sufficient to express
our meaning before declared. But to proceed.

The Efficient Causes, Efficient Cause.
and the Rules drawn from the same come next to consideration.

The first whereof is the Arbitrator: Johannes Paulus Lancelottus. Arbitrator
quid.
Of whom the Author of the Institutions of the Canon Law gives this
description: Arbitri dicuntur proprie, qui (nullam potestatem habentes ex
Lege,) consensu Litigantium in Iudices eliguntur: in quos compromittitur, ut
eorum sententiae stetur.

Out of the books of the Common law, a description of an Arbitrator may be
thus collected.

Vne Arbitratour est Judge private, eslew per les parties. 9. Edw. 4.43. b.
Fairefax. 16. Edw. 4.9. a. Feneux. 19. Hen. 6.37. b. Askew. pur appeaser les
debates enter eux. 8. Edw. 4.10. a. Billinge. Et de arbitrate and adjudge
selonque lour bone intent. 19. H. 6.37. a. Paston.

Sithence in the Award it self, the Law requires such qualities, there has
not been made many nor scarce any question, who may be an Arbitrator, and who
not: Neither (considering what has been said touching the form of an Award)
should it be greatly necessary. Therefore we will proceed, respecting in the
Arbitrator these three things.

1. First his Ordinance, from whom it is. 2. His Authority, what it is. 3. His
Duty, wherein it consists.
Touching his Ordinance, Ordinance.
he is ordained by these two things: 1. First, by the election of the parties.
20. H. 6.41. a. 2. By his own undertaking of the charge. 8. E. 4.10. a.
Billinge.


Touching his Authority, Authority.
what it is.

1. First it is derived from the submission, and extends no further. 2.
Thereby he is a Judge between the parties. 3, And therefore he cannot
transfer his authority over to any other.
Touching his Duty, it consists in these three. Duty.


1, First to hear the grief of the party. 2, To judge according to equity.
3, To notify their Award.
First therefore concerning the election of the Arbitrators by the parties to
the Controversy (which ought likewise to be parties to the Submission) there
is first of all to be considered, Election of the Arbitratour.
what persons may by the Law submit themselves to an award made by others, and
what persons cannot. Queux persons poient eux submitter al agarde. Deputy.


And therefore,

Si l'une des parties submit luy a une Arbitrament d'une part, et Depute del
auter part in nosme del dit auter party: Arbitrament sur ceo fait per enter
eux semble bon. 4. Eliz. 217. a. 60.

Le Baron poet luy mesme submit al agard pur luy et sa feme pur chattels des
queux il ad le disposition in droit, et per reason de sa fem, et ceo Liera la
feme. Baron and feme.
21. Hen. 7.29. b.

Si enfant submit luy al une agard, Enfant.
il ser a lie de ceo performer cy bien come home de plein age. 13. Hen. 4.12.
a. 10 Hen. 6.14. a.

Si diverse d'une part ont fait tort a un auter, Ascuns departies.
and cesti a qui le tort est fait, et un de les auters submit eux al agard, de
cest agard fait les auters nient parties al submission averon advantage in
extinguishment del tort. 7. Hen. 4.31. b. 20. H. 6.12. a. 20. H. 6.41. a.

Si diverse del une part submit eux mesmes al agard de certain persons, and
diverse del auter part: Joint and several.
Les Arbitratours ont power de fair agarde pur matters enter eux joyntment,
and issint pur matter enter eux severalment, 2. Rich. 3.18. b. vide 21. Hen.
7.29. b. Com. Dalton. 289. b.

Si diverse del une part and de auter submit eux al agard del une, Ascunes des
parties.
que fait agard perenter ascunes d'une party, and ascunes del auter party and
nemy perenter eux touts, and ne parle rien en son agard des auters, uncore tiel
agard est bone, 22. Edw. 4.25. b.

Thus much touching the parties that do submit themselves unto an Award, and
which make an election of the Arbitratours. undertaking the award.
Now follows that somewhat be also said as touching the undertaking of the
charge of the said Award.

Si le Arbritr atour protest, Del parcel.
que il ne voile meddle ave tout ceo que est commit a luy, ou conteyne en le
submission, ou sil fait agard tantum del parcel, le agard est bone, 19. Hen.
6.6. b. 39. Hen. 6.11. b. Prisot, cont. 4. Eliz. 217.60.7.8. Eliz. 243. b. 52.

Mes si le submission soit per fait conditionalment que le dit agard soit
deliver devant tiel jour: Parcel.
une Arbitrament de parcel nest bone, 4. Eliz. 217.60.7.8. Eliz. 243. b. 52.

Mes uncore, Parcel.
si le submission soit que ils estoieront al agard des Arbitratours de tout le
chose comprimit ou fait pur ascun parcel de ceo: donque le Arbitrament est bone
pur parcel, 39. Hen. 6.11. b.

And thus much has been said of the taking upon them of the charge of the
Arbitrament.

Now rests it likewise to speak of the Authority of the Arbitrators
themselves: which is, as before is declared, grounded upon the submission.

The submission or comprimise therefore out of the Civil Law, is thus defined;

Compromissum est simultanea illa partium promissio, Compromise ou submission.
qua sua sponte, ad alicujus boni viri Arbitrium suam remittunt controversiam.

Submissions are in two manners, either by writing, or by word.

Those that are by writing, are either by obligation, or by covenant.

Which obligation is either of Record, as a recognizance, or by deed between
the parties.

And this submission by writing, or by word, is either absolute, or
conditional, so that the award be delivered by a certain day, or such like.

Wherefore in as much as the authority of the Arbitrator is deduced from the
submission, it follows that,

Le Arbitrament que est fait de chose nient contain in le submission, est
void, Nient contain in submission.
7. Hen. 6.40. b. 19. Hen. 6.39. b. Fort. 9. Ed. 4.44. a. Chock. 19. E. 4.1. a.
Neele. 7.8. Eliz. 242. b. 52.

Mes si le submission est de chose personal, Nient contain in le submission.
les Arbitrators poient agard, que un des parties fera act que est de chose
real in satisfaction der personal tort, 9. Ed. 4.44. a. Brian.

Si le submission soit de chose real, Real.
les Arbitratours poient agard satisfaction deste fait de chose personal, 9. E.
4.44. a. Brian.

Si les arbitratours agard, Estranger.
que un des parties fera act al estranger, come feofment, ou tiels sembles, tell
arbitrament est void, 22. Hen. 6.46. b. 17. Ed. 4.23, a. Catesby, 19. Ed. 4.1.
b. Brian. 5 Hen. 7.22. b.

Si le submission soit d'une chose, Incident.
le Arbitrament poit esse fait de chose incident a ceo. 8 Hen. 6.18. b. 19. Ed.
4.1. a. Chock. ver. 9. Hen. 7.15. b. 16. a.

Upon this authority given to the Arbitrators by the submission, to deal in
manner as aforesaid, in things touching the same submission.

It ensues also secondarily, Judge.
that

Le Arbitrator est un Judge perenter les parties, 19. Hen. 6.37. b. Ascough, 9.
Ed. 4.43. b. Fair f. 16. Ed. 4.9. a. Iency. Com. Fogasta. 6. a.

Wherefore likewise it ensues that the Arbitrator being a Judge cannot
transfer that his Judicial authority to any other.

And therefore,

Si le Arbitrament soit, Estranger.
que les parties estoicra al arbitrament d'un estranger; ceo nest bone agard,
47. Ed. 3.21. a. Cont. 8. Ed. 4.10, 11. a.

Mes si l'estranger ad fait un Arbitrament devant perenter les dits parties,
Estranger.
le Agard pur estoier a tiel Arbitrament del estranger est bone, 39. Hen. 6,
10. a. 11. a.

Mes si le Arbitrament soit que les parties performera le Agard d'une auter
devant fait perenter mesmes les parties, Estranger.
lou in verity nest ascun tell agard: uncore cest Arbitrament est bone prima
facie tanque soit monstre que nest tiel agard, 39. Hen. 6.12. a. Prisot.

Mes uncore si le Arbitrament soit, Advice.
que une act limit per le Agard sera fait per le advise and counseil d'une
auter person; tiel Agard est bone, 8. Ed. 4.11. a. 14. Ed. 4.1. a. Chock.

Mes si le Agard soit, Advice.
que le act sera fait per le Advise del Arbitratour mesme apres le Agard rendu
sur tell Agard nest bone, 19. Ed. 4.1. a. Chock.

Si les parties eux submit al Agard de certain persons, Vmpier.
and s'ils ne poient agree, donque al ordinance d'un auter come umpier; si les
Arbitratours font Agard de parcel, le umpier ne fera agard del auter parcel
remnant, 39. Hen. 6.10. a. b.

Mes si le submission soit tiel que le umpier fera Agard del tout ou part,
donque il poit fair Agard de cest part, ovesque que les Arbitrators navont
meddle, 39. Hen. 6.11. b. Prisot.

Now as touching the duty of the Arbitratours. Duty.
First

Les duties des parties est a vener devant les Arbitratours and monstre lour
grieves.

1 Et le Arbitratour doit eux oir. 2 Et solonque ceo adjudge, ou auterment il
nest bone Judge, 8. Ed. 4.10. a. Billinge.
Those which affect the Method of Ramus (that is, to begin with the efficient
cause, as here, with Arbitratour) rather then that which is usually prosecuted
by the Interpretors of Aristotle (namely, to begin first with the matter and
form, which we hitherunto have endeavored to follow) may here add to, the
second part of the duty of an Arbitrator (that is, to that which has been
here said of this Judicial Authority and Judgment) as much as has been
before, first of all, showed by us, touching the Material and Formal causes,
and the Grounds and Rules incident thereupon.

But nevertheless, to proceed with our intended enterprise; touching the third
part of the duty of an Arbitrator, viz. the publishing or notifying of his
Award; It is to be considered that the publishing or notifying of an Award is
either provided for and ordained by the submission it self; or else it is left
and permitted to the discretion of the Arbitrator.

If it be provided for, by the submission; for the most part it is in this
manner, that either the same Award made, be notified to the parties, or some of
them; and that, either by a certain day or time, or else without limitation of
any time.

As concerning therefore the delivery of the Award, there is to be noted; that
where such provision is made of notification by the submission, that then;

Arbitrament nest Arbitrament devant que il soit pronounce, Pronounce.
8. Ed. 4.21. b. Chock.

Lou per le submission est ordain ou provide condicionalment, que le agard
soit deliver, Delivery de Agard.
ceo nest ascun arbitrament in ley devant que il soit deliver in fait, 8. Ed.
4.11 Yelverton. 8. Ed. 4.21. a. Chock. vide 1. Hen. 7.5. a. 37. Hen. 8. Brown,
Conditions, 46.

Mes si le submission soit que le agard sera delivere al parties, Delivery.
etc. devant un jour hoc petentibus, mes null certain jour limit quand doit
este deliver, les parties doient prender notice del agard a lour peril, 8.
Edw. 4.1. b. 21, etc.

Si diverse d'un party and diverse de auter party submit eux al Arbitrament de
un auter, Delivery.
provise, que il soit deliver al parties, ou a un de eux: ne besoign al
Arbitrator a deliver ceo a ambideux del un party ou (...) de chacuns party:
mes suffist si soit deliver al as^^^^^^ dits parties, 4.5. Eliz. 218. b. 5.

Si le submission soit que le Arbitrament sera deliver devant tiel jour,
Delivery.
il poet cy bien este deliver per parol come per fait: si non que le submission
soit que il sera per fait, 4.5. Eliz. 218. b. 5.

Si le submission soit que le Arbitrament sera deliver ceo poet este fait in un
County, County and lieu del delivery. Temps.
and deliver in auter County, 5. Hen. 7.7. a.

Si le submission soit per fait, and le temps pas in que le Arbitrament doet
este fait, les parties ne poient proroge le temps ouster pur fair le agard
sans novel submission a tell intent, 49. Ed. 3.9. a.

Mes si le submission soit sans fait, Temps.
les parties poient proroge le temps que fut done pur fair le agard, 49. Ed.
3.9. Fitzh. agard, 22.

Si les Arbitrators font lour agard perenter les parties un jour, Temps.
ils ne poient fair auter agard perenter les parties un auter jour, coment que
le temps don per le submission ne soit expire, 22. Hen. 6.52. a. vide 33. H.
6.28. b.

Arbitrament ne poet este fait part a un temps, Temps.
and part al auter, coment que soit deins le temps del submission, 39. H.
6.12. a. Danby, 8. Ed. 4.10. b. Fairfax, 19. Ed. 4.1. a. Chock, vide 3. Hen.
4.1. b.

Mes les Arbitrators poient Common enter eux mesmes, and agree sur un chose un
jour, Temps.
and de auter chose auter jour, and in le fine fair une entire agard de tout:
Et ceo est bone, 47. Edw. 3.21. a. 39. Hen. 6.12. a. Danby.

Si Arbitratours agard un chose de une part, Temps.
and devant que ils poient agree de lour agard del remnant, le temps done per
le submission expire; tout lour agard est void, 39. Hen. 6.12. a. Prisot.

But if there be by the submission no order taken for the Delivery or
Publication of the Award;

Then

In honesty and Conscience le Arbitratour est tenus de fair notice al parties
de ceo. vide 8. Edw. 4.10. a. Billinge, Notice.
vide 8. Edw. 4.2. a. b. Markham.

Mes in rigore Iuris l'arbitrement mesme est intend chose Notorious, Notice.
8. Ed. 4.1. b. Chock. 8. Edw. 4.21. b. Chock.

Et pur ceo.

Parties al Arbitrament sont tenus de prender notice del agard a lour peril,
Notice.
8. Edw. 4.18.21.18. Edw. 4.18. a. 1. Hen. 7.5. a.

Coment que les Parties ne sont daver Notice done a eux de L'arbitrement,
Notice.
uncore si les Arbitratours agard que un des parties fera act que depend sur
auter primes destre fait del auter party, de ceo il aver notice, 8. Edw. 4.21.
b. 20. Edw. 4.8. b. Sulliard.

Hitherto has been said of such matters where the Arbitrators have executed
their Authority without control of the parties: But if, before any Award
made, their Authority shall be lawfully countermanded; Then does there remain
in this place to be considered, 1, Whether such Countermands be permitted by
the Law. 2, And in what Cases not. 3, And also in what manner the same is to be
done.


Wherefore

Si le submission soit sans fait, Counterma^d.
chescun des parties poit Countermand and discharge les Arbitratours, 49. Ed.
3. vide Fitzherbert Arbitrament 22. 21. Hen. 6.30. a. 28. Hen. 6.6. b. 5. Edw.
4.3. b. 8. Edw. 4.10. b.

Mes donque les parties doient doner Notice al Arbitratours del dit discharge,
Counterma^d.
8. Edw. 4.10. b. Markham, 8. Edw. 4.12. a. Lakyn.

Mes si diverse d'un part and diverse d'auter part eux submit al Arbitrament
sans fait, Counterma^d.
un del une part ne poet discharge le Arbitratour sans les auters son
Compagnons de mesme le party, 28. Hen. 6. b.

Mes si le submission soit per fait un des parties ne poit Countremaund les
Arbitratours, Counterma^d.
49. Edw. 3. Fitzh. Arbitrament 22. nient in le liver a large. 5. Edw. 4.3. b.
8. Ed. 4.11. b. Pigott. Regulae a sausa finali.


The last cause of the four before remembered being the Final Cause (that is)
the end and scope wherefore men do submit themselves unto the Arbitrament and
Award of any person, consists upon two things.

1 Chacun Arbitrament est a fair final determination and de appeaser le
strifes, Final determination.
debates and variances enter les parties. 19. Hen. 6.37. b. Newton, 8. Edw.
4.10. a. Lakyn. 8. Edw. 4.12. b. Yelverton.

2 Chacun Arbitrament est a reducer chose incertaine a une certainty, A reducer
incertaintie al certainty.
and nemy a reducer un certainty in auter certainty, 6. Hen. 4.6. a. Hankford.
4. Hen. 6.17. b. Weston. 10. Hen. 7.4. a.

Thus much has been said as touching the Causes.

Now as concerning the Genus or General Notion: In the former definition of an
Arbitrament, It is to be considered, That

Chescun Arbitrament est un Judgment, Judgment.
8. Ed. 4.1. b. Fairefax. 8. Edw. 4.10. a. Ieney. 21. Ed. 4.39. a. Vavasour.

Because the special difference used in the said former definition of an
Award, was this, That it was given by Judges elected by the parties, and not by
compulsary Jurisdiction of the Court, thereof ensues, That

Il est diversaie ou home est Judge per authority del ley, Intent del
Arbitrator.
and per Election del party mesme: Car Judge de Record ne doner Judgment verse
les parties, si non que ils sont appells devant eux per process del ley: Mes
autrement est dun Arbitratour que est Judge per enter les parties, 8. Ed. 4.2.
a. Illingsworth.

Of this also ensues, that whereas every Judgment of Record shall be executed
literally, according to the warrant issuing out of the Record, upon and for the
executing of the said Judgment; Yet nevertheless.

Chescun Arbitrament doit este expound et intend accordant al intent des
Arbitratours, Intent.
and nemy Literalment. 17. Edw. 4.3. Brian. 21. Edw. 4.39. a. b. vide 19. Hen.
6.36. b. Markham.

Mes si l'intent des Arbitratours ne estoit ove la ley: Intent,
donque les parties ceo performera accordant eux parolls in tiel sense que
agree ove le ley. 21. Edw. 4.39. b. Fairefax.

The Causes of an Arbitrament being thus deciphered there follows next the
consideration of the effects thereof.

The Effects of an Arbitrament are these which do ensue.

Per Arbitrament le Controversy transit in rem Iudicatam. Transition in rem
judicata^.
49. Edw. 3.3. a. Hanwer. 20. Hen. 6.41. a. Paston. 9. Edw. 4.51. a. Danby. 6.
Hen. 11. b. Hussy. Com. Fogossa, 6. a.

Et pur ceo

Lou le party port action pur le tort a luy fait, Iour de nint venus. purpay le
money.
est bone Plea que il eux submit al Arbitrament de tiels; qui agard que il
pajera tant etc, mes le jour de payment de ceo nest uncore venu, 6. Hen. 7.11.
b. Hussy. 9. Edw. 4.51. a. Chock. 20. Hen. 6.12. b. Newton. 20. Hen. 6.40. a.
b. Paston. 28. Hen. 6.12. 5. Ed. 4.7. a. Iour de payment.


Mes si le jour de payment soit pass, il doit monstre que il tender les
deniers al jour, and que il est uncore prist. 8. Hen. 6.25. b. Martin. 16. Edw.
4.8. b. Pigot. Uncore priste


Car,

Arbitrament per que les Arbitratours agard, Done action.
que un des parties pajera money, done action. 5. Edw. 4.7. a. Chock. 16. Edw.
4.9. a. Pigot. 17. Edw. 4.2. b. Townsend. 17. Edw. 4.8. a. Pigot. Fitzh. Natura
brevium 121. g. 6. Hen. 7.11. b. Hussy. 9. E. 4.51. Danby.

Et si les parties ne perform L'arbitrement, Restore al primer actio^. Restore
al primer actio^.
le part est restore a son primer action, 49. Ed. 3.3. a.

Mes uncore est a son Election de aver Brief de debt sur le agard, ou le
primer Action, 49. Ed. 3.3. a. 33. Hen. 6.2. b.

Mes si le payment soit fait, Determine.
le primer tort est tout ousterment determine per le agard, 4. Hen. 6.1. a. 8.
Hen. 6.25. b. 21. Hen. 7.28. b.

Ex que ensuit auxy.

Si les Arbitratours agardant, Double Action.
que un des parties pajera tant des deniers, Et chescun de eux est oblige al
auter pur estoier al agard le party avera action sur le agard, and auxy sur le
fait si agard ne soit perform. 21. E. 4.41. b. 33. Hen. 6.2. b.

Si le submission soit par paroll, Collateral matter.
and Arbitrament soit que un des parties fairont un collateral act, auter que
payment des deniers, ceo ne done action, and si ne soit execute in fait et
satisfy, le Arbitrament and ascun effect; Et tell Arbitrament ne determine le
primer tort, 19. Hen. 6.38. a. Newton. 20. Hen. 6.19. a. Markham. 5. Edw. 4.7.
a. Chock. Com. Fogoss. 11. b.

Uncore si le submission soit per obligation, Collateral matter.
si un Collateral act soit agard deste fait; si ceo ne soit perform, le
obligation sera forfeit, 9. Ed. 4.44. a.

Thus much touching the effects of an Award.

A Consequent thereof is, the Performance; wherein we are to consider, That

Les parties doient fair tout ceo que in eux est a ceo perform, Performance.
21. Ed. 4.39. b. Fairefax.

Si per le Arbitrament soit agard que un act sera fait le quel home poit
performer, Assistance.
in deux manners lun voy per luy mesme, et per l'auter voy il doit aver l'aide
d'un auter person: le party doit ceo performer per tell mean, que il solement
poit fair sans aid de l'auter, 21. Ed. 4.40. b. Hussy.

Arbitrament ne doit este fait in part, Part.
et in part ne my, 6. Hen. 7.10. b.

Mes coment que Arbitrament ne poet este fait per les Arbitratours, Part.
part a une temps, et part a auter temps: uncore ceo poit este perform part a
un temps et part al auter, 8. Ed. 4.10. b. Fairefax.

Les parties averant reasonable temps a eux allow pur le performer d'un agard,
Temps.
si null temps soit limitt, 20. Edw. 4.8. b. 21. Ed. 4.41. a. b. etc.

Si le act que les Arbitratours agard que l'un party performera, Primer Act.
ne poit este perform devant auter Act primes fait per l'auter party, si cest
party ne fait le primer act, l'auter est excuse, 5. Edw. 4.7. a.

Arbitrament que l'un party pajera money, Tout a un temps.
and l'auter fera Releas; ceo sera fait a un mesme temps, si ne soit obligation
de performer le Agard. 21. H. 7.28. b. Knightly, and Reed.

Mes si soit Obligation a performer le agard, Chacun perform son part.
donque chacun doit perform son part de soubs le peril de L'Obligation, 21.
Hen. 7.28. b. Reed.

Si Obligation soit fait pur estoier al Arbitrament coment que le Arbitrament
soit void in Ley, Void award Quaere.
uncore ceo doit este perform, auterment le Obligation sera forfeit 22. Hen.
6.46. b. Port, per Cur.

Mes si action soit port sur tell void Agard, Void agard.
le Action ne sera maintain, 22. Hen. 6.46. b. Port.

Si le matter contenus in le agard, Averment.
and le matter contenus in le submission de que les Arbitratours doient
agarder, differt in parolls, ou in circumstance, les parties al Arbitrament ne
seront receive in suit sur ceo de avererrer que tout est une, 7.8. Eliz. 242.
b. 52.

Thus much has been spoken concerning Arbitrements, their Causes, Effects, and
Consequents.

There rests to accomplish our intended method, that we add somewhat
touching that wherewith an Arbitrament is compared, matched and resembled in
the Book Cases.

Wherefore know you that,

Chacun Accord resemble un Arbitrament. Paria. Differentia.


Uncore chacun Accord doit este satisfy ou Recompense; et Accord ne done
Action; lou del auter part Arbitrament pur que les parties sont adjudge de
paier deniers, done action; and ne besoigne deste plede, execute come devant ad
apparus, 6. Hen. 7.11. b. 5. Ed. 4.7. a. 17. Ed. 4.2. b. 17. Ed. 4.8. a. Com.
6. a. Fogossa.

And thus far forth for example sake, have we set out these Grounds and Rules
of Arbitrements: Whereunto if there were added, in their due places, the
residue of the Rules and grounds which may be collected out of the books of
the Law concerning the same, and furnishing both these and them with as many
Cases as might be applied thereunto; the same Cases being put at large under
every of their Rules, to demonstrate that in particular, which the Rule
includes in general, the enterprise would prove (as I think) some show of a
Treatise, concerning this Title.

Which being no hard thing to accomplish, thereby would appear that it were
neither unpossible neither unprofitable, nor altogether unpleasant, to reduce
every title of the Law particularly to a Method; and so consequently, the
whole body thereof into a perfect shape, which now seems wholly without
Conformity, and altogether dismembered.

Wherefore now, as touching the Material Cause of Rules and Grounds, thus much
said, may suffice.

Formal Causes and Grounds of the Law.
THe divisions of grounds of the law, as touching and concerning the form, are
in two sorts to be considered. 1, First, the Coherence of the words and the
Matter. 2, Secondly, the manner of the Manifestation thereof.

For the Coherence of the matter and words, there are to be regarded these two
qualities: 1. First, Verity, and 2. Secondly, Amplitude or Generality.


Verity of Propositions or Grounds consists of two sorts: For they import
either a necessary or known truth which cannot be impugned: Or Contingent
Verity or Probability, which may sometimes notwithstanding their show of
truth, be impeached of falsehood, and so be subject unto many exceptions.

The former of these are called Primarie Conclusions of Reason. And the latter
Secondarie Principles.

1, Those of the first sort are such general assertions of the Law, as are
imprinted in the mind of every Man, and discerned by the light of very Nature
it self: which, as most certain and undoubted, need no confirmation or
fortification, but of themselves are most sufficiently known to be true and not
impugnable: which the Philosophers do call, Primae and per se cognitae;
Communes animi Conceptiones and Notitiae, familiar to the conceit of every
person.

Notes Collected touching the Verity of Principles.
PRincipiorum, Arist. lib. 1. Them. cap. 25 T. 43.
Alia sunt necessaria, Alia in rebus contingentibus cernuntur. Axioma verum,
est, quando pronunciat vt Res est.

Axioma verum est, Peter Ramus li. 2. dial. c. 3.
aut Contingens. Necessitans.


Necessarium Axioma, Peter Ramus ibidem. Arist. Top. lib. 1. cap. 1.
quando semper verum est; nec falsum esse potest. Vnde Aristoteles, Vera quidem
sunt and perspicua ea, quae non ab alijs sed a seipsis sidem habent.

De primis Principijs.
PRincipia nihil aliud sunt quam Propositiones immediatae.

Ego propria cujusque generis Principia appello, Arist. lib. 1. them. cap. 8. T.
24.
quae, quod sint, Demonstratione probari non possunt: (Nam, quae sit verborum
vis and significatio, tum Principiorum, tum eorum quae ex Principijs
efficiuntur, intelligendum est) Quod vero ipsa sint Principia, citra
demonstrationem ponitur; Reliqua autem Demonstratione concluduntur.

Prima et principia pro eodem sumo. Arist lib. 1. them. c. 2. T. 5
Est autem Principium demonstrationis Propositio, quae ob id immediata dicitur,
quoniam nulla est alia prior per quam ipsa confirmari possit.

Primaria principia dicuntur universalia quaedam I^ris pronunciata, Io. Coras.
de Art juris. lib. cap. 24.
quae omnibus hominibus ita sunt impressa naturaliter and infixa, ut, velut
indubitata and notissima, non alia egeant Demonstratione, aut certe levi aliqua
probatione Confirmentur.

Vnde et Communes animi Conceptiones et Notitiae appellantur quod suapte vi and
perspicua sit and evidens horum Principiorum veritas and Natura, Ibidem.
quasi sine aliqua Dubitatione and Contradictione veluti ab omnibus Concessa,
in disputatione sumantur.

Of which sort for Example are some of them before mentioned, and here again
to be remembered in this behalf, in manner following.

Volenti non fit injuria.

Omne majus continet in se minus.

Qui sentit Commodum sentire debet and onus.

Fraus and dolus nemini patrocinantur.

With infinite other in universal manner proposed, and with not a few in
special set forth; As in Grants, as before has been declared.

Quando aliquis quid concedit, and id etiam concedit sine quo res concessa esse
non potest.

In Testaments.

Testamentum est morte confirmatum. Com. Gri^sbr. 280. b.


In Rents.

Chacun Rent est issuant horse de terre.

With exceeding many other of like nature to be found in every title or
tractate of the Law. The manifest truth and great Reason of which said Grounds
is evident to every person of any Judgment, and need no proof for
demonstration and establishing of them.

2 Secondary Principles, are certain Axioms? Rules, and Grounds of the Law,
which are not so well known by the light of Nature, as by other means: and
which although they need no great proof to be confirmed; because they
comprehe^d great probability; yet many times are they, at the first show, not
yielded unto without due consideration: and are peculiarly known, for the most
part, to such only as profess the study and speculation of Laws.

Probable they are said to be, Probabilia sunt quae probant, aut o^ibus, aut
plurimis, aut certe sapientibus atque ijs vel omnibus vel plurimis vel ijs
quorum spectata est and perspecta sapientia. Arist. Top. lib. 2. c. 1. Doctor
and Student l. 1. c. 5. f. 10. a.
because, although the manifest truth of them be unknown, yet nevertheless
they appear to many, and especially to wise men, to be true.

And of this sort in the Laws of the Realm there are so many found, that some
men have affirmed, that all the Law of the Realm is the Law of Reason: because
they are derived out of the general Customs, and Maxims, or Principles of
the Law of Nature or Primary conclusions.

And for the knowledge of these Propositions there is a greater difficulty; and
therefore therein depends much the manner and form of Arguments in the Laws
of England.

Notes collected touching the difference between Primarie and Secondarie
Prinples.
PRincipia immediata quae in demonstrationibus accipiuntur, Arist. l. 1. c. 2
T. 5.
in duo genera distribui possunt.

Vnum eorum quae quanquam demonstrari non possunt, non tamen it a aperta, and
per se manifesta sunt, ut necesse sit ante cognita esse ei qui artem aliquam
discere velit, quas nos Positiones appellamus.

Altero genere continentur ea, quaeita sunt per se perspicua, ut non possint
non esse, omnibus multo ante cognita, and perspecta quam quicquam doceatur;
quae Pronunciata dicuntur.

To like effect speaks Aristotle in another place, Ea pro initio and
proposito sumenda sunt.

1 Quae in omnibus. 2 Vel certe in plurimis rebus inesse videntur.
The former sort Aristotle seems to call, as before showed, Pronunciata, the
other Propositiones.

And although in the Law of the Realm, they are indifferently called, without
distinction, Rules, Principles, Grounds, Maxims, Eruditions, and such like:
yet the judgment of Massaeus herein is worthy observation.

Accursius videtur non parum aberravisse a vero, Ant. Massaeus l. 1. de
exercitio Iuris peritorum.
cum idem significare voluerit Principa, Maximas, and Regulas; cum (Aristotele
auctore) icuiusque scientiae principia sunt quaedam propria, quae quod vera
sint non contingit demonstari, and quae per se, and non per alia fidem habent,
quoniam nihil prius superiusque in ea scientia est per quod confirmari
explicarique possint.

Talium autem Principiorum, nonnulla sunt positiones, alia dignitates, sic
dictae, ob id quod jure illis fides habenda sit, cum ea unusquisque audita
statim admittit: quale est istud: Totum unumquodlibet majus est aliqua sua
part. Hae rursus appellantur Maximae, Propositiones, and Communes animi
conceptiones; quod multorum scilicet intellectu facile percipiantur. Tales
autem non sunt Regulae; quae licet sint universalia Praecepta, indigent tamen
probatione, and probaripossunt: Nec tamen auditae admittuntur.

He seems to attribute the name of Principles, Axioms, and Maxims to the
first sort, and the name of Rules to the second.

Of the secondary Principles or Rules there are two kinds. Some deduced and
drawn from the usual and ordinary disposition of things (as has been before
declared) and by the observatio^ of humane nature dispersed in the minds of
men, collected by long observation: Whereof some are altogether upheld in the
Law upon common presumption, and intendment: Others do rest upon discourse of
Reason deducted in Argument. But of the former, some are such, as although they
are but probable, and import no certain truth, and therefore may
notwithstanding be sometimes untrue: yet nevertheless for the great
likelihood of them in humane actions, and the better to frame a conformity,
through the whole body of the Law, the said Laws permit no allegation to
impugn them, or any speech or averment to impeach their credit.

The first sort of Secondary Rules grounded upon entendment.
OThers there are also that depend upon entendment: But of the former kind,
this is one, grounded upon natural affection.

La ley ne voit presume que ascun voit led son heir, Com. Sharington and
Pledal.
ou auter que est prochein de son sanck, mes que il voit plus toft advance luy.

Which Ground, upon the presumption of natural affection, is not such, as that
it sounds always true; (for in diverse persons nature works diversely)
Wherefore although this assertion show how every man should be affected,
notwithstanding it is no proof that all men are so affected. And yet
nevertheless this strong entendment of Law, does not permit any thing to
impeach the same; and will not suffer any person bound by collateral warranty
(the reason whereof flows herehence) to traverse such affection, although
there be never so pregnant proof to encounter the same.

Notes touching the Definition, Division, and necessary Consequents of
Secondarie Principles.
IVris Praecepta secundaria sunt certa quaedam Axiomata and Definitiones seu
Regulae, Johannes Corasius de juris art cap. 26. lib. 1.
quae non tam natura quam civili aliqua ratione and authoritate, aut communi
mortalium usu per hominum animos diffunduntur.

Quae etsi plerumque vera sunt, nec valde egeant demonstratione; non tamen ita,
priusquam pressius considerentur ab illis cognoscuntur qui nostrae scientiae
dant operam. Quapropter, levialiqua and verisimili ratione, ut ijs
assentiantur, opus est.

See the manner and means how they are inferred by discourse out of the
general Customs or Principles of Reason, Doctor and Student l. 1. c. 5. fol.
10.
and the example thereof used by the Author of the Dialogues of the Doctor and
Student.

Presumption or Entendment of Law, whereupon certain of the secondary Rules
are grounded (as before is showed) are in two sorts: for species praesumptionum
sunt duae: una, quae legitimis probationibus regulariter refutari potest, quam
communem licebit appellare: Ioach. Hopp. de juris art lib. 2. fo. 466.
altera, quaereprobari non potest, quae and specialis recte fortasse dicetur.
Certe magno Reip. bono constituuntur hujusmodi praesumptiones: nec potest fieri
ut sine praesumptionibus ulla certa jura, aut ullae certae leges describantur.
Ibidem.


Secondary Principles are grounded either upon Entendment of Law, of which sort
some are such as do admit of no proof to encounter them, and rest upon
Entendment, but yet admit proof to the contrary. Or discourse of reason.

So likewise the Law upon like common presumption conceived of the acts and
behavior of men, intends this Principle.

Null home sans cause voile fair act a prejudice soy mesme. Com. Manxel. 6. a.


And hereupon the Law presumes that every assertion and allegation proceeding
from any person which sounds to his prejudice and hurt, is so undoubtedly
true, as that there shall not be suffered any travers or denial of the same.
Wherefore if in a Praecipe quod reddat brought of twenty acres of Land against
one, and he, before the Statute of Conjunctim feoffatis, had pleaded
Ioyntenancy with another of deed; or sithence the said Statute, if he had
pleaded Ioyntenancy by Fine with another; although the Plea be utterly false,
yet shall not the demaundant have any answer or travers thereunto; because that
when the demandant by his Writ has admitted him Tenant of the whole; and he
says that he was Ioyntenant with another; this other, if he be false, may stop
the Tenant by this Record; To say the contrary of his affirmation, and thereby
may gain the Moity of the land, against him that has so pleaded: And
therefore, for that, that men are not wont to tell untruths in disadvantage of
themselves; and that the saying hereof if it were not true, will greatly be to
the prejudice and hurt of him that affirmed it; thereupon the Law presumes,
that it was true indeed; and will in no wise admit the travers against the
same; or give the demaundant ability to impugn it; but hereupon presently, the
Writ shall abate, and no maintenance of the writ for the cause aforesaid, shall
be allowed.

In like manner also unto matters of Record the entendment of law does give an
impeachable credit; And hereof also this rule of Law is drawn.

Matters de Record import in eux (per presumption del ley, Com. Ludford. 491. b.
pur leur hautnesse) credit.

And therefore none shall be permitted to say that the Kings Patent under the
great Seal was made or delivered at any other time then that wherein it
bears date; No more then a man may say, That a Recognizance or Statute
Merchant or Staple, was acknowledged, or any Writ was purchased at any other
time, then that wherein it bears Date. For an averment that it was antedated,
or that it was delivered or acknowledged after the date, is an averment tending
to the discredit of the great Seal, or of the Justice or Officer of Record
which recorded the Recognizance, or the Statute Merchant, or such like.

In the dealings and affairs of Men, Lambers Justice of Peace lib. 1. cap. 13.
one Man may affirm a thing which another may deny. But if a Record once say
the word, no man shall be received to aver; speak against it; or impugn the
same. No though such Record contain manifest and known falsehood, tending to
the mischief and overthrow of any person. 38. Ass. 21.


And therefore whereas certain persons were Outlawed in the Kings bench, in
the time of Shard Justice, and their goods forfeit, and their names likewise
certified into the Exchequer with an abstract of their goods, It happened so that
the name of one (by misprision of the Clerk) was, among the rest certified
likewise into the Exchequer, as outlawed, and that he had goods to the value
of six pounds, whereas indeed the same man was not outlawed. And thereupon a
writ issued to the Sheriff of that County, where the said good s were supposed
to be, to seize the same to the use of the King, who returned that a Nobleman
had seized the same goods; And thereupon issued forth another Writ out of the
Exchequer, to cause him to answer the same goods so seized by him, who upon the
Return of the second Writ, alleged, that the party whose goods he had
seized, was not outlawed: And Green, one of the Justices of the Kings bench
came into the Exchequer with the person who was supposed outlawed, and there
testified that he was not outlawed; but showed, that that which was certified,
was done altogether by the misprision of the Clerk: Where Skipwith returned
him this answer; That although all the Justices would now record the contrary,
that they could not be permitted, nor any credit might be given thereunto, when
as there was a Record extant, and not Reversed, testifying the same Out-lawry:
yea, the Law so mightily upholdeth the intended Credit of a Record, that it
prefers the same before the oaths of men, sounding to the contrary, and in
respect thereof, will not permit a verdit to be received, which might impeach
the same.

And therefore whereas one brought a Writ of waste, 9. Hen. 6.56..b
and assigned the wast in diverse particular things, and moreover in a Message
and Teneme^ts in Wood-Church; where among other wastes assigned, the Plaintiff
showed, that the Defendant had done and permitted waste in the Hall of the said
Message, etc. The Defendant pleaded in this Action, that Woodchurch was a
Hamlet of A. and no Town of it self. Which plea includes a Confession of the
waste to have been done in such manner as was declared. And upon this plea,
the parties were at issue; with the which the Jury were charged: And further
it was given them in charge, that if they found that Woodchurch was a Town of
it self, and no Hamlet of A: as the Plantife had supposed, that then they
should assign damages severally for every waste committed. The Jury at length
found, that Woodchurch was a Hamlet of it self, and assessed damages for
certain of the particular wastes supposed severally, as they ought. And as
touching the wast supposed to be done in the said Hall, they said there was no
such Message. The Judges rejected their verdit, because it was contrary to
that which was employed by the Plea of the Defendant of Record: and so enforced
the Jury to give damages for a wast: which (indeed) was not done contrary to
the Conscience of the Jury; notwithstanding that some of them made
protestation, that in so doing they might be perjured: Which wholly was done
only to uphold the credit of the Record; and that the verdit (of Record) might
not be contrary to that which was employed by the Plea of the parties.

Moreover, there is a Rule of Law wholly grounded upon Entendment, which is
this;

Livery del fait sera intend in le lieu ou le date fuit.

The delivery of a Deed shall be intended to be where it bears date.

Which Rule the Law upholdeth for certain truth, (although in very deed it may
be at sometimes untrue) And therefore will not permit any proof which may
impeach the intended truth of the said proposition. For confirmation whereof, a
notable case cited in the 31. Hen. 6. and by way of Argument alleged in
Fogassa his Case, 31. H. 6. Co^. Fogassa. 7. b.
may be produced; which was in this manner. An Action of Debt was brought upon
a Deed; The Defendant denied the same; whereupon the parties were at issue; and
the witnesses produced to prove the Deed were examined, where the Deed was
delivered: who answered: At York; which was in another County then where the
said Deed bare Date; And hereupon the Defendant demurred: And after upon
consideration, Judgment was given against the Plaintiff in overthrow of the
Action founded upon that Deed; which cannot be intended to be delivered else
where then at the place where it bears Date.

Many Examples may be further produced to like effect, to prove that diverse
Rules there are received in the Law which upon presumption and common
Entendment, to eschew some notable mischief or inconvenience, are so holden
for Truth, that in no wise they shall be incountred; although indeed, as
occasion may fall out, they do contain manifest and apparent falsehood. But
these already in that respect alleged may abundantly suffice for example.

Of like nature also there are in the Law other kind of Rules or principles;
The second sort of Secondary rules grounded upon entendment
which although, they do concern contingent matters; and therefore may
sometimes be impeached, and found untrue; Yet do they carry a kind of Credit
also upon presumption or Entendment of Law, although not so vehement as the
former.

Wherefore although the Law does receive them Prima facie, and at the first
show, as likely, and gives credit unto the Assertion contained in them, yet
nevertheless does it admit proof to the contrary, and so suffers such
presumption or Entendment, which upholdeth such Rules, to be impeached, and
controlled by a contrary trial by pregnant proof, and so does permit any
averment to be made against the same. For Example: It is a Rule in Law that a
Verdict sera intenda touts foits vray tanque il est revers pur ceo que il est
issint trove per serement de 12. homes. 20. H. 7.11. b Coningsby.


A verdict shall be intended always true, till it be reversed, for that it is
so found by the oath of twelve men.

And hereupon it is agreed for Law, 5. H. 7.22. b.
That if a Judgment be given erroniously, the party grieved thereby shall not
only have his writ of Error to redress the same, but also a supersedeas, to
Countermand execution thereupon. But if Judgment be given upon a verdict,
although the same verdict be untrue, and the party grieved do bring his writ
of Attaint; Yet nevertheless he shall not in that case have a supersedeas to
stay execution, for the intended truth, which the Law supposes in the said
verdict. And yet the Law permits the falsehood in verdicts to be laid open,
and punishes them with great severitie, 33. Hen. 8.196. Brooks case, 4. Ed.
6. Com. 49.

If a Writ of Conspiracy be brought against one for that he gave evidence
before the Justice of Peace at their Sessions, 20. H. 7.11. b. Coninsby.
concerning the suspicion of a Felony supposed to be done by the Plaintiff,
upon which Evidence the Plaintiff was indicted of the said Felony; and after
found Not guilty by a Jury of twelve Men; It is no plea in this writ of
Conspiracy for the Defendant to say, that the Plaintiff was guilty of the
Felony, for that were to encounter the verdict; which shall be intended true.

And although the Law do give Credit to all verdicts, Com. Wrotsley. 193. b.
yet does it not foreclose the party grieved thereby, but permits him to
impugn it, and to impeach it of falsehood, if he can, by his writ of Attaint.

Also there is a Rule in the Law, That

Feesimple ou auter estate certain convay a un scra intend de continuer in le
person in que il est repose, touts foits durant mesme l'estate.

An estate of inheritance or other estate certain conveyed to a man, shall be
intended to continue in the person wherein it was reposed always during the
continuance of the said estate.

Although this for Law be Prima facie intended true; yet nevertheless
thereunto this must be added, viz.

Si ne soit monstre coment auterment ceo est divist.
If it be not showed otherwise how it is divised.
By thus much said, it is sufficiently made manifest, that some propositions,
Rules and Grounds of the Law are intended true; but yet proof is allowed to
encounter the same.

So hitherto has been spoken of the Verity of Propositions; whereof some are
indeed and nature manifest true, and grounded on necessary reason; and other
some are true also, but upon matter contingent.

Contingent verity, was said to be of two kinds. The one grounded on common
Presumption and entendment of the Laws, which likewise was subdivided into two
branches. Some of them such as do not admit any Contradiction to impugn them;
For the certain supposed truth (though indeed not always found in them, yet
always deemed by them) allows no control; The other sort of Rules resting
upon Entendment, are such as are Prima facie supposed true, but yet no
otherwise supposed true then till the contrary be proved, and they impeached of
falsehood: Of both which there has been showed sufficient examples.

Now therefore in order follows the second principal part of Contingent
Propositions or grounds framed upon observation of Nature, The second
principal kind of contingent Propositions.
and disposition of things, collected and drawn by discourse of Reason,
because it cannot be equally evident to every Man's capacity. And for as much as
the said discourse and manner of reasoning, through the weakness of man's
understanding, and difficulty of the matter, may fail and be oftentimes
deceived in some circumstances which may and daily do occur through the
variety of particular matter, which again (in Reason) may offer a contrary
resolution; Therefore are those Grounds not universally true, but subject to
many and manifold exceptions: And yet nevertheless true in all such Cases as
are not comprehended under those Restraints or Exceptions. Of which kind we
mentioned some in the beginning; as namely; 1, Sublata Causa tollitur Effectus.
2, Qui tacet consentire videtur. 3, Quod initio non valet, tractu temporis non
convalescit. 4, Quando duo Iura in uno concurrunt, aequum est ^^si esset in
diversis.
Every of which with many other of the like nature, though they be of themselves,
upon the first view of great Probability; yet nevertheless, being with more
earnest consideration pondered, are found not so firm as they seem, but are
subject to some controulment, and to be impeached with sundry instances and
exceptions. Of such like the number is in manner infinite: at the least many
thousands in our Law, which are published in the French.

Nest Loial pur ascun de enter in le terre del auter sans son license. 12. H.
8.2. b. Eliot.


It is not lawful to enter in another man's ground without License.

Descent de Estate d'inheritance in terr, toll le entry de cesty que droit ad.

The descent of an estate of inheritance in lands takes away his entry which
has right.

But these few shall suffiice in this place for an example.

Wherefore for as much as the mind of man is beautified with two faculties or
powers in quality different, though flowing from that which is in nature
indivisible; whereof the one we now call for distinction sake (Capacity) and
the other (Discourse.

By the former of which we apprehend, as with the inward eye, the natural
light and resplendencie of many Primary Propositions, and known Notions; whose
clearness and evidence causes every one to yield thereto their consent.

And by the later we do Collect, Reason, Argue, and infer of those former
Notions and Resolutions, certain Secondarie Propositions, descended and
derived from the first, as branches from the Root, or Rivers from the
Fountain; which by how much the more they are drawn from their spring, by so
much the more (by reason of the variety of interposed circumstances) they are
oftentimes obscured and made less clear and evident.

And since that every Science is not of like certainty, Ethicae ver^ supponitur
quasi moralis scientiae, quia tractat de moribus. Bracton l. 1. c. 2.4. b.
Arist. Ethic. l. 1. c. 3.
by reason of the variable condition of the subject whereupon it is employed;
so that rightly of Moral Philosophy (consisting wholly of man's changeable and
inconstant conversation, and from whence indeed, the knowledge of all Laws are
in a generality derived, and thereto to be referred) said the Philosopher
Aristotle right well, in excuse of his purposed Method in the delivery of the
same, That Doctrina discernens honesta and turpia, tantis dubitationum
fluctibus concutitur, ut multis lege tantum and opinione, non natura,
constitutum esse jus videatur. It follows me thinks, of necessity, that it
is scarcely possible to make any secondary Rule of Law, but that it shall fail
in some particular case: whence springs this often used assertion, Non est
Regula quin fallat: And therefore the Ordainers and Interpreters of Law,
respect rather those things which may often happen; and not every particular
circumstance, for the which though they would, they should not be able by any
positive Law to make provision.

By reason whereof they do permit the Rules, Axioms, and Propositions of the
common Law, upon discourse and disputation of reason, to be restrained by
exceptions; which are grounded upon two causes. The one is Equity: the other is
some other Rule or Ground of Law, which seems to encounter the Ground or Rule
proposed: wherein, for conformities sake, and that no absurdity or
contradiction be permitted, certain exceptions are framed, which do not only
knit and conjoyne one Rule in reason to another, but by means of their equity,
temper the rigor of the Law, which upon some certain circumstances in every
of the said Rules might happen and fall out: Bract. l. 1. c. 5
Et omnia been coaequiparat, as says Bracton.

And therefore the Author of the Dialogues between the Doctor and Student,
Lib. 1. ca. 16.
describes equity according to this the effect thereof here mentioned: which
is, that it is no other thing, but an exception of the Law of God, or of Reason
from the general rules of the Law of man, when they by reason of their
generality, would in any particular case, judge against the Law of God, or the
Law of Reason: The which exception is secretly understood in every general
Rule of every positive Law. And a little after, in the same place affirms,
That equity follows the Law in all particular cases, where right and justice
requires, notwithstanding that the general Rule of the Law be to the contrary.

And the exception so framed upon any Rule or Ground to the which it is
annexed, does not impeach the credit of the said Ground; but being included
therein, as aforesaid, Format Regulam in omnibus casibus non exceptis.

But lest some men might think, L. quaesit. ff. de fundo instructo.
that whatsoever is spoken in the said Dialogues touching equity, might be
only understood of that equity which either enlarges or restrains Statute
Laws, and of which M. Plowden in his Appendix unto the Argument of the case of
Eston and Studd, in his second Commentaries so largely out of Aristotle, and
Bracton discourses. There follows in the same place of the said Dialogues,
and in the chapter next ensuing are proposed two Axioms, Grounds, or Rules,
with their exceptions, there put for example, and which do tend to the purpose
and proof of that whereof we now speak.

And because that those said Rules there mentioned are last of all here for
example before proposed, it shall be requisite first of all to furnish every of
them with examples.

But yet for the better understanding of that which is behoofefull to be known
concerning equity in general, we are to note that every Rule with his
exceptions or (to speak otherwise in words) every received difference in the
Law (being indeed nothing but a Rule or Ground and his exceptions) does either
flow from equity, or else result of the combining of two Rules together, as
before has been declared.

The use therefore of equity is triple in our Law: The triple use of equity in
the Laws.
For 1 Either it keeps the common Law in conformity by means here mentioned.
2 Or it expounds the Statute Law. 3 Or thirdly gives remedy in the Court of
Conscience in cases of extremity, which otherwise by the Laws are left
unredressed.


Wherefore as all men endued with the right use of reason, and conversant in
the knowledge of any Law, must of necessity confess, that every Law does
stand upon permanent Rules, as of Iron not to be bent or broken upon this or
that occasion, or to be infringed upon this or that occurrence (for else there
need no Court of Law, but all should be one with the Court of Conscience, and
have their proceedings framed according to the Arbitrary conceit of the
Judge.) So likewise nevertheless, upon every circumstance of time, person,
place, and the manner of doing, there falls out such matter of equity, that
if Law should be pursued according to the settled Rules thereof, Summum jus (as
Cicero says) would prove Summa injuria: wherefore Law without equity were
rigor. And yet again, of the other side, if all Laws should change and be
controlled as often in every case as equity would require, then should there be
(as aforesaid) no Law certain. And therefore it stands with good reason,
that the common Law in some cases, should allow and follow equity, as far
forth as the costancy of the Law would permit, and for the better conformity of
one Rule thereof with another: which common Law again in other cases should
refuse equity for the better avoiding of confusion.

EQuity therefore in all the use thereof, and in every of the threefold before
mentioned observations has a double Office, Effect, or Function.

Sometimes it does amplify.

Sometimes again (when reason will) it does diminish or extenuate.

A description of the former is that which Bracton yields, Aequitas est rerum
convenientia quae in paribus causis paria desiderat jura, and omnia been
coaequiparat, and dicitur aequitas quasi aequalitas. Lib. 1. c. 4. 5.


This enlarges the common Law; for it teaches to proceed in the same from one
case to another like thereunto; and so to proceed, Com. 467.
that Si aliqua nova and inconsueta emerserint, and quae prius usitata non
fuerint in regno; si tamen similia evenerint, per simile judicentur; Bracton
li. 1. cap. 2.. 7.
cum bona sit occasio a similibus procedere ad similia.

And therefore these cases differing never so much in circumstance, so that
they do concur in reason, should be ruled after one and the self same
manner. For, Vbi est eadem ratio, idem jus statuendum est. But hereof we shall
hereafter have more ample occasion to speak, when we take in hand the last of
Aristotle's before remembered observations; namely Similitudinum collectionem, or
cognitionem.

This equity moreover in Statutes enlarges the letter to cases not
comprehended within the words; if nevertheless they do stand in equal
mischief.

Lastly, in all cases of mischief, for redress whereof Positive Law or
ordinary Rules of Law are defective; equity extends forth her hand in the
Court of Conscience to help therein the said defect of the Laws.

The second kind of equity does again of the other side restrain the ample
or general rules of the common Laws by ministering exceptions,

And in Statute Law it does also limit the overlarge letter, drawing it wholly
to, and keeping it within the bounds of the intent and meaning of the makers.

In the Court of Conscience it gives likewise comfort, considers all the
circumstances of the fact, and is as it were tempered with the sweetness of
mercy, and mitigateth the rigor of the common Law; and leaving the inflexible
stiff Iron rule, takes in hand the Leaden Lesbian rule: which being rightly
swayed in cases of extremity, and therein, enjoining the common Law of her
strait proceeding, issues this sentence full of comfort to the afflicted,
Nullus recedat a Cancellaria sine remedio. 4. Hen. 7.


Wherefore if the same equity be used in such cases only as are of extremity
(as indeed it should) it causes the Chancellor, into whose hand the managing
thereof within this Realm is committed to be in high estimation of honor:
Cicero in Orat. pro Muraena.
so that In ejus sort juris dicendi gloriam conciliat magnitudo negotij,
gratiam aequitatis largitio; in qua sort sapiens Praetor offensionnem vitat
aequabilitate decernendi; benevolentiam adjungit lenitate audiendi.

And thus much by the way has been spoken of equity, upon the occasion of
speech of exceptions which do restrain Rules and Axioms, that the original
fountain from whence such exceptions do spring, might the better and more
manifestly be conceived.

And therefore thus much thereof suffices, reserving the rest to his due and
native place.

Now we will proceed with the first example published in the said Dialogues of
the Doctor and Student, concerning the exceptions attributed and annexed unto
Maxims, Rules, and Grounds.

There is (says he) a general prohibition in the Laws of England; That

It is not lawful for any man to enter into possession or freehold of another
without authority of the owner, or of the Law. The first Ground.


This Ground may be proved by many particular cases and authorities: for the
Law of property would that every man's own should be private and peculiar
unto himself; and therefore it is said, That

Nest loyal al un de enter en mon terre sauns mon license. 12. H. 8.2. b.
Elliot. 21. Hen. 7.27. b. Kingsmel. Read.


Lou mes beasts sont damage fesant in auter terr, jeo ne puis enter pur eux
enchaser horse ains convient a moy primerment a tender amends.

If my beasts be damage fesant in another ground, I may not enter and drive
them out, but I ought first to tender an amends.

Si home ad merisme gisant sur la terr d'un auter, 21. H. 7.13. b. Read.
il ne poit justifier le entry in le terr a veyer ceo si soit in bon plyte.

If one have his. timber lying on another ground, he cannot justify his entry
to see his timber in good case.

Si maison soit lease a moy, 13. H. 7.9. b.
and jeo mit mon biens en ceo, and puis mon lease expire les dits biens estant
in le meason, nest loyal pur moy a ore pur enter en le dit meason de eux
prender.

If a house be leased to me wherein I put my goods, where they lie till the
lease be expired, I cannot now enter into the house to take them.

Si jeo mit mon chival in vostre stable and vous ne voiles ceo deliver a moy,
14. H. 8.1. b. Brudnel.
and jeo enter and enfrend vostre stable, jeo sera puny pur l'entry, and le
enfreinder del stable, mes nemy pur le prisel del chival.

If I put my horse into your stable, and you will not deliver him unto me; if I
enter and break your stable, I shall be punished for entering and breaking the
stable, but not for taking my horse.

Si jeo command un a deliver a vous certain beasts que sont en mon Park, 18.
E. 4.25. a
nest loyal pur vous de enter en mon Park, and prender les dits beasts, ovesque
cesti que jeo issent command per reason de cest commandment; car vous purra
assets bien eux receiver coment que vous demurres horse del Park.

If I command one to deliver you certain cattle out of my Park, it is not
lawful for you to enter into my Park with him whom I commanded to deliver
them: for you may receive the^ though you stay without the Park.

Si jeo bail biens al home, 9. Ed. 4.35. a 21. H. 7.13.
jeo ne puis justifier l'entry en son meason pur prender les biens, car ceo non
fut per null tort que ils viendra la mes per l'act de nous ambideux.

If I deliver my goods unto a man, I cannot justify the entering into his house
to take them, etc.

Si le vicont ad fierifacias pur levier deniers recovers verse ascun, 8. Ed.
4.4. a.
uncore si per force de ceo il ne voile enter et debruser le meason de cesti
verse que le recovery fuit, il sera de ceo puny pur cest entry en trespass.

If the Sheriff has a fierifacias, to Ievie money recovered, if by force
thereof he enter, and break the house of the debtor, he is subject to an action
of trespass.

Si un Vicar ad offerings in un Chapel de quel Chapel le franktenement est in
moy; 2. H. 4.24. a.
il ne pur ceo justifiera l'entry et debruser de ma Chapel pur eux prender
horse.

If a Priest have offerings in a Chapel, the freehold of which is in me, he
cannot justify the entry and breaking the Chapel to take out his offerings.

Si home esteant in sa Garren demesne springa un Feasant, 38. E. 3.10. l
et lessa sa falcon vola a ceo que vola in le Garren d'un auter home, and la
prist le Feasant, nest loial pur le owner del falcon, pur enter in le auter
Garren, and de la emporter.

If a man spring a Pheasant in his own Warren, and let his falcon fly at her,
and she flies into another Warren, and there takes the Pheasant, he that
owes the Hawke cannot enter into the others ground to take her.

Having proved the former ground with these sufficient former authorities, let
us now descend unto the examination of such exceptions of the said proposition,
as may exemplify our former speeches, whereof some certain being orderly
delivered and confirmed with some authorities of book cases, I hold it
sufficient so to make manifest our meaning at this present; leaving a more
exact consideration thereof to more fit place and opportunity.

We are therefore to conceive that there is an infallible rule of Law, That

Le Common wealth est destre prefer devan ascun private wealth.

The Common wealth is to be preferred before any private wealth.

By reason whereof lest contradiction between the said proposed rule and this
now in hand should ensue upon some circumstance which may fall out; therefore
the said last specified ground, concerning the benefit of the Common wealth,
does minister an exception for the better understanding of the aforesaid rule
proposed, namely, That

Home poit justify son enter en le franktenement ou sur le possession de un
auter si soit pur le benefit del Common wealth. The first Exception.


A man may justify his entry into another freehold, if it be for the good and
benefit of the Common wealth.

And therefore these cases following depending thereupon are produced to prove
and manifest the same.

Si jeo vien in vostre terre, et occide un Fox, un Gray, ou un Otter, pur cest
entry jeo ne sera my puny, pur ceo que sont beasts encounter le Common profit.
12. Hen. 8.10. a. Brook.


If I come into your ground to kill a Fox, Gray, or Otter, for this entry I
shall not be punished; for they are beasts against the common profit.

Pur le Common wealth meason sera plucked down si le prochein meason soit
ardent. 13. Hen. 8.16. b. Shelley.


For the good of the Commonwealth an house shall be pulled down if the next
be fired.

Et Suburbs del City seront plucked down in temps de Guerr, pur ceo que ceo
est pur le common wealth: 8. Ed. 4.35. b Littleton.
Et chose que est pur le common wealth chascune poit fair sans aver action.

And the suburbs of a City shall be razed in the time of war: And that which
is for the good and profit of the Common wealth any man may do without danger
of another action.

Home justifiera son entry in auter terr in temps de Guerr pur fair Bulwark
in defense del Realm, 21. H. 7. b. Kingsmil.
Et ceux chooses sont justifiable and loial pur maintenance del Commonwealth.

A man may justify his going into another man's ground in time of war to make
a Bulwark in defense of the Realm, etc.

Pur felony, 13. Ed. 4.9. a
ou pur suspicion de felony home poit debruser meason pur prender le felon, car
il est pur le Commonwealth pur prender eux.

For felony or suspicion thereof a man may break a house to take the Felon;
For it is the good of the Commonwealth, to have him taken: With such like.

Moreover because there is another Rule of Law, That

Null prendra benefit de son torts demesne.

No man shall take benefit of his own wrong.

And sometimes it falls out that men, through malice to have others in
danger, would not stick to lay a train to entrap them, to the intent, that
they might, by some color, for their further vexation, prosecute suit against
them; To uphold the Conformity of Law: upon those two grounds, that one of them
do not encounter the other, there is a second Exception to the former Rule
namely, That

Si home soit le Cause pur que un tortious Entry est fait sur son Possession,
The second Exception.
il navera de ceo Remedy: mes le party que ad issent enter, sur le matter
disclose poit aid luy mesme and justify tiel Entry.

If a Man be the cause that a wrongful Act or Entry be made upon his
possession, he shall have no remedy for it, but the party who has entered may
disclose the matter to justify his entry.

Home ad un Molyn, 9. Ed. 4.35. ab.
and l'eaw courge per le terr d'une auter al dit Molyn, le Tenant del terre
mise stakes deins le dit eaw sur que il edify un meason, per reason de quel
l'eaw ne poit vener cy bien al dit Molin come devant: Le Tenant del Molyn enter
en la dit terre, and enrasa les stakes, per que la dit Meison eschew: Et in
Trespass pur entry en la dit terr and enraser la meason; tout cest matter pur
avoider le dit Nuisance fuit plede per le defendant and tenus bon Justification.

A Man has a Mill, and the water running to it comes through another
ground, and he fastneth stakes upon the ground in the water, and builds an
house; by reason whereof the water comes not to the Mill, as well as in time
past, the Miller enters unto the others ground and breaks down the stakes,
and thereby the house falls; If the other bring an Action of trespass
against him, for this, he may show that he did it, to avoyde wrong done to
himself, and justify the deed.

Home aver pris les beasts de I. S. and eux impound in sa terre, and vint un
pur Replevy mesme les beasts, 20. Hen. 6.28. a.
Et pur ceo que cest que ad eux destreine ne voilet suffer les beasts deste
Replevy, il ove arks and sagitts, sagitta al cesti que vint pur eux
repleuy-esteant in le port de mesme le close, lou ils fuere impound, pur que il
pur doubt enfreint le close in auter lieu, and enchase horse les avers que
fueront impound; Et per cest entry et infriender del Close, le Plaintiff port
trespass, Et sur tout cest matter disclose ceo, semble bone Justification.

A man having taken I. S. his goods, and impounded them in his own ground, a
Replevin was brought for those Cattle, and he that destrained them would not
suffer any Replevin to be made, but standing in the gate of the Close where the
Cattle were impounded, shot at him that came to make the Replevin, whereupon
the broke the Close in another place, and drew forth the said beasts: For which
breaking the Plaintifes Close, he brought an Action of trespass; but upon this
matter disclosed, it was taken for a good justification.

In travers, 21. Hen. 6.39. b.
le defendant dit, que pur ceo que le Plaintiff violet aver le defendant in son
dainger, il command un son servant de chaser les beasts de defendant in les
blees del plaintiff mesme, and le defendant cy hasti meant que il avoit notice
de ceo, il enter en le dit terre le Plaintiff, 9. Ed. 4.35. a Littleton.
et eux enchase horse: Et ceo fuit tenus bon Plea nient amountant al general
issue.

In an Action of trespass, the Defendant said, that because the Plaintiff
would have the defendant within his danger, he commanded one of his servants
to drive the Defendants beasts into the Plaintifes Corn; And the Defendant
as soon as he had notice thereof, entered into the Plaintifes Close, and drove
them out; This was taken for a good Plea, and not amounting to the general
issue.

In travers pur entry in le close, 37. Hen. 6.37. a.b.
etc. Del Plaintiff le defendant justifiera, pur ceo que le Defendant fuit
Chivanchant en le roial chimin que gisoit pres le meason del Plaintiff, quand
il vint la encounter la dit mese, la vient le Plaintiff ove Arc et sagitts et
fist un assault sur le defendant, pur que il avoid son Chival, and fua in le
dit mese, and ouster in le dit close; Et puis reveint in le dit chimin. Et ceo
fuit tenus bon Justification, si il voile add a ceo que le Chymin est in mesme
le ville que le meason est, ou in quel ville ceo est, and que le huis del meal
fut evert altemps: per que le defendant issint did accordant.

In an Action of Traverse for entering into the Plaintifes close, the Defendant
justified, for that he ryding in the Kings high way, which lay near to the
Plaintifes house, the Plaintiff set upon the Defendant, when he came near
against the Plaintifes house, and assaulted him with bow and Arrows; Whereupon
he forsook his horse and fled into the house, and so through it into his
Close, and after returned into the high way; And this was taken for a good
justification, if he had showed further that the high way was in the same town
where the house was, and showed in what town the house was, and that the door
of the house was open, etc.

Moreover, where there is a ground or rule of Law, as has been often before
remembered, That

Quando aliquis quid concedit, and id concedere videtur sine quo res concessa
esse non potest.

Hereof ensues a third Exception to be annexed unto the said former Ground: in
this manner,

Si home ad interest ou authority derive de ascun person, owner, and possessor
del soil: The third Exception.
le quel cesty a que le interest ou authority est done, ne poit accomply sans
Entry in la terr ou mease de cesti que issent done la interest ou authority, la
son entry est imply in la dit interest ou authority: Et pur tlel cause son
entry la sera justifiable.

Le Abbe de Hyde fait lease d'un ferm rendant Rent a son Monastery de Hyde,
Com. Kidn. and Brand. 71. a.
tandem le dit Monastery vient al mains le Roy, Hen. 8. per le statute de
Dissolutions, que puis ceo grant ouster al estranger: le lessee del dit ferme
poit bien venir al dit Monastery la a tender la dit Rent, Et cesti que ad le
possession de ceo navera eint travers pur tiel entry.

Si A: Com. Kidw. and Brand. 71. b.
soit tenus a B: in un obligation de 20. l. pur pair a luy 10. l. a tiel jour
la intent que null lieu est expres pur le payment, A: est tenus a querer B.
inquocumque liew que il soit: Et si B: est in son meason demesne, and vient a
luy la, and tender le argent, il ne sera trespasser pur le vener la Mes sil ust
este in la meason de ascun auter home, la il seroit trespasser al dit home: Mes
in l'auter cas intant que il fut assentant que il paiera a luy les dits
deniers, and in ceo fut il contain que il fut assentant que il vener a luy pur
ceo purpose: il ensuitt ex consequenti que il ne puniera luy pur ceo chose a
que luy mesme fut privy and agreement.

Si jeo enfeoffe G. and face litre d'attorney a C. a deliver seisin a G: 18. E.
4.25. b
pur le veinder sur la terre, et pur l'entry fait per G. de prender la livery,
G. ne sera punish in trespass; car il est impossible que il receivera livery si
non il entra in le terre, et il est imply in le fesance del feofment que il
viendra sur la terr de prender Livery.

Si home moy grant pur foder in son terre, 9. Ed. 4.25. a.
and de fair un trenche de tiel font ou spring jusques a mon place, si puis le
Pipe est estopp ou enfreint issint que l'eau issue horse, 13. H. 8.15. b
^^nglefield.
jeo ne poi foder in son terre pur mender le Pipe, car ceo ne fut grant, a moy,
etc. Mes cest opinion fut deny per tout le Court, car fut dit, que il poit
enter and foder pur ceo mender, pur ceo que est incident a tell grant a ceo
discourer and d'amender. 9. Hen. 6.29. b.


In travers pur entry en un meason le defendant dit que long temps devant le
trespass que A. fut seisi del dit meason in fee, and que ceo est in tiel ville
and devisable per testament, per que le dit A devise le dit maison a un fem in
tail, and que sil devy sans issue que son Executor ceo vendroit, and fait le
defendant son Executor and devy, la fem entermary ove le Plaintiff and puis
devy sans issue, pur que le defendant enter sur le poss: le Plaintiff a voir,
si fut bien repair alintent de scavoir a quel value le reversion fut a vender,
and ceo fut tenus bone Justification.

In Trespass pur Entry in meason and prisel del bient le defendant dit que le
Baron del Plaintiff fut possesses des dits biens and fuit seisy del dit meason
in fee, 2. Hen. 6.15. b. 16. a.
et fait le defendant, and auter ses Executours, et devy possesses des dits
biens, and le defendant vint al dit meason apres la mort le Testatour pur
administer and trovant huys del dit meason overt il enter and prist les biens,
et ceo fut tenus bon Plee per tout le Court.

By reason also that there is a Rule of Law,

That

Le possession del terre de chescun home est subject al Jurisdiction del ley.

Thereof also this Exception following holds likewise place in restraint of
the said former general Rule or Ground, that is to say,

Lou le ley done al ascun authority de enter in auter ter ou sur le possession
del auter, il justifiera son entry. The fourth Exception.


Si jeo suy seisi de terre in fee sur bon and indefesible title, Com. Manxel
13. a.
et un estranger demand cest terre per precipe verse an auter estranger, and sur
ceo le vicount per force del precipe vient sur la terre ove sommoners, and
summon luy verse que le precipe est port, and puis le demandant recover verse luy
per default ou per issue try sur certain point, and perforce de Haberi facias
seisinam le vic' vient arere and mist cesty que ad recover in seisin; jeo ne
puniera le vicont pur le primer vener, ne pur le second vener in le terre, pur
ceo que le vicont ne fait riens mes execute le mandement le Roy come il ad in
charge, and mon Possession est chargeable a cest Jurisdiction del Roy and ses
ministers.

Si home fait lease pur vie, Littleton Villenage. Com. Manxel 13. a.
and un villeine purchase le reversion, semble a Litt. que le signior del
villein poit maintenant vener al terre et claim mesme le reversion, et per tell
claim le reversion est maintenant in luy, et pur tell vener a le terr et act
fait il nest trespassor.

Si villein purchase advowson plen d'incumbent, Com. Manxl 13. a.
le signior del villein poit vener al dit Esglise, et claim le dit advowson,
et pur ceo le Incumbent ne punishera luy per tiel vener al dit Esglise.

In Trespass le defendant plede que il fut seisy del meason et terre et ceo
lease al plaintiff pur term de ans, 11. H. 4.75. b
et que fut certify que wast fut fait, et il enter in le close and meason pur
viewer si wast fut fait, et le huis del maison fuit overt, and demand
Judgment, et ceo fut tenus bon bar; a que le Plaintiff replica que il la
demurr encounter le volunt le Plaintiff un jour et un nuict, etc.

Hitherunto have we expressed certain exceptions of the fore-specified Grounds
which are derived from the reason of some other grounds and Rules of the Law,
and which reason would should be added, as restraints unto the said former Rule
of Law first remembered for conformities sake, and that the Law no way be
impeached of contrarieties. Now rests also that we deliver some few other
exceptions unto the said general Rule drawn likewise from the fountain of
equity; which are such as do ensue.

Since it were void of all reason and conscience that a man should punish a
wrong done unto him, Exceptions ministered by equity.
by the which he either sustaineth little or no detriment or damage, or at
leastwise more benefit then he sustaines prejudice: Therefore this exception
unto the said general Rule, is among other likewise allowed for Law. That

Lou le party sur que possession home fait tortious entry, The fifth Exception.
est plus benefit per tiel entry que prejudice, la home bien justifiera la dit
tortious entry.

Which the cases following do likewise at large sufficiently confirm.

Si jeo suy in peril deste murder in mon close, 12. H. 8.2. b. Pollard.
ou in mon meason, il est loial a chescun de enfrender mon meison ou close pur
moy ayder, et pur ceo que est pur mon benefit.

Si jeo voy vostre beasts demesne in vostre corn, 13. H. 8.15. b. Norwich.
et jeo eux enchase horse, jeo ne sera my puny pur ceo que fut pur vostre
advantage, et vous aves interest in les beasts. Mes si jeo chase les beasts
d'un estranger horse de vostre corn, jeo serra puny pur ceo; car vous puisses
aver remepy pur ceo; scil. per distress.

Si jeo view le Chimney de mon voycin urant pur saver les chooses que sont deins
son meason, 21. H. 7.27. b. Palms.
jeo justifiera l'entry in le meason, and deprender les biens que jeo trover
dedans pur eux saver.

In trespass de Parco fracto, 20. H. 6.37. a
le defendant justify le trespass pur ceo que fut controversy perenter luy,
and le seigneur de Huntingdon Plaintiff pur le overture d'un gorce, et pur ceo
que le dit seigneur fut in le dit Park hunting, il enter pur les ports estea^t
overt a monstre a luy ses evidences concernant le dit gorce and ceo fut tenus
per tout le Court bone Justification.

Again, the like equity does minister one other exception of the like quality;
for it were unconscionable and unreasonable that a man should be punished for a
wrongful entry, whereas he is compelled so to do, and cannot without his great
prejudice eschew the same: And therefore it is holden for Law, That

Si home enter sur le possession de un auter, The sixth Exception.
leu il ne poit auterment fair sans son grand prejudice, ceo ne sera deem
tiel entry de que il sera puny.

Si home ad Querck cressant in midds de trois maisons, 13. H. 8.16. b. Brown.
et il decoupe ceo, et le Querck eschuet in terre d'un auter, si il justify in
trespass il covient de alleager que il ne auterment puit fair.

Home de coupa thorns que cresse in son terre and ils eschaont inter d'un
auter, 6. Ed. 4.7. b.
and il enter and eux prender horse, sil ne poit in auter manner fair, ceo luy
excusera.

Si home chase avers per le chymin, Doctor and Student. ver. 10. Ed. 4.7. b ae.
Ed. 4.8. b. 6. Ed. 4.7. b.
et les beasts happont de escaper in les blees de son vicin, and cesty que eux
enchase enter freshment in le terr de eux enchaser horse, pur ceo que ils ne
ferront ascun damage, il justifiera tiel son entry in trespass.

And thus much has been said touching the first Ground proposed in the said
Dialogues of the said Doctor and Student, which has been proved in particular
with cases, and thereunto have been annexed certain exceptions which have
likewise been fortified with Book Cases, and Authorities, whereby the former
assertions have not only been exemplified, but also thereby it does plainly
appear, That almost every disposition in the Laws, de qualitate, or de jure,
is in conference of Maxims, and rests between the Rule and the Exception,
which is either ministered by reason of equity, or upon some other Rule or
Axiom. So that every difference showed between Cases, is nothing else but the
Rule and his exceptions; the effect whereof briefly is set forth by Morgan, who
says: That

Maxims ne doient este impugn, Com. Colth. 27. a
mes touts temps admit; mes les maxims per reason poient este confer and
compare l'un ove l'auter, coment que ils ne variont: Ou per reason poit este
discuss quel chose est plus prochein al Maxim ou mean perenter les Maxims
and quel nemy: mes le Maxims ne unque poient este impeach ne impugn, mes
touts dits doient este observe and tenus come firm Principles de eux mesmes.

For the better understanding whereof, we may note that all matters of debate
which may be referred to the controversies or questions de qualitate or de
jure, as has been said, have either commonly a Maxim of the one part, and a
Maxim of the other; or several reasons of each part derived from sundry
Maxims; or else that there is a Maxim of the one part, and there is equity
and reason which does minister an exception to that Maxim or general Rule: So
that all disceptation herein is, as has been said, in conference or comparing
of Maxims and Principles together, discoursing which thing is directly under
the reason of the said Maxim; and what matter or circumstance may make a
difference, and will be by exception exempted from the same; as more at large
hereafter in the declaration of the use of these Maxims may be made manifest
and apparent.

Now rests moreover to prosecute the second Axiom or Principle proposed in
the said Dialogues, namely, that which follows there in the sevententh
chapter of his first book, that is to say:

It is not lawful for any man to enter upon a descent. The second Ground.


Which ground being expounded by Littleton in his chapter of descents to extend
only to descents of an estate of Inheritance and freehold, and not of a
reversion or remainder, all which follow after in the said Chapter, are nothing
but Cases of Exceptions unto the said Grounds, as it is evident unto every one
that considers the same, and therefore shall it here be needless long to
insist thereupon. Nevertheless it shall be expedient to show some exceptions
thereunto, especially some certain, of such of them as being exceptions unto
the said Rule, are again restrained with other exceptions. Because there is a
Rule of Law, That

Laches ou folly ne sera impute a un enfant de luy prejudice. First exception
Littleton Garranty 279.


Therefore lest contrariety might happen in consequence of reason between the
said Rule of descents, and this Rule last remembered: there is ministered by the
means of this latter Rule, an exception unto the said former ground, namely,
That

If an infant have right of entry, Littleton descents cas. 402 20. H. 6.28. b
he may enter upon a descent.

This exception, although it does import great probability of truth, yet is the
same like unto the Ground in this respect, namely, that it is also subject to
be restrained with another exception, viz.

If an infant, or such privileged or excepted person have a right of entry,
and a descent of those lands is had to one that has a more ancient right; the
party having such ancient right shall be remitted: and both the right and entry
of the infant taken away.

And this exception ensues of another general Rule of Law, which is, That

An ancient right shall always be preferred before another mean right or
title.

The said exception upon exception, grounded upon the last remembered Rule, may
be plainly proved by this case.

If Tenant in Tail do discontinue and after do disseize his discontinuee, 11.
E. 4.1. b.
and during this disseisin the discontinuee dies, his heir within age; and
after the Tenant in Tail does dye seized; and this land descends unto the
issue in tail, the heir of the discontinuee being still within age; This is a
remitter, and the entry of the heir of the discontinuee is tolled,
notwithstanding that the Ground and Principle is, that the laches of the infant
shall not prejudice the infant. And the cause is the ancient right the issue
had.

Moreover the former General Rule touching descents that toll entries, The
second exception.
has among other, also this exception.

A descent had during the Coverture, Litt. fol. 59. case 403. 9. H. 7.24. a. 2.
Ed. 4.24 a 7. Ed. 4.7. b. 20. H. 6 28. b
shall not toll the entry of the woman or her heirs after the Coverture
dissolved.

But because there is a General Rule of Law, That,

None shall be favored in any Act wherein folly may be imputed to him.

From whence is derived also this more special Rule or Ground.

Coverture shall not aid a woman where the taking of a Husband which
respects not her benefit may be imputed to her folly. Com. Zouch. 366. a. 42.
E. 3.12. b 9. H. 7.24. a.


Hereof ensues this exception upon exception to the said former remembered
Rule, That

Where folly may be imputed to the woman for taking of such a Husband as will
be heedless of her benefit, 42. E. 3.12. b 9. H. 7.24. a. Litt. fol. 95. cas.
404.3.4. Ph. Ma. 144. n. 57.
there a descent, during the coverture shall bind the woman and her heirs.

Much more might be said of like effect, but this for example sake shall
suffice.

Now rests briefly to say something touching the first proposed Latin Rules:
Com. 72. b. Com. 268. a. Com. 294. a.
Of which the former was this,

Sublata causa tollitur effectus.

This Rule is not absolutely true; for the Philosophers from whence it is
borrowed, do understand it, De causis internis, non de externis.

The Civil Lawyers do restrain it in this manner, Prataus.
Haec autem Gnosis sine Regula, de causa finali, non de causa impulsiva
intelligitur.

The common Law of the Realm, thus;

Sublata una causa, si alia remanet, non tollitur effectus.

The second Rule; which was this, Qui tacet, consentire videtur, is verified
with this exception.

Si ad ejus commodum and utilitatem spectat, Prataeus l. 7. c. 3. fol. 911.
praesens and tacens pro consentiente habetur.

The third Rule was this,

Quod initio non valet, id tractu temporis non convalescit.

Which Ground may be confirmed with many cases, yet is the same Ground
restrained with this exception, because That

Habet locum in his tantum quae statim debent valere, Decius.
and nullam suspensionem habent.

If a man make a lease for life of land unto I.S. and after does make a lease
for years unto I.N. of the same land to begin presently, 37. Hen. 8. Brook.
Leases 48. Com. Smith and Stapleton 433. a. Com. Griesbrooke. 422. a.
This lease being made by word is void; for the freehold in the first lease is
more worthy, and by law intended to be of longer continuance then the term in
the second lease: yet if the first leasee die, or surrender before the second be
expired, the residue of the term is good.

If the father devise his land unto his daughter and Heir apparent, and after
leaving his Wife encinct, 5. Ed. 4.6. Per Billing quod fuit concessum and
Abridge per Fitzh. tit. Assi. 27.
or with child with a son, upon the death of the father this devise unto the
daughter is void for that she is his heir; but after, when the son is borne
it is good.

The fourth Rule of the said Latin rules before set down, was this,

Quando duo jura in uno concurrunt, aequum est acsi esset in duobus.

This Rule has exception grounded upon another Rule, that is, That

Vigilantibus and non dormientibus jura subveniunt. Com. 375. b.


Or to the same effect;

Vnicuique sua mora nocet.

And therefore

In causes de negligence ou laches diverse droits concurrant in un person ne
seront deem si come ils fustent in diverse persons. Com. Stowell. 372. b.


Where, if Tenant pur auter vie be, the remainder for life over to another, the
remainder in fee to the right heirs of the Tenant pur auter vie, If the said
Tenant pur auter vie be disseised, and the disseisor levy a fine with
proclamations, and the five y^^^es do pass, and after Cesti que vie dies;
and after also dies he in remainder for life; he which was Tenant pur auter
vie, shall not have other five years after the death of the Tenant for life in
remainder to pursue his right for the feesimple.

Upon like reason, if a Bishop be seized of an Advowson in the right of his
Bishopric, and the Church become void, and six months do pass; the Bishop
shall not have other six months as Ordinary, the same Church being in his
Diocese, as he should have if the same Church were of the patronage of another
person, although he be in one respect Patron, and in another Ordinary.

Hitherto we have entertained discourse as touching the verity of Axioms,
Rules, and Grounds; which, as has been showed, is either necessary or
contingent.

Contingent verity was divided into two branches; the one resting upon the
entendment of Law; the other being derived from the disposition and nature of
humane things, by debate and discourse of reason.

Of the first sort there are two kinds; for some propositions there are,
although of themselves but only probable, yet nevertheless are supposed of
such certainty, that no averment shall be received to encounter the same. Other
some, although they be by the Law intended true, Prima facie, yet nevertheless
the same Law allows an averment, and admits proof to impeach the same.

Those moreover which rest upon discourse, of reason, are subject to diverse
exceptions, the material cause whereof is, the infinite variety of
circumstances that in all humane actions do happen.

The form and nature of the exception is perceived and known by this effect
following; in that it restrains the ground unto which it is connexed.

The efficient causes are two, viz. Equity or some other Ground of the Law
importing contrariety. And the end thereof is conformity and coherency of Law
agreeable unto Justice, whose minister the Law is.

Moreover as occasion has been offered in the declaration of the causes from
whom Exceptions of Rules do spring, there has been showed the use of equity
in the common Law, Statute Law, and Chancery, by the two effects thereof,
application and restraint; the one enlarging, and the other abridging.

Wherefore now rests to speak of the second principal part, concerning the
form of Aixomes, namely, generality: The consideration whereof, brings to
memory, that GOD in his most excellent work of the frame of transitory
things, though he has furnished the world with unspeakeable variety, thereby
making manifest unto all humane creatures, to their great astonishment, his
incomprehensible wisdom, his omnipotent power, and his unsearchable
providence, yet being the God of order, not of confusion, has admitted no
infiniteness in nature (howsoever otherwise it seem to our weak capacities)
but has continued the innumerable variety of particular things under certain
specialls; those specialls under generals; and those generals again under
causes more general, linking and conjoyning one thing to another, as by a
chain, even until we ascend unto himself, the first, chief and principal
cause of all good things. And this is that which Plato out of Homer, was wont
to call Jupiters golden chain.

The eye whereby we do see and view, and the inward hand whereby we do reach
and apprehend these things, is man's understanding, which is wholly employed
about universality as about his proper object, by means whereof, in all things
rational, being discovered by the use of reason, man's understanding for the
attaining of knowledge proceeds from the effect to the cause, and again from
the cause to the effect; that is, from the particular to the special, and from
the special to the general; and so to the more general, even to a principal
and primary position or notion, which needs no further proof, but is of it
self known and apparent. And so again from such chief and primary
Principles and propositions to more special and peculiar Assertions,
descending even to every particular matter.

But that, of this which has been said, some example might be showed,
especially in this matter, which we now have in hand, namely, concerning the
Grounds and rules of the Law of England; let one of the proposed grounds first
before mentioned stand here for an example, viz.

Nihil est magis rationi consentaneum, quam eodem modo quodque dissolvere quo
constatum est.

This principle being a Rule of Reason containing great probability, and being
of the number of those that before we said to have been derived from the
observation of the nature of things, which though it be subject to manifold
exceptions, yet nevertheless as a general Rule, the same is verified in many
special Axioms; and they again diversely subdivided into many more peculiar
propositions; as the example of these following may make manifest.

1 Cesty que est charge per Record doit luy discharger per Record. 2 Cesty que
est charge per fait doit luy mesme discharge per fait, ou per auter matter cy
haut. 3 Cesty que est charge forsque per parol, poet este discharge per parol.
Of which general Propositions there can be made no better reason then by the
commemoration of the said first before showed general Rule.

Moreover, the first of the last above remembered comprehends under the
generality thereof certain other more special Rules:

As

In det sur arrerages de account que est matter de Record, le party doit
discharger luy per matter cy haut, and nemy per specialty, ou fait ou auter
matter que nest cy haut. 6. Hen. 4.6. a. 3. Hen. 4.5. a. 11. Hen. 4.79. b. 13.
Hen. 4.1. a. 8. Hen. 5.3. b. 3. Hen. 6.55. a. 4. Hen. 6.17. b. 20. Hen. 6.55. b.

In det sur recovery, home ne sera discharge mes per matter cy haut: ou a tiel
effect, 6, Hen. 4.6. a.

Under the second Rule or Ground before proposed touching a discharge where the
party is charged by matter of specialty; those special Rules following are
likewise comprehended.

In null case home ne poit avoid single obligation, sans auter specialty de
auxy haut nature, 1. Hen. 7.14. b. 5. Hen. 7.33. b. 11. Hen. 7.4. b.

Home que ad enfreint covenant ne pledera matter in discharge de ceo sans fait,
3. Hen. 4.1. b. 1. H. 7.14. b. 21. Hen. 6.31. a.

Home ne discharger a luy mesme dun annuity que charge son person sans
specialty, 5. Hen. 7.33. b. 35. H. 8.51. a. Dyer.

The first rule of these last remembered Grounds, namely, touching obligations,
is again divided into diverse particulars; as for example.

Arbitrament ne dischargera home de un d^ty due per un obligation, 8. H. 7.3.
b. 6. H. 4.6. a.

Si le obligee deliver l'obligation al obliger come acquittance, and puis ceo
prist de luy, and commence suit sur ceo, cest delivery ne sera discharge del
obligation, 1 Hen. 7.17. a. 33. Hen. 8.51. a. Dyer. 22. H. 652. b.

The other following concerning indentures of Covenants, may likewise be
divided into other more particular assertions: but to avoyde tediousness,
these already showed abundantly manifest our meaning, and therefore may suffice.

The use of this kind of observation of the generality of Rules and
Propositions is manifold. The use of general Rules, and the observations of
their specialls.


First, things proposed in the generality are best known and most familiar to
our conceit, since they be the proper object of our understanding, as before is
declared.

Secondly, they do better adhere and stick in memory, since Intellective
memory is (as the understanding is) employed about universal and general
things.

Thirdly, universal Propositions are the precepts of Art, and therefore they
are called perpetual and eternal: for no Art, Science, Method, or certain
knowledge can or may consist of particularities: for the orderly proceeding of
every Art, Methodically handled, is from the due regard had of the general, to
descend unto the specialls contained underneath the same: wherefore it ensues
hereof, that general Propositions are the most speedy instruments of
knowledge: for experience, which wholly is gotten by the observation of
particular things (being deprived of speculation) is slow, blind, doubtful,
and deceiveable, and truly called the mistress of fools.

IF perchance upon occasion of some former speeches here published touching the
universality of Grounds, there be demanded this question.

Why the Laws of England at the first and from time to time,

I answer thereunto, Glanvile, Bracton, Britton, and others appears.

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Last of all, obscurity; therefore there is nothing of more force and effect
touching the making and framing of a good Law, then the present occasion
offered, since thereby is brought to light, that which otherwise would not as
much (many times) as be thought upon, and gives occasion to dispute that which
none would have thought ever should have come in question. And therefore not
without due consideration among the Romans, Disputationes fori, and with us
Demurrers have ever been allowed as originals of Law.

As touching the manifestation of Rules, all are affirmative or negative:
wherein though the affirmative be, for many causes, the more worthy; yet such
negation as implies affirmation (and therefore called pregnant) is not without
some use in the setting down and delivering of exceptions and general Rules.
And thus much touching the form of Rules, Grounds, and Axioms.

The efficient cause of Rules, Grounds, and Axioms is the light of natural
reason tried and sifted upon disputation and argument. And hence is it, that
the Law (as has bin before declared) is called reason; not for that every man
can comprehend the same; but it is artificial reason; the reason of such, as
by their wisdom, learning, and long experience are skillful in the affairs
of men, and know what is fit and convenient to be held and observed for the
appeasing of controversies and debates among men, still having an eye and due
regard of justice, and a consideration of the common wealth wherein they live;
for well says Aristotle, Arist. l. 3. Pol. c. 7.
Hoc quidem perspicuum est, leges pro ratione Reipub. esse scribendas. And of
this reason that we speak of, Tully has a notable saying. Cic. 1. Offic.
Ratio est societatis humanae vinculum, ut oration, quae dicendo, communicando,
disceptando, judicando, conciliat, inter se homines conjungit, and retinet
naturali societate. Wherefore since the Grounds of Law are the foundation of
Law, or at leastwise the Law it self delivered in manner of compendious and
short sentences and propositions; that which is the efficient cause of Law,
must likewise be the efficient cause of those Rules and Axioms.

Inasmuch then as Primaria efficiens causa juris, Johannes Corasius de art
juris lib. 1. cap. 20.
est natura and ratio civilis, ex quibus potissimum leges emanant, and veluti
scaturiunt. The same nature and reason are likewise the principal and
original efficient cause of the Rules, Axioms, Grounds, and Propositions of
the Law; I mean Civilis ratio, that is, reason respecting justice and the
Common wealth.

This reason has in the written works of the Laws of this Land, either been
plainly published and expressed in the books of Law, upon deceptation of cases
in debate, and left unto posterity, as the Lights, Rules, and Directions,
whereby the said cases so called into question, were at the last decided and
determined.

Or else it is not at all expressly published in words, but left nevertheless
employed and included in the cases so decided, and therein does as it were lie
hidden; and yet nevertheless to be easily, with industry collected and
inferred upon those Cases decided, and does necessarily follow upon the
resolution of the same, and being thence drawn, may abundantly serve to
infinite uses, in the determinating of other doubts, which daily do and may
come in debate. Wherefore since in the Law (as in other sciences) all arguments
and disputation do either consist of express proof and allegation of
Authority (which are called Inartificiall Arguments) or else of application and
inference; as well the Rules to be collected upon inference and application of
other Cases, are to be regarded and to be produced, as those which are direct
authorities. And forasmuch as in very few cases of doubt newly rising in
debate, and called into question and controversy, express proof and pregnant
authority can be found; the Lawyer is most beholding to Inference and
Application, wherewith he is instructed and taught, that Cases different in
circumstance, may be nevertheless compared each to other in equality of
Reason; so that of like Reason, like Law might be framed. And by how much
Application and Inference does more depend upon wit and Art, than the producing
of express Authority; by so much the more it excels the same, since the
Allegation of express Authority, rests wholly upon Industry and Memory in
publishing and noting that which he finds already framed to his hand.

Express Rules, Axioms, Grounds and Positions of the former sort are
published in the books of Law, either in the Latin tongue, as are the former
general rules first mentioned, and also so infinite other of that kind; or
else in the French; in which tongue the Reports of forepassed Cases are
published unto the use of posterity, and wherewith the said book of years and
terms (almost in every case therein found) are fully furnished. So that all,
though it shall be needless to make manifest that by Example, which of it
self is evident; yet still to pursue the former Method and order hitherunto
observed, we shall easily perceive the same in this short case hereafter
expressed.

Un home avoit a luy and ses heirs le nomination del Clerk d'un Esglise a un
Abbe, and le Abbe doit presenter ouster le Clerk nominate al ordinary, or e le
Roy ayant les possessions del Abbey ad present son Clerk al dit Esglise estant
void sans ascun nomination. Et le opinion del Court fut, que le party que
averoit le nomination, avera Quare impedit verse le Incumbent tantum, sans ascun
deste nosme Patron: Car le Roy ne poit este sue come disturber: Tamen fut dit
que le Roy ne poit este Instrument al ascun home. Et Shelley dit que il est
Instrument a chacun home: Car per luy chacun Subject ad Justice a luy minister.

The Principles, Maxims, Rules, or Grounds expressed in plain words in this
case, and which are indeed the very reason of the Resolution therein taken are
these.

1 Le Roy ne poit este sue Come disturber. 2 Lou le Roy present per tort, Quare
Impedit sera port verse L'incumbent sole sans ascun deste nosme Patron. 3 Le
Roy ne poit este instrument al ascun home, si come son servant. 4 Per le Roy
chescun subject ad Justice a luy minister. 5 Le Roy est instrument a chacun
home pur minister a luy Justice.
So that the Reasons of every Resolution in any booke-Case being reduced into
short Sentences, Propositions or Summarie Conclusions are the Grounds, Rules,
and Principles that we do mean and speak of in this place.

Such Summarie Conclusions, Corolaries, Reasons, Grounds, or Propositions
therefore as before declared, are delivered in the books of Reports in two
manners.

Sometimes without any note or mark that they are Grounds or Rules, but only
as laid down and dispersed in the Arguments and Resosolutions as short Reasons
of the opinion or determination there expressed; as in the last example
appears.

Sometimes with a note or mark that they are Grounds, or Rules and Maxims,
and are expressly invested with such names, as in the entrance of this treatise
has appeared. And thus much of the Grounds or Propositions expressed in the
books.

Now as touching the second sort, which are to be collected, and inferred out
of the Cases left reported, we plainly may perceive the notable use of such
collection, in reading advisedly the Commentaries of Mr. Plowden, or other the
best books of Reports; or diligently observing any notable Argument made at
this day in any the Kings Courts in matter of Demurrer, where we may not think
that every case cited or alleged out of the books for proof of the
Controversy, is therefore alleged because it has express matter therein
published in plain words, and tending to the resolution of the point in
question: but at sometimes, and that most commonly, such proof is produced
upon inference, and yet nevertheless, sufficiently pregnant to approve the
matter whereunto it is rightly applied: which inference and application
proceeds wholly upon collected Rules and Axioms included in the resolution
of those Cases produced, although the same be not expressly spoken or published
therein.

Wherefore notwithstanding the best means of the collection of the said Rules,
depending only upon Meditation, and resting wholly upon the sagacity, wit,
industry, and judgment of the Student, (because every man's several conceit is
in it self sundry) may best be referred unto the student himself: yet
nevertheless, shall it not be amiss here to manifest such direction therein
as may be observed with some fruit.

1 First, after the case read, let us consider with our selves, and meditate in
our minds, to what several purposes the same case may be applied, and what
matter, or several matters the resolution of the said Case can confirm. Which
when we have considered of, it shall be good for our memory to commit them to
writing, in manner, and according to this example following; 33. H. 8.48. b. n.
1. Dyer.


Fut move si Tenant in tail d'un Manor, a que vilains sons regardant, en
feoft un des vilains d'un acre per cel del Manor, et devy, coment que le Manor
descend al issue in tail, uncore il ne poit seiser son vilain tanque le acre
soit recover.

Upon meditation had of this case, what it will prove, these Propositions or
Rules following may easily be collected.

1 Lou home ad forsque un action al principal chose la il naver benefit del
accessory, tanque il ad per recovery continue le principal.

And because here the whole principal is not discontinued, but only one Acre,
thereof may be collected,

That

2 Regardancy ou Apendancy nest solement al tout le Manor, mes chachun acre del
demeanes.

Moreover, because the principal in this Case, viz. the acre discontinued,
cannot be recontinued without suit to be attempted against the Villein, it
follows in Reason, that he shall not be infranchised thereby: Whence also
this Axiom is to be confirmed or proved, That

3. Necessary suite ew verse un villeinper le signier ne enfranchise le villein.

Hereof has appeared that although none of these Propositions be expressed in
the resolution of the said Case, in the book wherein the same is left
reported; yet nevertheless are they necessarily employed in the resolution of
the said Case, as before has been declared.

But if the Case so read does consist of many points or several questions
sunderly debated, every of them may likewise be sunderly and apart considered
of, according to the manner before showed.

A second means, Hulls in 9. Hen. 4.8. a. in the end of a Case there argued,
where he holds for clear Law,

That

Si un home fait fine pur un trespass don't il fut endite son boache sera estopp
a dire que il nest my culpable, 9. H. 4.8. a.
sil soit eint implead apres.

But because the same is denied in Hen. 6. we endeavoring to prove the same
by Syllogism, shall not only confirm it, but also exemplify our former
speeches.

Major] Null sera permit a denyer cest injury pur que il ad fait satisfaction,
ou ad suffer punishment.

Minor] Mes cesty que ad fait fine pur un offense ad fait ascun satisfaction
and in ceo ad este puny.

Conclusio] Il que ad fait un fine pur une trespass ou auter offense sera estopp
a ceo denier apres.

Every of these propositions be eft-soones confirmed not only with the Case
before spoken (for as they do prove the Case, being the immediate Reasons
thereof; so are they to be proved again by the Case as by their-effect) but
also with sundry other Authorites found in the books of like effect.

A third observation of Propositions and Axioms may be drawn from the
consideration of the Titleing words,

Fine, Estoppel, Enditement, Non culpable, Party, etc.

And herein is to be meditated and considered what Rules may be derived and
collected out of the said case, and be referred to every of the said Titles; as
namely,

Under Fines.
1 FIne fait pur un offense prove, cesty que fait le fine voluntarunt, deste
culpable del dit offense.

2 Fine fait per un offense causera cesty que fait le offense que il ne ceo
deniera apres.

Under Enditement, these.
SI home soit convince, d'un offense sur un Enditement, que est al suit le Roy,
il ne deniera le dit offense, sil soit apres de ceo implede al suit del Party.

Under Estoppel, these.
HOme sera estopp per matter de Implication que imply le contrary de son disant
de Record.

Under Non Culpable, these.
NOn Culpable ne sera plede per ascun lou per implication il ad confess le
cause del action.

Under Party, these.
SI offense soit commit cy bien al Roy que come al Party condemnation al suit
d'un d'eux, aydera l'anter in son suit.

A fourth manner of observation is to refer unto every Ground or Rule so
collected, a Rule,

Home ne sera permit a denier ceo que devant il ad confess per implication de
Record. 9. H. 4.8. a.


Under which Ground not only the first proposed Case of 9. Hen. 4.8. a. may
be comprehended; and diverse others of like effect and purpose, and which do
concur under the said General Rule; As for example.

He which is arraigned, Stamf. 155. a cap. 62. Stamf. 98. b. 22. E. 4.39 b
after he has pleaded either in Bar or in Abatement of the Appeal whereon he
was arraigned, may plead over not guilty to the felony: Except the Bar or Plea
do comprehend such matter as does acknowledge the felony; as a Release or
pardon. But if he do plead any such Plea or Bar, viz. Release, or Pardon in
in any Appeal or Enditement, he cannot plead over Not guilty to the Felony,
because thereby he confesses the Felony by implication.

If in a Praecipe, 11. H. 4.69 a Culpepper.
the Tenant say that he is Leassee for life, and pray in aid, the demandant
says he has fee, which the Tenant denies not, and therefore he is owted of
the aid: If after he will say he is Tenant for term of life, and vouch, he
shall not be thereunto received.

These Cases with many other may be comprehended under the generality of the
last specified Rule, and are one in Reason, not under one immediate Reason, but
under this Reason, viz. Home ne serra admit a contradize ceo que il ad confess
de Record.

Moreover there is another Case, one in effect of Reason with the former
proposed Case, which because it is nevertheless in circumstance more general,
therefore it cannot be comprehended under the last specified Rule, as namely.

If a man be indicted of Travers, 7. H. 4.35. b.
and thereupon be found guilty by verdict at the suite of the King; If after,
the party against whom the Travers was committed, bring an action for the same
Travers; the other shall not plead Not guilty thereunto.

In the former Grounds, and Cases thereupon, the party was concluded by an
employed confession; but in this last Case, he is convinced by an open trial or
verdict. And whosoever will comprehend both this and the former Cases under one
Ground or Rule, must make the same more general then the former, in this
manner.

Home ne serra permit a denier tiel offense de que il poit este convince per
matter de Record.

And forasmuch as a man may be convinced of anoffence as well by confession, as
by verdict; and that as well by implicature confession, as by express
confession: Therefore every of the said former Cases may be concluded and
comprehended under the amplenesse of this last remembered Ground.

A special Ground may be reduced unto a rule or Proposition general, by
seeking the Genus or general Notion of every Titeling word found in the said
special Ground, As for example, the said Proposition before remembered, and
which has been exemplified with Cases, was this.

Home ne serra permit a denier ceo que devant il ad Confess per implication de
Record.

Upon the word (denier) it may be drawn more general, thus;

Home ne sera permit de contrary son act demesne que devant il ad conuz.

A more general Reason whereof may again be yielded, thus.

Seroit inconvenient que le ley alloweroit a dize, and a dedize une mesme chose
de Record.

Upon the word (Confession) these Reasons also may be assigned more general
than that first ground.

Confession de un est le plus pregnant proof que poit este encounter luy.

A reason hereof: For, Le Confession de chacun que concern luy mesme sera
intend vray. For,

Null convoit le offense melious que cesty que ad ceo commit and perpetrat.

Upon the word (Implication) these general Rules may be proposed.

Confession per Implication est cy fort encounter le Party come Confession
express. For

Pregnant Implication est equivalent al matter express.

Upon the word (Record) somewhat likewise may be said of like effect; viz. thus;

Matter de Record que est grounded sur le act del Party mesme luy issint liera
que il ne contra dira ceo apres. For,

Le credit d'un Judicial act ne sera impeach per ascun que est privy a ceo, For,

Matter de Record est plus hault testimony in ley.

Under the word (Fine) there was mentioned this Ground or Rule.

Fine que est fait pur un offense prove home culpable del offense.

Here hence these Propositions being more general, may be derived.

Null per Common presumption voit fair voluntary fine pur le offense de quel il
nest culpable.

A reason whereof may be thus.

Poena culpam implicat. And Le Consequent imporia son Principal.

Hereof you see what abundance of Rules and Propositions one Case contains;
and that we may descend from the particular case, to the special Reason, from
that to a more general, until we find out the very primarie ground of
natural reason, from whence all the other are derived.

Herein this Caution is to be considered and had in mind, that in collection
of Grounds and Principles out of any proposed Case, the same may be native, and
always appliable and reduceable to the immediate Reason of the said Case, so
that in any occasion of Argument, the same Case may be a pregnant and efficient
proof thereunto.

Furthermore collection of Propositions may be drawn and reduced from all the
principal places of Logical invention.

1 As from the Causes unto the Effect. 2 And contrariwise from the Effects unto
their Causes. 3 So likewise from the Consequent unto the Antecedent. 4 And from
the Antecedent to the Consequent. 5 Moreover a Pari, as from the Equal or
like. 6 A majori from the more likely unto that which is less probable. 7 And
again, from that which is less Likely or Probable to that which is more
Probable. 8 Finally, from the Contrary to his Contrary: since that Eadem est
ratio and proportio Contrariorum.
THe reasons and causes wherefore these Propositions, Rules, and Axioms (as
has been declared first in manner as aforesaid) are not only to be
considered, observed and collected, but always to be had, and carefully to be
kept in memory; and the end and scope whereto they serve and tend, will
manifestly appear, as well by the observation of the right use of them, and
the manifold utilitie and great help, which rises by the daily meditation
therein, as likewise by the consideration and amendment of some inconsiderate
abuses which have crept into the daily handling of them, both in judicial
places abroad, and in private exercises at home.

The necessary use of them therefore consists in two parts.

1 The one serving to the obtaining of the knowledge of the Law.

2 The other in use and practice of the Law learned by these Propositions and
Rules, reducing them, as occasion serves, to public and private behoof.

The first is Speculative.

This last Practique.

As touching the first, the profit hence springing may soon be seen and
discovered, if we call to our memory, that no manner faculty whatsoever to be
learned by the light of Reason, can consist or be comprehended by the capacity
of man's understanding, except (as before also in part has appeared) it be
furnished with certain Assertions, Precepts, Rules, and Propositions, and the
same adorned with these two qualities, Universality and Verity. And as none
may worthily take upon him the name of a Divine, which is ignorant of the
Principles of his Science; or any man may well arrogate the title or name of a
Philosopher or Physician, who knows not the several Rules, whereupon, as
upon sundry foundations, the said several faculties are built and erected; so
none may be deemed a Lawyer, or admitted, or can give good advise therein,
which knows not the Precepts whereon his Art depends; or has not read the
determination of former doubts left reported in books, being the greatest part
of the written Law in this Land; And thence, not collected Conclusions for the
decisions of present and future controversies.

Moreover seeing the Law of this Land is wholly Rational (as has been said)
wherein, as in all other Sciences, the mind of man holds and keeps the
former published proceeding, by apprehension and discourse, collecting Primary
and Secondary Conclusions and Grounds, it cannot be otherwise, but that the
observation of these Primarie and Secondarie Conclusions, must needs be the
best, most approved, profitable and speedy mean, for the attaining of the
right, sound, and infallible knowledge of the said Laws.

And if there be any way extant, or to be found by man's wisdom, to purge the
English Laws, from the great Confusions, tedious and superfluous iterations,
with the which the Reports are infested; or quit it of these manifold
contrarieties, wherewith it is so greatly overcharged, so that the Coherencie,
constancy, and conformity thereof, is almost utterly lost, and not without
some blemish and reproach of our Nation and Commonwealth, in manner clean
abolished; Surely, as to me seems, there is likelihood by that way and means
to bring the same to pass, or by none. For, by Rules and Exceptions, all
Sciences are and have been published, put down and delivered: out of Rules and
Exceptions, a method is framed, by which means men may view a perfect plot of
the coherence of things: Even as in a large spread tree, from the lowest root to
the highest branch; from the most ample and highest General, by many degrees
of descent, as in a Pedigree or Genealogy, to the lowest special and
particular; which are combined together as it were in a consanguinity of blood
and concordancie of nature.

And yet therewithal perusing the particular differences and degrees of
distinction between them, in all the course of humane studies, there is none
that does more commend unto your cogitations the wonderful force of man's
wisdom, then does this discourse, which treats of the Principles, Grounds,
Rules and Originals of Law and Justice, being the chain of humane society,
without the which it cannot consist; and which, besides the exceeding pleasure
that the consideration thereof breeds in the well-affected mind, is able to
bring us speedily to ripeness and maturitie in that profession. For,

Principium est dimidium totius, says Aristotle.

Short refined Reasons of long perplexed cases, do, through their soundness,
satisfy our judgments, through their brevity and shortness, wonderfully
delight the mind, through their pithinesse, they may be deemed incomparable
treasures, yielding a great show of wit, and wonderfully sharpning our
understanding, of infinite use, in all humane affairs, containing much worth
in few words, no burden to memory, but once obtained, are ever retained.

Since all Sciences do tend to Verity (as has bin before often affirmed) which
is the object of the intellectual part of our mind; And since Verity and
Truth cannot be obtained or found without due knowledge of the causes; Tunc
enim (as says the Philosopher) unumquodque scire arbitramur, cum ejus causas
and Principia cognoscimus. And not unfitly said the Poet,

Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.

Then must the right and due observatio^ of these and such like principles
containing the Causes of things, be a direction to conduct and lead us to the
knowledge of that faculty and science, whereof they are Principles. For from
hence all artificial Demonstrations are, and have been drawn and deduced.

To adhere therefore and wholly to respect particular cases, without any
observation of the general Rules and Reasons, and to charge the memory with
infinite singularities, is utterly to confound the same; a labor of
unspeakable toil, and wherein we shall never free us from confusion; but
engender in our selves, that wrong opinion which many have (amiss)
entertained, that there is nothing certain in our Laws.

Finally, if the Law be every man's inheritance borne under the same, as notably
(besides our own Laws) says the Prince of Orators, M. T. Cicero pro Cecinna.
Tully, Major haereditas venit unicuique nostrum a jure and legibus, quam ab
ijs a quibus illa bona relicta sunt. Nam ut perveniat ad nos fundus, testamento
alicujus fieri potest: ut retineamus quod nostrum factum est, sine jure civili
fieri non potest. And all men's inheritance shall be certain both for the
private repose of the people, and public good and quiet of the Commonwealth.
We must needs think the Law of this Land full of defect, except we think and
deem it to be (as indeed it is) certain.

Who then can, without the consideration of these universal Maxims,
Propositions, Rules, and Principles, wherein certainty is alone contained,
attain unto the certain knowledge thereof? for as it has been truly
published; Principiorum est unumquodque sibi ipsi fides; Insomuch that cum
negantibus ea, non est disputandum, 10. Eliz. 27 1. a. Dyer, 26.

Hitherto has been spoken what profit the careful consideration and
observation of Principles, Rules, and Maxims of the Law of this Realm does
give us, and what assistance we may find therein toward the study and
speculation of the same. It rests therefore now, that somewhat be said of the
commodity which may come to him, that shall manage and practice the same
Laws, and to what use this observation therein likewise serves.

Two kinds of Arguments are noted by Morgan.

Ily sont deux principal chooses sur que Arguments poient este fait, s. nostre
Maxims, and reason, Com. Colthurst.
le Mere de touts Leyes, etc. I think by the latter of these, the use of
Argumentation upon reasons drawn from the logical place of invention, are to
be understood; as namely, to argue and reason in cases of debate, from the
causes, effects, parts, consequents, mischiefs, and inconveniences, and such
like; which aptly may be called natural reason, because all Art therein
observed, is but the imitation of nature: which kind or course of Argument is
much used in ancient books, when as there were fewest books of reports extant.

But by the former of these two specified kinds of Arguments, is meant as
manifestly appears, the help that Grounds and Maxims do yield in that
kind. For the understanding therefore of the right use thereof, it behooveth
to consider, that the same wholly does consist in the apt and convenient
application of the said Rules, unto such particular cases daily falling in
debate, as may be comprehended under the generality of the same Rules, and may
in every respect be rightly reduced thereunto; so that the Rule might serve as a
well-grounded reason of the matter called in question.

To this effect the Author of the Dialogues between the Doctor and Student,
after he had at large spoken of the credit and supposed certainty of a
Principle or Maxim of the Laws of this Land, adds further that such Maxims
be not only holden for Law, but also other cases like unto them, and all
things, that necessarily follow upon the same, are to be reduced to the like
Law.

A second use of the observation of principles in Argumentation may be this.

We are taught (as says Aristotle) and as likewise has before been remembered,
by the election of principles to abound in matter sit for Argumentation. Our
propositions may be framed as parts of Syllogismes, or as antecedent
propositions of Enthymemes, by which form of Arguments, this profit and
commodity is reaped, that he which rightly uses the same, in proof or
disproofe of any proposed matter shall not need to fall into any unnecessay and
extravagant matter, or digress from the point that he has in hand. For if
the parts of our argument so to be concluded, do consist of Propositions
which are Principles in Law, and be in due and expedient manner framed and
combined together, the Conclusion, which is the point in question, will follow,
either necessarily or probably, according to the truth of the said
propositions, for as we have before showed, that by reducing a Case to a
Syllogism, we might find some of the principal reasons and propositions,
whereupon the verity of the said case, being the conclusion, depends; as
trying out the cause by the effect: So of the contrary part, to frame the
effect by the cause; the same propositions will, as they confirm one case, so
likewise establish all other special cases, which shall happen to concur in
equal and like reason, or be reducible to, or under, the generality of the
said proposition.

And although the Lawyer be not tied to this short course of Argument current
in schools, yet in whatsoever large discourse of Argument, if this form be
respected, though amplified and enlarged with Prosyllogismes, after the manner
of Rhetoritians or Orators, it will yield the fruit before remembered. There are
in our books extant of both, as namely, by Conisby, to prove that a man might
grant his Lease for years without Deed, uses this plain and express
Syllogism; whereof every proposition being a Ground and Principle in the Law,
the Conclusion necessarily does follow. 14. H. 7.3. b.


1 Major] Chose que jeo poy prender in lease sans fait poiet passer horse de moy
sans fait.

2 Minor] Et un lease de terre pur term d'anus est bon sans fait.

3 Conclusio] Ergo per mesme le reason il poit passer horse del Lessee, and ceo
sans fait.

Likewise a question grew whether the heir or executor were to have a furnace
fixed unto the soil, 20. H. 7.13. b
or such chattels as were annexed to the freehold after the death of the
Testator, or no; where the Reporter puts down the opinion of Reed chief
Justice, Fisher and Kingsmill, that the executors should not have the same
under the frame of this form of Syllogism; whereof every proposition is a
Rule of Law.

1 Major] Ceux chooses que ne poient este forfeit per utlary in personal
action, ne este attache in Assise ne distraine per le signior pur Rent, tiels
chooses executours naveront.

2 Minor] Mes un furnace ou table six sur la terre, ou posses, ou un pale, ou
un covering de un lict merisme, ou board annex al franktenant, ou house and
fenesters, and auters tiels semblables queux sont annex al franktenement, and
sont fait, pur un profit del inheritance, ne poient este forfeit per utlary, ne
attach, ne distraine.

3 Conclusio] Ex consequenti sequitur que executours naveront tiels chooses.

As touching the second sort of Argument by Syllogism, in the Commentaries of
Plowden the same is very frequent and usual. And herein to take example out of
the first case, because it first comes to memory; All the said Argument of
Griffith in the case of Fogossa, may be reduced into this Syllogism set forth
in the entrance thereof.

Major] Chascun agreement covient este perfect, plein and compleite.

Minor] Et le evidence icy ne prove le agreement deste perfect, ne plain, ne
compleit, mes plus toft un communication ou parlance que un agreement.

The conclusion is suppressed, for that it apparently follows of the
premises, until the end of the argument; where at last it is expressed in this
manner.

Conclusio] Et issint le agreement est imperfect a doner action pur le subsedy
per que le agreement intend per le statute nest accomply.

The Major Proposition is amplified with this Prosyllogisme.

Car agreement concernant personal chooses, est un mutual assent des parties,
and doit este execute ove un recompense, ou auterment doit este cy certain and
sufficient que doit doner actio, ou auter remedy pur recompense, and sil issent
nest, donque ne sera dit agreement mes plus toft un nude communication.

And this proposition he prooveth by the cases thereafter by him alleged.

The Minor proposition of the first Syllogism is there enlarged, where he
further adds.

Et issint in nostre case entant que estatute de Ann. 1. Regis nunc, cap. 3.
etc. until the end of the case.

The like may be observed in every good and effectual argument; but we stand
not upon example.

A third profit may be considered herein: cases, which therefore we know are
applyable to our purpose; and yet nevertheless, except we draw the unity of
reason so found and considered in the said cases, unto a short Sentence,
Ground, Rule or proposition, wherein they may concur, and do agree; we shall
be driven with long circumlocution and many words, to make manifest our
meaning in the allegation of the same, especially if the cases do not concur
and agree in one mediate reason or likeness, but are upon some conformity
further off, to be resembled each to other. As for example.

Le Roy ne poit arrest un home de suspicion de treason ou felony, 1 Hen. 7.4. b.
luy mesme, come un subject poit fair, pur ceo que si il fait tort in ceo
feasant, le party issint injury ne poit aver action envers luy.

Si home soit in debt a un sur contract sans specialty; 49. Ed. 3.5. a 50.
Assis. p. 1. 9. Eliz. 262.
si apnes cesty a que le det est due soit utlage in action personal, le Roy
naver cest dett pur l'utlary a luy forfeit, pur ceo que donque le defendant
perderoit le benefit del ley gager que il puis aver in suit de ceo commence
verse luy per le Creditour.

Coment que lestatute de W. 2. cap. 3. done resceit a cesty in le reversion
generalment uncore si le tenant pur vie soit lou le Roy ad le reversion; 25.
Ed. 3.48. a. b. Com. Walsingh.
and il estant implede fait default apres default, le Roy ne sera receive come
common person seroit. Car, sur le resceit, le demandant doit counter verse cesty
que est receive, Mes issent ne poit ascun counter verse le Roy, ne luy suer, mes
per petition; Et pur ceo, si le Roy seroit resceive le breve, le demanda^t
abateroit maintenant, and pur cest mischief, al demandant le Roy ne sera
resceive: mes son droit sera save per auter mean.

These three cases greatly do differ both in the circumstance of matter, and in
the immediate reasons, and yet nevertheless have some resembla^ce, and a kind
of conformity and likeness, between them each to other.

1 First they all concern the King.

2 Secondly the King in every of them is restrained from that power or benefit
that his subject has. For

1 In the first, he cannot arrest one as his subject may.

2 In the second he shall lose that debt which his subject, in whose right he
claims it, should recover.

3 In the third he shall not be received where the subject might.

And lastly, in every of these cases, if the King should be admitted to do as
a common person might, the subject in suit with him should sustain great
prejudice. For

1 In the first he should not be permitted to punish the injury done to his
person.

2 In the second he should lose the benefit of waging his Law. And

3 In the third and last have his action debated without his default.

The likeness of which cases cannot so well be conceived without many words,
except we reduce unto some general Axiom the unity and resemblance of reason
found in them. And therefore this proposition without more might have sufficed
for all.

Where the subject by reason of some Prerogative, that is in the King, should
otherwise be put to a prejudice; there the King shall not be allowed that
benefit which every of his subjects by Law enjoys.

In which general Axiom or Rule, a general reason of all the said several
Cases does equally concur.

By this observation we may reap likewise a fourth commodity, Bracton li. 1.
cap. 1.. 3.
For, true is that sentence, which Bracton has borrowed out of the Civil Law,
Omnia habere in memoria, and in nullo errare, divinum est potius quam humanum.
Wherefore when the Case is out of memory, and the circumstances thereof quite
forgot, the Reason yet remains, and is had in memory. For, Memoria
intellectiva est universalium, ut est ipsemet intellectus.

It is not the Case ruled this way, nor that way, but the reason which makes
Law; Math. Gribaldus de ratione studij juris lib. 1. cap. 4.
For, Non quid sit intelligere sufficiat, sed cur sit diligentius inquiratur.
So that he which by observation of these Grounds and principles, reme^breth
but the reason (as he easily may) shall so sufficiently resolve all doubts of
like degree, as if he had remembered the express Cases from which the same
reason is deduced. Although in argument, I confess, not only the general
reasons, but likewise the special Cases are as proofs produced and alleged.

Lastly,

And thus much touching the commodities growing by the consideration and
collection of Principles, Rules, Axioms, Grounds and Maxims: and of the scope
and end whereunto they tend in managing of our Laws, as well for the behoof
of the Student, as for the use of the Practiser. And now remains that a few
words be said to forewarne both, of certain abuses ordinarily bred herein.

1 The first Abuse is, that neither the Ground oftentimes produced does come
near the Reason of the Case, in question; nor the Cases alleged to prove and
fortify that Ground, do directly confirm the same. A sault very usual in
public exercises; and may be redressed, if we do call to mind that any case
alleged ought not to be wrested to prove the Rule or Ground alleged; but
the Rule, Ground or Principle ought to be the very immediate or secondary
reason of the Cases whence it is drawn, and which cases are brought to
confirm the same, in such sort, that all the Cases alleged do concur in
equality of reason, likeness, and proportion; and in full proof of the
Principle so produced. And that the ground or principle be a reason of the
question in variance, to subvert or confirm the same. Wherein also let this be
weighed, that a few principles cannot sufficiently serve to supply al occasions
in that behalf, but the same must be drawn and deduced of all Causes, Titles,
and matters in the Law fit for argument and use.

2 A second principal oversight is this. Many to prove their opinion in the
controversy proposed, frame their reason rightly from some notable Ground, and
known principle or Rule, which though it be well applied, yet not regarding
the manifold Exceptions whereunto the same Principle is subject, they do set
it forth so general, that it gives their adversary some cause of challenge
and cavil thereunto, by objecting some instance or cases upon exception of the
said Rule: and thereby does not only seem to enfeeble the same, in showing the
fallacies thereof; but sometime in show, weakeneth the whose reason and
argument grounded thereupon.

3 The third abuse of these Principles or Propositions, is, in the too much
frequenting and often needless use of them. For sometimes the obscurity of the
cause, may require some other manner of argument, drawn from places of
invention, which may content and satisfy the mind of the hearers much better.
And sometimes the clearness of the matter it self, needs not such
preparation of proof and confirmation of those principles and rules. For then
is the most and best of them, when that both propositions and Cases to confirm
the same, have great coherence with the question; when both the circumstance of
the Case in question, and the cause of doubt, do give occasion to use them; so
that which thereby is affirmed, may rightly be reducible to the purpose.

4 Fina^lly, it sometimes falls out to be a fault overmuch to abound in well
doing. Omne nimium vertitur in vitium, says the Proverb; for sundry times it
happens, that it is very convenient and direct to the matter to make argument
upon a well applied Principle, Rule or Ground, which by men of great learning
and reading is sometimes so sufficiently handled, with such abundance and ample
furniture of notable and direct Cases, that their endeavor herein deserves
high commendations: yet more convenient were it, that their pains were less.
For to what purpose behooveth it, to heap Case upon Case, as it were one on
the neck of another, Pelion upon Ossa? whereas many probable reasons, though
confirmed with few good Cases, breed greater contentation to the hearer, by
reason of the several proof made thereby then many Cases.

FINIS.

