CONSIDERATIONS TOUCHING THE NEW CONTRACT FOR TOBACCO, AS THE SAME HAS been
propounded by Master DITCHFIELD, and other undertakers.

Printed 1625.

CONSIDERATIONS touching the new Contract for TOBACCO.
As the same has been propounded by Master Ditchfield, and other undertakers.
IN all contracts, especially of so public nature, there are two principal
qualities thought most considerable, Justice and Profit: For actions unjust
want the blessing of God: and vnconcionable damage draws on the complaints
and murmures of men.

The former Contract for Tobacco, having ben dissolved by the Lords, as not
being beneficial to the Plantations: it was hoped and expected that a new
Contract to succeed in planting thereof, should have rejected the former
errors, and ben wholly bent to the comfort of the now languishing Colonyes: But
the same having ben taken into the careful consideration of sundry persons,
well willer to the plantations, and many factions now partially affected, who
neither had any hand as furthering the former Contract; nor came with any
prejudice against this latter when it was first broached. It has appeared unto
the^ so full of all kinds of injustice both to the Adventurers and planters,
and so bent to the certain and sudden ruin of the plantations, that they
have thought themselves bound both in duty and conscience to deliver these
Reasons ensuing against it.

The new Contract therefore, as it has been delivered by parts in the meeting,
we conceive to be these.
1 That the To^acco being henceforth to be made all in roll, two hundred
thousand weight thereof shall be taken off by the Contractors and no more, at
two shillings four pence the best sort, and 16. pence the other: and one third
to be paid for it in hand, the other two thirds at 6 and 6 Months. 2 That the
King shall have yearly 10000 pound certain rent, and that 5000 pounds more
shall be bestowed upon the plantations 3. That for the third year, the Planter
shall have two shillings 4 pence, and three shillings if their be profit, and
250000. weight taken off; and the King shall have 15000. pounds, and 5000. to
the Plantation. 4. That all the Tobacco of the plantation shall be brought to
the port of London, and if more do come then 200000. the Contracters to take
out of the whole what they will, and then to ship out the rest into Turkey and
he bound not to bring it in again, nor to sell it to any that are like to do
so.


Reasons against this Contract.
the whole what they will, and then we shall shift out the rest into Turkey,
and be bound not to bring it in again, nor to sell it to any that is like to
do so.

It seems very hard that these Colonies in this their Infancy, should have
worse conditions imposed upon them for their Merchandise, then any other to our
knowledge in the world, for their goods being their own, and they borne for
subjects they shall be commanded to bring all into this port of London, and
yet not certain to vent the one moyitie of their Merchandise. For, the
Colonyes, if they stand and prosper, cannot make so little as 400000. weight a
year; and these Contractors will take off only 200000. Again, for the
particular Adventurers and Planters, there shall no man be certain to have any
taken off, some only the Contractors particular friends; which the Contractors
having liberty to choose and refuse what they list, there is an open gate for
all parts of partiality in that kind. The Contractors and their friends making
great quantities. Then for those great quantities of Tobacco which shall be
refused, what shall become of them? They must be sent into Turkey: new
Merchants must be sought; disgraced were offered them; loss by long keeping
and shrinking; double charge by new fraught, that the poor pla^ter and
Adventurer were much better to give it away in the plantatioe, then here after
so great charge to sell it for a little or nothing.

2 Touching the price of two shillings 4 pence for the best sort, and 16. pence
for the rest: it is to be known and considred, that of long time by agreement
between the Companies and Colonyes, the Tobacco in Virginia it self, is
valued at 3 shillings the pound, and in Summer Islands at 2 shillings six
pence: which price they planters there refusing to abate, and the Adventurers
and Merchants here not able to give, has occasioned the selling of wares unto
them at double and treeble their values, they having their no money, but paying
for all in Tobacco. See then in what state this contract does place them. Their
Tobacco must now be all made into roll, to the greater wast of the commodity,
and greater charge and labor of the planter and maker, whereas leaf Tobacco
in Foreign parts does sell much better, being made thus, it is all to be
brought to the port of London, and so into the custom house, where it must
abide the Contracters pleasure and leisure, what and whose they will take, and
what and whose they will leave: the charge of fraught and shrinking, cannot be
valued at less then 4 pence the pound: so the clear price comes of the best
to 2 shillings and 12. pence the rest. Now experience has showed, that in
every years returns of Tobacco, there has been some few Countries that have
far exceeded the rest in goodness, these then must be taken for Tobaccoes of
the best sort, and paid for at the best price, and all the rest being above 20.
times as much in quantity, and not attaining to the goodness of the former,
must necessarily in right and truth be made Tobacco of the other sort, and
consequently rated at the lower price, the Contracts stiftnes refusing to have
more then two sorts. In conclusion the Adventurer and planter, can by this
contract expect little more then 12. pence the pound for his Tobacco. And this
at the best hand, for so much as the contracters shall be pleased to take off:
for, as for the remains refused, which must go into Turkey, if he gets 4. the
pound, he may think himself well dealt with by those that need to give no
manner then the list, And for this 12. pence: it shall be paid, one third part
in hand, and the other two thirds, at 6 and 6 months. And this being the maine
substance of this contract, it cannot but be apparent unto all men of
experience in the affairs of the plantations, that the Adventurers and
Planters, shall not sell their Tobacco for one half of that which it stands
them in. For as for trusting to the hope of that clause in the Contract, that
after two years, if their be profit, the price shall be raised to 2. shillings
and 3. shillings, that comfort is small, the time being long, the hope
uncertain; and even that price being too little to make them sauers. And thus
much touching the particular estates of the Adventurers and planters wherein
they are to be placed by this new contract.

3. But now thirdly to come to the general Plantations themselves, and to
enter into consideration, whether by virtue of this Contract they are likely to
subsist and prosper: It is here first to be considered, that the plantations
having been founded under his Majesty's gracious amity, at the excessive great
charges of the Adventurers and planters, and so continued for many years, with
small or no retribution except to some few persons: and the atempts of setting
up Staple commodities, as Iron, Silk, wines etc. though persued with great
constancy, care and charge, have hitherto failed by sundry misaccidents. To
think the bestowing now of 5000. pounds a year upon the plantations, and that
drawn from the labors, and as it were, from the blood of the planters, will
raise them up from that great decay, into which during the space of those
latter two years they have apparently fallen; is like to prove a great and
dangerous error, whereas the only means remaining to advance the plantations,
was the encouragement of the Adventurers thither, especially in person, with
hope of wealth, good government and Justice. Experience having showed that
after the public stock was utterly exhaust, and the Lotteries ended, yet the
plantation in Virginia did exceedingly increase by the multitude of Families,
and other particular persons, transported thither at their own charge, upon
the a foresaid hopes and encouragements, till the fatal blow of the Massacrie
given those a broad, and the great molestations and disheartnings of the
company and Adventurers here at home, cast the Collony into that consideration
in which now it languisheth. But whenever it shall please his gracious
Majesty, to reviue and renew the former hopes and encouragements, it will no
doubt restore the former life to the plantation; the remains whereof this
contract must needs extinguish, which is thus to be demonstrated. The only
commodity for Merchants in both the plantations: is at this day no other then
Tobacco, whereby their apparel, tools, implements, and all other necessaries
(except victual) are procured, there are at this day in both the Colonies, at
the least 3000. persons. This allowance of 200000. weight to both the
Plantations, comes but to 65. pound weight of Tobacco the person, which at
12. the pound weight, comes to 3. pound 5. shillings, out of which all the
planters in the Summer Islands, and such as are Tenants, or Servants in
Virginia, pay half to their owners, whether Landlords or Masters: so that to
themselves their remains for their maintenance, only 32 shillings 6 pence the
piece. The charge of transporting a person to Virginia, cannot be less at this
day then 20 pounds, which being a thing so generally known, must needs
disharten all future planters from going, and force the present Adventurers
rather to send for their servants home, then to mainteyne them at a parpetuall
charge without hope of profit. And this has diverse of them already openly
declared, we conclude therefore that to imagine, that the bestowing of 5000.
pound a year upon the Colonies, and that drawn from the hard labors of the
poor planters themselves will uphold the plantations, when they shall find
that they can be no longer masters of their own goods, but must be forced to
transport them, when they cannot vent them, to put them into their hands, who
shall take and refuse what themselves please, and sell them before their faces,
perhaps at a Noble a pound, and give them but 6 pence after a years attendance
for their goods, with the fraught and all other charges and losses: and this
example also in Tobacco ingendring a fear of the like measure in all other
commodities whenever they should be raised. That we say as before in our
understanding to be a very great error, and of pernicious consequence to hoth
the plantations. No less then to draw 40 ounces of blod from a tender weak
Infant, and then to make him a restoratiue out of five ounces of the same blood.

4. Now in the last place, seeing this contract is so much magnified as tending
to the great and certain good of the plantations, we will take a little
pains to make inquiry by way of reasons for whose benefit in truth, it has
been set on foot.

By force of this Contract, and by virtue of his Majesty's Proclamation,
getting into their hands the sole sale of all Tobacco to be expended either in
this virtue, or the kingdom of Irelad. It is not to be thought but they will
advance the price (after the nature of all Monopolies) at least to as high a
rate as it has borne in former times, that is to 8 or 9. shillings the pound;
but admit they will begin first with a Noble a pound, two hundred thousand
Nobles comes unto sixty six thousand, six hundred sixty six pounds 13
shillings 4. pence. His Majesty's rent out of the plantations comes unto 15.
thousand pounds: the planters and the Adventurers part after the rate of 18.
pence the pound, which in probability is like to be the highest medium comes
unto 15000. pounds. So the charge in the whole coming unto 30000 pound.
Thereis 36000 pound, and one thousand marks remaining to themselves in way of
retribution for their pains and adventure; and as themselves say to appease
all such storms as may arise. To great a proportion to be drawn from the
plantations, to allow them scarce a sixth part of their own, and to bestow
almost four six parts upon men no better deserving. In the former Contract,
what clamor and complaint against 25000. pounds to have been raised for
Saleries, and all other charges, which came to little more then a penny upon
the pound? Whereas these men profess that under 12 pence a pound gotten at
least, they would not meddle with it, and they hoped for far more. By
computation of the former contract there was to come 60000 pounds at least, to
the benefit of the plantations; whereof the 4 part is now is thought a
sufficient portion, and yet that Contract was said to be pernicious to the
Colonies, and this beneficial. Indeed to do equal right unto both, the
contract is better then the former, in that it excludes all foreign Tobacco
which with great violence was pressed upon the former for the first two years;
but this is to be attribued to his Majesty's great grace, giving a favorable
ear to the suit of the Commons in Parliament, as appears in his Majesty's
late proclamation. In the debating of the former Contract it was alleged
against it, by such as are now great furtherers of this, that though the
planters Tobacco were sold at 5 shillings the pound yet by reason of his
Majesty's third, they should be loosers; and now 16 pence a pound is thought
price sufficient. This excessive gain of the contracters and undertakers, we
conceive undoubtedly to be a thing unjust, and tending to the immediate
destruction of the plantations, for whatsoever they get the planter loses,
and where the planter loses, the Colony is so much impouerished: For
whatsoever the planter makes, that goes all back to the plantation again, and
what the contracter gets, it remains with him to his own enriching. For, as
for the returning of 5000. pounds to the plantations which this heavy contract
adnexed; It is in truth to send one hundred men thither, and to stay thousands
from thence. The strenght and prosperity of the Colony consisting in
multitudes of people.

5. Some things we are forced to add touching the proceeding of this Contract.
1 First, whereas the Adventurers of the Summer Islands remain still a Company,
and are restrained by their Letters Pattents from ordering of matters of Trade
but in a Quarter Court: This Contract has been sought to have been concluded,
in a mean and extraordinary meeting, and no Court at all, when few were
present, and those few men's silence also entered as a consent, not many of them
understanding it, and those that understood it being amazed, at so great
Injustice.

2 Secondly, the Virginia Company being now discharged, it had been fit the
Colony had been consulted about it; and not to dispose of other men's states and
goods, without their consent and knowledge.

3 Thirdly, the very manner of treating of this Contract, has bred a suspicion
of very indirect proceedings: for first it has been framed secretly and in the
dark: it has been published but by fragments, and some principal parts
concealed. Some of the Commissioners appear to be the chief and principal
Contracters: other some, though they do not appear; yet they are partners with
them in their Trading, are Contracters, which plainly shows that they have an
interest in it. And so the same men are the Contriuers and makers of the
bargain for themselves, and buyers and sellers, of one and the same wares; and
take away and set the prizes of other men's goods, for their own inordinate
lucre.

4. Lastly, under pretense of doing althings orderly, they have made a Commitie
of themselves, as in the behalf of the Colonyes and planters, to Treat with
their fellow Commissioners the Conracters for speedier payments.

And most of these men have they chosen to be Committies whom the Adventurers
and planters have a long time complained off for their exorbitant wrongs to one
or both the plantations.

Many other exceptions may be taken, but these shall suffice at this present.

FINIS.

