THE POPES BVLL GELDED Or AN EDICT Published by the Duke and State of Venice,
against the late Bull of Pope Paulus Quintus, the sixth of May 1606. in the
fourth Indiction.

Truly Translated out of the Italian Copy, as appears in this Book.

HEB DDIM HEB DIEV printer's or publisher's device

LONDON. Printed for John Hardy, dwelling on Saint Peter's Hill. 1606.

LEONARDO DONATO by the Grace of God Duke of Venice, etc.
To the most Reverend Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, of all our Dominions of
Venice, and to all Vicars Abbots, Priors, Rectors of Parish Churches, and other
Prelates Ecclesiastical. Health.
IT has come to our knowledge that the 17. of April last past by order of the
most Holy Father Pope Paul the fifth, was published and affixed in Rome a
certain Bull thundered out against us, our Senate and Dominion, directed to
you, of such Tenor and Contents as therein appears. VVhereupon finding our
selves bound to preserve in peace and Tranquillity the State which God has
given us to govern: and to maintain the Authority of a Prince that in
temporal affairs acknowledges no Superior under the divine Majesty. We by
these our public letters protest before God, and to all the world, that we
have not failed to use all possible means to make his Holiness capable of our
most strong and insoluble Reasons. First by our Ambassador Lieger with his
Holiness: Then by our letters, responsiue to Breises written by him; and
finally by a special Ambassador sent for this verry purpose. But finding his
holiness ears shut unto us, and seeing the foresaid Bull to have been
published against the form of all reason, and contrary to that which the
divine Scriptures, the doctrine of holy Fathers, and the sacred Canons do
teach us, in prejudice of the secular Authority given us from God, and of the
liberty of our State, with disturbance of the quiet possession, which by Gods
grace our faith full subjects under our government hold of their goods, honors,
and lives, with universal and grievous scandal of all. We doubt not a whit
to hold the foresaid Bull, not only for unjust and unlawful, but also for
anulled and of no value, and so without force, frustrated, and unlawfully
thundered, De facto nullo Iuris ordine seruato. Wherefore we have reputed it
convenient to use against the fame such remedies as our Ancestors and other
Sovereign Princes have used with Popes, that have extended the power given
the^ by God for edification, beyond their limits. Especially being persuaded
that by your and other our Loyal subjects, and by the whole world it shall be
so held and reputed. Assuring our selves, that as you have hitherto, attended
to the Cure of souls of our faithful subjects, and to the Divine service,
which through your diligence flourishes in this our state no less thenin any
other so you, will hereafter continue in the self same pastoral care, being
it our most steadfast Resolution to continue in the holy Catholic and
Apostolic faith and in the observance of the Holy Romain Church; even as our
Predecessors from the beginning of the foundation of this City till this
present by the grace of God have done. And we will that these our Letters for
the understanding of all men be affixed in the public places of this our
City, and so of all other subject to our Dominion, Assuring our selves that so
manifest a publication will come to the ears of all such as have had knowledge
of the foresaid Bull; and also to the notice of his Holiness, whom we beseech
our Lord God to inspire that he may understand the Nullitie of his Bull and of
other his attempts against us, and that he taking knowledge of the Justice of
our cause, we may be encouraged to observe our Reverence to the Holy Sea
Apostolic, of the which we and our forefathers, together with this
Commonwealth have been, and will be ever most devoted.

Given at our Ducall Palace the sixth of May in the fourth Indiction. 1606.
Giacomo Girardo Secretary.

Imprinted by Rampazotto Printer to the Duke.


Leonardo Donato per gratia di Dio Duce di Venetia, etc.
ALLI Reuerendissimi Patriarchi, Arciuescoui, Vescoui di tutto il Dommio nostro
di Venetia, and alli Vicarij, Abbati Priori, Rettori, delle Chiese Parochiali,
and altri Prelati Ecclesiastici Salute.
Evenuto a notitia nostra, che li xvij. Aprile pro ssimo passato per ordine del
Santissimo Padre Paulo Papa Quinto e stato publicato, and affisso in Roma
vn'asserto Breue fulminato contra Noi and il Senato, and Dominio nostro,
diretto a voi, deltenore, and continenza come in quello. Per il che
ritrouandosi in obligo di conseruare in quiet, and tranquillitalo Stato datoci
da dio in gouerno, and mantenere l'auttorita di Principe, che non ricon osce
nelle cose temporali alcun superiore sotto la Diuina Maesta, per queste nostre
public littere protestiamo innanzi al Signor Dio, and a tutto il. Mondo, che
non habbiamo mancato di vsare tutti limodi possibili per render la Santita sua
capace delle validissime, and insolubile ragioni nostre, Prima per mezzo dell
Oratore nostro reside^te appresso la sua Santita, Poi per lettere nostre,
respo^siue alli Breui, serittici dalei, Et finalmente per vnoratore espresso,
mandatole a questo effetto: Ma hauendo trouate chiuse le orrecchie della
Santita sua, and vedendo il Breue sudetto essere publicato contro la forma
d'ogni ragione, and contra quello, che le Divine scritture, la dottrina delli
Santi Padri, and li Sacri Canonimsegnano, in pregiudicio dell auttorita
secolare donataci da Dio, and della liberta dello Stato nostro, con
perturbatione della quieta possessione, che per gratia Diuina sottol nostro
gouerno li fideli nostri sogetti tengono delli beni, honor, and vite loro, and
con universal, and granissimo scandolo di tutti: non dubittamo punto tenere il
sudetto Breue non solo per ingiusto, and indehito ma anco ra per nullo, and di
nissun valor, and cosi inualido irrito, and fulminato illegitimamente, and de
facto nullo iuris ordine seruato, che non habbiamo riputato conuenire l'vsar
contra quello li remedii, de' quali li nostri Maggiori, and alteri Principi
supremi si sono valuti con li Pontefici, quali nell'adoperare la Potesta datali
da Dio in edificatione, hanno trapascati li termini; Massime essendo certi che
da voi, and dalli aliri fideli nostri soggetti, and dal mondo tut to sara
tenuto, and reputato per tale. Assicurandoci che voi, si come sino al present
hauete atteso alia cura delle anime delli nostri fideli, and al culto Diuino,
il quale per la vostra diligenza fiorisce in questo nostro Stato al pari di
qualonque altro cosi all'auuenire continuarete nell'istesso vfficio Pastorale.
Essendo deliberatione nostra fermissi ma di voler continuare nella Santa Feed
Cattolica, and Apostolica, and nell'osseruanza della Santa Chiesa Romana si
come li Maggiori nostri dal principio della fondatione di questa Ci^ta sin'al
present per Diuina gratia hanno continuato,

Et queste nostre vogliamo, che ad intellige^tia di tutti siano affisse nelli
luoghi publici d^ questa nostra Citta and di tutte le altre nostre fedeli
suddite al Dominio: Essendo certi che vna publicatitione tanto manifesta
andera, allorecchie di tutti quelli ch'hanno auuto cognitione del sudetto
Breue, and peruenire anco a notitia della Santita sua quale preghiamo Dio
nostro Signore che inspiri a conoscere la nullita del Breue suo, et delli altri
atti fatti contro di Noi, et conosciuta la giustitia della nostra causa,
ciaccrescalanimo a seruare la riuerenza verso la Santa Sede Apostolica,
dellaquale Noi, et li nostri precessori insieme con questa Repulica siamo
sempre stati, and saremo deuotissimi.

Data nel nostro Ducal Palazzo a vj di Maggio, nella Indittione Quarta. 1606.
Giacomo Girardo Secretario.

Stampata per il Rampazetto Stampator Ducade.



