(...) (...) the church, And between the aultres ma^^ (...) the swan^e therein
/ and after make to say two (...) good and devout priests upon the said
aul^^^ (...) in the chalyces. Than yt each of us dyspose (...) well and
devoutly so yt we were worthy to pra^^^ Ihesu christ. And I believe yt he will
streto^ over him / and he shall return to his four^^ Than king oryant and
Helyas held her cou^^

How queen Beat^yce made great Joy o^ (...) was returned to his right form.
Ca. ^^^^^^

(...) / as it had been ordained. And for to make (...) ^ell and duly ordained
two aulters and a (...) ^s said. Than came the noble Helyas to the (...) ^^ere
he found his brother the swanne / and man (...) him. And famylyerly he came to
him / and (...) as his good and faithful brother. And in lyke^ (...) time he
had conduyted the said Helyas / so (...) ^ted him to the church before ye
crucyfyxe. (...) ^ence of ye king / the queen / their children (...) ^s he was
laid in the bed between ye. ij. (...) ^e as were devoutly said two masses /
which (...) said herd well and devoutly being mekely (...) both their knees
prayenge almighty god (...) ^e bounte it would please him to show his (...)
happened that ye time ordained of god was (...) the swanne should return in
his form (...) ^ght so as the priests consacred the body of (...) ^^e mass
the swanne returned in to his pro^ (...) was a man. And thus transwued he
arose (...) Ioynynge his hands / and escryed saying. (...) ^^^nke you humbly.
Jesus by his grace yield (...) ^t prayers yt ye have made for me / for by his
(...) delivered and put fro great pain. And than (...) ^kely kyssed ye king
his fader / his mother / and (...) ^edre and his sister. Than after ye mass
were (...) ^ap^ely rongen / and Tedeum song for Joy (...) god of his dyuyne
virtues. After that were (...) bed three fa^e children. The which she a^a^^ed
and ga^ to souke of her own milk in so great habundaunce th^^ they were well
and substauncyally nourysshed. And th^^ her seemed that the two first had each
of them a crow^^ of fine gold upon their heedes / but the crown of ye the
(...) Was broken because another woman than his mo^^^^ had given him souke of
her milk. And at this (...) the no^le ydam awaked of her dreme. Than herd she
(...) voice of an aungel that god had sent her saying, yda^ (...) god sends
the gretynge. Know thou for truth th^^ you shall co^ceyue of thy husband
three male children which you shalt nourysshe with thyn own milk. And god
sh^^^ give them his blyssed benedyccyon. For they shall co^q^^re the realm of
thy holy land of Iherusalem / and sh^^^ deliver the holy sepulcre of our lord
Ihesu christ out o^ (...) puyssan^ce and captyuyte of the unbelieving sarazyns.
A^^ therefore govern them well. And when the good yd^^ had herd these
tidings she thanked and praised (...) sovereign lord god of his good
aduertysynge / and of (...) grace that he did to her. And thus b^hrey ^s (...)
^ge she conceived and chylded three (...) that (...) ^wyte ye first Godfrey of
Boulyon / these (...) and the third Eustace. The which she (...) and ^ou^ ^ed
dylygently. But in a solempnyt^ (...) ary^ (...) Boulyon the bishop of Lyege /
the duke (...) (...) ^uke of Fryse / the earl of Flaundres / the earl o^ (...)
many other great princes and mighty barons (...) ^ho were ^here assembled for
to make a certay^ (...) (...)^ment touchy^ge ye prouysyon of some affairs yt
(...) which the ^e^t young Eustace somewhat ^o ^onge (...) y^ (...) ^e /
wherefore he began to weep so fast that a woman ^ge one of the nouryces ran
dyligently for to apease (...) / and gave him her pappe for to souke. And wha^
his ^er the countess returned for to vysyte him she foun^e (...) said nouryce
the which gave him to souke of her ^^^ke. Wherefore she was so gretely angered
and dysplea^^^^^ (...) she said. Ha woman evil aduysed what have ye
pre^^^^^^ly done. Now shall my sone Eustace lose his noble dy^te for to have
taken of your milk / wherefore I ought (...) to hate you. Alas madame said the
nouryce for god^^^ ^oue pardon me / for certainly I wend to have done (...)
because he wept so fast to the end to have stylled hy^. (...) the said
countess abode all the day by her three chyl^^^ / without any meet or drink
for the dyspleasure that (...) ^ad of that another woman than she had given
sou^^ (...) her child. And after dinner the earl of Boulyon led (...) ^he
princes / lords / and barons before named in to his ^ete chamber for to show
unto them his three fair so^^^ Godfrey / Baudwyn / and Eustace. And when yt
they (...) ^e the noble countess beside her three children they sa^ (...) her
and them right (...) ^ely. And in likewise on (...) side she received and
feested them with her speech as (...) ^he as to her was possible / and to the^
showed her. (...) ^^^^dren / but for to make them any welcomynge she wol^ ^ot
ones arise. wherefore her husband the earl was so ^yspl^^sed / but he conveyed
each of them to his lodgys (...) ^^^hout making any semblaunt thereof. Than h^
retour^^^ again to her al angry for to blame her the^ (...) said.


