The protestation and profession of thirteen Popish Priests, exhibited to Queen
Elizabeth, F. M. at that time excommunicated, and sententially deposed by Pius
Quintus of her Regal Power
WHereas it has pleased our most gracious Queen (as it appears by the late
Proclamation) in some measure to acknowledge the fidelity of us the secular
Priests, native Subjects of her Majesty: And seeing she according to her
Princely clemency, has given an ample earnest of her favor, and some mercy
toward us (being all subject by the Laws of this Realm to death, by our return
into the Country, after our taking the order of Priesthood since the first
year of her Majesty's Reign) and seeing also, she being content with the
sincere profession of our Allegiance only which might render her secure of our
Loyalty toward her Royal Person, Crown, State and Dignity, requires nothing
further. We whose Names are under written, being most humbly prostrate at her
Majesty's feet, acknowledging our selves most strongly obliged to her Highness
for these so great favors, are most willingly ready to give her Majesty in
this matter, such fealty, and satisfaction, as any Catholic Priests can, or
ought to give to their Princes.

First therefore we acknowledge and confess, that the Majesty of our most
gracious Queen, does Reign with no less full authority and superiority over
us, and the rest of the Subjects of her Kingdom, then any of her Ancestors
at any time ever did. Furthermore, we profess that we are willingly ready to
obey her commands in all cases and conditions, so far as at any time, ever
any Christian Priests, either in this Kingdom, or any other Christian
Kingdom, are bound by the Divine Law, and Christian Religion, to obey their
temporal Prince, as to pay tribute, and all other customs of the Crown, and
to be obedient to her Laws and Magistrates in all civil causes; and pray to
God, that according to his sacred will, she may obtein a happy and quiet Reign
in this life, and after this life, eternal bliss. And this our acknowledgement
we conceive to be so solidly grounded upon the divine word, that noe authority
nor cause, nor pretense of cause, can or ought to give us any just and lawful
dispensation, more then to any Protestant whatsoever, whereby we should
detract our obedience to her Majesty in any civil or temporal affairs.

Secondly, seeing in these last years there have been many conspiracies
contrived against the Person and State of her Majesty, and hostile enterprises
undertaken for the invading her Majesty's Dominions, under certain new
pretenses, and counsels of restoring the Catholic Religion by Arms (a thing
attempted in other parts of the world against her Majesty and her Kingdoms,
chiefly and solely beyond any other, who receeded no less then she, from the
Religion of the Apostolic See) by which violent endeavors her Majesty,
otherwise of a singular clemency toward her Subjects, might be highly moved
to make more sharp Laws, and to take care to have them executed against the
Catholics (who being joined to the Sea Apostolic in matters of Faith and
Religion, might easily be suspected to favor these conspiracies and invasions)
then perhaps, unless these acts of hostility and war had intervened, would
ever have been made, or thought upon. We therefore, that we may (even in this
particular cause) approve our Loyalty to her Majesty, do sincerely profess,
and by this public act make known to the whole Christian world, that we in
these cases of conspiracies and machinations against her Majesty's life,
invasions, and whatsoever hostile attempts, which be made by any foreign
Prelate, Prince or Potentate whatsoever, either jointly, or severally to the
perturbation or destruction of her Majesty's Person, State, Kingdom or
Dominions, under any color, show, pretense, or design of restoring the
Catholic Religion in England or Ireland, shall be ready to defend her
Majesty's Person, State, Kingdoms and Dominions, from all such horrible and
violent incursions, and injuries* And moreover, to detect, and lay open all
conspiracies, plots, which we shall understand to be undertaken by any Prelate,
Prince, or Potentate whatsoever, against her Majesty's Person or Dominions, for
what cause soever, as was said before; and also to our uttermost power to
resist them, and earnestly persuade all Catholics (as much as in us lie) to
do the same.

Thirdly, if after any sentence of Excommunication declared, or to be declared
against her Majesty, or before any such conspiracies, invasions, or horrible
attempts, as above, to be made, even the Pope should excommunicate all born
within her Majesty's Dominions, that should not receed from the defense of her
Majesty and her Dominions, and join to the party of the conspiratours and
invadours, in these and the like cases: We in these and all such cases, do by
no means esteem our selves or the Lay-Catholicks, to be any ways bound by the
law of conscience to obey this, or any the like censures: But notwithstanding
any authority, and whatsoever sentence of excommunication denounced or to be
denounced (as above) will defend our Prince and Country, which we think to be
our duty, and yield in temporal causes all obedience to her Majesty.

Fourthly, but because it is most certain, while we thus endeavor by our
Christian and sincere protestation to approve our pious affection and Loyalty
to her Majesty, there will not be wanting many who would condemn this our
lawful Act, and interpret it to the worst sense; and moreover traduce this act
of ours with unjust censures and calumnies to the Christian world, and
especially to his Holiness, to the great prejudice and hurt of our credits and
persons, unless we should timely prevent their endeavors, we humbly beseech
her Majesty, that as in this our recognition, while we render unto her
Highness the things which are Caesar's, by her gracious concession it may also
be lawful for us, for the avoiding of malevolent scandals, by the like public
act openly testify, that we by acknowledging of our obedience to her Majesty,
receed from no law of Christian duty, which we owe to the supreme Pastor.

Fifthly, wherefore we acknowledge and confess, that the Bishop of Rome in that
See, is Successor to S. Peter, and that he has not less, yet not more ample
authority or jurisdiction over us and the rest of the Christians then that
Apostle had by the concession and command of our Savior Christ. And that we
will be*obedient to his Holiness, as far as we are bound by the Divine Law,
which we doubt not may rightly stand with our Allegiance which we have
professed to our temporal Prince; for as we are most ready to pour forth our
blood for the defense of her Majesty and our Country, so we are resolved to
part with our life, rather then violate the lawful authority of the Catholic
Church of Christ.

Will. Bishop.
John Colleton.
John Mush.
Rob. Charnock.
John Bossevile.
Anthony Hebborne.
Roger Cadwallader.
Robert Drury.
Anthony Champny.
John Iackson.
Francis Barneby.
Oswald Herdham.
Richard Button.


