AT A SESSION OF SEWARS HOLDEN AT THE CITY OF ELY, the xxij. and xxiij. days
of September, Ann. Dom. 1619. before the Reverend Father in God NICHOLAS, Lord
Bishop of Ely, Sr. MILES SANDYS, Knight and Barronet, Sr. EDWARD RADCLIFFE,
Sr. JOHN CVTS, Sr. SIMEON STEWARD, Sr. RICHARD COXE, Sr. WILLIAM WENDIE,
Knights: JOHN GOSTLIN Doctor of Physic, Vicechancellor of the University of
Cambridge, JOHN CROPLEY, and HENRY SMITH, Doctors of Divinity, JOHN POPE
Doctor of Law, Henry Bing Esquier, Mr. Jerome Beale, Bachelor in Divinity,
Daniel Wigmore Archdeacon of Ely, Robert Steward, Isaac Barrowe, Daniell
Goodricke, Peter Franckland, Esquiers; Rebert Clench, John Pepis, John Orwell,
Simon Watson, and Henry Vpcher, Gentlemen, Commissioners of Sewars amongst
others assigned: It is ordered as follows: viz.
WHEREAS The Kings most excellent Majesty, by his gracious Letters, dated at
Windsore the iiij. day of this instant month of September, directed unto the
Commissioners of Sewars in the County of Cambridge, Isle of Ely, Suffolk,
Norfolk, Lincoln, Northampton, Huntingdon, etc. therein signifying, that Sr.
WILLIAM AYLOFFE, Knight and Barronet, Sr. ANTHONY THOMAS Knight, with other
their friends, at their own charge have undertaken the great and worthy work,
to draine the grounds surrounded with fresh or salt waters, in the several
Counties of Cambridge, the Isle of Ely, Norfolk, Suffolk, Lincoln,
Northampton, Huntingdon, etc. whereby his Majesty conceiueth, that a great and
inestimable profit will arise to the Kingdom, and that the said work will
disburthen the said Counties, and the Inhabitants thereof, from the taxes and
charges now continually imposed upon them, and will reconcile, and utterly take
away all differences, and discontents heretofore arising about the leuying of
such taxes: Also signifying, that the said Undertakers have already concluded
in point with his Majesty, concerning the recompense for the draining his
Majesty's lands, and the lands of the Prince his Highness; And has by his
Majesty's said Letters, recommended the said Undertakers, and their designs to
the especial care of all the Lords, and other Commissioners of Sewars, for all
and every the said Counties, requiring them to be aiding and assisting to them
in the Contracts to be made with the Subjects according to Law; And that all
persons should be respective, and conformable to that his Majesty's Royal
pleasure.

AND therewithal, the right Honorable Lords, and others of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel, for further direction and instruction, have also
directed their Honorable Letters, bearing date at Windsore aforesaid, the v.
day of the said month of September, Wherein their Lordships for the better
clearing of the said business, have mentioned one chief purpose of the said
Undertakers, That they entend to begin their works at the Sea, and to open
the out-falls of Neane and Welland, and make them nauigable to the Towns of
Spalding and Wishich, which (their Lordships conceived) will take away all
fear of turning the waters upon any the neighbour-Countries, and draw the
same into their true and natural channells, without any further trouble or
inconvenience.

For the readier, and more speedy execution whereof, their Lordships by their
said Letters did likewise require the said Commissioners of Sewars, to observe
well his Majesty's said gracious, and Princely direction.

WHEREFORE We the foresaid Commissioners, at this present Session of Sewars,
assembled in all humble obedience to his most excellent Majesty, and dutiful
observation of his Majesty's said Royal pleasure; And being very forward and
willing, to give all due respect to the right Honorable their Lordships
instructions and commands; And also because the said Undertakers this day
repairing unto us have declared,

That their intent is so to draine the said Fennes and grounds, as that by
their said works, and drainings, none in general, nor any person in
particular, shall receive any hurt or prejudice.

And that they will from time to time, maintain and secure the same so drained.

And that they will not receive any recompense, but where through their
industry an increase of benefit shall be raised to the owners, or occupiers
thereof, and that after their works shall be perfected.

And if any question arise whether any benefit be received in any particular by
their said industry, it shall be decided by a sufficient and able Jury, (to be
named by the Commissioners of Sewars of the County of Cambridge now being)
and inhabiting within the said County, or the greater part of them, for the
County of Cambridge; and such Jurors so nominated, and no others, shall be
returned by the Sheriff of the said Sheire.

And if any like question arise for the Isle of Ely, it shall be decided by a
sufficient and able Jury, to be named by the now Lord Bishop of Ely, and such
Jurors so named, and no others, shall be returned by the Baliffe of the
Liberties of the said Lord Bishop, upon evidence given on either side.

And also that they will give such recompense and satisfaction to those parties
that shall receive hurt or damage, by any of their said works, as the foresaid
now Commissioners, or the greater part of them, for lands lying in the County
of Cambridge; and the said L. Bishop now being, (for the lands lying in the
Isle of Ely) shall think fit.

And that at their own charge, they will make provision, that water shall be
conueled, and stay at those Towns (where water has heretofore come, and
stayed) for Navigations and Transportation, and the Towneships afterward to
maintain it.

And that they will better, and in no wise hurt, or impair, the Navigations in
the Rivers of Grant and Owse.

WE (being desirous so excellent a work should have all possible
furtherance, as well in regard of the exceeding benefit which is intended, as
for the encouragement of those persons that adventure great sums of money to
perform the same) do order, decree, enact, and establish, as follows: viz.

THAT the said Undertakers shall have free consent and approbation of this
Court, to proceed with their enterprise so soon as they shall think meet,
We being determined to glue them all aid and assistance, which lawfully we
may by authority of our said Commission: And that We shall also from time to
time, assist and further them in the said Contracts, with the Lords, owners,
commoners, and parties interessed in the said fennes and grounds, in all
lawful manner, according to his Majesty's said pleasure, and their Lordships
said directions, and according to such agreements and Contracts, as by the said
Undertakers with the Lords, owners, commoners, and parties interessed in the
said fennes and grounds, shall be made and set down.

IT IS ALSO agreed, and so ordered at this Court, that the Tenor of this Order
be published in all and every Town, Parrish, Village, Manor, or Lordship,
within the County of Cambridge, and Isle of Ely, by the Lords of the Manors
in their Courts, Leetes, or Courts Barons next to be called, and by the
Ministers of the Parishes in the Churches on this side, and before the fifth of
October next; to the end that all owners, commoners, and other persons
interessed in any drowned grounds, within the County and Isle aforesaid,
having notice thereof, may apply themselves with speed to repair unto the
Undertakers, or their Assigns, abiding at the sign of the Bell at Ely, and at
the sign of the Faulcon in Cambridge, for making and concluding their
Contracts according to the true intent, and purport of this Order: That in
default of such Contracts, this Court may (at the next Session of Sewars, which
is to be holden at Cambridge Castle, at eight of the clock in the forenoone,
the thirteenth day of October next) take further order for the expedition of
the preceding of the Undertakers in their works, according to his Majesty's
pleasure.

MEMORANDVM, That it is not the intent and purpose of the Undertakers, to alter
or change the state of any Commons, but only to have such competent part
thereof, to be set out in seueraltie to them, and their heirs, as shall
content them for their worthy work of dreyning the same, and the residue of
every Common to remain in the same Condition, (to all intents and purposes) as
now it does.


