A DECREE OF Star Chamber: Concerning Inmates, and divided Tenements, in
London or three miles about:

Made the fourteenth of February last past. 1636.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of John Bill. 1636.

DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
and lion and flanked by the English lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn
on the other

In Camera Stellata coram Concilio ibidem, decimo quarto die Februarij, Anno
duodecimo CAROLI Regis.
THis day was produced in Court a Decree drawn and penned, by the advice of
the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper the Lord Privy Seal, the two Lords chief
Justices, the Lord chief Baron, and the rest of the Judges of His MAJESTY'S
Courts of Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and Court of Exchequer, touching Jnmates,
and divided Tenements, and the same being read in Court, and well liked of by
all the Honorable presence there sitting, the said Decree was directed and
ordered to be here recorded: and to the end the same may be public, and that
every one whom it may concern may take notice thereof; The Court has now also
ordered, that the said Decree shall be speedily Printed, and that the same he
sent to His MAJESTY'S Printer for that purpose.

In Camera Stellata coram Concilio ibidem, decimo quarto die Februarij, Anno
duodecimo CAROLI Regis.
WHereas by a Decree made in this Honorable Court, the twentieth day of
October, in the fourtieth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lady
Queen ELIZABETH, upon the information of Her Majesty's then Attorney general,
against Rice Griffith, and John Scrips, (who contrary to the Proclamation
published and set out the seventh day of July, in the two and twentieth year
of Her Majesty's Reign, had erected and built Tenements, and divided them into
several Rooms, wherein diverse poor Tenants dwelt, that lived and were
maintained by the relief of the Parish, and begged abroad in other place) the
said offenders were sentenced. And as for the pulling down or reforming of any
House new built or divided contrary to the said Proclamation within the City
of London, or the compass of three miles thereof, (in which any poor or
impotent persons then did, or thereafter should dwell or abide) for that if the
same houses should be pulled down, destroyed or reformed, other habitations
must be provided for them at the charge of the Parishes where they were or
should be dwelling; The Court did think fit to forbear and respite the doing
thereof, but did order and adiudge, that all and every such poor and impotent
persons, which did or should dwell and inhabit in any new buildings or divided
tenements, erected and divided contrary to the effect and intent of her Highness
said Proclamation, and were or should in any wise be driven to live by begging,
or to be relieved by alms within the City of London, or any other place
within the compass of three miles thereof, should, and might, during the time
of his or their life or lives, abide and dwell in the same, without giving or
paying any manner of rent, service, or other recompense unto the Landlords or
any other, for, or in respect of the same, and not be thence removed, unless
they should after become able to live of themselves; and that the said
Landlord, Owner, or any other that claimed interest, to, or for any rent or
rents, growing, arising, or payable for any of the said new buildings, or
divided Tenements so inhabited, or to be inhabited with poor people as
aforesaid, should be enjoined, and upon that sentence and Decree take
sufficient notice and warning, that he or they should not implead, incumber,
disquiet, or molest any of the said poor Tenants, for any Rents, Covenants,
Conditions, Promises, or Agreements, touching, or in any wise concerning the
said Tenements, new buildings, or any of them, for the leuying, or recovering
of any rent, service, or other consideration in liew of any rent.

And for that the new buildings and divisions of sundry houses within the City
of London and three miles compass thereof, contrary to the tenor of the said
Proclamation, had been, and was occasion of great charges unto the Parishes of
the said City and Precinct aforesaid, whereby the said Parishes were still
overmuch burdened with poor and impotent perfons; It was therefore ordered and
decreed, that all such Landlords, or Owners of such buildings or divisions,
wheresoever they should dwell, should contribute and give such like ratable and
reasonable allowance with the said Parishioners, where such buildings and
divisions were, toward the finding and maintaining of the poor of the Parish,
in which such buildings were, or should be erected or divided, contrary to the
said Proclamation, as should be apportioned and allotted him of them to pay,
if he or they were dwelling in the said parish.

And it was further ordered and decreed, that after the death or departure of
such poor people, as did, or should inhabit the same houses or divided
Tenements aforesaid, the houses thereby being become void; Then the Lord
Mayor, and Justices of Peace near unto the City adjoining, thereby were
commanded to reform the said divided Tenements, and to prostrate, pull down,
and deface the said new buildings in such sort as the same should be no more
fit for habitation, and the timber and wood thereof to be converted and
disposed in such manner, as by the said Proclamation is required, as also to
take order in all other the premises, That the said Decree should be duly
observed and kept, and if any should be obstinate, then to bind such Landlords
as should obstinately and wilfully disobey the said Decree, to appear in this
Honorable Court, to answer their contempt therein.

And whereas the nine and twentieth of November, in the seventh year of the
Reign of King JAMES of blessed memory, this honorable Court did decree and
order; That the said Decree taken the twentieth day of October in the said
fourtieth year of the said late Queen, should be presently, and from time to
time thereafter more severely looked into, and put inexecution; And his
Majesty's learned Counsel, and also the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London,
together with all Justices of Peace, and other his Majesty's Officers
whatsoever, which the same may any way concern, were straightly charged and
required, that they, and every of them, should from time to time thereafter
diligently and strictly cause, and see the said Decree to be in all points
duly observed and put in execution, and termely to make certificate to this
honorable Court of their proceedings therein, and of such persons as they
should find to offend in that behalf, whereupon on this Court did purpose to
proceed against them for their contempts with very severe punishment. Since
which time sundry other Proclamations, as well in the time of the said late
King JAMES, as of His Majesty that now is, have been published and set out
against the said offenses, and many exemplarie sentences in this honorable
Court have been pronounced against offenders in that behalf, and many houses
and buildings erected against the said Proclamation have been demolished and
pulled down. And yet nevertheless, such has been the disobedience and
contempt of great multitudes, aiming only at their own gain, whatsoever peril
or inconvenience might happen to the Public, that the new buildings and
dividing of Tenements have daily more and more increased, and such numbers of
poor dissolute and lewd persons are therein harbored, that in many parishes
within the limits and precincts aforesaid, there are far more households and
families that live by begging, and other unlawful ways, and by relief and
alms of the parish, then are in the same parish to live by their own means
and vocation; So as the burden is grown so heavy to many of the said
parishes, that the wealthy are not able to relieve the poor in time of health,
much less in time of sickness or Infection, as has appeared in the late
visitation of the plague, wherein such multitudes of those poor and miserable
households have been infected, and their necessities grown to that extremity,
that the officers of the parish have not been able to keep them within their
houses, but the sick and infected have gone among the whole, and great swarms
of indigent and poor people, and many of them infected with the sickness,
have, maugre all authority and command of the officers, flocked in troops in
the principal streets of the city and suburbs of London, whereby the
Infection of the plague has been much the more dispersed, not only in the said
city and places adjacent; but into many other parts of the kingdom: Besides,
it is apparently found out, that those multitudes of new buildings and divided
Tenements, do draw into the said city, and parts adjoining, from all parts of
the kingdom, great numbers (idle, loose and dissolute persons) who are
harbored in those obscure and mean houses, and having no lawful trade or
vocation, do beg, and also commit Pilferies, Cosenages, and infinite
disorders to enable them to pay their Landlords rents: And many of the Owners
and Landlords or such Tenements, of purpose for raising of excessive rents to
themselves out of their houses and Tenements, do let, and parcel them out to
such idle, loose, and ill disposed persons, though they know them to be of
that condition, in regard they will give greater rents then a poor laboring
man is able to do and use all shifts and unlawful means to pay it. All which
enormities and many more, having, upon Survey lately taken, more evidently
appeared then in former time.

This Court for reformation thereof, does now again order and decree, that the
said several Decrees made in the fortieth year of the said late Queen
ELIZABETH, and the seventh year of the said late King JAMES, with such
additions and alterations as hereafter ensue, be severely and strictly
executed. And forasmuch as it appears not only by the said Decrees, but by
the general resolution of all the Reverend Judges of the Realm (whom His
Majesty out of His great care of the Public, has lately commanded to
assemble) that the erecting of new buildings within the limits before
mentioned, and the dividing of greater houses into pety tenements and
habitations, and pestering and filling the same with Inmates, or with
Inhabitants of such evil condition as aforesaid, is a most insufferable
annoyance against the Public, and consequently is against the Common law of
the Realm; And that not only the said evil conditioned Inhabitants, but such
by whom, or by whose means they are placed there, or who receive the rents of
such Inhabitants, are guilty of a Common Nuisance; and also that such Landlords
or Owners of such houses or tenements, which have or do receive the rents of
such poor Inhabitants, may by law be taxed toward the relief of the poor of
the said Parish, though they dwell out of the parish. This Court holds it
meet, that since the offenders have not taken warning by two such solemn
Decrees made in this Court, they should now be proceeded against with more
rigor and severity, and not be suffered any longer to make unreasonable gain
and profit to themselves by so great a wrong and general grieuance. And
therefore this Court does order and decree, as well in execution of the said
former Decrees, and pursuance of the said resolution of the Judges, that where
any houses formerly built within the limits aforesaid have been divided into
several habitations or dwellings, within the space of seven years now last
past, contrary to any former Proclamation or Decree in that behalf, the same
within the space of one year next ensuing shall be restored into their former
estate, so as there shall be no more habitations or dwellings then were before
the said divisions. And that all and every person and persons estated or
interessed in the same, either of inheritance or of any lesser estate, shall
before the Feast of the Ascension of our Lord now next ensuing, upon order or
command of the Lord Mayor, or some Justice of peace of the City of London, or
of the Alderman of the Ward, or his Deputy, (if the said Tenements be within
the said City or the liberties thereof) or of some Justice of peace near to
the place (if the said houses be out of the liberties of the City) enter into
bond of a competent penalty, to observe and perform this order in that
behalf; the said Bond to be taken in the names of some honest and sufficient
persons of the parish where such Tenements are, to the use of the said parish.

And it is further ordered and decreed, that where any houses, within the
limits aforesaid, have been erected or built within the said space of seven
years, or being formerly erected or built, have within the said space of seven
years been divided, and are employed for the habitation of indigent and poor
people, chargeable to the Parish wherein the said houses are, that in every such
Case, all and every person and persons estated, or interessed in the said
houses or Tenements of estate of inheritance, or any lesser estate, and which
have received the rents, issues, and profits thereof, of, and from such poor
Inhabitants, shall by virtue of this Order and Decree, be bound each of them
respectively for their time, to restore and repay to the Overseers of the poor
of the Parish, wherein the said houses be, all such sums of money as have
been disbursed by the Parish, for the relief of the Inhabitants in the said
houses in sickness or health, or for any other charge, wherewith such Parishes
have been burdened, since the feast of Pentecost last past, by reason of such
Inhabitants; And shall also before the feast of the Ascension of our Lord now
next ensuing, upon order or command of the Lord Mayor or some Justice of Peace
of the City, or the Alderman of the ward, or his Deputy (if the Tenements be
within the City, or Liberties thereof) or of some Justice of Peace near the
place (if the said houses be out of the Liberties of the City) enter into
bond of a competent penalty, to be taken in the name of some honest and
sufficient men of the parish, where such Tenements be, to the use of the said
parish; to save and keep harmless the parishes wherein the said houses be,
for, and during such their several estates or interests, respectively, from
all charges and expenses, any way touching or concerning the maintaining,
keeping, of releeuing of the Inhabitants, which by, or under them, or any of
them have been, of shall be placed in the said houses, habitations, or
dwellings.

And that where any Inmates within the said space of seven years last past
have been placed in any houses or tenements, within the limits aforesaid, and
are there continued, the same Inmates within the space of one year next
ensuing, shall be removed by the persons interessed and estated in the said
houses or Tenements, having power by reason of their estates, to remove them
so, as by the end of one year now next ensuing, there shall be no more
families then one abiding in any of the said houses.

And that all and every such person and persons, as are, or shall be estated,
or interessed in the said houses, as aforesaid, and to whom the rents, issues,
or profits of the said houses, are, or shall be payable, or answerable, shall
upon order or command of the Lord Mayor, or some Justice of Peace of the City,
or the Alderman of the ward, or his Deputy (if the said Tenements be within
the City of London, or Liberties thereof) or of some Justice of Peace near
the place (if the said houses be out of the Liberties) enter into bond of a
competent penalty (with sufficient sureties, if it shall be required) to
perform this part of this present Order and Decree; such bond to be taken in
the name of some honest person or persons for the use of the parish.

And it is further ordered and decreed, that all such persons, as are, or shall
be estated, or interessed in any houses divided above seven years last past,
Contrary to any Proclamation or Decree of this Honorable Court in that
behalf, of an estate of inheritance, or any lesser estate, which have
received, or hereafter shall receive the rents, or profits thereof from the
inhabitants, shall at their peril take a course, if they have power by reason
of their estates so to do, that the same houses be restored to their former
condition and number of houses, and no more then were before the dividing
thereof, witin the space of three years now next ensuing; And also that all
such houses which have been either built or divided, contrary to any such
Proclamation or Decree as aforesaid, within the limits aforesaid, before, or
above seven years last past, and are employed for the habitation of indigent
and poor people, who are chargeable to the parish, where those houses are;
That in every such Case all, and every person and persons estated or interessed
in the said houses or tenements of estate of Inheritance, or any lesser estate,
and having received the rents, issues and profits thereof, of, and from the
inhabitants, shall by virtue of this Order and Decree, every one for their
several time, be bound to restore and repay to the overseers of the poor of
the parish wherein the said houses be, all such sums of money as have been
disbursed by the parish, for the relief of the Inhabitants of the said houses
in sickness or health, or for any other charge wherewith such parishes have
been burdened, since the Feast of Pentecost last past, by reason of such
Inhabitants, and shall also before the said Feast of the Ascension of our Lord
God next ensuing, upon order or command of the Lord Mayor, or some Justice of
peace of the said City, or the Alderman of the Ward, or his Deputy (if the
said Tenenements be within the City of London, or liberties thereof) or of
some Justice of peace near the place (if the said houses be out of the
liberties) enter into bond of a competent penalty, with sufficient sureties,
if it shall be required, to save and keep harmless the parish from all
charges and expenses, any way touching or concerning the maintaining, keeping,
or relieuing the Inhabitants, which by, or under them, or any of them have been
or shall be placed in the said houses, habitations or dwellings; The said Bond
to be taken in the name of some honest person or persons for the use of the
parish.

And it is further ordered, and decreed, that besides all the paiments, charges
and burdens aforesaid, to be paid, done or performed by the said Landlords
or Owners, in ease of the Parish, for, or in respect of their own Tenants,
They, and every of them, shall contribute and give such like ratable and
reasonable allowance with the said Parishioners, where such buildings or
divisions are toward the finding and maintaining of the rest of the poor of
the said parish, as should be apportioned, taxed, assessed, or allotted for
him, or them to pay, if he, or they were dwelling in the said parish, and were
not charged toward the relief or maintenance of his, or their own under
tenants, as is aforesaid.

And this Court does further Order and Decree, that if any person or persons
shall hereafter new build, divide any Tenements within the limits aforesaid,
contrary to this Decree, or the said former Decrees, made in this Court, or the
several Proclamations heretofore published in that behalf, or shall place any
such poor, or indigent people in any such Tenements heretofore built or
divided, or hereafter to be built or divided, or receive any Inmates into the
same, that then the person, or persons so offending shall be by order or
command of the Lord Mayor, or some Justice of peace of the said City of
London, or the Alderman of the Ward, or his Deputy, (if the Tenements shall
happen to be within the said City, or the liberties thereof) or of some
Justice of peace near the place (if the Tenements shall be without the
liberties) enter into bond of a competent penalty, with sureties to some
honest person or persons, to the use of the parish in which the Tenements shall
be, within one month next after the date of such Bond, to pull down such new
erected Tenements, or to reform or restore such divided Tenements to their
former condition, or to remove such indigent people and Inmates placed therein,
as the case shall happen to be. And that all and every person and persons,
that shall hereafter receive any Rents, Issues, or profits, of or from any such
poor or indigent people inhabiting in any such Tenement heretofore built or
divided, or hereafter to be built or divided, shall bear, and pay all charges
and expenses which the Parish shall sustain or be put to, for, or by reason
of any such poor and indigent people inhabiting within the Parish, and shall
likewise be rated and assessed to pay, and are hereby also ordered and decreed
to pay their ratable share and proportion, with the Inhabitants of the parish,
for and toward the relief of the poor of such parish, as if the person or
persons receiving rents or profits from such poor and indigent Inhabitants
were dwelling within the parish.

And it is further ordered, that if any person or persons, shall refuse or make
default to satisfy or pay any the payments or charges aforesaid, or to
perform any part of this Order, That then process of Attachment out of this
Court shall be awarded against him or them, with such further process of
contempt, and imprisonment, and are usual against the breakers or contemners
of the Decrees or Orders of this Court, and before his enlargement shall give
security by bond as aforesaid, and satisfy and pay all such sums of money,
as he or they should or ought to pay, with double costs to the prosecutor or
prosecutors, for all the charges they shall sustain in prosecution of the said
contempts.


