WHERE AS IT is ordained and provided by statute, that the prices of (...) and
French wynes should be lymytted and declared by the lord Chancellor of
England, lord Treasourer of England, lord president of the kings most
honorable counsel, lord privy seal, and other the counsayllours of our
said soueraygne lord, specyfyed and declared in the said statute, as by the
same statute made and establysshed in the parlyamente begone and holden at
Westmynster the third day of November, in the.XXI. year of the kings most
gracyous reygne, and contynewed by diverse prorogations, more plainly appears.
Forasmoche as the said lords and counsaylours in execution of the said act,
have by their delyberate aduyses taxed, lymitted, assigned, and appointed the
prices of Gascoyne and French wynes, to be sold within this his Realm, That
is to say, every tonne of the best Gascoyne wine or French wine to be sold
after the price and rate of five pounds sterlynge the tonne, and every pype,
hoggesheed, poncheon, teerse, and other vessel of the same wine, to be sold
for their quantities, after and according to the same rate, and not above, and
for small and thynne wynes to be sold under the said rate, as the buyers and
sellers thereof can agree, The kings most royal majesty therefore straightly
charge and commands all manner his subjects and others, putting any manner
Gascoyne or French wynes to sale within this his realm, that they ne any of
them in any manner of wise by any craft, couyne, or private agreemente, shall
selle any manner of Gascoyne or French wine above the said price and rate of
five pounds sterlynge the tonne, and every pype, hoggesheed, poncheon, tiers,
and other vessel of the same wine to be sold for their quantities after and
according to the same rate, and not above, and to sell the said small and
thynne wynes under the said rate, in manner and form above specified, and not
above, upon pain to forfayte and pay such penalties, as be contained and
expressed in the same act. And moreover his high pleasure and commandment
also is, that all and singular Mayres, sheryffes, baylyffes, constables, and
other officers, to whom it appertains, that they and every of them, with all
diligence, cause and see, that this his proclamation be put in due execution,
after the tenure of the same, and also according to an other act of
parlyament, establysshed in the parlyament above rehearsed, against such as
woll refuse to sell their wynes at prices taxed, as is aforesaid, as they woll
answer thereto at their vttermoste peryls.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Tho. Berthelet regius impressor excudebat. CVM PRIVILEGIO.


