(...) ^^^IAMENT.
(...) and Temporal exactly delineated.
(...) manner of propounding, discussing, and enacting of Laws in both Houses.

(...) ^ation-House of the Clergy.

(...) Coppe^^ and explained with an historical Discourse thereupon.

(...) ^light to understand these state and gravitie used in the Parliamentary
proceedings.

(...) spoken in a Bil, and is confuted straight, (...)aine; no not though he
change his (...) ^an speaks but once in one day to the (...) ^oyd altercation
between parties, and (...) ^s to speak, without which order two or (...)
whole time. If any man reply with bitter (...) ^tings against another, or
speak unreverently (...) Privy Counsel, the whole House will cry, It is (...)
or a Bar a Bar, sometimes sending him to (...) Thus are the arguments made
pithy, strong and (...) not violent.

(...) Bill has been sufficiently discussed, amended and (...) (as before in
the Vpper-house) then the Speaker asks (...) go to the Question? If they
agree, he holds up the Bill in (...) and says, As many as will have this
Bill go forward (naming (...) yea; And as many as will not, say, No. They that
allow it (...) and as many as will not, cry No: and as the Cry of No or (...)
^eater, so is the Bill passed or dashed. If the Cries be (...), then they
divide the House, the Speaker saying, As (...) do allow the Bill, go down
with the Bill, and as many as do not, sit still: Thus dividing the^ ^s they
are numbered, and the most voices carries it. If some ^art of the Bill be
allowed, and some part disliked, then c^use they certain Committees, of those
who have spoken both for and against it, to alter or amend it amongst
themselves: yet the resolution of the Committees takes not away the liberty
from the rest of the house, who at the last Question have f^ ^wer again,
either to pass or dash it by plurality of voices.

Here is to be understood that the Speaker ha^^ no voice in the House; neither
will they suffer him ^o dissuade or persuade, with or against any thing.
Neither has any member of the Commons-house the liberty of Proxy as in the
Vpper-house; but each man answers for himself, and for no (...): Each house
has equal power of propounding laws (...) ^g themselves: and what the
Commons-house has pass^ (...) to the Vpperhouse; and there the Lords canvasse
the Bi^ (...) several times, as the Commons had done theirs: the same ^^^^er
being used, by sending from one house to another, and by giving Meetings and
Conferences to one another, as was before mentioned. If the Lords agree, then
they send the (...) to the Speaker presentative of the Clergy. All those of
the Province of Canterbury, meet every Wednesday and Friday after dinner in
Westminster Abbey; and those of the Province of York, meet in that Cathedral
on the same days. Their meeting is to pray for the good success of the
Parliament; to be near at hand to give their Judgment concerning such
Controversies in Religion as arise in the Houses. And when special Command is
directed to them by the King, to consult about the making of new Canons and
Orders of the Church. They give Subsidies and Aids to the King for the whole
Clergy: in which commonly they are more exemplary then the Laity.

Their Prolocutor is commonly some Deane of more eminent note, learning, and
language. But though the times have been, that the Parliament thought nothing
sure enough ratified by them, until it were solemnly blessed by the Churchmen:
yet now plainly the Convocation-house has not much to do in Parliament.

Printed at London for Nicolas Bourne at the South entrance of the Royal
Exchange. 1640.


