FOrasmoche as b^^ is op^^ly and (...) Lo^^^s the (...) our (...) ^^g ^^^^th
moves (...) ^^^eth by all the (...) ^^^uoth the m^ (...) be had in the church
of (...) of Rome and ^o^^ (...) counceile to be holden at the (...) ^^^mon our
holy F^der the Pope (...) ^^^ceded. And m^ ^ame toward (...) of all (...)
commandment. And that the (...) or authority in the same cou^^^^ (...) to d^
de^^^^ (...) of ^^d (...) other great terrible Deccees (...) by (...) of the
lynge the heith of the soul of the ^eto (...) ^er (...) le Realm of France
and all T^^t for (...) o^der the (...) ^^der (...) The seid Frensche king that
(...) the (...) king will ^^at thereby ret^^^ (...) moved and daily moves and
(...) ^^tted (...) th^^^ socoure ma^ntenaunce and (...) ^o^^ (...) ^^t mot^^^
(...) ^^staunce unto our sc^d ^o^^cr^ig^^ (...) ma^y ^ther (...) ample to all
crist^n ^^yth. (...) unto almighty god and to ou^ mo^^^^ (...) the same holy
Fader the Pope and holy church do* ^t and (...) as for (...) ageyn his highness
and his (...) his subject of Eng^and^ (...) ^^de to (...) land as by water
diverse (...) and (...) be by that mean^ other say (...) has d^^ge for and
about. the same which. ^^^^^s N^^^es and (...) great Costs and charges. (...)
in diverse sundry wise of satch (...) as euydently is known. The (...) Como^^
(...) present (...) meant in like manner assemble (...) and (...) ^a^^ples and
other thy^g (...) of England in manner and ^o^rme (...) ^sc^ crcept the (...)
o^ (...) ^^^^rge o^ and boroughes of this ^e^lme o^ ^^g^^ ^^e wa^ted d^^^cla^^
and de^^^yed (...) ou^rgre^t^ of.vi. M.^i. of the se^d. rv. and. r. ^^^e^^^^^
^a^^ as was before ^u^^ mad^ (...) ^^d ^ourme as (...) of ye last
graunteof.ii. hole rv. and r. unto ear ^^^d ^ouereig^^^^ (...) wa^ (...) lay
people and inhabitaunt within the S^^^e o^ the City o^ (...) S^ba^bes (...)
and (...) ^auntes (...) nemuth in the Shire of No^^^ ^^d the (...) people and
inhabitant (...) S^^^^r now (...) every of them or any of them for the goods
and ca^^^s and other (...) Since (...) City of (...) thereof or within the
Town of great Ierue^^uth and pr^^^ (...) there (...) of the s^id (...) of be
not acted decompelled but that they an^ (...) utterly quyte provided that this
present grant extend (...) Cambr^^^ fours as to or for any other charge for a
(...) and (...) of our (...) deyece of the Reign of king Edward the fourth
that is to (...) but that (...) of any g^^^er (...) is specified be and stand
utterly quyte and discharged (...) is (...) grant o^ to (...) The (...) the
exceptions thereupon had to be paid in the^r^ or East (...) which in albe^^
the year or our lord (...), this be (...) ordained by aucto^ meant that the
knights elected and recorded or and for every Sh^re (...) this (...)
^^ci^ament ^^^^^ens of C^^es an^ and Towns; where collectours have been used to
be named or ^^poynted for the (...) before this ^^me granted sha^^ ^^ent and
able persons for the collection of the seid.xv. and.x. in every of ^e (...)
Town and the names an^ seid collectours for the seid xv. and. v. the seid
I^^ghtes Cite^ens and but g^es for the S^^te (...) before Shall ce^^. Chaun^e^y
athissyde the Feast ^^^^rnt (...) ^ollectours and (...) also waunce upon their
account of Fees wa^^es and (...) as any Collector x. have had at any season in
tymepassed. (...) of their (...) deputed or any of them retu^^ to (...) ^^^ner
or oth^^ take more or gretter sum or in other ma^^^ and according to the
gr^^nt ought to be (...) any Town boro^^ that then. (...). Justices of the
peace whereof (...) the Que (...) every Shire Sspan^ o^ (...) Imu^^: (...) shall
hapyed question and variaunce at the comp^^^t o^ the ^^^es or persons (...)
gr^ued. And every (...) of the said* place in the name of any perrie so graued
or wronged have call power to bear and dece^^^ (...) well by (...) as by dyll
(...) do as by the same Justices shall be thought to ^^^uyent and reasonable for
the directo^^ (...) and (...) age thereof. And for the punyishe^ the offendour
in that behalue. And for^ the s^id one.xv. and ^as is before (...) granted
^^tender but unto a man su^me to ^arde the scyd great Commons after to their
powers willing I greater su^me toward the seid charges to (...) of our seid
sovereign (...) of dell in Sborter ty^^ fall and indifferent manner to be
leueyd then ly^de Common t^re of.iv. and.x. ^^th or can be according to the
A^^cien^ use ^herof. Willing a^^ nobles of this Realm toward the payment of
that gre^ter sum in such (...) manner to be charge that the same Estates pyers
and nobles (...) gets charge themself in their preparacion for them and the^^
reuynues or companyes toward and ^or the seid de^^nces ^^ue by ch^ssent of
^^^poralles in this Parlyament assembled granted unto our s^id sou^r^igne lord
one ^^^di^ to be taken and paid of every person under wry^^ England in manner
and form as follows that is to say O^^^^ry Duke vt (...) ^^^^re Marquis Et.
Marquess, and (...) Baron / baronet / and baroness.xi. s. Of every other
^^^ght na^ being lord (...) Parliament (...) Of every person man or woman
Rentes Freholde Copyholde, or Auncien demean Fees. Offices Anunytes or
Corrodyes to ^^s (...) or other (...) or persons to (...) xl. li. or above.xx.
s. Of every person man or woman having lands tenementes or tents; Freholde
Copyholded: Aunc^^^ ^^^tant Fees O^^es to his own use or other person or
persons to his use to the yearly value of.xx. l. or about and under the yearly
value of.xi. li. (...) Of every tenementes / or tents Freholde Copyholde or
Auncyen demean Fees offices Anunytes or Corrodyes to his own use or other
person or (...) rely value of.x. li. or above and under the (...) value.xx li.
v.^. (...) Of every such persons having lands ^^^^es or r^^tes Freholde
Copy Fees offices Anunytes or Corrodyes to his own use or other person^ or
persons to v^s use to the yearly value of.xi. s. or about and under the va^^^

Of every such person having Lands tenementes or tents Freholde
Copyholdes: Auncyen demea^e Fee^ Offices In^uytes or Cor^^ other person or
persons to his use to any yearly value under the yearly value of.xi. s.

Of every person man or woman borne under the ^ynger obedyence having goods
^^^cate^ies moveable to the v^lue. DCCC fi. or (...)

Of every such person having goods or cateiles moveable to the value of.
CCCC. fi. or about and under the^^^ value of. DCCC. fi.

Of every such person having goods of ^^r^^^es moveable to the value of CC.
fi. or above and under the scyd value o^ CCCC fi.

Of every such person having goods, (...) ^^te^les moveable to the value of.
C. fi. or above and under the value of CC.

Of every such person having goods or cate^les to the value of the (...) and
under the (...).

Of every such person having goods or ca^^hes mo^^able to the (...) value to
said (...).

Of every such person having goods or ca^^^les moveable to the value of
(...) above and vn^^r the value of the s^id xl. fi.

Of every such person having goods of ca^eiles moveable to the value of
(...) or ^boue and under the value of xx. fi.

Of every such person having goods or ca^eiles moveable to the value of the
or above and under the value of x. fi.

Of every alyen borne made denysen hau^nge like substance in lands tente^s or
other possessions as is beforeseid or ^^odes or ca^eiles as seid like su^me of
money to be tared as of him that is borne under the kings allegeaunce and no
otherwise.

And every Alyen and stranger not borne under the kings allegeaunce and not
made denysen having any Lands te^^es or ^other shall ^^^les moveable to any
manner of value as is beforeseyd to be charged with and in the double in money
after and in every Rat^^^ ^^o^^ted as (...) plan^^ the kings obedyence is
before rated. And so to pay the same double sum.

Of every laborer Iournemen Artificer handcraftymen and servant as well men as
women above the age of.x^. yere^ taking wages (...) to the value of. xl. s. by
year or above and being borne under the kings allegeaunce except women
couerte dar^n.

Of every laborer Iournemen Artificer handcraftymen and servant as well men as
women above the age of.x^. yere^ taking wages (...) to the value of.xl. s. by
year or above, and being borne under the kings allegeaunce except women
couerte dar^n.

Of every laborer Iournemen Artificer handcraftymen and servant as well men as
women above yseid age of.xv. years taking wag or other value of.xx. s. by year
or above and under ye value of.xl. s. being borne under the kings obedyence
women couerte baron except


