A Proclamacion, set forth by the Kings Majesty, with thassent of his derest
uncle, Edward Duke of Somerset Governor of his most royal person and of his
realms dominions and subjects Protector, and others of his most honorable
counsel, for the repressyng of certain Sedicious and Disobedient persons.
WHereas upon credible informacion of sundry decaies of houses and enclosures,
made by diverse persons contrary to the Kings Majesty's laws and statutes of
this realm: His highness by the advice of his derest uncle, the Lord
Protector, and others of his majesty's privy counsel, myndyng a gentle
reformacion of the same, gave warnyng by Proclamacion to the offenders, to
redress and amend their offenses in that behalf, before a certain day,
entendyng after thesaied warnyng, to have executed his highness said laws and
statutes sharply against such as notwithstanding thesaied warnyng, would have
continued in their said offense: Being informed that certain nombers of
disobedient and sedicious persons, assemblyng theimselfes together unlawfully,
in some parts of the realm, have most arrogantly and disloyally under
pretense of thesaied Proclamacio^, taken upon them his Majesty's authority,
presumed to pluck his highness sword, out of his hand, and so gone about to
chastise and correct, whom they have thought good: in pluckyng down Pales,
Hedges, and Ditches, at their will and pleasure, contrary to their duties of
allegeaunce, and to the danger of his majesty, and al other his highness good
and loving subjects. Like as his Majesty, by the advice and counsel
aforesaied, has resolved to take such order for the one party, as thesaied
decaies and enclosures shall, when his highness sees time (...) (...) reformed
according to his majesty's laws. statutes: And on the other part, these
outrageous attemptates, of thesaied sedicious and leude persons, stayed,
corrected, and punished, according to justice, for the more surety of his
highness, good and loving subjects, so has his Majesty thought good, to will,
charge, and command, like as by these presents, his majesty does straightly
charge and command, all and synguler his highness good subjects, of what
estate, degree, or condition soever they be, not only to beware how they
presume, at any time from hencefurth to make any such riottes, or unlawful
asse^bles, for any cause whatsoever, upon pain of his highness utter
indignacion, and as they will avoid the extremity and vttermoste peril, that
may ensue for the contrary: But also, as soon as by any means, they shall have
any certain knowledge, intelligence, or vehement suspicion, of any secret or
open conspiracy, or unlawful assembly of any multitude, either for the
breakyng down of Hedges, Paies, Ditches, or enclosures, or for any other
unlawful purpose whatsoever, that in every such case, they and every of
them, having any knowledge, or vehement suspicion, as is aforesaied, fail not
with as much speed, as he or they possibly may, to give notice and
informacion, to the next Justice of Peace, for the more spedy state, and
repressyng thereof.

And his highness further pleasure is, that if any person or persons (this the
declaracion of his majesty's pleasure notwithstanding) shall presume (as his
Majesty trusts none will) to make any the like sedicion, assembles, routes,
or riottes, that the Sherief, and Justices of Peace in every Shire, within this
his highness realm, and every of them shall not only extend their forces, with
all their possible diligence, for the state thereof, as is aforesaid, but also,
that they and every of the^, fail not to prosecute by the sword, and with all
force and extremity, all such offenders: and also, when they shall be departed
from their houses, to any assembly for any such unlawful purpose, to spoil
and rifle their houses and goods to their utter ruin and distruccion, and the
terrible example of others: straightly chargyng and commaundyng all Majors,
Bailiefes, Hedborewes, Constables, and all other his majesty's officers,
ministers, true and faithful subjects, that they and every of them, be aidyng
and assistyng, to thesaid Sheriefes and Justices, and to every of them in and
about the execucion of the premises, as they will avoid his Majesty's
indignacion, and imprisonment during his highness pleasure, without baill or
mainprise, and make further answer at their vttermoste peril.

And yet his majesty does his highness good and loving subjects to understand,
that if any of them do or shall suffer any wrong or (...) in any of thesaied
caces, or any like upon their humble and quiet^ (...) his majesty will
command such order to be given for redress thereof, as his majesty's laws
justice and (...) (...).

God save the King. (...)

