A proclamation sent furthe by the kings highness with thaduice of his most
dear uncle the Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector of all his realms* dominions
and subjects* and Governor of his most royal person, and the residue of his
most honorable counsel: concerning a certificat to be brought of the debtes
due by his graces father, late king of most famous memory.
WHere as the Kings majesty has been informed that sundery somes of money
were and be due to diverse his loving and faithful subtectes, in the time of
his most dear father, of most worthy memory, for sundery things taken to the
service of him, and the realm: and that his derest uncle the Duke of Somerset,
Protector of all his realms, dominions and subjects, and Governor of his
most royal person, and others of his counsel, the^ecutors of his majesty's
^a^ed most noble father, have disbursed great somes of money, to diverse his
highness ministers in those aff^^res, for the paymente of the said debtes,
desiryng to know, h^we much, and to whom, any debt does yet remain
unsatisfied. Wills, and requires, all and every his loving subjects, to
whom in this case it shall apperteine, to declare in writing unto before the
feast of Saint Ihon Baptiste next coming, what remains due unto them, and
wherefore. And the said to send the same declaracions to the lord Great
Master, before the end of Tri^itie Term, to thentent that upon the knowledge
of the certainty of the said debtes, The said lord Protector and the other
Executors, to the said late kings majesty, may take an order for the full
contentacion of every debt, whithe they entende to do accordyngly.

GOD SAVE THE KING
Richardus Grafton Regis impressor excussit. Cum priudegio ad imprimendum
solum.


