A Proclamation touching Coygnes.
THe Queen's hyghnes by thaduise and consent of her graces privy counsel is
pleased and does ordeyne, that from the date and publication hereof forwards,
every single Crusado of Portingalle, with the long cross, being of the just
standerde, finesse, and weight, shall be demed and accepted to be of the value
of. vj. s^. iiij. d. of curraunte money of this realm. Every Pystolette being
of the just standerd, finesse and weight, shall be demed and accepted to be of
the value of vj. s^. ij. d. of the curraunt money of this realm. Every
single Crusado of Portingale with the short cross, being of the just
standerde, finesse, and weight, shall be demed and accepted to be of the value
of. vj. s^. viij. d. of the curraunt money of this realm. And that every of
the said several coygnes above mentioned, being of the just weight and
finesse, according to the standerde of the same, shall commonly be paid and
received throughout this her highness realm, and other her graces dominions in
all paymentes and receptes, for, and after the rates and values before in this
present Proclamation expressed and declared.

Strayghtly chargyng and commaundyng all and singular her highness subjects and
others, dwelling, conuersinge, or trafekyng within her said graces realm and
dominions, that they and every of them observe, fulfill, and execute theffecte
and tenor of this present Proclamation, upon pain, that who so disobeyeth or
refuses so to do, being by due proof thereof detected, shall suffer
imprisonment, and further punishment at her hyghnes pleasure.

God save the Queen.
Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Reginae Mariae excusum. Anno. M.
D. L. IIII. 4. die mensis Maij.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


