A proclamacion set forth by the Kings Mai^estie with the advice of his
highness most honorable counsel, for the shortening of a day, limited in
another proclamation, concerning the abacing of the value of Shilinges and
Grotes.
WHereas the Kings majesty, very lately by proclamation did ordeine upon
diverse great and profitable considerations that the piece of silver coin,
called the shilling, should after the last day of August next, be current for.
ix. d. and not above, and the piece of silver coin called the grote, should
likewise after the same day be current for. iii, d. and not above: His majesty
now understands, upon the advertisement of his privy Counsel, that
although his meaning was much favorable to his people, in the setting so long
a day, not minding that the sodynes thereof should be over grievous: Yet
nevertheless, the covetousness of certain kind of people, is so insatiable,
that by the craft used in this behalf, the goodness of his majesty toward his
people, is much abused, by the excessive raising of the prices of victual and
other things, in the hands of Grasters, great Fermours, Merchauntes and such
like, that it appears now very needful, to shorten the former day. Wherefore
his majesty, with the good advise of the Lords, and others of his priuey
counsel, does ordeine, determine and publish, his most royal pleasor to be,
that the said piece of silver coin, named the shilling, shall at and
immediately, after this present proclamation published, be curtaunt, paid and
received but only for. ix. d. and not above. And likewise, the piece of silver
called the grote, shall at and immediately after this proclamation published, be
curtaunt, paid and received, for iii. d. and not above: Willing and straightly
commanding all manner of persons, so to receive and pay the same, neither for
more nor less, upon like peines contained in the former proclamation, any
thing in the said former proclamation notwithstanding.

At Grenewiche the of June. The fifth year of the reign of the kings majesty.
God save the King.
RICHARDVS GRAFTON typographus Regius excudebat. M. D. LI.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


