By the Queen.
THe Queen's Majesty strayghtly commands all manner her Admirals,
Viceadmirals, Captains, and masters of her Ships, that now be, or that
hereafter shall go to the Seas, and likewise all other her Subjects being
rulers of any Ships of war upon the Seas, to permit and suffer al manner of
Subjects of her good brothers the king of Spain tradyng the Seas, either for
marchaundize or fyshing of Herryng or other Fyshe, to use and follow the
accustomed trade of their marchaundize and fyshing, without any trouble,
vexation, or molestation. And if any of the French kings Subjects hauntyng
the Seas as Pirates or men of war, shall (as of late it is understood they
have) spoil or molest any of the said king of Spaynes Subjects: Her Majesty's
like pleasure and commandment is, that the Captains as well of her own
proper Ships, as of others, shall employ their whole force, to aid, defend,
and rescue the same, out of the hands of the said French Pirattes or men of
war, in like manner as the case were properly belonging to her own natural
Subjects. And if any shall either of set purpose or negligence do to the
contrary: her Majesty means to cause the same to be severely punished, as the
good amity betwixt her Majesty and her said good brother, does and ought to
require.

Yeuen at her hyghnes castle of Wyndsor the first day of September, the fyfth
year of her Majesty's reign. God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Jugge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


