By the Queen,
FOrasmuch as diverse covetous people have of late* upon intent only to enryche
them selves, and without any other cause reasonable, not only raised up the
prices of all manner of grain, bestiall, and other victuell: but also do in
many places forbeere to bring the same to the markettes as they were
accustomed, so as thereby the great number of poor people that have no store to
live upon* but from one market day to another upon their money, either can not
have such victuell as of necessity they ought to have for their sustentacion,
or else not without unreasonable prices, whereby they are like to be driven to
great extremity and lack. The Queen's Majesty has thought meet to charge al
manner of Justices of peace in every county, and all Majors, Sheryffes, and
other head ministers in towns corporate, to take a special regard hereunto
with all speed, and for the furniture of markettes with victuell where need
shall seem to be, and as the time of the year shall require, to see the same
duly served, by conference as well amongst them selves, as with the Justices
and Ministers of Counties adioynyng, for help of the poor people, by the best
means that may be uniformly devised and put in execution. And thereupon that
all officers having authority to set assise of victuelles, see the same from
time to time well ordered, and wayghtes and measures to be duly observed in
that behalf.

Yeuen at her Majesty's Pallaice of Westminster the tenth of March, the fourth
year of her highness most prosperous reign.

God save the Queen. Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard, by Richard
Judge and John Cawood, Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
