By the Queen,
THe Queens Majesty hearing by report of some of the subjects of her good
brother the king of Spain, that notwithstanding both the severity of Justice
diverse times extended by her Majesty against sundry Pirates with pains of
death, and also her often armyng of certain vessels to the Seas, for
thapprehensio^ of such offenders: yet of late by color of certain of the
subjects of the Queen of Scotts, hauntyng the Seas, for to take and sease
the subjects and ships of the king of Portingale: upon pretense of certain
old letters of reprisalles, diverse lewd and disordered English men, are
thought to resort and accompany the said Scottyshmen upon the Seas: Has
therefore thought mete to use diverse good means to remedy the said disorders
with speed. And considering it may be, that sundry of ignorance have both
repaired to the said Scottyshmen, and received their goods, without knowledge
or partakyng of any their evil factes. Before her Majesty will extend her
force of arms or Justice against any such: her Majesty warns them all to
return with speed, either to their dwelling places, or to the next port that
they may attain unto after the notice hereof, and there to give knowledge of
their names and dwelling places, and of all their enterprises done either by
them selves, or by such in whose company they were, whylest they were upon the
Seas.

And for further proceadyng against such others as will not return from that
trade, but will persevere therein: Her Majesty means, by sendyng of certain
her ships to the Seas, to cause them to receive by force and by Justice, such
extreme punyshemente as they have deserved, to thexample of all others. And if
any poor Maryners have been entyced by pretenses of trade of Marchaundizes, or
fysshyng, to serve and accompanye some lewd capitaines and masters of ships:
her Majesty is contented to show favor and mercy to all such persons, so as
they shall playnelye do their endeavor to attache the Capitaines or masters of
any ship that has committed any Piracie, and to bring them to land.

Finally her Majesty strayghtly charge and commands, that no manner of
ship or vessel, that shall be by any color to be suspected of Piracie, or
that shall not be known to be a notorious marchaunde, shall be suffered to pass
out of any port or creke, until the master, captain, or owner thereof shall
have put in suerties before the Uiceadmirall, Mayor, Baylyffes, or other
officers of the port where they shall prepare to embarke, to answer to all
manner of things that may be objected against such as have or shall possess,
or sail in the same ship.

Other particular orders her Majesty means further to prescribe unto the
Uiceadmirals of all coasts, for repressyng and auoydyng of all Pirates and
rouers upon the Seas, which her highness wylleth to be observed of all manner
her subjects. And besides straightly charge all Uiceadmiralles, Majors,
Sheriffs, Bayliffes, and other her officers and subjects, to have a diligent
and careful eye to thexecution hereof, in that may touch them or any of them,
as they will answer for the contrary at their uttermost peril.

Yeuen at Ingatestone the.xxi. day of July, the third year of the Queens
Majesty's reign.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


