HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE E R

royal blazon or coat of arms
ELIZABETH by the grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
defendour of the faith. etc. To all and singular Archbyshops, Bishops, Deanes,
Archdeacons, and other Officials persons Vicares, Curates, Ministers, and to
all other spiritual persons whatsoever they be, and also to all and singular
Justices of peace, Majors, Shireffes, Baylyffes, Constables, Hedboroughes,
Churchwardens, Tythyngmen, and all other our Officers ministers and subjects,
to who^ these presents shall come, greetyng. Whereas we upon humble suit made
unto us by diverse of our Nobility, and many others of great credit, and
specially at the most humble desire and zealous suit of the Mayor and Citizens
of our City of Bathe, have given license to new build and erect one Church,
upon the foundations of the late Abbey Church of the late dissolved Monastery
of Bathe, for the receauyng of such of the Nobility, and other our subjects
as resort or shall from time to time have occasions to resort to that City,
there to have convenient place to hear Sermons, and other divine service,
which cannot conveniently be in any other Church within our said City, for the
smalenes of the rowmes and buildinges of the same. And heretofore for lack of
convenient rowmes in the now Churches within our said City, the Sermons have been made in the open market place there, being not mete nor convenient for such
purpose, which greater Church cannot be of new builded and finished without
greater su^mes of money the^ the Citizens there be able to bear or sustain.
And albeit they show them selves very zealous, and do employ great trauayles
and charges therein, yet are they not hable to finish the same, therefore have
made their further humble suit unto us to license them and their assigns and
deputies to receive the gratuities of our subjects within this our Realm of
England and Wales for the finishyng of the said Church.

Know you therefore that we acceptyng very well of this zealous intent and good
meaning of the said Mayor and Citizens and tendryng their aid and help to
wards the new buildyng of the said Church, and also toward the enlargyng and
betteryng of an Hospital within that City of Bathe called S. Ihones, there
erected for the relefe and comfort of certain sick and diseased poor persons
that resort thither, from diverse parts of this our Realm are pleased and
contented, and by these presents for us our heirs and successors do give
license and free liberty unto the said Mayor and Citizens of our said City of
Bathe and their assign or assigns, deputy or deputies bearers of this our
license and grant or the duplicate, or true copy hereof during the space of
vij. years, next coming to ask gather receive and take the gratuitie, gift,
alms, and devotion, of all and every or any our loving subjects dwellers
within this our Realm of England and Wales, as well within the liberties as
without for the buildyng and erecting of the said Church and Hospital.

Wherefore we will and command you the said Parsons, Vicars, and Curates, and
all other aforesaid that you and every of you at such time and times, as the
said Mayor and Citizens or any of their assign or assigns deputy or
deputies, or any of them bearers or bearer hereof or the duplicate hereof,
shall repair unto your Churches and other places to ask and gather the
gratuities, gifts, alms, and devotion of our loving subjects or any of them,
that ye permit and suffer the said Mayor and Citizens and their assign or
assigns deputy or deputies so to do, without your let or interruption and to
declare the tenor and effect of these our letters patentes unto our loving
subjects exhortyng them to extend to so honorable a work their gratuities and
charitable gifts and alms, redoundyng greatly to the glory of almighty God,
and the great renown of this our Realm, and the ease and commodity of our
loving subjects.

And we further straightly charge and command all and every high Constable of
the hundredes Hedboroughes and other Constables, Churchwardens, and Tythyngmen
that upon the open readyng of these our letters patentes or the duplicate or
true copy thereof in any Church or other open place or places what soever, to
collect and gather all the gifts and deuotio^s of all our loving subjects,
where soever the same shall be read or declared and what sum or sums, soever
shall be so levied and received to be delivered to the use of the said Mayor and
Citizens for the purpose aforesaid, and cause the same sums to be endorced
upon these presents or the duplicate or true copy hereof, to the intent it
may plainly appear what has been collected toward the erectyng of the said
Church and Hospital, within this our Realm of England and Wales.

In witness whereof we have caused these our letters to be made patentes, witness
our self at Westminster the xiij. day of April, the xv. year of our reign.
per breue de priuato Sigillo. Dupl. Powle.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by John Day.


