By the Queen.
A Proclamation for the ordering of the exchange of Money used by Merchants,
according to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm.
FOrasmuch as there are so great abuses of late years grown by the corrupt
dealing of sundry Merchants and Brokers, as well Strangers as English, upon
bargains of exchanges, and rechanges of Moneys to be paid, both out and
within this Realm, as not only the good, laudable, and profitable use of
natural Merchandising is greatly decayed, the true values of the moneys of
this Realm much abased, and her Majesty's Customs and Subsidies, that are the
ancient inheritance of this Crown diminished and withdrawn, with sundry other
inconveniences, to the notable damage of this Realm: For the due remedy
whereof, there has been made heretofore sundry good Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, which do still continue in their force.

The Queens Majesty intending to have such great enormities and mischiefs
remedied, does give all manner Merchants, Brokers, and all other persons using
to bargain by exchange or rechange, to understand, that her meaning is to have
such Laws and Statutes to be put in execution, as have been provided, and do
remain in force for this purpose: and therefore warns all manner of persons,
to have hereafter due regard thereto, upon such penalties, as in the said
Laws, Statutes, and other Ordinances remaining in their force is provided: And
for the lawful satisfaction of all such as shall have necessary cause to take
or deliver any Money by exchange, there shall be certain Orders in writing set
up in places convenient, declaring the rates thereof, as the same shall and
ought to be paid to the use of her Majesty, or to her ministers and Officers
thereto authorized.

The xx. of September 1576. in the xviij. year of the prosperous Reign of the
Queens Majesty.
Imprinted at London by Richard Judge, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


