By the Queen.
WHereas of late years, there has been an intermission of the free traffike of
Merchants, betwixt the kingdoms and countries of the Queens Majesty of
England, and the king of Portugal, by reason of certain stays and arrests
made of diverse subjects on both parts, with their goods and shyps, to the
hynderaunce and discommoditie of both the said Realms and kingdoms, without
any intention of either of the said Princes to break or violate the ancient
amities and con^ederations continuing in force betwixt them, or to discontinue
the said traffike: but that, as it appears, the same arrestes have been first
occasioned by persons regarding more their private gain, then the continuance
of such an ancient amity, nourished and maintained by the mutual commerce of
the subjects on either part. So it is, that both their Majesty's good meanings
toward the continuance of their mutual amity, and restoring of the said
traffike, being made known from the one to the other by such their good
ministers as have been herein used: Therefore it is in their names accorded,
that all manner subjects of both the said Princes, of what kingdom or Country
so ever they be, from the xv. day of this present month of November, shall and
may from the said time use the like mutual traffike for Marchandizes, and in
the same places: that is to say, her Majesty's subjects, in the kingdoms of
Portugal and Algarbia, and in the Isles of Medera and Azore: and likewise the
subjects of the king of Portugal, in England and Ireland, as they were lawfully
accustomed before the said arrestes. And for that it is meant, that all
occasions of controversies and differences, that have happened betwixt the
subjects of either part, since the time of the said arrests, should be heard
and determined: It is ordained, that this restitution of the traffike, shall
remain from the said xv day of November, during the space of three years next
ensuing, to the intent that diverse Commissioners (to be appointed by the said
Princes withithin three months after the said xv day of this November) may
speedily hear, order, and determine, such differences: And that at the end of
the said three years, if by the said Princes in the mean time it be not
otherwise provided for continuance of the said traffike to have a perpetual
continuance, no new arrestes shall be made of any things brought into the
kingdoms and Isles aforesaid, of either of the said princes, during the time of
the said three years. Wherefore the Queens Majesty has thought it
necessary, like as it is agreed, that they said king of Portugal shall do the
like, to notify to all her subjects the premises, to the intent they may (as
they shall find meet and convenient) resort to the kingdoms and Islands
aforesaid of the said king, and there use the lawful and free traffike of
Marchaundizes, as before the last restraynt was lawfully by them used: Charging
them to give none occasion of offense to the said king or his subjects, but to
behave themselves in such sort, as thamitie betwixt the said Princes, and
traffike betwixt their subjects may continue, to the honor and comfort of the
Princes and the mutual concord and benefit of their people. The like whereof,
it is accorded shall be performed on the said kings part, for him and his
subjects, resorting into any of her Majesty's dominions: to whom also shall be
showed like favor for maintenance of their said traffike, as in times past
before the arrest has been. And for more full and ample declaration of both
their Majesty's good intens, for the preservation of the said amity and
friendship between them, and their said Realms and subjects: it is ordered
and agreed on both parts, that neither of their said Majesty's shall receive
any Pirate or Rouer, into any of the Ports or Creekes of either of their
Realms, Dominions, and Countries, which may, and shall have committed any
piracie or robbery upon either of their Subjects, nor shall show any favor,
give any aid or succor, or suffer any to be given directly or indirectly to
the said Rouers or Pirates. And moreover, that neither of their said
Majesty's shall, during the time of the said amity and friendship, in
either of their kingdoms, or any place of their Dominions, favor, entertain,
receive, or reteyne, nor suffer to be favored, enterteyned, received, or
retained, by any of their subjects, any Rebels, Traitors, or Fugitives,
subjects to either of their said Majesty's, nor give any aid, favor, or
assistance, or suffer to be given, to any such ^^is, Traitors, or Fugitives.
Her Majesty therefore charge, and straightly commands, (...) no such
Rouer or Pirate, having committed any spoil or outrage upon any of the said
Kings ^^^^^cts, be hereafter received or suffered within any of her Majesty's
Ports or Creekes: neither (...) of the said Princes Rebels, Traitors, or
Fugitives (being published, or otherwise notified to (...) such be received,
favored, or maynteyned within any of her Majesty's Dominions, upon pain of
her Majesty's high displeasure, and as they will answer to it at their
uttermost perils. And for (...) it may fall out, by reason of the publication
of this present accord here within her Majesty's Dominions, that some of her
Majesty's subjects may happen to traffike into the kings said kingdoms, and
for want of not understanding this present conclusion and agreement, by the
said kings ^^ster, be arrested there: it is also accorded, that upon notice
given unto the said king, the ships is arrested after the said xv. day of
this November, shall be immediately released, without any further process of
law, upon bare notice and intimation of the same. And for better assurance of
her Majesty's said subjects in their quiet and free trafike, it is promised by
the kings Ambassador here, but he will give letters of notification of the
said conclusion to the king his master, unto all such merchants and subjects
as shall require the same, for their better safety. Whereof her Majesty
thought it necessary to make this offer of assurance promised by the said
Ambassador in the name of the king his master, to be known unto her said
subjects, to the end they may be better assured how to deal, and what means
they have to use for their safety, in case any such arrest should happen,
until like publication be made within the said Kings Realms and Dominions, as
is here published on her Majesty's part.

Given at Hampton Court the x. day of November. 1576 in the xviii. year of her
Majesty's reign.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by Richard Judge, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regia Maiestatis.


