By the Queen.
A Proclamation notifying the dissolution of the Parliment that was proroged
unto the xiiii day of November. 1586.
WHere the Parliament holden and begun at Westminster the three and twentieth
day of November, in the seven and twentieth year of the Queens Majesty's
reign, has been continued by diverse prorogations and adiornements, until the
six and twentieth day of April now last past, at which day by her Majesty's
letters patents under the great seal of England, bearing date at Westminster
the same six and twentieth day of April, the same Parliament was proroged and
adiorned until the fourtenth day of November now next coming: Her Majesty
does hereby signify unto all her loving subjects, that as well for that the
matters presently requiring the consideration of a Parliament be of such
importance unto her Majesty and this her highness Realm, as they may not
conveniently be deferred until the said fourteenth day of November: and for
that also sundry of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the said Parliament,
are in the parties beyond the seas in her Majesty's service, whereby her
highness cannot use their service in the same Parliament, and for many other
weighty causes and considerations her Highness in that behalf especially
moving: Has by her letters patents under the great scale of England, bearing
date the foureteenth day of this instant month of September, dissolved the
same Parliament, so as the Lords spiritual and temporal, Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses of the same dissolved Parliament, shall not need to make their
appearance for the service of that Parliament in the said foureteenth day of
November next coming, but are of the same their appatance by reason of the
same dissolution clearly discharged. Nevertheless, her Highness being for the
respects aforesaid, and upon like weighty considerations minded presently to
summon a new Parliament, if any the Knights, Citizens or Burgesses of the
former dissolved Parliament shall fortune to be elected Knights, Citizens or
Burgesses of the Parliament now newly to be summoned, her Highness does
likewise signify, that they are then to keep their appearance with the other
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the same Parliament, at the day and place
when and where the same new Parliament shall be summoned to be holden and
kept, whereof her Highness requires them not to fail.

Given at her Highness Castle of Windsore, the fifteenth day of September, in
the eight and twentieth year of her Highness reign.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.


