(...) 31 Item ye shall enquire of those which within any of their Ships do
weigh marchandizes or goods, by or with balances or weights, not agreeing or
being sealed with or according to her Majesty's Standard, to the fraud, hurt
and deceit of her people. 32 Item ye shall enquire of all those viz. Marshals,
Bayliffes, and other ministers, and stewards of Noblemen, that have presumed to
take or receive to the use of their Lords and Masters any goods or other things
whatsoever upon the high Sea, or other places within the jurisdiction of the
Admiraltie spoiled and brought to land have presumed to take or receive to the
use of their Lords and masters such goods as are forfeited, or the forfeiture
of them to the prejudice and derogation of the Lord high Admiral. 33 Item ye
shall enquire of all those which gather and enclose the salt water into
ditches, and make to themselves standing fish ponds or indraughts and of ^ew
making and beginning gulfes and other deep and immovable places, getting and
receiving the commodities and profits thereof to their own proper and private
uses and necessaries, which in salt waters ought to be common to all persons.
34 Item ye shall enquire of those which do gather and receive within any port
or other place, of any ship of the portage and burden of fifty Tons and
upwards for anchorage thereof above four pence, and of any ship under that
burden for anchorage thereof above two pence, by means whereof the said ships
do leaus and forsake the said places to the burt hinderaunce and damage of the
common people adjoining. 35 Item ye shall enquire of the keepers of ports,
Customers, water bayliffes or other officers whatsoever, which claim or begin
new Customs for their own or their masters private or proper commodities. By
means whereof the ships and merchants do forsake the said port and places
with their merchandises to the hurt, damage, and loss of the common profit
and utility of the Commonwealth. 36 Item ye shall enquire of those which are
ordained or prested to serve the King upon the Sea in any ship in time of war
or peace, and if from the said service, without leave or unlawfully they have
absented themselves. 37 Item ye shall enquire what men of Honors, Stewards and
Bayliffes inhabiting or having mansion houses, near the Sea coast, do hold
and usurp to hold plea, of any matter or cause concerning merchants and
martiners or marine causes above the sum of forty shillings sterling. 38 Item
ye shall enquire of all ships which have been arrested or pressed to serve her
Majesty upon the Sea, and afterward the masters, owners, and proprietaries
thereof, by fraud and deceit have withdrawn or keep them from the same
service, defrauding her Majesty. 39 Item ye shall enquire of those which
wittingly and willingly have cut the cables of any ship or ships, or other
vessel or vessels, or has broken any (^^reasonable cause vrgeing him or them
thereunto) by means whereof the said ship or vessel is lost or drowned or
same man by that occasion killed. 40 Item ye shall enquire of those which
either by day or night have removed the anchor of any ship (not giving warning
thereof first, to the master and martiners thereof) by means whereof the said
ship or ships was cast away or lost, or any man slain. 41 Item ye shall
enquire of felonies committed and done upon foreign or strange ships, or
vessels being or tyding at an Anchor in any port, when it is not apparent, who
or what be or they were, that committed or did the said spoil or piracie. 42
Item ye shall enquire of petite transgressors or pickers which have stolen or
take away upon the Sea, or within any port or creek, anchors, cables, beyes,
sails, topes, girdles, shirts, breches, or other samll things whatsoever. 43
Item ye shall enquire of all common and notorious malefactors as well upon the
high Seas, as in any Port, Haven, Riner, Creek, or Stream. 44. Item ye shall
enquire who of Custom force, or authority (from merchants or mariners, with
their ships fraighted and laden with victuals and merchandises entering any
ports or other places) does take or has taken away victuals against their
wills, and pay them for the same at their pleasure, by occasion whereof the said
merchants and mariners, do lean and forsake the said Ports, and places, to
the hurt and damage of her Majesty's good subjects. 45 Item ye shall enquire of
all those persons that commonly fight with or beace any of her Majesty's
subjects and people within the jurisdiction of the Lord Admiral, contrary to
the peace of her Majesty. 46 Item ye shall enquire of all those which upon the
high Seas, have found any ships, pinnasses, Bontes forsaken, or wayfres dryning
or floating without any creature in the same, being by the space of a day
natural, and has not answered the Lord Admiral his part viz, the half
thereof. 47 Item ye shall enquire of all those which do receive or conceal
Deodandes (to the Lord Admiral in virtue of his office of Admiraltie by right
appertaying or belonging) that is ships or other vessels, out of which all
living creatures in the same by shiwracke seems to have been perished or cast
away. 48 Item ye shall enquire if any person or persons have been stain,
drowned, or come to his or their death by any ship or ships, or their Tackle,
furniture as Anchor, Cable rope, or any other thing whatsoever to the ship
belonging or by sailing, moving or going of the ship upon the sea. 49 Item ye
shall enquire of those which buy any kind of grain or corn of whatsoever
state, condition or degree they be upon the Sea coasts, and transport the same
to any the parts of beyond the Seas without the special license of the Queens
Majesty. 50 Item ye shall enquire of those which after some mariners, or
fishermen have set or laid their nets, toards, or engines to fish, do come
after them, and place, pitche or lay their nets and engines so near them; that
the fishermen which first set cannot fish, but are deprived and bereft of the
benefit of their birth and ^^^ing, or otherwise much grieved and troubled, by
means whereof contentions and debates often grow, and happen, to the great
prejudice of her Majesty, the Lord high Admiral, and other her Majesty's
subjects, against the laws of the Sea in this behaife provided. 51 Item ye
shall enquire and true presentment make of all those that since the late
Proclamation have had traffic with the Leguers in France, or shipped tarryed
or sent any victuals, Ordinauce, Powder, short or other Artillery for Spain,
the Islands, or any Leaguer town in France, or other place, in ^^^ity with
her Majesty. 52 Item ye shall enquire and present all manuer of ships,
boats, vessels, and other goods of men outlawed, remaining within the
jurisdiction of the Admiraltie. 53 Item ye shall enquire and truly present all
those that have set out any Ships or other vessels to sea, without Commission
under the great seal of England, or the great seal of the Admiraltie first
obtained. 54 Item ye shall enquire what ships, goods, moneys and
merchandises, have been taken at sea, without such commissions, and brought
into any part of her Majesty's dominions, and by whom, and who were owners,
captains, masters, and chief officers of such ships, and where they of their
prizes taken (...) arrive. 55 Item ye shall enquire of all manner of breaking
bulk of prizes, and disposing and parting of prize goods before sentence were
first given in the high Court of the Admiraltie, that the same were lawful
prize, and truly present by whom and where the same has been done. 56 Item ye
shall enqure for all such that contrary to their Commissions of reprisall have
carried any prizes by them taken into Barbary, France, Ireland, or any other
place out of this Realm, and there disposed the same, and of what value they
were of. 57 Item ye shall enquire, what Captains, masters, mariners, or others
at Sea under color of their Commission of reprisall, have aborded, taken or
spoy^^ any ship or ships of England, France, Scotland, Denmark, Italy,
Polland, Zealand, Germany, or any other place in league or amity with her
Majesty, and what goods they have so taken or spoiled, whither they have
brought them, and who have bought, received or had any part of the same in any
manner sort or con^ition or have borrowed or lent any money to bup the said
goods.
Iul: Caesar.

Imprinted ar London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


