By the Queen.
A Proclamation against certain seditious and Schismatical Books and Libels,
etc.
THe Queens most excellent Majesty, considering how within these few years
past, and now of late, certain seditious, and evil disposed persons toward
her Majesty and the Government established for causes Ecclesiastical within
her Majesty's Dominions, have devised, written, printed, or caused to be
seditiously and secretly published and dispersed, sundry schismatical and
seditious books, diffamatorie Libels, and other fantastical writings amongst
her Majesty's Subjects, containing in them doctrine very erroneous, and other
matters notoriously untrue, and slanderous to the State, and against the godly
reformation of Religion and Government Ecclesiastical established by Law,
and so quietly of long ^^^t continued, and also against the persons of the
Bishops, and others placed in authority Ecclesiastical under her Highness
by her authority, in railing sort, and beyond the bounds of all good
humanity: All which Books, Libels, and writings tend by their scope, to
persuade and bring in a monstrous and apparaunt ^^ngerous Innovation within her
dominions and Countries, of all manner Ecclesiastical Government now in use,
and to the abridging, or rather to the overthrow of her Highness lawful
Prerogative, allowed by Gods law, and established by the Laws of the Realm,
and consequently to reuerse, dissolve, and set at Liberty the present
Government of the Church, and to make a dangerous change of the form of
doctrine, and ^se of Divine service of God, and the ministration of the
Sacraments now also in use, with a rash and malicious purpose also to
dissolve the Estate of the Prelacie, being one of the three ancient estates
of this Realm under her Highness, whereof her Majesty minds to have such a
reverend regard, as to their places in the Church and Common wealth
appertains. All which said lewd and seditious practices do directly ^^nd
to the manifest wilful breach of a great number of good Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, inconveniences nothing regarded by such Innouations.

In consideration whereof, her Highness graciously minding to provide some
good and speedy remedy to withstand such notable dangerous and ungodly
attempts, and for that purpose to have such enormious malefactors discovered
and condignely punished, does signify this her Highness misliking and
indignation of such dangerous and wicked enterprises, and for that purpose
does hereby will, and also straightly charge and command, that all persons
whatsoever, within any her Majesty's Realms and Dominions, who have, or
hereafter shall have any of the said seditious Books, Pamphlets, Libels, or
Writings, or any of like nature already published, or hereafter to be
published, in his or their custody, containing such matters as above are
mentioned, against the present Order and Government of the Church of England,
or the lawful Ministers thereof, or against the rites and ceremonies used in
the Church, and allowed by the Laws of the Realm: That they, and every of
them do presently after, with convenient speed bring in, and deliver up the
same unto the Ordinary of the Diocese, or of the place where they inhabit,
to the intent they may be utterly defaced by the said Ordinary, or otherwise
used by them. And that from henceforth no person or persons whatsoever, be so
hardy, as to write, contriue, print, or cause to be published or distributed,
or to keep any of the same, or any other Books, Libels, or Writings of like
nature and quality, contrary to the true meaning and intent of this her
Majesty's Proclamation. And likewise, that no man hereafter, give any
instruction, direction, favor, or assistance, to the contriuing, writing,
printing, publishing, or dispersing of the same, or such like Books, Libelles,
or Writings whatsoever, as they tender her Majesty's good favor, will avoid
her high displeasure, and as they will answer for the contrary at their
uttermost perils: and upon such further pains and penalties, as by the Law
any way may be inflicted upon the offenders, in any of these behalfes, as
persons mainteining such seditious actions, which her Majesty minds to have
severally executed. And if any person have had knowledge of the Authors,
Writers, Printers, or dispersers thereof, that shall within one month after
the publication hereof, discover the same to the Ordinary of the place where
he had such knowledge, or to any of her Majesty's privy Counsel: the same
person shall not for his former concealment be hereafter molested or troubled.

Given at her Majesty's Palace of Westminster, the xiii. of February, 1588.
In the xxxi. year of her Highness reign.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer the Queens
most excellent Majesty. 1588.


