By the Queen.
WHerein the Parliament holden at Westminster, the second day of April, in the
xii. year of the reign of our sovereign Lady the Queen, there was for the
relief of diverse poors decayed towns, and of great multitudes of her poor
subjects, who otherwise were likely to perish, or to become unprofitable and
dangerous to the common weal, among other provided and established, one good
and beneficial statute, entitled, An act for the continuance of making of
cappes. By mean of which statute, great nombers of idle, poor, and impotent
persons were for a season set on work, while the awe of the said statute and
fear of due execution thereof continued, to the marvelous great commodity of
this Realm, and help of the needy, and redress ofyll occupied persons, as
by the experience thereof has been manifestly proved. And whereas
nevertheless by little and little, the disobedience and wanton disorder of evil
disposed and light persons, more regarding private fancy and vanity, then
public commodity or respect of duty, has increased by want of execution
of the said law, whereby those good and honest subjects that have by means of
the said statute, set to work a great number of poor people, are like to be
driven to give over their said trade of making cappes, and to send abroad
again into idleness and misery, those multitudes that have been by them
relieved, whereby is likely to grow great enormitie and inconvenience, if
speedy remedy therefore be not in time provided. The Queens most excellent
majesty therefore tenderly considering the premises, straightly charge and
commands all Justices of Assizes, Justices of peace, Majors, Shirifes,
Bayliffes, and other head officers of Cities, Boroughs, and Towns corporate,
and the Lords, Stewards, Bayliffes, and other officers of Leetes, Lawdayes, and
liberties, and all and singular Constables, Thyrdboroughes, Tithingmen,
Churchwardens, and all other her highness subjects, to whom the executing or
putting in ure of the same statute any way may appertain, that every one of
them according to his office, place, and calling, do their uttermost endeavor
for the due execution of the said statute: and that they the said Bayliffes,
Constables, Thyrdboroughs, Tithingmen, Churchwardens, and all other inferior
officers, and every of them, do every Sunday, and festival day, make diligent
view and search in all Churches, Chapels, and all other places within the
circuites and compasses of their offices and authorities, for all and singular
breakers and offenders of the said statute, and without delay cause the names
of all such offenders, and of the parents, gardians, governors, and masters
of every child, servant, and ward, so offending, together with the day and
place of the offense committed, to be then written, and to be lawfully and
orderly presented, at such Assizes, Sessions, or Courts (next after such
offenses) as have authority to enquire or determine the said offenses: And
that all Majors, Sherifes, and Baylifes of Cities, Boroughs and Towns
corporate, and all lords of Leetes, Lawdayes, and Liberties, do immediately
upon the proclamation hereof, call before them all the said Constables,
Thyrdboroughes, Tithingmen, Churchwardens, inferior Bailiffes, and all other
the abouesayd inferior officers, that shall be under their charge of
government, and them and every of them forthwith in our names do straightly
charge and command, that they, and every of them, to the uttermost of their
powers, do every Sunday and festiual day, make such diligent view and search,
and such note also of the names of all such offenders, and such presentment of
all such offenses as is abouesaid: And that all Justices of Assizes, and
Justices of peace in their circuites and Sessions, and all Stewards in their
Leetes, upon pain of her Majesty's high displeasure, omit not in any wise from
time to time, specially to give in charge, and cause to be enquired of all
offenses against the said statute committed, or to be committed within their
several precincts or jurisdictions, and also do duly hear and determine the
same, punishing every of the said offenders according to the said statute:
And that all the said Lords and owners of Leetes and Lawdayes, do as much as
in every of them shall lie, to cause their Stewards thoroughly to execute their
office and authority, according to the same statute, and that upon every such
offense found, both the said owners of Leets, and also the rulers and chief
governors of every City, Borough, Town, or Hamlet, where any such offense
shall be tried and found, shall do their uttermost endeavor by the law to
recover, have and obtain of every such offendour, all the penalties to them or
any of them, by the said statute forfeited, or to be forfeited.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1590.


