A Declaration of an order for the making of certain small Cases for
Ballaunces and Waightes to weigh all manner of Gold Coins current within the
Realm, provided to be sold to all persons that shall have cause to use the
same, which have been viewed by the Wardens and Assistants of the Company of
the Goldsmiths in London hereunder named, limitting the sundry prices thereof,
according to their several quantities: which Cases, with the Ballaunces and
Weightes have been made by order of the Master of her Majesty's Mynt in the
Tower of London, and viewed, allowed, and set to reasonable prices by the said
Wardens of the Goldsmithes in London, and thereupon according to her Majesty's
Proclamation heretofore made for this purpose, now put into Print, by order of
the L. Burghley, L. Treasourer of England, whereof the original forms (so as
before is said, rated and prised) remain in the receipt of the Eschequer, to be
hereafter compared with such as shall be sold by the said Master of the Mynt,
according to their several forms and prices. 19. Martii. Anno Domini. 1587.
and 30. Elizab. Regina.
The first and greatest Case. FIrst a Case of Wood with several partitions for
xiiii. printed Waights, with iiii. other partitions for other Waights, and one
partition with a cover for Grains, esteemed at viii. d. iiii. s. vi. d. The
Ballaunce of the same Case at xvi. d. The xiiii. printed Waightes for Coins.
xviii. d. The suit of i. d. wayght from ob. wayght to v. d. wayght. ix. d. The
suit of grains from di. grain to v. grains. iii. d. The second Case. Item, a
lesser or second Case of Wood having a partition for Ballaunce, xiiii.
partitions for xiiii. several Wayghtes for Coins, and one partition for small
grains, esteemed at vi. d. iii. s. iii. d. The Ballaunce of the same case at
xii. d. The xiiii. printed Waightes* at xviii. d. The Grains iii. d. The
third Case. Item a lesser or third Case of Wood having a partition for the
Ballaunce, two partitions for the xiiii. several Wayghtes for coins, and one
partition for grains esteemed at iiii. d. iii. s. i. d. The Ballaunce of the
same case at xii. d. The xiiii. printed Wayghtes at xviii. d. The Grains iii.
d. The iiii. Case being Lether. Item a Lether case printed and gilded with
Gold, having in it a partition for the Ballaunce, two partitions for Waightes
and Grains esteemed at xii. d. iiii. s. vi. d. The Ballaunce of the same case
at xii. d. The xiiii. printed Waightes' at xviii. d. The suit of i. d. wayght
at ix. d. The suit of Grains at iii. d. The v. Case being Latten. Item a case
of Latten for a pair of folding Ballaunce also of latten at viii. d. iii. s.
v. d. The Ballaunce to the same case at xii. d. The xiiii. printed Waightes at
xviii. d. The Grains at iii. d.

Hugh Kayll. John Eccleston. Affabell Partridge. John Hyllard. John Fox.


Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


