By the Queen.
WHere by Queens most Excellent Majesty, being given to understand of a very
great outrage lately committed by some Apprentices, and others being
Masterlesse men, and vagrant persons, in and about the Suburbs of the City of
London, in assaulting of the house of Lincolnes Inn, and the breaking and
spoiling of diverse Chambers in the said House, which offenses her Highness is
minded to have to be duly examined, and thereupon as well the offenders therein,
as also such persons of the said House of Lincolnes Inn, as did by any means
give any occasion to provoke the same unlawful outrage, to be duly and very
severely punished according to their demerits; has therefore thought good for
the better avoiding of such like outrages hereafter (by the advice of Her
Majesty's Privy Counsel) straightly to charge and command all such as be any
Householders within the several Parishes of S. Dunstanes, S. Brides, S.
Andrews in Holborne, S. Giles in the field, S. Martin in the field, the Strond
and S. Clement without the Temple Bar, that they and every of them, do cause
all their Apprentices, Iourneymen, Servants and family in their several
houses, other then such as shall be appointed to keep several Watches, to
tarry and abide within their several houses, and not to be suffered to go
abroad after Nine of the clock at night, upon pain of imprisonment. And that
all Constables, petty Constables, and others being appointed to keep any
Watch or Watches, finding any such Apprentices, Iourneymen or servants,
wandering abroad out of their Master his House after Nine of the clock in the
night, shall not only take and commit such person to prison, but also shall
warn and command the Master of every such person to come and appear before
the Alderman or his Deputy of that Ward, (if he be within the Liberties of the
City of London) or else before some Justices of Peace, if he be without the
Liberty of the City, there to answer to his contempt, for suffering his
Apprentise or Servant so to go abroad, contrary to this Her Majesty's express
commandment.

And Her Majesty's further pleasure is, that this order shall be by every of
the said Householders duly observed and kept, for, and during the space of Six
days, next ensuing the date of this Proclamation.

And further, her Highness does straightly charge command all such persons as
be Masterlesse men, and other vagrant persons, not having wherewith to
maintain-themselues, and being or abiding in any the Parishes aforesaid, That
they and every of them, do presently depart from hence to the several places
where they were borne, upon pain of imprisonment.

Given at Ely place the xxiiij. day of September, in the xxxij. year of her
Majesty's most gracious Reign.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most Excellent Majesty. 1590.


