royal blazon or coat of arms
ELIZABETH by the grace of God Queen of England France and Ireland defender
of the faith etc.
To all and singular Archbishops Bishops Archdeacons Deanes and their officials
Parsons, Vicars Curates, and to all other spiritual parsons. And also to all
Justices of peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Constables, Churchwardens, and
to all other our officers ministers and subjects whatsoever they be as well
within liberties as without to whom these presents shall come greeting.
Whereas we are credably certefied as well by the pitiful supplication and
petition of our poor and true subject Hugh Euance of the borough of Thetforde
in our Counties of Suffolk and Norffolke Maulster, as also by the testimonial
of Sir Arthure Heu^^ningham Knight, Sir Edward Clear Knight, Miles Corbett
Esquire, Thomas K^y^ett Esquire, Bassingbourne Gawdie Esquire, and Edward Eden
Esquire, Justices of peace their that where his maulting house Kill house,
three hundred Com^e^ of maulte besides all his barlie and other come upon his
chambers being. And also most of his dwelling howses with goods therein to the
value of Two hundred and threescore pounds and vpwardes is by sudden
misfortune utterly burnt waisted and consumed with fire happened the xvii day of
April last past to the extreme impouerishing and vitter undoing of the said
Hugh his poor wife and children or ever, unless they be charirably helped
and relieved with the devotion of well desposed people. Know ye therefore that
we have licensed and by these presents, do license the said Hugh or his deputy
the bearer hereof to ask, gather, receive, and take the alms, charity, and
devotion of our loving Subjects, inhabiting and dwelling within our said
County of Norffolke and Suffolk with our city of Norwhich and all towns and
boroughes corporate whatsoever in either of the same counties and not
elsewhere, toward the relief of the said Hugh his poor wife and children.
Wherefore we will and command you and every of you, that at such times as the
said Hugh or his Deputy shall come and repair to any your Churches or other
places to ask and gather the charity and devotion of our loving subjects, as
is aforesaid, quietly to permit and suffer them so to do without any manner
your lets interruption or contradiction. And you the said Spiritual persons to
declare the teanour of these our Letters Patents unto our said subjects,
exhorting them to extend their charities in this behalf. And also you the said
Constables and Churchwardens to be aiding helping and assisting the said Hugh
and his deputy in your Churches for the collecting and gathering of thalmes
aforesaid. In witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made
patentes for the space of one whole year next after the date hereof to endure.

Witness our self at Westminster the eleauenth day of May in the three and
thirteth year of our Reign. Steward.


