Letters from the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel for
the furnishing and supplying of Horses in all Towns where the Posts are
established, for the relief of the Posts there, and furtherance of her
Majesty's service, Directed To all Majors, Shiriffes, Justices of the Peace,
Bailifes, Conestables, Hedborowes and all other her Majesty's officers,
Ministers, and loving Subjects, to whom it may or ought to appertain, and to
every of them.
The due execution whereof is also specially recommended to the Lord Lieutenant
of the Shire, and his several Deputies.
FOrasmuch as special and extraordinary occasions are sundry times offered for
the affairs of the State and service of her Majesty to send and dispatch in
Post, both by Packets and otherwise oftener and in greater numbers, then that
the ordinary provision of the Post-masters in their several Stages is able to
perform, with the expedition requisite and at their hands required, as by
their several and sundry complaints to their Master and Comptroller general
appears, and by him has been likewise intimated unto us; These are therefore
to will and require you, and in her Majesty's name to charge and command you
and every of you whom this may or ought to concern, to be ayding and assisting
with your best countenances, authorities, and powers unto the Post of that
Stage when and as often as in her Majesty's behalf he or any from him shall
repair unto you, And for his better relief to take present order and the like
from time to time hereafter as the Service shall require, that as well within
that Town or Stage where the Post abides, as from other places of the
Countries next adjoining within Liberties and without, the Conestables and
other Officers provide, take up, and bring in, some ten or twenty able and
sufficient horses, (or some such number more or less, as the service shall
import) with furniture convenient to be there from six days to six days, at
their Owners charges held ready and at the direction of the Post of the place
for the better performance of his duty as well touching the Packet (his
peculier charge) if his own horses be formerly employed, as also for the
speedier horseing a way of such special persons as in her Majesty's service
shall ride in Post. Unto the Owners of which horses, the said Post shall allow
and pay from time to time such rates and prices as he takes for the hire of
his own. Hereof we require you and every of you not to faue, as you will
answer the contempt at your utter most peril.

From the Court at Greenwich the 11. of April 1596. Jo. Puckering. R. Essex. H.
Hunsdon. W. Cobham. Tho. Buckhurst. R. Cecile. Jo. Fortescu.


WHereas we wrote our former Letters of the 11. of this month for the
furtherance of her Majesty's service that horses should be supplied from out of
the Towns, and Stages where Posts are laid, and Countries adjoining to the
relief of the said Posts, whose ordinary furniture oftentimes does not
suffice, we have thought it eftsoons very requisite, to will and require you,
And in her Majesty's name more streitly to command you and every of you, to
put our said former Letters in due execution. Adding withal for the better
contentment of the Owners of such horses so appointed to serve in their turns,
that no man whatsoever be suffered to run or ride further then from one Stage
to the next Stage without changing; And the rider to pay or satisfy for the
hire of his horse or horses aforehand, and at the first delivery of them. And
if any shall herein disobey or contend, to signify his name unto us. Requiring
you and every of you by the Conestables and other Officers to take note in
writing of the names of all men keeping horses within the Towns, villages, and
country next adjoining to any Stage where the Posts are placed, the better
thereby to put in execution the true purpose and intent of our former Letters
for the present occasion of her Majesty's service and the affairs of the
Realm, at the intimation and requests of the Posts in their several charges;
wherein if any default shall be found by cunning, negligence, or other abuse,
in the Conestables, Officers, or owners of any horses; to signify the same to
the Lord Lieutenant of the Shire, or his deputy or deputies, or (if need be)
to any of us; or to M. John Stanhope the Master or Comptroller general of al
her Highness Posts. And hereof we eftsoons require you to have that care
that to your several duties and places belongs, and as you tender her
Majesty's service, and the state of the Realm.

From the Court at Greenewich the 20. of April 1596. John Puckering. W. Cobham.
R. Cecill. W. Burghley. T. Buckhurst. Jo. Fortescue.


Imprinted at London by the deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. ANNO. 1596.


