By the Queen.

A Proclamation to repress all Piracies and Depredations upon the Sea.
THE Queens Majesty being certainly informed, through the manifold and daily
complaints made to her Highness, as well by her own Subjects, as others, of
the continual Depredations and Piracies committed on the Seas, by certain
lewd and ill disposed persons, pretending to make war against the enemies of
her Majesty, and of this Estate; And finding that the ordinary Proceedings
held of late times for the suppressing of these enormities, and offenses, have
wrought less reformation then was expected; In her princely care to preserve
Justice, as one of the maine pillars of her estate, and for the speedier
repressing of al such Piracies and Depredations, crimes most hateful to her
mind, and scandalous to her peaceable government, And for the better
continuance of amity with all other Princes and States, not enemies to her
Majesty: Has with the advice of her Privy Counsel not only been at charges
some few months since, to send out a Pinnace of her own now in the Straits to
search those seas for such offenders, and to use all good means by force, or
otherwise to take and bring home all such of her Subjects, as being Pirates do
rob and spoil the Subjects of her friends, not any way caring to obey any
Laws, or other Orders lately published upon the growing on of these foul
crimes, and Piracies, colored by other Uoyages; But also for prevention of any
more such lewd purposes in any that are to go forth, Has set down certain
Articles hereafter following, Which her Highness commands all her Officers
whom it may concern, of what degree soever, to see duly executed: Wherein if
any manner of person shall be found culpable, or wilfully negligent, Her Majesty
declares hereby, that punishment shall be inflicted upon him or them with such
severity, as the example thereof shall terrify all others from committing any
so odious crimes.

FIrst, That no man of war be furnished, or set out to Sea, without license
under the great Seal of the Admiraltie, upon sufficient bonds with Sureties,
first given to the Judge of the high Court of the Admiraltie, or to his
Deputy, for the good behavior of themselves and Company, toward her
Majesty's friends and Allies, according to the purport and limitation of the
said Bonds with their Conditions, and the true meaning of them, under pain of
death, and confiscation of lands and goods, not only to the Captain and
Mariners, but to the owners and Uictuallers; Besides the satisfying to the
party damnified of all his losses, costs and damages, if the Company of the
said Ship shall commit any Piracie, Depredation, or murder at the Sea upon
any of her Majesty's friends.

ITem, That if any person whatsoever, shall upon the Seas, take any Ship that
does belong to any of her Majesty's friends, and Allies, or to any of their
Subjects, And after knowledge had, that the said Ship does belong to her
friends, does not forbear to stay the same, unless it shall be laden with
goods of her Majesty's enemies, or with marchandizes of such nature or
quality, as may serve to furnish the King of Spain his Armies, or Nauies, and
going into the kingdoms of Spain and Portugal, Or shall take out of it any
goods belonging to her said friends, except goods of the aforesaid nature or
quality, bound for Spain, or Portugal; He or they so offending shall suffer
death with confiscation of lands and goods, according to the Law in that case
provided.

ITem, That all Admiral causes (except the causes now depending before the
Commissioners for causes of Depredations) shall be summarily heard by the
Judge of the high Court of the Admiraltie, without admitting any unnecessary
delay.

ITem, That no appeal from him be admitted to the defendant or defendants, in
causes of Depredation, either against the offenders, or their Accessaries,
before or after the offense committed, Or those in whose possession the goods
spoiled are found; Unless first by way of provision, the sum adjudged, be
paid to the plaintiff upon Sureties to repay it, if the Sentence shall be
reuersed.

ITem, That no prohibition in such cases of Spoil, and their accessaries, or
dependances be granted hereafter.

ITem, That no Prizes taken shall be disposed of, till adiudication given by the
said Judge, and order given by him, for the disposing thereof, under pain of
confiscation of Ship and goods: And the parties who shall buy, take or receive
any part thereof so disposed before Sentence, to be fined to her Majesty's
use, and their bodies imprisoned during her Majesty's pleasure.

ITem, That the Uiceadmirals, or Majors, Bailifs, or other chief Officers of
every Port, Admirals of themselves, shall not suffer any Man of war to put to
sea, without such license from the Judge of the Admiraltie, as aforesaid,
neither suffer any Man of war to dispose of or unlade (without urgent
necessity, and in that case to be safely kept and cellered) any goods taken at
fea, till such judgment and order by the said Judge, as aforesaid, under pain
to every Uiceadmirall, or other such Officer, transgressing this Article, to
forfeit to her Majesty one hundred pounds, for a fine, for every such offense,
besides the satisfying to the party damnified, of all his losses, costs and
damages.

ITem, That no bond be taken of any Man of war, but by the said Judge of the
Admiralty, that the same may be always foorth-comming in the Office, to
answer all complaints: And the said bonds to be taken to the use of the Lord
Admiral, which he is to assign over to the parties damnified, upon just
complaint.

ITem, That no ship or goods taken from any her Majesty's friends, shall be
delivered by any other order, then upon proof made in the said Court of the
Admiraltie, before the said Judge of the Admiraltie or his Deputy, to the end
that a Record may be kept of all such restitutions made to Strangers, to serve
when occasion shall require.

ITem, That the said Judge of the Admiraltie, upon sufficient notice given to
him in the Office of the Admiraltie, of any Man of war gone to the Sea
without license from him under the great Seal of the Admiraltie first
obtained: Or of any, who have disposed, sold, or alienated any ship or goods
whatsoever, taken at Sea, before such judgment, as aforesaid, given by the
said Judge, shall proceed against the said ship, goods, or party, according to
law in that case provided, within the space of three months next following,
upon pain to incur her Majesty's heavy displeasure.

ITem, That for the better information of the said Judge, every Uiceadmirall is
enjoined by this Proclamation (whereof he shall take notice at his peril) to
certify into the said Court of the Admiraltie, every quarter of a year, what
Man of war has gone to the Sea, or returned home, with any goods taken at
Sea, or the procedue thereof, upon pain to lose to her Majesty (by way of
fine) for every such default, twenty pounds of English money, to be answered
into her Majesty's Receipt of the Exchequer, by Certificate from the said Judge
of the Admiraltie under the great Seal of that Office, to be directed to the
Lord Treasurer, and Barons of the Exchequer.

ITem, That no ship or vessel furnished to Sea in warlike manner, shall enter
into the Streits, or Mediterranean Sea, upon pain to the Offenders, of
confiscation of goods and lands, and of whatsoever there taken, and further, to
suffer as in case of Piracie.

LAstly, It is straightly prohibited to all English Men of war that shall go to
the Seas, that they, nor any of them (under pain of death to the Offenders as
in cases of Piracie, and to the Owners, confiscation of their ship or ships of
war) shall sell, alienate, or dispose of any goods taken at Sea, either in
Argier, Tunis, Zant, Petrasse, or any other place in Barbary, Greece, or
Italy, or elsewhere, but in the kingdom of England only: Neither shall any of
her Majesty's subjects, residing for the time in Barbary, or places adjoining,
or any other place out of England, dare to buy or receive, directly or
indirectly, any such goods taken at the Seas, under pain of confiscation of
his own proper goods, chattels, and lands here in England, and such other
punishment, as by the Law may be inflicted upon a contemner of her Majesty's
Edicts and Proclamations. Given at her Majesty's Manor of Richmond, the
twentieth day of March, in the four and fortieth year of her Highness reign.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Queens most excellent
Majesty. 1601.


