Orders conceived by the Lords of her Majesty's Privy Council, and by her
Highness special direction, commanded to be put in execution for the
restraint of killing, and eating of flesh this next Lent, and to be executed
as well by the Lord Mayor within the City and Suburbs of London, and by the
Officers of the liberties and etempt places in and about the same, as by order
to be prescribed by the Lords Lieutenants of all the Counties of the Realm, to
the Justices of Peace, Lords of Liberties, and Officers of corporate Towns.
S. Febr. xxxix. year of the Queens Majesty's reign.
FIrst her Majesty's pleasure is, upon her understanding of the great disorders
heretofore and especially the last Lent committed in killing and eating flesh
in the time of Lent, especially in the City of London, and the liberties
thereto adioining, that the statute made in the fifth year of her Maissties
reign, for the restraint thereof, be put in due execution by the way of
inquisition, and charge of Iuries, and by any other good means, both within
the City and all other places requisite within the Realm.

And for the better knowledge of the truth of these disorders, and redress of
the inconveniences, the said Iuries shall call before them, and send for any of
the servants of any Inholders, Victuallers, Tauerners, and keepers of ordinary
Tables, and such other that utter victuals, to examine them upon their
corporal oaths, what flesh shall be, or is any day during the Lent season
dressed, killed, uttered, or eaten in their houses: which if they shall refuse
to do, then they shall commit to prison the said servants, so refusing upon
their oaths to declare the truth.

And because a great part of this disorder grows by the Butchers of the City
of London, and also of the Country, that secrets kill and bring flesh to the
City: there shall be only viii. Butchers licenced by the Lord Mayor to kill
flesh within the said City and liberties thereof, without paying any thing
for their license, because they shall be bound in reasonable sums of money to
abscrue such order as shall be prescribed to them.

And every of these Butchers, to be so licenced, shall be first bound in the
sum of two hundred pounds to her Majesty's use, and the bonds to be
certified to the Queens Remembrancer in the Eschequer) to sell no flesh in the
time of Lent, but to such persons as shall show them special warrant from the
Lord Mayor under his hand, and that the Butchers do truly keep particular
books of their daily sales, and the names of those to whom they shall so sell,
with the quantities and the times thereof.

That the Lord Mayor give order to these Butchers, not to sell any flesh but at
reasonable prices, and for that purpose the prices shall be set down by the
said Lord Mayor, such as may be reasonable both for the buyer and seller: and
it the Butcher shall ^^eake that order, then to be forth with discharged, and
committed to prison, and another put into his place, and his bond to be
certified into the Eschequer to the Queens benefit.

That the Lord Mayor himself shall grant no warrant for buying of flesh in
Lent, but to such as shall have and show to him license in good writing
according to the laws of the Realm to eat flesh, and the said license to be
viewed and registered, first by some two meet persons to be appointed for this
purpose by the Lord Mayor, and books to be kept thereof, to be showed further
when the same shall be required, unless it be to Ambassadors and Agents of
foreign Princes, to whom notwithstanding no further ^^a^^^tie shall be
allowed, then ratably for their own household, and that such Ambassadors and
Agents shall give to the L. Mayor (...) Certificate weekly, what they shall
require to be for their own tables.

That the L. Mayor shall now presently before Lent, cause all Inholders,
Tablekeepers, Victuallers, Alehousekeepers, and Tauerners within the City and
liberties thereof, to appear before him, or such persons as he shall appoint
meet for that purpose: and shall take bonds of every of them in good sums of
money, not under one hundred pound a piece to her Majesty's use, not to
(...)esse any flesh in their houses this Lent time for any respect, except it
be for some such person that lies in their house, and that also has license
through sickness or other necessary cause, to eat flesh. Bonds shall be taken
also of the Poulters, not to utter any Poultry ware, but to such as shall be
likewise licenced to eat flesh, and that such as will not give such bonds, that
they be secluded from all utterance of victual during the Lent season:
excepting those Poulters that do ordinarily serve her Majesty's household, of
whom like bonds shall be taken by her Majesty's Officers of the Green cloth.

And for the Butchers and others that come with victuals of flesh out of the
Country to the City, the L.Mayor shall cause certain persons, whereof some to
be named to the L. Mayor by the Wardens of the Fishmongers, to watch at the
gates and other like places in the Suburbs, where flesh may be brought in, to
view and search, and to intercept the same. And in case the same shall be bound
to be brought to any person not warranted nor licenced to eat it, as it
aforesaid, then the same to be forfeited and sold at the discretion of the L.
Mayor, for the use of the poor in the Hospitals and prisons in the City, and
the bringers to be imprisoned. And otherwise the Carriers of the said victuals
of flesh to be guided to the persons houses that have license, with regard
therein not to be abused. And this watch to be continued daily during the whole
time of Lent: and if any of these watchmen be found negligent and corrupt in
his charge, then he to be committed to prison, there to continue during the
whole Lent.

And to the end the said Orders may be duly executed, it is thought convenient,
that the L. Mayor should send for ye chief Heads of the company of the
Fishmongers, and shall cause them to make choice of four or more wise and
discreet persons of the said Company, and men of good wealth and ability, to
whom they shall commit the charge to make inquiry after such as shall be found
transgressors of the said Orders, who in respect of their travel bestowed in
that behalf, shall have the one moitie of such bonds as shall be forfeited by
transgressing of the said Orders, and the other moity to be converted unto
godly uses, by the discretion of the Queens Majesty's High Almner, specially
upon poor and lame soldiers, with the priuitie of some of the Privy Council.

And that there may be due execution of the said Orders, as well without as
within the Liberties of the City, it is thought convenient, that they that
have the chief charge over the places privileged and exempt. where any Leets
or Law days are kept, shall authorize under their hand and seal four persons
as are above mentioned, to make search within the said privileged and exempt
places for such as shall transgress the said Orders, and shall for their
travel therein employed, receive the moitie of the Bonds forfeited, as is
above mentioned. And for the avoiding of corruption and partiality in the
said persons, it shall be necessary of take their others, and give bond in
some good and large sums, to see (as much as in them lies) a due observation
of the said Orders.

And for that it is to be doubted, that the said Fishmongers, upon the
observation of the said Orders, will take occasion thereby to enhance the
prises as well of Fresh as of Sea fish: It is thought meet, that the L. Mayor
shall take order with the said Fishmongers, that as well the Salt as Fresh fish
shall be uttered at reasonable prises.

And it is ordered, that no Butchers shall kill any Beeues, but such as shall
be specially licenced thereunto, without any fraud, for the furnishing of such
ships as shall be lawfully employed by Sea, either in the way of traffic, or
otherwise. And that such Butchers as shall be licenced within the Liberties by
the head officers of the Liberties to kill any flesh, shall every fourteen
days at the least, give a true certificat unto the Lord Mayor and head
officers of the places exempt, of such numbers of Veales, Lambs, and Muttons,
as shall be by them weekly killed: to the end, there may be a true certificat
made every fifteen days unto ye Lords and others of her Majesty's Privy
Counsel, what numbers of the several kinds above mentioned shall be killed,
either within the City, or places exempt.

And as these Orders are expressy devised to be executed in the City of
London, and places near to the same, so her Majesty's pleasure and
commandment is, that the execution of these or like Orders be performed by the
commandment of her Majesty's Lieutenauts to be sent to the Justices of the
Peace, in all Shires within their rule, and to all other Officers in Towns
corporate, or in any Liberties, with like order for bonds to be taken to her
Majesty's use.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


