By the King.
A Proclamation against Inmates and multitudes of dwellers in strait Rooms and
places in and about the City of London: And for the rasing and pulling down
of certain new erected buildings.
WHereas it falls out by woeful experience, that the great confluence and
access of excessive numbers of idle, indigent, dissolute and dangerous
persons, And the pestering of many of them in small and strait rooms and
habitations in the City of London, and in and about the Suburbs of the same,
have been one of the chiefest occasions of the great Plague and mortality,
which has not only most extremely abounded in and about the said City, and
Suburbs thereof, and especially in such strait rooms and places, and amongst
persons of such quality, but also from thence has most dangerously
ouerspread, and infected very many principal, and other parts of this Realm,
(which Almighty God cease at his good pleasure) His Majesty tendering the
safety of his loving Subjects, and minding, as much as in him lies, to avoid
the continuance or renewing of such mortality, does by the advice of his
Privy Council, not only straightly require and command that his Majesty's
good and profitable Orders and directions already published for the staying
(if God so please) of the same Infection, be carefully, speedily, and duly
executed, but also does straightly prohibit and forbid, That no new Tenant or
Inmate, or other person or persons, be admitted to inhabit or reside in any
such house or place in the said City, Suburbs, or within four miles of the
same, which have been so infected, during the continuance of this Plague and
mortality, in or about the said City, nor after, until such time and as it
shall be thought safe and expedient by the principal Officers there for the
time being, That is to say, if it be within the said City, by the Alderman of
the Ward, or his Deputy; if without, then by the next Justice of the Peace.
Wherein his Majesty straightly does charge and require every of the said
Aldermen, and their Deputies, and every Justice of the Peace to whom it shall
appertain, That they take special care, that none of the foresaid Rooms,
Houses, or places be hereafter pestered with multitudes of dwellers, or with
any Inmates. And that such of the said Rooms, Houses, or places as by any
Proclamation heretofore published, are ordered or appointed to be rased or
pulled down, shall forthwith, the same being now void, or as the same shall
hereafter become void, be rased and pulled down accordingly. And being once
pulled down, that they or any of them at any time afterward, suffer not any
of the same to be newly erected, as they will answer the contrary at their
uttermost peril.

Given at his Majesty's Manor of Woodstocke, the sixteenth day of September,
in the first year of our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of
Scotland the seven and thirtieth. God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1603.


