By the Queen.
A Proclamation for prohibition of transporting moneys into Ireland.
THe Queens most excellent Majesty having found by exprience oflats years,
since the time that she has had cause to send extraordinary sums of moneys
into her Realm of Ireland, for the payment of the great Forces which there she
mainteineth, that infinite discommodities and loss does arise to this her
Realm of England by transporting of the sterling moneys of this Realm into
Ireland, for that the same do for the most part either come into the hands of
the Rebels, whereby they are enabled to continue their wicked and detestable
rebellion and treasons (providing themselves by the help of those moneys of
arms and munitions of wars from foreign parts) or else are transported from
thence into other Countries by Merchants for lack of commodities whereon to
employ them, and hereby this Realm exhausted of the treasure which should be
kept within the same: Her Majesty also finding by the laws of this Realm in
the times of her Progenitors made, and specially by one Act of Parliament made
in the nineteenth year of her Nighnesse grandfather of famous memory, king
Henry the seventh, (yet continuing in force and effect) that for like
inconveniences then felt, the transportation of moneys out of this Realm into
Ireland was expressly and severely forbidden, under great penalties: Her
Highness has thought good, for remedy of the like inconveniences in time to
come, to put in execution those former laws restraining the transportation of
moneys into Ireland. Wherefore her Majesty does straightly charge and command
all Judges, Justices, Magistrates and Officers to whom it shall appertain, to
see severe and due execution of such laws as do prohibit the transportation
of her coins of England into Ireland, and namely the said statute made in the
nineteenth year of the reign of her Majesty's grandfather, and does also by
this Proclamation admonish all her loving subjects of both her Realms, and all
others, trading in her Realm of Ireland, that they shall from henceforth
forbear all transportation of moneys of England, into Ireland, contrary to the
said laws and statues, for that her Majesty will cause the former laws and
statutes prohibiting the said transportation of money to be so straightly
looked unto, and executed, as the penalties thereof shall fall heavily upon the
offenders against the same, without any hope of remission.

Given under our sign manuell, at our Manor of Greenewich, the third day of
July, in the three and fortieth year of our reign.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Queens most excellent
Majesty.

ANNO 1601.


