By the Queen.
THe Queens most excellent Majesty, understanding that the infection of the
plague in the cities of London and Westminster does yet continue, so as with
safety the next Michaelmas Term cannot be kept as was accustomed in the city
of Westminster: and therefore doubting that if the said Term of S. Michael now
next coming should be kept at the said city of Westminster, it can not be but
dangerous to such her loving subjects, which for their lawful causes should
make their necessary repair to the said cities: Therefore her Majesty
considering the great inconveniences that may thereof ensue, by the advice of
her Highness Counsel does find it very expedient that adiournment should be
made of the said Term, in form following, That is to say, in or from the
first Return thereof, commonly called Octabis Michaelis, unto the Return,
commonly called Mense Michaelis, then next ensuing, when the rest of the said
Term shall be continued and kept in manner and form hereafter specified. For
which purpose, especial choice is made of the Town of ^* Albans in the
county of Hartford: at which place her Highness pleasure is, that the residue
of the said Term shall be kept as hereafter is excessed: and therefore does
declare, and hereby signify her will and pleasure, that writs of adiournment
shall be directed to the Justices of either Benches, and to the Judges of all
other her Majesty's courts, to who^ like writs have been usually directed,
giving them authority to adiourne the ^^e Term from Westminster aforesaid,
unto the said town of S. Albans, unto and in the Return and day called Mense
Michaelis, from or in which (...)Mense Michaelis, the residue of the said Term
shall be adiourned to and in the Return and d^y called Crastino Animarum next
ensuing, in ma^^ and form as by the said writs of adiournment shall be directed.
And also that all matters, causes, and suits between party and party in her
^^^nesse courts of Chancerie, Star Chamber, Eschequer, the courts of Wards and
Liueries, the Duchy of Lancaster, and Requests, shall have ^^^tinuance, and
the parties shall have day in or from the said Octabis Michaelis unto and in
the said day of Mense Michaelis, and from thence shall have continuance, and
the parties shall have day in and to the said Return of Crastino Animarum as
is aforesaid, willing and commanding them and every of them to whom it does
apperteine, to keep and observe their apparances and assemblies in a land
every her said courts to be holden as is aforesaid, in the said Mense
Michaelis, and from thence to the said Return called Crastino Animarum, as is
aforesaid, in like manner, form and ^ondition as they should or ought to have
done, if the said Term and courts had been holden and kept at Westminster, and
as they and every of (...) will answer at their perils. Provided always, and
her Majesty's pleasure and commandment is, that all persons that are or ought
to ^^^^^ie any Bonds, Recognizances, or other things into her Majesty's
Eschequer: and also all Collectours, Receivers, Shirifs, and other Ac^untants,
and all other persons that should or ought to account or pay any sum or
sums of money in any of her Majesty's courts of Esche^uer, court of Wards and
Liueries, or of her Duchy of Lancaster, or any of them, or enter into any
account in any of the said courts, shall repa^re into the said city of
Westminster, until full Term shall be kept and holden at some other place, and
after full Term so begun and holden, then (...) such town or place where the
Term shall be kept and holden, where her Highness has appointed the officers
and ministers of the same, as (...) that purpose her Majesty has thought
expedient, and there to certify, pay, and do in every behalf, as though no
such Proclamation of ad^ment had been had or made. And her Highness further
pleasure and commandment is, that all Shirifs shall return their writs and
pro^^^^ against all such Accountants and Debtors at the days therein
appointed: and if any person or persons who ought to account or pay any ^umme
or sums of money to her Majesty, in any the courts and places aforesaid, do
make default therein, that then her Highness writs and pro^^^^t shall be
awarded and sent forth against every such person and persons, and the same to
be duly and orderly served and returned by the Shirifs and officers thereunto
appointed, in such like manner and form as the same should have been, if this
present Proclamation had not been made. And if any Shiriffe, or any other
officer shall make default, or be negligent in serving, executing, or returning
of any the writs and process afore^^id, that then every such Shiriffe and
other officer shall incur such pains and penalties, as by the said courts, or
any of them shall be taxed and assessed. And further, her Majesty considering
that if there should happen to be any access and appearance at the said town
of S. Albans, during the re^^^^e of the Term, of such as have had the plague
in their houses, or have been themselves infected therewith, there might ensue
great peril and image to those that have as yet been clear thereof, and so
further inconvenience might grow thereby to the rest of the Realm: Her
Highness for (...)avoiding thereof, does straightly charge and command that
no such person or persons who have been so infected, or have had the plague in
their ^ouses, or have been in any house, at the time of their being in the
same, infected with the plague at any time sithence the xviii. day of September
(...) past, of what estate or degree soever he or they be, shall repair to the
said town of S.Albans or other place whatsoever, to which any part of the
(...) Term of S. Michael shall be adiourned, during the residue of the said
Term, except he or they shall be commanded by special Process, or other^^^^
have special commandment for his or their personal appearance. And yet never
the less, every such person or persons so infected before his their repair
into the said Town, shall before he or they enter into any house within the
Town or place aforesaid, openly notify and declare by (...)me message to the
principal officer of the Court where he should appear, his or their state
touching his or their infection, with the cause for which he or they shall be
called by Process or other commandment, or to such person or persons as shall
be appointed by the L. Keeper of the great Seal of England, to have regard
thereunto: So as if the said party shall be ordered to come into the Town or
place aforesaid, or into any the Courts there, the same shall after (during the
space of his or their abode there) bear and hold up in his or their hand
upright to be seen, one red (...) of the length of one yard or more, upon
pain of her Majesty's displeasure, and imprisonment of their bodies during her
Highness pleasure. and further her Majesty straightly charge and commands
all Justices of Peace of the said County of Hartford, as well within Liberties
as without dwelling within twelve miles of the said Town of S. Albans, and all
Bailiffs, Constables, and head officers of any Boroughes, towns, ^^lages, or
hamlets within eight miles of the said Town of S. Albans, that they and every
of them shall from and after the day of the proclaiming this Proclamation
within the said County, do their best endeavors to make and set forth such
good orders as (by the goodness of God) may (...) most to the preservation of
all places within the same circuit of eight miles from the infection of the
plague, and for that purpose to assemble themselves together weekly at some
convenient place in the said County from the time of the publishing of this
Proclamation, until the end (...) the residue of the said Term, as well for
the devising as for the execution of such good orders. And that the said
Justices of Peace shall in the first ^ay of the sitting in the residue of the
said Term, signify and declare to the L. Keeper of the great Seal of England
all that they, and the said Constables and other the said Officers shall then
have done in and about the premises: And shall also from time to follow such
directions as ^ey shall receive from the said L. Keeper and other of her
Majesty's privy Counsel being at that Town of S. Albans, tending to the
preserua^on of the places within the circuit above specified from the said
infection of the plague: Not doubting but that as well the said Justices, as
other the ^^feriour officers will carefully discharge their duties in that
behalf, as they tender the continu^nce of her Majesty's favor, and will
answer (...) the contrary at their perils.

Given at the Castle of Windsor the xxiiii. day of September, in the xxxv.
year of her Majesty's reign.

