By the Queen.
FOrasmuch as her Majesty does understand that the Statutes made heretofore
for the maintenance and increase of the Game of Phesants and Partridges, and
for the redress of such abuses, as have been and are usually committed in the
waste and spoil of the said Game by disorderly means, have taken and do take
so little effect, as that not only the observation of the said Statutes is
utterly neglected, but greater boldness, and a further degree of offense in
that kind is commonly used and practiced, by taking and killing the said Game
by such unlawful means near unto her own houses of residence; insomuch as
her Majesty is deprived both of the use, and of the pleasure of the said
Game: Her Majesty therefore supposing that her straight commandment published
by her Proclamation shall take better effect, does straightly charge and
command all and every person and persons of what degree or estate soever, not
to take, or cause to be taken with any Netts, Setting dogs or any other
Instruments or Engines, any Phesants or Partridges, or any Foul of the River
within six miles of any of these her usual houses, viz. Windesor Castle,
Whitehall, Hampton Court, Richmond, Greenewich, Datelands, or Nonesuch, upon
pain that every person so offending, shall for the same not only make such
forfeiture, and have any such other penalty, as by the said Statutes is
prescribed, but suffer such further punishment, as by her Highness Privy
Council either in the Court of Starrechamber, or otherwise, for such wilful
disobedience and contempt toward her Majesty shall be inflicted. And for the
better avoiding and prevention of such abuse and disorder, her Highness
further pleasure and Commandment is, that no person or persons whatsoever,
inhabiting or abiding within six miles of any of her Houses before mentioned,
shall keep, or suffer to be kept within his house any Setting Dogees, Netts,
or other Engies for the taking of Phesant or Partridge, or of any Foul of the
River, upon pain of forfeiture of all such Nets, Engines, Instruments, or
Setting Dogs, and of such further punishment, as by her Majesty's Privy
Council (as aforesaid) shall for their contempt be imposed.

And lastly whereas her Majesty both for her exercise and for her delight is
pleased many times to see her Hawks fly, and would more often use the same,
if by the aforesaid disorders, and by the spoil and disturbance of the Game by
the common Hawking near unto her Houses, her pleasure therein were not
prevented: Her Majesty does likewise straightly charge and command that no
person or persons, of what estate or degree soever they be, shall Hawke ax
Phesant or Partidge, or at any Foul of the River, within three miles of any
her aforenamed Houses, under the degree and quality of a Noble man, or of one
of her Privy Council, using the same in their own person, for their
recreation, upon pain of forfaiting their Hawks, imprisonment of themselves,
and as they will avoid the further danger of her Majesty's heavy displeasure.
And her Majesty does hereby straightly charge all Justices of Peace,
inhabiting within or near to the precincts above limited to any her Highness
Houses, that they do carefully look to the executing of this her pleasure now
published, and cause the offenders, whom they shall chance to find, to be
apprehended and committed, and of their faults advertise some of her Highness
Privy Council, or the Officers of her Greenecloth, for that if it shall
appear that any of the said Justices have used negligence, or conniuence
herein, her Majesty will extend the pain of her displeasure unto them, and
cause them to feel the smart thereof.

Given at her Majesty's Manor of Datelands the fifteenth day of September in
the four and fourtieth year of her Highness reign.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Queens most excellent
Majesty. 1602.


