By the King.
ALthough the Offenses committed against the Queen our sister deceased, and
the honor of he Estate by the Carle of Tyrone, were such as al Princes ought
to very sensible of, and not by the impunitie of offenders so high a nature,
give way to others to attempt the like: Yet because we have understood that
before the death of the Queen, the said Earl having expressed and made known
to Her, many tokens of an unfeigned repentance, had so far moved her
therewith, as she had given power to the L. Mountioy her Deputy, and now our
Lieutenant of that Kingdom, to receive him to mercy if he should seek it,
which Her purpose, we cannot but commend, as being derived from the virtue of
Clementie, of no less ornament to Princely dignity then is the rigor of
Justice: And for that the said Carle has not only done none offense against
us since our coming to this Crown, but also, as we are certainly informed by
our Lieutenant, has both abandoned his adherence to all foreine Princes, and
offered himself in his own person to do service upon any other Rebels within
that Realm of Ireland; We could not think him worthy of less favor at Our
hands, then he had obtained at Hers, against whom his faults were committed.
And therefore he being now admitted by our said Lieutenant, by virtue of the
power first given Queen, and since confirmed by Us, into his State and
condition of a good Subject, and in the rank and dignity of an Earl, And
being also come over into this Realm to cast himself at our feet, and to
testify by his own words, his unfeigned sorrow of his former Offenses, and
earnest desire of our Mercy and favor: We have thought good a signify to
all men by these presents, that we have received him into Grace and favor, and
do acknowledge him our Subject, and a Noble man of such rank and place as in
that our Realm of Ireland he is: And that therefore if any man shall by
words, or deed, abuse the said Earl of Tyrone, or misbehaue himself toward
him, and not yield him such respect and usage, as belongs to a person of his
sort received into favor and good opinion, we shall esteem it an Offense,
deserving such punishment, as the contempt of our pleasure so expressly
signified does deserve.

Given at our Manor of Greenwich the eighth day of June, in the first year of
our Reign.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

ANNO DOM. 1603:


