By the King.
FOrasmuch as the Kings most Excellent Majesty is graciously minded to make his
speedy repair from Barwick to his Highness City of London, In which his
journey he is to pass from thence through diners Shires of this Realm: These
are to notify unto all Sheriffs of the several Counties through which his
Majesty shall so pass, that his Highness will and pleasure is, that each of
them respectively being attented with the Justices of Peace, and other
Gentlemen of the said several Counties, fail not to wait on his Majesty, to
receive him at his first entrance into the same County whereof they are
Shiriffes, and so to continue their attendance until such time as his Majesty
come to the uttermost bounds of the same County, Where the Shiriffe of the
next County is in like manner to attend and receive him: And this to be so done
from County to County, until his Majesty shall come to the said City of
London.

And furthermore, for that it is requisite that sufficient and plentiful
provisions be made in all such Counties and places where his Highness shall
either lodge or rest by the way, not only for his Majesty and such Noble
Personages as shall attend him, but also for the whole Train: These are in his
highness name to charge and command all Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and
others his Majesty's Officers, Ministers, and Subieets to whom it may
appertain, That they and every of them take special care and regard, that all
manner Victuals and other provisions necessary and convenient for his Majesty
and his whole train, be in convenient time brought to all places where his
Highness shall lodge or rest in his passage as aforesaid, there to be uttered
and sold for reasonable prices: For all which, the owners thereof shall from
time to time receive good and present payment. And as it is not doubted, but
that all his Majesty's good and faithful Subjects will be most ready and
willing to show themselves forward and careful in the due accomplishment of
the premises, according to their loyalty and duty: so if any shall be found
disobedient, negligent, or remiss therein, These are to let them know, that
they are to sustain such condign punishment as their offense in that behalf
deserves.

Given at his Majesty's palace of Whitehall, that tenth of April, in the
first year of his Majesty's Reign.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

Anno Dom. 1603.


