royal blazon or coat of arms
JAMES by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
defender of the Faith, etc.
To all and singular Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deanes and their
Officials, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and to all Spiritual Parsons, And also to
all Justices of Peace, Majors, Shiriffes, Bailiffes, Constables, Church
wardens, and Headboroughes, And to all other our Officers, Ministers and
Subjects whatsoever, as well within Liberties as without, to whom these presents
shall come, greeting.
We have understood by a License granted by our brother the French King, to
Master John Triphon the bearer hereof being a Grecian borne, of a Noble house,
That for Religion he, his Mother and Sisters, have been banished and driven
out of their Country by the Great Turk, and that his Mother and Sisters are
fled to the Island of Creete, Whereby both himself, and they, are fallen into
great want and misery, remaining thus exiled from their Country, and are
likely to fall into greater distress, except they be relieved by the
charitable Devotions of well disposed Christians toward their maintenance, and
the payment of a great Ransom laid upon them. Now for that there is nothing
more acceptable to Amighty God then the charitable comforting of distressed
Christians, fallen into such calamities, especially for their profession of
Christianity. We tendering the poor and lamentable Estate of the said John
Triphon, his Mother and Sisters, of our especial Grace and Princely
compassion, have given and granted, And by these our Letters Patents do give
and grant unto the said Master John Triphon or his Deputy the bearer hereof,
full power, license and authoritic to ask, gather, receive and take the Alms,
and charitable devotion of all our loving Subjects, inhabiting within our
Counties of Middlesex, with our Cities of London and Westminster, with the
Suburbs thereof, Kent, Essex, Hartford, Surrey, Sussex, Buckingham, Bark,
Cambridge, with the University there, Suffolk and Norffolke, with the City of
Norwich, and in all Cities, Towns corporate, privileged places, Parishes,
Vtllages, and all other places whatsoever, within any of our said Counties and
Cities, and not elsewhere, for, and toward the maintenance of himself, his
Mother and Sisters, and the payment of their said Ransom. Wherefore we will
and command you, and every of you, that at such time and times as the said
Master John Triphon or his Deputy the bearer hereof, shall come and repair to
your Churches or other places to ask, gather, receive and take the gratuities
and charitable Devotion of our said Subjects, quietly to permit and suffer him
and his Deputy so to do, without any manner your let or contradiction: And you
the said Parsons, Vicars and Curats, for the better sturring up of a charitable
devotion, deliverately to publish and declare the Tenor of these our Letters
Patents unto our said Subjects, exhorting and charitably persuading them to
extend their liberal Contributions in so good and charitable a deed. The late
Statute made in the five and thirtieth year of the Reign of our late dear
Sister Queen Elizabeth for the punishment of Vagabonds and Rogues, or any
other Statute, Law, Ordinance, or provision heretofore made to the contrary in
any Rogues, or any wise notwithstanding. In witness whereof we have caused
these our Letters to be made Patents for the space of one whole year next
after the date hereof to endure.

Witness our self at Westminster the fix and twentieth day of December, in
the first year of our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland
the seven and thirtieth.

