An Act for punishment of Rogues Vagabonds, and sturdie Beggars. Anno xxxix.
Reginae Elizabethae.
FOr the suppressing of Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy beggars, Be it enacted by
the authority of this present Parliament, that from and after the feast of
Easter next coming, all Statutes heretofore made for the punishment of Rogues,
Vagabonds or sturdy beggars, or for the erection or maintenance of houses of
correction or touching the same, shall for so much as concerns the same, be
utterly repealed: And that from and after the said feast of Easter, from time
to time it shall and may be lawful to and for the Justices of Peace of any
County or City in this Realm or the Dominions of Wales, assembled at any
quarter Sessions of the Peace within the same County, City, Borough, or town
corporate, or the more part of them, to set down order to erect, and to cause
to be erected one or more houses of correction within their several Counties
or Cities: For the doing and performing whereof, and for the providing of
stocks of money, and all other things necessary for the same, and the raising
and governing of the same, and for correction and punishment of offenders
thither to be committed, such orders as the same Justices or the more part of
them shall from time to time take, reform, or set down in any their said
quarter Sessions in that behalf, shall be of force, and be duly performed and
put in execution.

And be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all persons
calling themselves Scholars going about begging, all Seafaring men pretending
losses of their ships or goods on the Sea, going about the country begging,
All idle persons going about in any country either begging or using any
subtle craft, or unlawful games and plays, or fayning themselves to have
knowledge in Physiognomie, Palmestry, or other like crafty science, or
pretending that they can tell destinies, fortunes, or such other like
fantastical imaginations: All persons that be, or utter themselves to be
Proctors, procurers, patent gatherers, or Collectors for gaoles, prisons, or
Hospitals. All Fencers, Bear wards, common players of Interludes, and
Minstrels, wandering abroad (other then players of Interludes belonging to any
Baron of this Realm, or any other honorable parsonage of greater degree, to
be authorized to play under the hand and Seal of Arms of such Baron or
personage) All Iuglers, Tinkers, Pedlers, and petie Chapmen wandering abroad
All wandering persons and common Laborers, being persons able in body, using
loytering, and refusing to work for such reasonable wages, as is taxed or
commonly given in such parts, where such persons do, or shall happen to dwell
or abide, not having living otherwise to maintain themselves, All persons
delivered out of gaoles that beg for their fees, or otherwise do travail
begging: All such persons as shall wander abroad begging, pretending losses by
fire, or otherwise: And all such persons not being felons, wandering and
pretending themselves to be Egyptians, or wandering in the habit, form, or
attire of counterfeite Egyptians, shall be taken, adjudged and deemed Rogues,
Vagabonds, and sturdy beggars, and shall sustain such pain and punishments,
as by this Act is in that behalf appointed.

And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that every person which is by
this present Act declared to be a Rogue, Vagabond, or sturdy beggar, which
shall be at any time after the said feast of Easter next coming, taken
begging, vagrant, wandering or misordering themselves in any part of this
Realm, or the Dominion of Wales, shall upon their apprehension by the
appointment of any Justice of the Peace, Constable, Headborough or Tythingman
of the same County, Hundred, Parish, or Tything, where such person shall be
taken, the Tythingman or Headborough, being assisted therein with the advice of
the Minister, and one other of that Parish, be stripped naked from the middle
upwards, and shall be openly whipped until his or her body be bloody: and
shall be forthwith sent from Parish to Parish, by the Officers of every the
same, the next straight way to the Parish where he was borne, if the same may
be known by the parties confession or otherwise. And if the same be not
known, then to the Parish where he or she last dwelt before the same
punishment by the space of one whole year, there to put him, or her self to
labor as a true Subject ought to do: Or not being known where he or she was
borne or last dwelt, then to the Parish through which he or she last passed
without punishment. After which whipping the same person shall have a
testimonial subscribed with the hand, and Sealed with the Seal of the same
Justice of the Peace, Constable, Headborough or Tythingman, and of the Minister
of the same Parish, or of any two of them, testifying that the same person has
been punished according to this Act, and mentioning the day and place of his
or her punishment, and the place whereunto such person is limited to go, and
by what time the said person is limited to pass thither at his peril. And if
the said person through his or her default do not accomplish the order
appointed by the said testimonial, then to be eftsoons taken and whipped, and
so as often as any default shall be found in him or her, contrary to the form
of this Statute, in every place to be whipped, till such person be repaired to
the place limited: The substance of which testimonial shall be registered by
the Minister of that parish, in a Book to be provided for that purpose, upon
pain to forfeit five shillings for every default thereof, and the party so
whipped, and not known where he or she was borne, or last dwelt by the space
of a year, shall by the Officers of the said Village where he or she so last
past through without punishment, be conveyed to the house of Correction of the
limit wherein the said Village stands, or to the common jail of that County
or place, there to remain and be employed in work, until he or she shall be
placed in some service, and so to continue by the space of one year, or not
being able of body, until he or she shall be placed to remain in some
Almeshouse in the same County or place.

Provided always, and be it enacted, if any of the said Rogues shall appear
to be dangerous to the inferior sort of people where they shall be taken, or
otherwise be such as will not be reformed of their rogish kind of life by the
former provisions of this Act, That in every such case it shall and may be
lawful to the said Justices of the limit where any such Rogue shall be taken,
or any two of them, whereof one to be of the Quorum, to commit that Rogue to
the house of Correction, or otherwise to the jail of the County, there to
remain until their next quarter Sessions to be holden in that County, and
then such of the same Rogues so committed, as by the Justices of the Peace then
and there present, or the most part of them, shall be thought fit not to be
delivered, shall and may lawfully by the same Justices or the most part of
them, be banished out of this Realm, and all other the Dominions thereof, and
at the charges of that Country, shall be conveyed unto such parts beyond the
Seas as shall be at any time hereafter for that purpose assigned by the privy
Council unto her Majesty, her heirs or successors, or by any six or more of
them, whereof the L. Chancellor, or L. Keeper of the great Seal, or the L.
Treasurer for the time being to be one, Or otherwise be judged perpetually to
the Galleis of this Realm, as by the same Justices or the most part of them it
shall be thought fit and expedient. And if any such Rogue so banished as
aforesaid shall return again into any part of this Realm or dominion of
Wales, without lawful license or warrant so to do, that in every such case,
such offense shall be felony, and the party offending therein suffer death as
in case of f^lony: The said felony to be heard and determined in that County of
this Realm or Wales, in which the offender shall be apprehended.

And be it also enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any town, parish,
or village, the Constable, Headborough or Tithingman be negligent and do not
his or their best endeavors for the apprehension of such Vagabond, Rogue, or
sturdy Beggar, which there shall be found contrary to the form of this present
Act, and to cause every of them to be punished and conveyed according to the
true meaning of this present Act, that then the said Constable, Headborough,
or Tithingman, in whom such default shall be, shall lose and forfeit for every
such default x s And also if any person or persons do in any wi^e disturb or
let the execution of this law or any part thereof, concerning the punishment or
conueying of Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, or the relief or settling of
poor impotent persons in any manner of wise or make rescusse against any
officer or person authorized by this present Act for the due execution of any
the pr^misses, the same person so offending, shall forfeit and lose for every
such offense the sum of v. li. and shall be bound to the good behavior.

And be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no person or
persons having charge in any voyage, in passing from the Realms of Ireland or
Scotland, or from the Isle of Man into this Realm of England, do wittingly or
willingly bring or convey, or suffer to be brought or conveyed in any vessel
or Boat, from and out of the said Realm of Ireland, Scotland, or Isle of Man,
into the Realm of England or Wales, or any part thereof, any Vagabond, Rogue,
or Beggar, or any such as shall be forced or very like to live by begging
within the Realm of England or Wales, being borne in the same Realms or
Island, on pain of every such person so offending, to forfeit and lose for
every such Vagabond, Rogue, Beggar, or other person like to live by begging xx.
s. to the use of the poor of the said parish in which they were set on land.
And if any such Mannisk, Scottish, or Irish Rogue, Vagabond, or Beggar, be
already, or shall at any time hereafter be set on land, or shall come into any
part of England or Wales, the same after he or she shall be punished as
aforesaid, shall be conveyed to the next port or parish in or near which they
were landed or first came, in such sort as Rogues are appointed to be by this
present Act, and from thence to be transported at the common charge of the
Country where they were set on land, into those parts from whence they came or
were brought. And that every Constable, Headborough and Tithingman neglecting
the due performance thereof, shall forfeit for every such offense x. s.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no diseased or
impotent poor person shall at any time resort or repair from their dwelling
places to the City of Bath, or town of Buxton, or either of them to the
Bathes there for the ease of their griefs, unless such person do so, bear to
beg, and be licensed to pass thither by two Justices of the Peace, of the
County where such person does or shall then dwell or remain, and provided for
to trauail with such relief, for and toward his or her maintenance, as shall
be necessary for the same person, for the time of such his or her travel, and
abode at the City of Bath and town of Buxton, or either of them, and return
thence, and shall return home again as shall be limited by the said license,
upon pain to be reputed, punished, and used as Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy
Beggars declared by this present Act. And that the inhabitants of the same
City of Bath, and town of Buxton, shall not in any wise be charged by this
Act, with the finding or relief of any such poor people.

Provided always that the Justices of Peace within any County of this Realm
or Wales, shall not intromit or enter into any City, borough, or towns
corporate, where be any Justice or Justices of the Peace for any such City,
borough or town corporate for the execution of any branch, article or sentence
of this Act, for or concerning any offense, matter or cause growing or arising
within the Precincts, liberties, or jurisdictions of such City, borough, or
towns corporate, But that it may and shall be lawful to the Justice and
Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bayliffes, and other head Officers of those
Cities, Boroughes, and Towns corporate, where there be such Justices of the
Peace to proceed to the execution of this Act, within the Precinct and compass
of their liberties in such manner and form as the Justices of Peace, in any
County may or ought to do within the same County, by virtue of this Act, Any
thing in this Act to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Provided always that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend, to the poor people for the time being, in the Hospital, called S.
Thomas Hospital, otherwise called the Kings Hospital, in the Borough of
Southwarke, near adjoining to the City of London, but that the Mayor,
comminaltie and Citizens of the said City of London for the time being,
shall and may have the rule, order and government of the said Hospital, and of
the poor people therein for the time being, any thing in this Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always that this Act, or any thing therein contained, or any
authority thereby given, shall not in any wise extend to dishenherite,
prejudice or hinder John Dutton of Dutton, in the County of Chester Esquier,
his heirs or assigns, for, touching or concerning any liberty, pre-eminence,
authority, jurisdiction or inheritance, which the said John Dutton now lawfully
uses, or has, or lawfully may or ought to use within the County Pala^tine of
Chester, and the County of the City of Chester, or either of them, by reason
of any ancient Charters of any Kings of this land, or by reason of any
prescription, usage or title whatsoever.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all fines and
forfeytures appointed, or to grow by this present Act, (except such as are
otherwise limited and appointed by this present Act) shall wholly go and be
employed to the use of the reparations, and maintenance of the said houses of
Correction, and stock and store thereof, or relief of the poor, where the
offense shall be committed at the discretion of the Justices of the Peace of
the same limit, city, borough or town corporate: And that all fines and
forfeytures appointed or to grow by conviction of any person according to this
present Act, shall by warrant under the hands and seals of any two or more of
the Justices of the Peace of the same County, city, borough or town corporate,
be levied by distress, and sale of the goods and chattels of the offender,
which sale shall be good in the Law against such offender, And that if any of
the said offenses shall be confessed by the offender, or that the same shall
be proved by two sufficient and lawful witnesses, before such two or more
Justices of the Peace, That then every such person shall forthwith stand and b^e
in the Law convicted thereof.

And be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that any two or
more Justices of the Peace within all the said several Shires, cities,
boroughes or towns corporate, whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall have full
power by authority of this present Act, to hear and determine all causes that
shall grow or come in question, by reason of this Act.

And be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Lord
Chancellor or Keeper of the great seal of England for the time being, shall
and may at all times hereafter by virtue of this present Act, without further
warrant make and direct Commission or Commissions under the great seal of
England, to any person or persons giving them or some of them thereby
authority, as well by the oaths of good and lawful men, as of witnesses, or
examination of parties, or by any other lawful ways or means whatsoever, to
enquire what sums of money or other things, have been or shall be collected
or gathered for, or toward the erection of any houses of correction, or any
stocks, or other things to set poor on work, or for the maintenance thereof
at any time, after the seventeenth day of November, in the eighteenth year of
the reign of the Queens most excellent Majesty, and by whom the same were or
shall be collected or gathered, and to whose hands commen, and to what use, and
by whose direction the same was or shall be employed. And to call all and every
such person and persons, and their sureties, and every of their executors or
administrators to an account: And to compel them and every of them by
attachment of their goods or bodies to appear before them for the same, and to
hear and determine the same, and to levy such money and things as they shall
find not to have been duly employed upon the said houses of correction, or
stocks, or upon other like uses, having in such other like uses respect of
things past by the said Commissioners to be allowed of, either by distress,
and sale of the goods and chattels of such persons, as they shall think fit
to be chargeable or aunswerable for the same, or by imprisonment of their
bodies at their discretion: And that the said Commissioners shall have full
power and authority to execute the same Commission, according to the tenor and
purport thereof: And that all their proceedinges, doings, judgments, and
executions by force and authority thereof, shall be and remain good and
available in the Law: which said money so levied by the said Commissioners,
shall be delivered and employed for the erecting or maintenance of the same.

Provided always nevertheless that every Seafaring man suffering shipwreck,
not having wherewith to relieve himself in his travels homewardes, but having
a testimonial under the hand of some one Justice of the Peace, of, or near
the place where he landed, setting down therein the place and time where and
when he landed, and the place of the parties, dwelling, or birth, unto which he
is to pass, and a convenient time therein to be limited for his passage, shall
and may without incurring the danger and penalty of this Act in the usual
ways, directly to the place, unto which he is directed to pass, and within
the time in such his testimonial limited for his passage, ask and receive
such relief as shall be necessary, in, and for his passage.

Provided also, that this statute, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to any children under the age of seven years, nor to any such
Glassemen, as shall be of good behavior, and do travail in, or through any
Country without begging, having license for their traveling under the hands
and seals of three Justices of the Peace of the (...) County where the^
travel, whereof one to be of the Quorum.

And be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this pre^ent
Act shall be proclaimed in the next quarter Session or Sessions in every
County, and in such other market Towns or places, as by the more part of the
Justices of the Peace in the said Sessions shall be agreede and appointed. This
Act to endure to the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

FINIS.

