By the King.
FOrasmuch as it appears now in part, who were the Accomplices of Percy in his
detestable Treason published by our former Proclamations, in their assembling
together to move our people to Rebellion, Although perhaps many of them did
never understand the secret and depth of his abominable purpose* and that
amongst those which do flee for fear of our Power, and for the guiltiness of
their offense, we are informed that the said Percy is: We have thought it good
to make known to all men, both that we put great odds between his part of
the Treason and other men's. And also, that forasmuch as it imports greatly
that he should be taken, to the end that by his confessions, the whole plot
and the partners thereof might be discovered, and from himself the horrible
purpose opened, which it is likely that many Whom he has seduced did never
understand, And also that by the exemplary punishment of him, others be (...)
from such Treasons, as tend not only to Our destruction, but to the confusion
art utter dissolution of the State:

If any person shall apprehend the said Percy, and br^ng him to Us or any Our
Officers alive; if that person be an offe^^^our and partner with him in his
Treason in whatsoever degree, We will not only give him pardon of his Life,
Lands, and Goods, but also bestow on him a reward of the value of one Thousand
pounds at the least. And if he be no offender, yet shall he have that or a
greater reward. And for their assurance We do hereby give Our Princely word.

Given at our Palace of Westminster the eighth day of November, in the third
year of our Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

Anno Dom. 1605.


