By the King.
WHere upon our first coming to the succession of this Kingdom, at the suit
of diverse persons, who had or pretended to have from the Queen of famous
memory our Sister deceased, Commissions as annexed of course to several
offices which they held, for the taking up of Hounds, Greyhounds, Spaniels,
and Dogs of other sorts accustomed for Venerie, Faulconry or other sports of
Princes, We did renew unto them their said Commissions, and grant the like to
some others who had no offices, upon diverse suggestions made unto us, which
Commissions we have since been informed from diverse parts of our Realm,
that inferior Officers who have been trusted with them, have abused and do
daily abuse, contrary to the meaning of the same, which was to be executed no
further forth then the necessity of our service should require: And forasmuch
also as we have had good proof that Gentlemen and others, who delight in the
like pastime of hunting and hanking, have and will be ready at all times of
their own good will and respect to our recreations, to furnish us of
sufficient number of Dogs of all sorts, which we shall have cause to use,
when they shall be informed that we have need of them:

We have therefore found it unnecessary to continue the execution of any our
Commissions heretofore given for that purpose, And do hereby notify the same
to all our Subjects, and expressly charge and command all those, who have any
such Commissions or Warrants from us under our great Scale, or any other our
Scales, that they do not only forbear to put the same in execution from
henceforth, but also do bring in and deliver up the said Commissions and
Warrants, into our Chancerie, or any other Office, where they have been sealed,
within the space of Twenty days after the publishing hereof, as they will
answer the contrary at their peril. Willing also and commanding our Attorney
general, and all other of our Counsel learned, that whenever they shall
receive information, that any person, who has had such Commission from us,
shall after the time above limited execute the same, that they do prosecute
their offense therein as in case of contempt by all such ways and means, as
in like case is usual.

Given at our Honor of Hampton Court, the xxvij. day of September, 1605. in
the third year of our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland. God save
the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1605.


