By the King.
THe Kings most Excellent Majesty considering what peril oftentimes ensues
by the means of great assemblies of people in the time of Infections diseases,
Does therefore straightly charge and command, That no manner of person or
persons of what estate, degree or condition he or they be, inhabiting within
the Cities of London, or Westminster, the Suburbs of the same, or any other
place where the Iusection of the Plague is, not being Household servants to his
Majesty, or necessary persons for provisions of his Household, do presume to
resort or come unto his Highness Court at Whitehall, or wheresoever it shall
please his Majesty to lie or abide, until such time as his Highness pleasure
shall be further known herein, (except the Lords, the Bishops of this Realm,
the Judges of the Law, the King and Queens learned Council, the principal
Magistrates of the City of London, his Highness Household servants, and
necessary persons for provisions of his Majesty's Household, not having the
Infection of the Plague in their houses, or near unto them, during the time
aforesaid.)

It is also further by his Majesty thus provided, That if any other (except
before excepted) shall have necessary cause to come unto the Court from the
said Cities of London, Westminster, the said Suburbs or other places before
declared, the same persons shall not come within the utter gate of the Court,
until they have first sent unto one of the Kings Majesty's Porters at the
Gates, and to him declared unto whom he has necessary occasion to repair
within the Court, and thereupon the said Porter shall cause the party to stay
abroad, without entering into any House, Tent, or company of any persons, and
shall certify the Lord Steward, Lord Chamberleine, Master Treasourer, Master
Comptroller, the Vicechamberlein, or one of them, or some of the principal
Officers of the Greencloth, if the matter appertain to the Kings Majesty's
Household, or to some other of the Lords, or other of his Majesty's Privy
Council, according to the quality of the matter, and of the persons with whom
the party has to do in the Court, and by a warrant in writing, signed with
the hands of any of the said Lords, Councellers, or Officers, certified to any
of the Kings Majesty's Porters, that the said person shall, or may come into
the Court, then the said Porter shall permit and suffer him so to do:
otherwise the said persons shall be commanded to return without any longer
abiding, upon pain of his Majesty's grievous displeasure, and severe
punishment in the Marshalsea.

Given at his Majesty's Palace of Westminster the second day of November, in
the fifth year of his Highness reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

ANNO DOM. 1607.


