A Publication concerning all sorts of Gold and Silver thread, granted by his
Majesty's Letters Patents, under the great Seal.
WHereas we have been informed of the manifest injuries and wrongs done unto us
by the secret bringing and conueying into this our Realm of England and other
our Dominions of right gold thread, right silver thread, and right gold and
silver thread, wrought and un wrought in lace and otherwise, commonly called
and known by the name or names of Venice gold, Venice silver, or Venice gold
and silver, Florence gold, Florence silver, or Florence gold and silver, French
gold, French silver, or French gold and silver, Millen gold, Millen silver, or
Millen gold and silver, and Copper gold thread, and Copper silver thread, and
Copper gold and silver thread wrought and unwrought in lace or otherwise,
commonly called or known by the names of Cap gold, Cap silver, and Cap gold
and silver, Cullen gold, Cullen silver, or Cullen gold and silver, Bridges
gold, Bridges silver, or Bridges gold and silver, or by what other name or
names so ever, in secret and unlawful manner without paying the Custom and
Subsidy of right due and belonging to us of or for the same: For remedy
whereof we have thought good by our letters patents indented under our great
Seal of England, bearing date the 13. day of January last past, to demise and
to farm let unto Roger Pennell, and Richard Grimstone, their executors and
assigns, all the Customs and subsidies which at any time or times, during the
space and term of 16. years next after the feast of S. Michael the archangel
last past, before the date of the said letters patents, should or ought to
arise, renew, happen, grow due, or payable to us, our heirs and successors,
of, for, or in respect of all or any of the said wares, commodities and
marchandizes of all or any of the sorts, or kinds aforesaid, or called or
known by any of the names aforesaid, which at any time or times during the
said term of 16. years, should be brought or transported from any the parts
beyond the Seas into this Realm of England, or any of the Dominions of the
same, for such yearly rent as by the said Letters Patents is to us, our heirs
and successors reserved. And whereas also by the same Letters Patents we have
straightly charged and forbidden all manner of persons other then the said
Roger Pennell and Richard Grimstone, their executors, deputies, and assigns,
and other then such person or persons, as within the space of fire months next
after the publication hereof, shall become bound unto the said Roger Pennell,
and Richard Grimstone, or to the suruiuour of them, or to the assigns of them,
or of the suruiuour of them, in a bond of five hundred pounds, of lawful
English money, for the due payment of such customs and subsidies, as by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm ought to be answered and paid for the said
wates and commodities and every of them, and not to utter or sell the same
wares or merchandise, or any part thereof, before such time as the same wares
or merchandise shall be sealed with the seal mentioned in the said Letters
Patents, whereof the print and stamp is set and expressed in the margent of
these presents (unless the said Roger Pennell and Richard Grimstone shall
neglect or refuse to seal the same) to transport or bring from any the parts
beyond the Seas, and to lay on land within this our Realm of England, or any
of the Dominions of the same at any time or times, during the said term of
sixteen years, any of the said wares, commodities or merchandise, of all or
any the natures, sorts or kinds aforesaid, or called or known by any of the
names aforesaid. And whereas also by the said Letters Patents we have granted
that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Roger Pennell and Richard
Grimstone, their, and either of their executors, deputies, factours, and
assigns, and to and for all such person and persons only which shall so
become bound, according to the purport and true meaning of the said Letters
Patents, to bring or cause to be brought from the parts beyono the Seas, into
this our Realm of England, or any of the Dominions of the same, according to
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, any of the said wares, commodities or
merchandise, of all or any of the kinds or natures aforesaid, or called or
known by any of the names aforesaid;

And further by our said Letters Patents we have willed and commanded that no
merchant, nor any other person or persons shall within the said term of
sixteen years buy, acquire, obtain or receive within this our Realm of
England, or any of the Dominions of the same, of any person or persons, to the
intent to mechandize, bargain, vent or utter again in gross or by retaile,
or to work or make in lace or fringe, any of the said wares, commodities or
merchandises of any the natures or kinds aforesaid, or called or known by any
the names aforesaid, unless the same be first marked or sealed with the said
seal, unless the said Roger Pennell and Richard Grimstone, their executors,
administrators, deputies, factours and assigns, shall wilfully refuse or
neglect to seal the same upon pain of our high displeasure, and to suffer
such fine and corporal punishment as offenders in case of wilful contempt of
our express commandment ought to suffer and sustain. And moreover by the
said Letters Patents our will and pleasure is signified, and we thereby willed
and commanded that the said Roger Pennell and Richard Grimstone, their
deputies, factours, servants, and assigns, shall have convenient place in the
custom house of London, and in all other custom houses, and places of lading
or vnlading of wares elsewhere within England, or in any of the Dominions of
the same, there, at their pleasure to be present, and to receive, collect and
enjoy without interruption of any person or persons whatsoever, all the said
customs and subsidies according to our said Letters Patents, and have granted
by the same Letters Pattents unto the said Roger Pennell, and Richard
Grimstone, their deputies, factors, servants and assigns, being accompanied
with the Constable, or any other our officers for the time being, in lawful
manner and from time to time, and at all times lawful, meet and convenient,
during the said term of sixteen years, to search all ships, vessels,
boats, bottomes, houses, warehouses, shoppes or convenient place or places
whatsoever, for all or any of the said wares, merchandises or commodities of
any of the natures or kinds aforesaid, or called or known by any of the
names aforesaid, whereof the customs and subsidies are granted or demised by
the said Letters Patents, as shall be brought or laid on land within this our
Realm of England, or any of the dominions of the same within the said term of
16. years, by any person or persons, before the Customs and Subsides due for
the same shall be paid or compounded for, to or with the said Roger Pennell and
Richard Grimstone, their executors, administrators or assigns, and to take and
seize the same.

And furthermore whereas we have by our said Letters patents straightly charged
and commanded all and every person and persons, Merchants denizens or strangers
whatsoever, that they or any of them do not attempt or presume to vnship,
discharge, unlade, and lay on land any of the wares, commodities, or
merchandises before mentioned, in any Port, haven, creek, place or places
whatsoever within this our Realm, before such times as the Customs and
Subsdies due and payable for the said wares, merchandises and commodities, and
every of them, be duly answered, paid, or compounded for, to or with the
said Roger Pennell and Richard Grimstone, or either of them, their, or either
of their executors, administrators, deputies, servants, Factors or assigns, or
some, or one of them, upon pain that every person, or persons. Merchants
denizens or strangers whatsoever, that shall unlade, or lay on land any of the
said Wares, merchandises or commodities, the Customs and Subsidies whereof are
by the said Letters patents demised and granted before such time as the
Customs and sub^^dies thereof shall first be duly answered, paid or compounded
for, to or with the said Roger Pennel and Richard Grimstone, or either of them,
their, or either of their ^^cutors, administrators, deputies, Factors or
assigns, within the said term of 16. years in these presents mentioned,
shall forfeit and loose all and every the ^^me Wares, merchandises and
commodities so unshipped, unladen, discharged or laid on land, before such
time as the Customs and Subsidies by the said Letters patents demised and
granted payable for the same Wares, merchandises or commodities, be or shall be
first duly answered or compounded for, to or with the said Roger Pennel and
Richard Grimstone, or either of them, their, or either of their executors,
administrators, Factors, deputies or assigns, the one moitie of all which
forfeitures to be to us our heirs and successors, to the use of us our heirs
and successors, and the other moitie of the same forfeitures to be to the said
Roger Pennel and Richard Grimstone, their executors, administrators and
assigns, or to such other person or persons as shall first seize the same to
his or their own uses, without any account thereof to us, our heirs and
successors, to be rendered or paid for the same.

And whereas by our said Letters patents we have charged and commanded all and
every Customers, Controllers, Surueyors, Searchers, Waitors, and other our
Officers and ministers whatsoever, of all and every Ports, Havens, creekes,
members and passages within this our Realm of England and dominion of Wales,
That they or any of them shall not permit, tolerate, or suffer directly or
indirectly any Merchant English, denizen or stranger, or other person
whatsoever, to discharge, unlade or lay on land any of the said Wares,
merchandises and commodities, the Customs and Subsidies whereof are by the
said Letters patents demised and granted unto the said Roger Pennel and
Richard Grimstone, before such time as the Customs and Subsidies thereof be
duly answered, paid or compounded for, to and with the said Roger Pennel and
Richard Grimstone, or one of them, their, or one of their executors,
administrators, assigns, deputies, Factors or servants, or some of them,
according to the true intent and meaning of the said Letters patents. And that
if any such Wares, merchan^izes or commodities, be discharged, unladen or laid
on land, that after knowledge thereof, they shall forthwith and with all
convenient speed, give notice of such discharging, vnlading or laying on land
to the said Roger Pennel and Richard Grimstone, or one of their executors,
administrators and assigns, or to their deputies, Factors, or servants, to the
end they may take the benefit of our said grant, upon paint of our displeasure
and indignation, and of such forfeiture, pain and punishment, as by the Laws
of our Realm can or may be inflicted upon them, and every of them in that
behalf.

And we have also by our said Letters patents straightly charged, prohibited
and forbidden all and every the Owners, farmers, or occupiers of all and every
Was, keys, Brewhouses, and other such like place and places of lading, or
vnlading whatsoever, within this our Realm of England, That they nor any of
them shall not suffer or permit any Goods, wares, merchandises or other
commodities to be unshipped, unladen, discharged or laid on land, in any of
the said Wharfes, keys, Brewhouses or other such like places of lading or
vnlading, contrary to the Books of Customs made in the seventh year of the
reign of our ^eare sister Elizabeth the late Queen of England, upon pain of
our displeasure and indignation, and of such pains and penalties as by the
Laws and Sta^utes of this Realm can or may be inflicted on them for their
offense in that behalf, As by the said Letters patents more at large
appears. All which pre^isses, to the intent our will and pleasure in that
behalf might the better be known to all such our loving Subjects whom it may
concern, We are pleased ^^at they should in our name be published, notified
and commended by these presents to all and every our loving Subjects to be done
and performed, upon the ^ines and penalties aforesaid, according to the tenor
and true intent of the said Letters Patents.

2. February 1604.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.


