By the King.
WHereas the Kings Majesty, for the better relief and sustentation of the
poorer sort of people within this his Kingdom, in this time of scarcity and
dearth of Corn and Grain, did out of his Princely and gracious disposition,
lately cause certain Orders to be generally published and sent into all the
Counties, Cities, and principal plates of this Realm for the serving of the
Markets from time to time with convenient quantities of Corn and Grain,
whereby the poor might be chiefly provided for with so much thereof, as should
be necessary for them at reasonable rates: And whereas it has pleased God to
give this year greater increase of Barley then of other Grains, which of it
self, or being mingled with Wheat or Rye, will make good Bread, especially for
the poorer sort of people: His Majesty is given to understand, that of this
great quantity of Barley (whereof the greatest part ought and might be made
into Bread as aforesaid) much is by the infinite multitude of Maultsters, like
to be turned into Malt as hitherto it has been, and then again by common
Bruers brued into strong Beer and Ale, which consumes double the Malt that is
needful, and serves not for use, but for drunkenness and excess; Although
both by the Laws now in force, and by the said Orders lately published, there
is provision against these abuses. His Majesty therefore continuing his
Princely care for the preservation and relief of his poor Subjects, And to
the end that the great waste and consumption of Barley in making of Malt may
be prevented, and that the poor may have sufficient store of Barley to make
Bread for their sustenance at reasonable prices, in this time of scarcity of
Wheat and Rye, Has therefore thought good, and by this his Proclamation does
straightly charge and command all Justices of Peace, Majors, Constables,
Headboroughes, and other his Officers to whom it apperteineth, That they
forthwith after the publishing of this his Proclamation, do carefully and
diligently cause the Laws and Statutes of this his Realm, concerning Malt
and Maultsters, and concerning the Assize and price of Beer, to be put in due
execution, And by all means to diminish the number of Maultsters, and to
establish good Orders to such as they shall allow still to Malt for the
sparing of Barley, as much as may be, As also to see that common Bruers,
Alehouse keepers, and all others that sell Ale or Beer, make their Beer and
Ale not too strong, but of such rate and price, as may occasion least expense
of Malt, and whereby they may utter their Beer at low and reasonable prices,
that the poorer sort may have the greater proportion for their money.

And his Majesty does likewise straightly charge and command all Maultsters,
common Bruers, Alehouse keepers, and such as sell Beer or Ale, to observe and
keep as well the Laws and Statutes of this Realm in that behalf made, as his
Majesty's said Orders lately published, and all other Orders and directions of
the said Justices of Peace, Majors, Bayliffes and other Officers hereafter to
be made, according to his Majesty's gracious commandment in this Proclamation
contained.

Given under our hand at Thetford the xij. day of December, in the sixth yeereof
our Reign of great Britain, France and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. Anno 1608.


