THat the Lord Mayor shall now presently before Lent, or at the beginning
thereof, cause all Inholders, Keepers of ordinary Tables, Victualers,
Alehouse-keepers, and Tauernors, within the City and Liberties thereof, to
appear before him, or such persons as he shall appoint meet for that
purpose, and shall take Bonds with sufficient Sureties of every of them in good
sums of money, viz. one hundredth pounds the Principal, and the Sureties
thirty pounds apiece, to his Majesty's use, not to dress any Flesh in their
houses this Lent time, for any respect, nor suffer it to be eaten: The like
Bonds with Sureties shall be taken of the like persons, upon like Penalties, by
the chief Officers of Westminster, and the Liberties thereof, and every of the
said Bonds to be certified into his Majesty's Exchequer.

ANd for the Butchers and others that come with victuals of flesh out of the
Country to the City; the Lord Mayor shall cause certain persons to watch at
the Gates, and other like places in the Suburbs, where flesh may be brought
in, to view and search, and to intercept the same: and if any of those
Watchmen be found negligent, and corrupt in his charge, then he to be
committed to Prison during the whole Lent.

ANd to the end the Fishermen may employ themselves to Sea, with better
intouragement then heretofore; And that the Fishmongers may furnish themselves
with such store from time to time hereafter, as shall be expedient as well for
the provision of the City, as for selling the same at reasonable rates: They
are hereby required to take notice of his Majesty's commandment, and constant
resolution for the observance of Lent, and Fish days both now and hereafter,
as by Law is required.

ANd forasmuch as the use and liberty now taken, is so far declined from the
abstinence, and moderation of former times, as instead of fasting, and
forbearing Suppers on Fridayes both in Lent, and other times, which heretofore
was duly observed: there is now nothing more usual, then to make special
choice of Friday nights for Suppers and entertainment, and to mark out those
days for riot and excess, to the great offense and scandal of Government: For
the avoiding whereof, as it is to be wished, that every man would be a rule of
order to himself in his own house, as well in respect of the Public, as of
his private ease and commodity: So his Majesty both straightly charge and
command all Inholders, Keepers of Ordinary Tables, Victualers,
Alehouse-keepers, and Tauernors, not to make any Supper for any person, or
persons whatsoever upon Friday nights either in Lent or out of Lent, nor to
suffer any Meat to be then dressed, uttered, sold, or eaten in their houses,
upon such punishment, as is due to those that shall contemn his Majesty's
Royal pleasure and commandment.

ANd as these Orders are expressly devised to be executed in the City of
London, and places near to the same: So his Majesty's pleasure and
Commandment is, that the execution of these, or like Orders be performed by
the commandment of his Majesty's Justices of Peace in all Shires within their
Rule, and to all other Officers in Towns Corporate, or in any Liberties, with
like order for the Bonds to be taken to his Majesty's use, and certified into
the Exchequer. And that no manner of toleration, favor or conniuencie be used
by any Justice of Peace, or other Officer, contrary to the true meaning of
these Orders, as both they that shall presume wittingly so to tolerate the
offense, as also the Party himself offending, will answer the same at their
uttermost perils. It being his Majesty's express pleasure, that his Laws in
this case shall be hereafter severely executed upon all offenders whatsoever.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

ANNO DOM. 1613.


