By the King.
A Proclamation against the uttering of light Spanish Silver Coin.
WHereas the Spanish Silver Moneys (which heretofore were good and of full
weight, and went in payments by toleration without prejudice, or rather to the
benefit of Trade within this Realm,) are now of late in a manner generally so
clipped and impaired, That in the payment thereof, the loss is most commonly
(to the Receiver) no less then a full third part; And whereas there is daily
brought from foreign Countries into diverse parts of this Kingdom, an
exceeding great quantity of the said light Spanish Moneys, by reason that the
gain thereupon is so excessive; which Moneys (being here mixed amongst his
Majesty's proper Coin,) are passed away at the very full value that they were
to bear, if they were not defective as aforesaid: which abuse does so far
impouerish the Receivers, (being, for the most part, of the poorer sort,) and
does breed such a general contention, and disturbance betwixt the Buyer and
Seller, and the Creditour and Debtour, as (if the same should be long endured)
it would breed an intolerable inconvenience. His Majesty therefore being
sensible of the least grieuance of His loving Subjects, much more of a case so
much concerning their good, and His own Honor, Does by these presents
straightly forbid and prohibit, that any Spanish Moneys of Silver that are
clipped, or otherwise abated of their true and original Values, shall be
uttered and paid, or accepted and received by way of payment within any His
Majesty's Dominions, upon pain of Fine, and imprisonment to be inflicted and
adjudged by His Highness Court of Star Chamber, or otherwise course of Law.
And does further command, That such defective Spanish Moneys be with all
convenient expedition brought into his Highness Mint in the Lower of London,
to be coined of new into current Moneys of this Realm, where the Owners shall
receive present payment for same, according to their true weight and values in
Bullion.

Given at our Palace of Westminster the twentieth day of May, in the eleventh
year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

ANNO 1613.


