royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
IN calling to our Princely remembrance, that in the late Rebellion upon
pretense of Depopulation and unlawful Enclosures, the greatest number of the
offenders have not been proceeded with according to Justice and their
traitorous deseruings, no nor so much as apprehended or touched for the same,
although they be in no better case or degree, then those few which have
suffered or been called in question: There want not some reasons and
circumstances which (if we would consult only with policy or passion) might
induce us to further severity, and a more general execution of the Law upon
the same offenders. For we are not ignorant, that of all other seditions and
rebellions, none does bring such infinite waste and desolation upon a Kingdom
or State, as these popular Insurrections, which though they do seldom shake
or endanger a Crown, yet they do bring a heap of calamities upon multitudes
of innocent Subjects, and chiefly upon the Authors and Acters themselves.

And again, We do observe, that there was not so much as any necessity of
famine or dearth of corn, or any other extraordinary accident, that might
stir or provoke them in that manner to offend; but that it may be thought to
proceed of a kind of insolency and contempt of our mild and gracious
Government, which might (in some Prince) turn the same into more heavy wrath
and displeasure. But We nevertheless having at the very entrance of our
Reign, in the highest treasons against our own Person, intermingled Mercy
with justice, are much more inclined in this case, which concerns a number of
poor and simple people, to extend our natural clemency to wards them.
Whereupon we have resolved to set wide open the gate of our Mercy unto them,
and to bestow upon them our free Grace and Pardon, without further Suite or
Supplication.

And therefore we do hereby take and receive all the said Offenders, and every
of them, to our Mercy, and of our Grace and mere motion, freely pardon unto
them their said Offenses, and all pains of Death or other punishment due for
the same, and promise unto them, in the word of their natural Liege Lord and
King, that they shall not be in any wise molested or impeached, in Life,
Member, Lands or Goods for their said Offenses, or any of them. So as
nevertheless, that before Michaelmas next they do submit themselves, and
acknowledge their said Offenses before our Lieutenant, Deputy Lieutenant, or
Sheriff in the County where they shall remain, whereof We will and command
a Note or Entry to be made and kept.

And We are further graciously pleased, that if any of them severally or
jointly shall desire for their better assurance, to have our Pardon under our
great Seal, that our Chancellor shall make the same unto them without further
warrant in that behalf. Not intending nevertheless to prejudice any our
Subjects private Suite or Action, but so much as in Us is, absolutely to
acquit and discharge them against Us, our Heirs and Successors.

Given at our Castle of Windsor the 24. day of July, in the fifth year of our
Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland. God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM* 1607.


