royal blazon or coat of arms incorporating Scottish thistle and Tudor rose
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE By the Kings Majesty's Surueyor of coals to be
shipped at Newcastle upon Tyne, Sunderland, and Blythe, and other places
adjacent, to be brought to the City of London, or otherwise to be spent within
the Realm of ENGLAND.
THe Kings most Excellent Majesty, affecting nothing more then the good of his
loving Subjects in general, and having been very credibly informed of the
great abuses and wrongs daily committed in mingling amongst coals, commonly
called Newcastle coals, much black Earth, Dirt, Slate, and other bad stuff
not fit to burn or serve for firing, and so mingled are brought and uttered
within the Realm of England, and thereby for the most part the same Newcastle
coals are made vnmerchantable, to the great hurt and prejudice of the buyers
thereof, as well Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, and other his Majesty's loving
Subjects, who partly for the preservation of woods, and partly for the
scarcity of woods, do for the most part burn of the same.

Has been graciously pleased by his Highness Letters Patents, under his
Majesty's great Seal of England, bearing date the six and twentieth day of
February, in the thirteenth year of his Majesty's reign of England, France,
and Ireland, and of Scotland the nine and fortieth, to prohibit and suppress
such wrongs and abuses as aforesaid: And to appoint the foresaid Surueyor to be
Surueyor of the said coals, who, or his Deputy, or Deputies, are to be
attending and attendant in and about the searching, viewing, seeing, and
surueying of the said coals: And are appointed to inform and complain
against such as shall offend in such mingling or uttering of vnmerchantable
coals, as aforesaid: And to have a Seal of office, under which to certify
what coals, and of what sort of goodness of coals, any Master, Owner, or
Shipper, do or shall take in, freight, or lade into their Ships or Barks at
the places abouesaid, to be brought to the City of London, or otherwise to be
spent within this Realm of England, to the end that the buyers of the same
coals may the better know and be informed of the goodness or badnesse of them.

And therefore if any person, or persons, shall at any time, or times
hereafter, have any cause or causes of complaint against any Master, Owner,
Shipper, or others, for bringing, uttering, or selling unto them such
vnmerchantable coals as aforesaid: Let him or them so grieved, repair unto
Andrew Boyde Esquier, his Majesty's Surueyor in that behalf appointed, or unto
his Deputy or Deputies, at his Offices hereunder mentioned, and there in
writing (without any charge to such as shall so complain) leave his or their
cause or causes of complaint touching the premises, and speedy information,
according to the provision of the said Letters Patents, shall be made and given
against such as do or shall offend against the same Letters Patents: As his
Majesty's most gracious pleasure is therein signified.

The Offices for receiving of such complaints concerning the abuses abouesaid,
The one that is for the City of London is kept at Dowgate: And the other
Office is kept in the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne.

God save the King.

