royal English blazon or coat of arms By the King.
Letters Patents, commanding that no greater or other Customs, Imposts, Fees,
Entrie-Siluer, or other duties whatsoever, shall be hereafte^ taken, exacted or
received, by any Officers or Subjects of England and Ireland, from
Scottish-men, (...) Scottish Ships, or any Goods or Merchandises Imported or
Exported by them or their Ships, then is usually received from English and
Irish men, English and Irish Ships, or any Goods Imported or exporte^ by them
or their Ships, to or from England and Ireland, in all respects: And that
Scottish Ships be no more reputed or accounted Strangers Bottomes, but free
Bottomes, paying no more Customs, Imp^sitions or other duties for Goods
Imported, or Exported by them, then if they were Imported or expo^ted in
English or Irish Bottomes, to or from England or Ireland.
James by the Grace of GOD King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To Our right trusty and righ^ well-beloved cosen
and Counselor Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Lord high Treasurer of England, And
to the Treasurer, Chancellor, under Treasurer, Chamberlaines and Barons of Our
Exchequer (...) England for the time being, And to Our Attorney General for
t^^ time being, And to all and singular Our Customers, Collectours* Fermours,
Comptrollers, and other Officers of all and every Our Customs, Subsidies*
Imposts, Butlarage, Prisage, and other duties within all and every Our Ports,
Hauen^ Creekes, Members and places whatsoever, within Our Realm of England for
the time ^^ing, and which hereafter shall be; And to Our right trusty, and
right well-beloved, Sir A^thour Chichester Knight, Baron of Belfast, Lord Deputy
of Our Realm of Ireland, A^ to the Lord Deputy, Lord Lieutenant, Lord
Justice, and chief Governor of Ireland t^ the time being, And to the
Treasurer, Chancellor, Vice-Treasurer, and Treasurer, and wars, and Barons,
and other Our Officers of Our Exchequer of Ireland for the time b^ing, And to
all and singular Our Customers, Collectours, Fermours, Comptrollers, another
Officers of all and every Our Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Butlarage, Prisag^^
and other duties, within all and every Our Ports, Havens, Creekes, Members,
and place^ whatsoever, within Our Realm of Ireland for the time being, and
which hereafter shall^^ and to every of them, Greeting. Whereas ever sithence
Our coming to the possession (...) the Imperial Crown of the Kingdoms of
England and Ireland, Our full resolution an^ constant purpose and meaning was,
and always has been by all good means to set f^^ward and advance Trade,
Trafique and Merchandise, as well within Our Kingdom (...) Scotland, as in Our
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and to augment and increa^^ the Ships,
Shippings, and Navigations of the same Kingdoms of England, Scotla^^ and
Ireland, for the wealth, strength and prosperity of the same Kingdoms; And
for (...) purpose, and to give the better encouragement unto Our natural
Subjects of the said Kin^dome of Scotland, to set forward and increase their
Trade, Shipping and Commerce, (...) have heretofore given diverse and sundry
private directions to diverse Fermors of Our ^^stomes, Subsidies, Imposts, and
other duties, as well within Our Port of London, as i^^uers other Ports and
places in England; That Our said Subjects of Scotland, nor th^^^ Ships,
Pinaces, Lighters or other Vessels, nor any of their goods, wares, or
merchandi^^ either brought into this Realm of England, or into the said Realm
of Ireland, or tra^^ported out of the same Realms of England and Ireland, or
either of them, should be charg^^ with the payment of any greater or other
Customs, Subsidies, Tonnage, Butlarage, P^^sage, Imposts, Impositions, or
other payments, sums of money, or duties whatsoeu^^ for or in respect of any
their Ships, or other Vessels, upon pretense and allegation that the^^ said
Ships were strange and vnfree Bottomes, or for or in respect of any such
Exportatio^ or Importation of any wares, Merchandises, or commodities into the
said Kingdoms England or Ireland, or either of them, and the Islands under the
Dominions of the sa^^^ Then only with such and the same, and no greater nor
other then Englishmen, for and inspect of their Ships, or for or in respect of
any Importation or Exportation of goods, war^^* Merchandises and commodities
into the said Kingdom of England, and the Dominion of the same; or Irishmen
for or in respect of their Ships, or for or in respect of any Impor^^tion or
exportation of goods, wares, Merchandises and commodities into the said
Kingdo^^ of Ireland, or the dominions of the same, or either of them are from
time to time respectiue^^ charged withal. AND whereas notwithstanding Our said
Princely resolution, consta^^ care and directions so given, as aforesaid, for
the advancing of the good estate of Our said kin^dome of Scotland, We are
nevertheless given to understand by the manifold complaints (...) diverse Our
good Subjects of that Kingdom, that they, their Ships, Barks and other
ve^sels, goods, wares, and Merchandises are from time to time, as well in diverse
Ports, Hauen^ and places of lading and vnlading within Our Realm of England,
as also in diverse Ports* Havens and places of lading and vnlading within Our
said Realm of Ireland, charged a^^ burdened with diverse more and greater
Customs, Subsidies, Impositions, taxations, p^^ments, and sums of money,
then Our natural Subjects of England, or Our Subjects (...) Ireland are
severally and respectively charged withal, contrary to Our good meaning (...)
that behalf: WE understanding that the Fermors and Officers of Our Customs,
Su^sidies, Imposts, and other duties within Our Port of London, and other of
Our principa^ Ports, having taken notice of Our good pleasure and intention
concerning the premises, Ha^ from time to time duetifully and obediently
submitted themselves thereunto: AND the^^fore supposing that ignorance of Our
Princely will, and not any wilful neglect or contempt (...) Our pleasure, has
caused some other of Our Customers, Fermors and Officers of Our sa^^ Realms of
England and Ireland, to whom Our good purpose and intention was not (...) well
known, to run unwittingly into Our displeasure; WE have therefore thought good
to give general and public declaration and notification of Our pleasure and
will herein, to the intent that none of Our Subjects, either in England or
Ireland, may pretend ignorance in that behalf. AND therefore do by these
presents signify and declare as well unto you the persons above mentioned, as
unto all other Our Officers, ministers and Subjects whatsoever within Our said
Realms of England and Ireland, and either of them whom it does and shall
concern, That Our Royal will, pleasure and express commandment is, tha^
(...) more greater or other Customs, Subsidies, Butlerage, Prisage, Tonnage,
Imposts, i^^^sitions, duties, payments, or sums of money, Fees for Entries,
or other Fees, or rewa^^^ whatsoever, shall at any time hereafter be taken,
received, exacted, required, challenged (...) ^^manded by any Our Officers or
Subjects of England or Ireland, of any Scottishm^^ (...) Scottishmen, or any
other person or persons borne within Our Realm of Scotland, (...) in respect
of their persons, country or nation, or for, or in respect of any the Ships,
Pin^^^^ Barks, boats or vessels, of any such Scottishman or Scottishmen, as
vnfree Bottoms, ^^^ming, arriving or remaining within any Port or Ports, Haven
or havens, or other cree^^ (...) place, creeks or places within Our said
Realms of England and Ireland, or either of th^^^ or the dominions of them, or
either of them, for exercise or trade of Merchandise, or for (...) respect of
any Goods, wares, Merchandise or commodities whatsoever, by any such
S^^^tishman or Scottishmen, imported or brought in, or hereafter to be imported
and brought (...) the said Realms of England and Ireland, or Exported and
carried out, or hereafter to (...) Exported and carried out of the same
kingdoms, or either of them; Then only such and (...) same, which are and
lawfully ought to be taken, required and had of the natural borne, S^^iects of
England, and the natural borne Subjects of Ireland, severally and respectiue^^
(...) the like cases, and for the like respects, Any former Law, statute,
custom, ordinance, usage ^^uision, or any other matter or thing whatsoever to
the contrary notwithstanding; W^^^^ and straightly charging and commanding all
Our officers, ministers and Subjects wha^^^euer, as well within Our kingdom of
England, as within Our kingdom of Ireland, to (...) it appertains, That they
and every of them take full notice and understanding of Our Ro^^^^ pleasure and
commandment before declared; And to see the same duly observed in (...)
things according to the tenor and true meaning of the same, upon pain of Our
heavy ^^dignation and displeasure, and of such punishment and penalties, as by
Our Laws (...) statutes can or may be inflicted or imposed upon wilful
contemners of Our commande^^^^ and prerogative Royal: Nevertheless, Our will
and pleasure is, And We do by these, (...) sents signify and declare Our
Royal intent and meaning to be, That all and every (...) Subjects of Our
Realm of Scotland, shall be subject to such forfeitures and penalties in (...)
of deteyning of Custom or other duties and coloring Strangers Goods, or
other^^^^ in like manner as Our Subjects of England and Ireland respectively are
by the Lawe^ (...) Statutes of either Realm, or by Our prerogative Royal
liable unto. IN witn^^^^ whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made
Patents.

Witness Our self at Westminster the twelfth day of April, in the thirteenth
year of Our Reign (...) England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the
eight and fourtieth.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO 1615.


