By the King.
A Proclamation for the settling and increase of the manufacture of Pins in this
Realm.
WHereas many differences have long depended, and sundry complaints have been
to Us and Our Counsel made by the Company of Pinmakers of London, against the
haberdashers and traders in Pins there, for want of taking off that
manufacture, here made, from their hands. For the composing of which
differences, sundry orders have been heretofore conceived by Our said Counsel
in favor of the said Pinmakers, which nevertheless have not yet given an end
thereunto. We therefore, desirous to end the same differences, and intending
the relief of the said Pinmakers, by the settling and increase of the said
manufacture in Our own Realm, where by so many of Our poor Subjects, their
wives and children may be employed and maintained by their labors, which We
hold to be just and equal. And finding no fitter way to effect the same, then
by appointing to the said Company of Pinmakers, the first vent and sale of
Pins, as well foreign as home made, but yet at such moderate rates and prises,
as We have prescribed them; Do hereby declare Our royal will and commandment
to be: That all Pins whatsoever, from the fifth day of August next following,
to be imported into this Our Realm from any the parts beyond the Seas, for the
space of three years next coming, shall be brought and landed within Our Port
of London only, and in none other Port or place whatsoever. And the same
Pinnes, being there duly customed, shall be at usual rates uttered and sold
by the Importers thereof, to the said Company of Pinners of London only, and
to none others: Who having bought such quantities of good and marchantable
stuff, as, together with their own Pins here made, will serve to supply the
necessary use of Our Realm, are first to seal, and then to utter them again
to the Haberdashers and traders in that commodity, at such reasonable rates as
we have preseribed: whom we do hereby also expressly charge and command,
from time to time, as nerde shall require, to buy and take the same off, and
from the hands of the said Company of Pinners only, and from none other person
or persons whatsoever: Under the pain of the forfeiture of all such Pinnes as
shall be Imported, bought or sold, contrary to the Tenor of this Our Royal
Commandment.

Provided, that all such Merchants, or others that now have shipped any Pins
beyond the Seas, for any other Port then the Port of London, shall within
fourteen days after the date of this Our Proclamation, forbear to import or
unlade them in any other Port or place, then in the said Port of London: nor
shall utter or sell them to any others, but to the said Pinners of London:
Under the pain of the forfeiture thereof, to be seized and taken as forfeited
to Us, Our Heirs and Successors. Willing, and hereby straightly charging and
Commanding all Majors, Shiriffes, Bayliffes, Justices of Peace, Customers,
Comptrollers, Searchers, Waiters, Constables, Headburroughes, and other Our
Officers and Ministers, to be ayding and assisting to the due execution and
accomplishment of this Our Royal will and Commandment, as they tender Our
pleasure, and will answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at Basing the two and twentieth day of July, in the sixteenth year of
Our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Deputy Printers for the
Kings most Excellent Majesty.

ANNO. M.DC.XVIII.


