By his Majesty's Officers for Licencing of Pedlers and Petty-Chapmen.
HIs Majesty, purposing to reform the abuses daily committed by Pedlers and
Petty-Chapmen, which in too great numbers abound in every part of this
kingdom. Is graciously pleased, for the seperating of honest industrious
persons from wandering roagues and vagabonds, that a competent number of such
persons as shall procure Certificates under the hands and seals of two
Justices of peace of the Country where they most usually reside, to testisie
their fitness to use the said Trade: and shall become bound to his Majesty
before his said Officers, with two sufficient suerties to continue of good
behavior, shall be Licensed to use the said Trade, during their natural
lives.

To which end, his Malesty with the advice of his learned Counsel, has by his
Highness Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, erected an Office
for ever to endure; and to be kept in London, and in any other places within
the Realm of England and Wales; And has therein authorized certain Officers
for term of years, as well to grant Licenses under the Seal of the said
Office upon the cautions aforesaid, unto such honest Persons as shall repair
unto them: As also to restrain and cause all such persons to be suppressed and
punished as Rogues, according to the laws in that case provided: who shall
presume to travel and exercise the said Trade in England or Wales, not being
thereunto licensed as aforesaid.

For the better execution whereof, his Majesty by his said Letters Pattents
does require all Justices of Peace Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables,
and all other his Officers in their several places to be ayding and assisting.

The Office for granting the said Licenses, is kept at one Mr. Thomas Whitleys
house over against Saint Stephens Church, in Walbrooke London.

God save the King.

