WHereas it has pleased His Majesty, by His Proclamation bearing date the xv.
day of May 1609. to publish His pleasure touching the ordinary Posts of this
Realm, for the orderly carrying of Letters and Packets to, and from the parts
beyond the Seas, intending thereby the general quiet of His Realm, the
advancement of His own Service, and the lawful Trafique of all honest
Merchants, forbidding also all others whatsoever, to entermeddle therewithal,
not having special and sufficient Warrant, as in, and by the said Proclamation
under His Majesty's own hand more at large appears; which notwithstanding,
sundry disauowed persons, especially of late times, do come from foreign
parts without Authority, and contrary to the Intercourse, have used, and do
still continue secretly, and suspiciously to take up, and convey Letters and
Packets, to the manifest hinderance of His Majesty's Service; which by their
means lies open to all kind of secret and dangerous practices, the apparent
wrong of His Majesty's Officer, (who has taken great pains in settling the
business with most conueniencie for His Highness Service) and the disturbance
of the said ordinary Posts in performing their duties; the special default
whereof, is found to grow through the want of due regard in those to whom the
same was recommended. For redress whereof in time to come, and for a further
intimation of His Majesty's pleasure, We have thought it most expedient
(according to His Majesty's commandment) of His behalf, and in His Name,
hereby to forbid all such disauowed persons, the gathering up, and carrying of
any Letters or Packets hereafter, or any way directly, or indirectly, to
intrude themselves in any such employment; and likewise to forewarne all
Merchants and others, as they tender His Majesty's Service, and their own
lawful Trafique and quiet, That they do duly observe and perform the tenor
of the said Proclamation. To which end, We do by these presents authorize Our
well-beloved Matthew de Quester, Postmaster for foreign Service, under His
Majesty's Postmaster general of England, to seize, enquire out, and apprehend
all such busy disauowed persons, as are not appointed and allowed of by the
Post-Masters reciproquely, or by other sufficient authority, and them so
apprehended, to stay, and commit over to the next Magistrates of the place, and
all his, or their Letters, to seize, and bring unto Us, or any of Us, or any of
His Majesty's Privy Council, that after view, and consideration had of them,
such further order may be taken with the parties offending, as shall be found
expedient according to the intent of His Majesty's said Proclamation hereunto
annexed. And for the better performance fo His Majesty's pleasure herein, We
do hereby straightly require and command all His Majesty's Offices whom it may
concern, That they, and every of them be ayding and assisting unto the said
Matthew de Quester, in the execution of this Service, as they will answer the
contrary.

From the Courtat Whitehall the 27. of January 1615. G. Cant. T. Suffolk.
Lenox. Exeter. E. Zouche. E. Wotton. I. Stanhope. Tho. Lake. Raphe Winwood.


TO all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Bailiffes, Constables,
Commissioners, Searchers, and the Officers of Rye, Dover, Sandwich, and other
Ports within this Realm, and to all other his Majesty's Officers and loving
Subjects to whom it may appertain.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1615.


