By the King.
A Proclamation for the continuing of Farthing-Tokens.
FOrasmuch as since the publishing of Our third Proclamation given at Royston,
the six and twentieth day of October 1615. establishing the continuance of Our
Farthing-Tokens, and prohibiting the use of all, or any other Tokens
whatsoever; We are informed, That diverse Chandlers and other Tradesmen do
continue the making, use and utterance of their unlawful Tokens of lead,
brass, or other metal, or matter contrary to Our Command by several
Proclamations formerly declared, and in contempt of Our Royal commandment, and
in derogation of Our Prerogative Royal, pretending to be sucharged with Our
Farthing-tokens for want of a due rechange of them into sterling money, which
by Our former Proclamation was limited but for one year only, for the intent
of the better distributing of Our said Farthing-tokens; And whereas the said
Chandiers and other Tradesmen, to whose hands the greatest quantity of Tokens
are brought, have also alleged, that the issuing of Our said Farthing-tokens
from the Makers at the rate of one and twenty shillings in Tokens, for twenty
shillings in Sterling money, did breed an inconvenience and a further surcharge
unto them, in that many for the gain of that twelve pence in twenty
shillings, would take Our said Tokens by great sums, and so with the same
and some money pay handy-craftsmen for their labor at the weeks end: We
(intending to remove the neglects, abuses, and inconveniences aforesaid, and
that every person may be left without all excuse, if again they should
presume to infringe Our Royal commandment); Do by these presents publish and
declare Our Royal will and pleasure, that all points and Articles contained in
Our said former Proclamations be duly in all things observed, performed and
kept; and that the further use of the said leaden Tokens, and all or any other
Tokens whatsoever made or used within Our Realms of England and Ireland, and
Dominion of Wales, be from henceforth utterly suppressed and abolished: And
that Our Fathing-tokens formerly by these presents authorized shall continue
and be without any alteration of the stamp, or print now used, according to
the intent of Our said former Proclamations. And furthermore Our Royal will
and pleasure is; That from henceforth (in the issuing of Our said
Farthing-tokens) there be given but only twenty shillings in Farthing-tokens
for twenty shillings in Sterling moneys, and that there be established a
continual rechange for them within Our City of London, where Our said Tokens
shall be issued, that all Tradesmen and others receiving the said Tokens for
Sterling money may at all convenient times, have in like manner Sterling money
for Our Farthing-tokens, delivering in exchange one and twenty shillings in
Tokens for twenty shillings of Sterling money, according to the intent of Our
first Proclamation, bearing date the nineteenth day of May, in the eleventh
year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland. And therefore We
do straightly prohibit and forbid as aforesaid, all and every person and
persons whatsoever, as well to use, receive, or keep any Tokens whatsoever,
other then Our said Farthing-tokens, as also to make and counterfeit Our said
Farthing-tokens, or the Engines or Instruments whereby they are made, or to be
made, upon pain of condign punishment for their offenses in contempt of Our
Commandment, and in derogation of Our Prerogative Royal; Straightly charging,
and commanding all and singular Majors, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs,
Bailiffes, Constables, Headboroughes, and all other Officers and ministers to
whom it shall or may appertain, to do their uttermost endeavors, for the
discovery and searching out of all offenses, and offenders, against this Our
Royal Commandment, and for the due execution and performance of the Premises.

Guien at Our Manor of Theobaldes, the seventeenth day of March, in the
fourteenth year of Our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland,
the Fiftieth.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

ANNO MDC.XVI.


