I R

DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
JAMES By the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all and singular Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deanes, and their
Officials, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and to all spiritual persons. And also to
all Justices of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, Churchwardens
and Head boroughes: And to all Officers of Cities, Boroughes, and Towns
corporate: And to all other our Officers, Ministers, and Subjects whatsoever
they be, as well within Liberties, as without, to whom these presents shall
come, greeting:
WHEREAS we are credibly given to understand, as well by the humble
supplication and petition of our poor distressed Subject Anne Challons, the
distressed Widow of Captain Henry Challons late of Stonehouse in the County of
Deuon, as also by a Certificate under the hands of our trusty and well-beloved
Subjects Sir Charles Cornwallis Knight, one of our Justices of Peace within our
County of Norfolk, Sir Allen Apsley Knight, Lieutenant of our Tower of London,
Sir Ferdinando Gorge Knight, Governor of our Fort at Plymouth, and one of our
Justices of Peace within our County of Deuon, Captain John Barley of Cauerton
in our County of Buckingham, and Captain John Smith of our City of London,
That our foresaid Subject Captain Henry Challons, was in his life time a
Gentleman of worth and reputation and very serviceable for his Prince and
Country, who was one of the first sent out by virtue of our geacious Letters
Patents for to settle a Plantation in the North parts of America, in whose
passage thither in a Ship called the Harry of Stonehouse, whereof he was owner,
and wherein all our foresaid Justices and loving Subjects were adventures 07
for that voyage, it so fortuned that the said Ship was by the Spanish Fleet
coming out of the West Indyes taken, who not only confiscated both Ship and
goods but also detained him and his Company prisoners at which time our
foresaid trusty and well-beloved Subjects Sir Charles Cornwaillis was then our
Ambassador in Spain, by reason of which untimely accident together also with
other losses sustained in Ireland, our said poor Subject lost to the value of
Three Thousand pounds and upwards to his utter ruin and overthrow, who grew
so greatly oppressed both outwardly in body and inwardly in mind as disparing
of relief, he dyed in Prison, leaving behind him a distressed Wife and many
poor Children without any means to sustain them, whose woeful and unhappy
estate we much pity and have thought good according to our accustomed clemency
toward the distressed, to commend the same unto the charitable consideration
of all our loving and weldisposed Subjects within certain Counties hereafter
mentioned, not doubting but that all good Christians well weighing the
premises, will be ready and willing as feeling members one of another
miseries, to extend their liberal contributions toward the relief and
comfort of a poor unfortunate Widow and her Four fatherles Children.

KNOW ye therefore, That of Our especial Grace and Princely Compassion, We
have given and granted, and by these our Letters Patents, do give and grant
unto our said poor Subject Anne Challons, and to her Deputy and Deputies, the
bearer or bearers hereof, full power, license, and Authority to ask, gather,
receive, and take the Alms and charitable benevolence of all our loving
Subjects whatsoever, Inhabiting within our Counties of Middlesex, Essex, Kent,
Surrey, Sussex, Suffolk, and Northampton, with our City of Westminster and
the Liberties thereof, and in our Cities of Canterbury, Rochester, and the
Cinque Ports, with our Cities of Chichester, and Peterborough, with our
Borough of Southwarke, And in all other Cities, Towns Corporate, Privileged
places, Parishes, Villages, and in all other places whatsoever within our said
Counties and not else where, for and toward the relief and maintenance of our
said poor Subject and her Fatherles children.

WHEREFORE we will and Command you and every of you, that at such time and
times, as the said Anne Challons, or her Deputy or Deputies, the bearer or
bearer hereof, shall come and repair to any your Churches, Chapels, or other
places, to ask and receive the gratuities and charitable benevolence of our
said Subjects, quietly to permit and suffer them so to do, without any manner
your lets or contradictions, And you the said Parsons, Vicars, and Curats, for
the better stirring up of a charitable devotion, deliberately to publish and
declare the Tenor of these our Letters Patents, or the Copy or Brief thereof,
unto our said Subjects upon some Sabbath day, when as the same shall be
tendered unto you. Exhorting and persuading them to extend their liberal
contributions in so good and charitable a deed. And you the Churchwardens of
every Parish, where such Collection is to be made (as aforesaid) to collect and
gather the Alms and charitable benevolence of all our loving Subjects, as well
Strangers as others, and what shall be by you so gathered to deliver it to the
bearer or bearers of these our Letters Patents and to no other person, when as
thereunto you shall be required. And lastly, whereas we are informed of the great
abuse which is now crept in amongst these poor people, who sell their Lycences
unto some other person, whereby men's charity goes not the right way, but unto
such as deserve it least: That from hence forth our will and pleasure is, that
if it may appear unto you or any of you, that the said Anne Challons, has
contracted any bargain, or made or shall make sale of these our Letters
Patents, whereby the benefit should pass from her to any other person, That
thereupon these our Letters Patents shall be void and of none effect. Any
Statute, Law, Ordinance, or Provision, herefore made to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

In witness whereof, We have caused these our Letters to be made Patents for
the space of One whole year next after the date hereof to endure.

Witness our self at Westminster, the Nineteenth day of January, in the
Eighteenth year of our Reign of England, France, and Ireland: And of Scotland
the Four and Fiftieth. 1620. Steward.
God save the King*
Printed By Roger Wood, and Thomas Symcocke.

Cum Priuilegio.


