I R

DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
JAMES, By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all and singular Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deanes, and their
Official^: Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and to all spiritual persons: And also to
all Justices of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, Churchwardens,
and Headboroughes: And to all Officers of Cities, Boroughs, and Towns
corporate: And to all other our Officers, Ministers, and Subjects whatsoever
they be, as well within liberties as without, to whom these presents shall
come, greeting.
WHEREAS by our Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster the Last day of
October in the Nynth year of our Reign of England, etc. upon a Certificate
under the hands of our Right trusty and wel-beloued Subjects Sir Francis Fane,
sir George Fane, sir Robert Bret, sir Maximillian Dalison, and sir William Page
Knights, Justices of the Peace within our County of Kent, We did give and
grant unto our poor distressed Subject John Tyler of Shorn within our
foresaid County Maultman, full power, license and authority to ask, gather,
receive and take the Alms and charitable benevolence of all our loving
subjects whatsoever Inhabiting within our Cities of London, and Westminster,
with the Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and in our Counties of Kent, Essex,
Surrey, and Suffex, for and in respect of his great losses sustained by Fire,
Amounting to the value of Two Hundred Pounds and upwards, and the relief and
maintenance of himself, his poor wife, and Family. NOW forasmuch as We have
been lately very credibly given to understand as well by a Certificate from our
true and Loyal Subjects the Inhabitants of our Town of Shorn aforesaid, as
also by Affidauit, That our said poor Subject John Tyler at the time of the
granting of our said Letters Patents, was suddenly visited by Almighty God
with grievous sickness and lamenes in his lims, whereby he was not able to
make any Collection of our said grant within the time limited (saving only
Four Parishes within our City of London) whereby he lost the relief We
graciously intended toward him; Since which time he is ^as^e^^ into further
want and misery by the like misfortune of Fire, whereby his Malt-house and
other Outhouses, together with the goods and substance therein were burnt and
consumed: By reason whereof, and of other casual means he has lost to the
value of Three Hundred Pounds more, To the utter undoing of him and his poor
wife being now aged Fowerscore years a piece, and not only stripped of all
their maintenance and liuelyhood, but also in these their latter days
overtaken with extreme want and penury, being past labor and not able to
help themselves, so that they are like to perish for want of things necessary,
unless some charitable course be forth with taken for their relief heerin,
whose miserable and poor estate We much pity, and seeing that by Gods
^^^ta^ion he was not able to take the benefit of our former Letters Patents
with the time limited, but left the same vncollected, We have thought good
(upon the humble suit of all our foresaid subjects the Inhabitants of Shorn)
to renew our foresaid Letters Patents for longer time for the places formerly
granted wherein no Collection has been made, whereby our said poor Subject may
now receive such relief as it shall please God to stir up in the hearts and
charitable minds of all our loving and wel-disposed Subjects by Christian
contribution toward the relief and comfort of their poor distressed Brother,
who through mere want sustenance is enforced to crave the same.

KNOW ye therefore, that we (tendering the lamentable and distressed estate
of our said poor Subject) of Our especial Grace and Princely compassion, have
given and granted, and by these our Letters Patents do give and grant unto our
said poor Subject John Tyler, and to his Deputy and Deputies, the bearer or
bearers hereof, full power, license, and authority, to ask, gather, receive
and take the Alms and charitable benevolence of all our loving subjects
whatsoever inhabiting within our Cities of London, and Westminster, with the
Suburbs and Liberties, thereof, and in our Counties of Essex, Kent, Surrey, and
Sussex, with our Cities of Canterbury, Rochester, and the Cinque Ports, with
our City of Chichester, (where no former Collection has been made) And in all
Towns corporate, privileged places. Parishes, Villages, and in all other
places whatsoever within our said Counties, and not elsewhere, for and toward
the recovery of his great losses, and the releife and maintenance of himself,
his poor wife and Family.

WHEREFORE We will and command you, and every of you, that at such time and
times as the said John Tyler, or his Deputy or Deputies, the bearer or bearers
heerof, shall come and repair to any your Churches, Chapels, or other places,
to ask, and receive the gratuities ^ble benevolence of our said subjects,
quietly to permit and suffer them so to do, without any manner your lets, or
contradictions. And you the s^^d Parsons, Vicars, and Curats, for the better
stirring up of a charitable devotion, deliberately to publish and declare the
(...) these our Letters Patents, or the Copy or Brief thereof, unto our said
Subjects, within One Month next after your receipt the^of, Exhorting and
persuading them to extend their liberal contributions in so good and
charitable a deed. And you the Churchwardens of every Parish where such
Collection is to be made (as aforesaid) to collect and gather the Alms and
charitable benevolence of all our loving Subjects, as well strangers as others,
from seat to seat; And what shall be by you so gathered, to endorse on the
Back side hereof, in ^ords at length, and not in figures, and the same deliver
to the bearer or bearers hereof, when as thereunto god shall be ^^^^^^d Any
Statute, Law, Ordinance, or provision heertofore made to the contrary in any
wise notwit^standing.

IN witness whereof, We have caused these our Letters to be made Patents for
the space of One whole year nextt after the date heere^^ to endure.

Witness our self at Westminster, the Second day of March, in the Seau^nt^^nth
^eare of our Reign of England, France, and Ireland: and of Scotland the Th^^e
and Fiftieth. Steward,
God save the King*
Printed by Thomas Purfoot.


