I R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation commanding persons of quality to reside in their Countries.
WHereas by two former Proclamations, the one dated the twentieth of November,
and the other the two and twentieth of December last We did publish and
declare Our Royal pleasure concerning the repair of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and of other persons fo quality from the Cities of London and
westminster, and other parts adjacent, and from other Cities and Towns unto
their Country dwellings: we have lately caused diligent survey and enquiry to
made in the Cities of London and westininster and the Suburbs of the same;
whereby it appeared, That as many persons of quality and worth, both men and
women, have duetifully submitted to Our gracious commandment, so diverse have
not only neglected the same, but retiring for a time unto some in or near the
said Cities, where they secretly soiourne, or otherwise obscure and cover
themselves only to be out of the way of enquiry, do endeavor so clude and
frustrate Our sincere and Honorable intendments, whereat We aimed in both Our
said Proclamations, which is the reviving and settling of Hospitality and good
Government in all the parts of this Our Kingdom. And therefore, as We may not
let pass the obedience of the one, without Our Gracious approbation and
acceptance; so We cannot but give notice to the other, that We are sensible of
their contempt, and that those subtilties and euasions, can neither hide them
from the eye of Our providence, nor excuse them from the hand of Our Justice,
which without Our greater clemency, expecting their speedy reformation and
conformity, would soon seize and lay hold on them for their obstinacy and
disobedience; And therefore We being fully resolved for the general good of
Our people to perfect that work which We have (upon such just grounds and
important reasons) begunned, Have thought fit once more to admonish all such as
have not yet conformed to Our said Proclamations, That they immediately yield
obedience thereto by repairing with their families to their proper dwellings
and habitations in the Country, as by Our former Proclamations they were
enjoined, and that such as are at this present resident in their Countries do
there continue their habitations and families; And that all persons do
forbear by soiourning in or about any Cities or Towns, or by any other
euasions whatsoever, to endeavor the frustrating of the said Proclamations.
And to the intent, that none should upon hope of alteration of Our purpose
either take or keep houses in or about the Cities of London or Westminster
with intent to withdraw themselves, their wives or families thither from their
habitations in the Country in the winter next ensuing, We have thought good to
let them know, That We are fully determined to hold the same course then,
which We have formerly propounded, and therefore they being forewarned may so
dispose of their affairs, as with least intonuenience to themselves they may
perform Our Royal commandment, given by this and other Our former
Proclamations.

Given at Our Court at New Market the six twentieth-day of March, in the one
and twentieth year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Maiesite. M.DC.XXIII.


