HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted by a crown and
flanked by the Tudor rose and Scottish thistle
By the King.
A Proclamation for explaining and enlarging his Majesty's former orders for
Buildings, in and about London.
WHereas by sundry Proclamations grounded upon important and weighty reasons,
We have heretofore made known Our Pleasure, as well for restraint of new
Buildings in and near Our City of London, As for reedifying old Houses with
Brick and Stone, The good effect that has ensued thereby, and by the
diligence and care of Our Commissioners authorized for the execution of Our
Commandments in that behalf, And the duetifull obedience and conformity of
many Our best disposed Subjects, Has not only given Us great content, but
confirmed Our Resolution against all opposition of refractory persons, to
proceed in a work not only honorable and graceful, but safe and healthful
for Our said City; It being not without president of ancient times, even in
this Our City of London; In the Records whereof it is remembered, that in the
time of King Richard the first, Henry Fitz-Allwyn then Mayor, for prevention of
casualties by fire, caused provision to be made, that Buildings in the said
City should be of Stone, which for many years after was observed: But the
neglect thereof in succeeding times, especially in the present, the great
confluence to Our said City, pestering of the Streets with Iutties, Stalles,
and other annoyances scarcity of Timber, and many other occurrents, have
turned the policy of those ancient times from conueniencie to necessity: In
which respect, We are now fully determined, not only to ratify Our former
Commandments, but to use all possible endeavor by Our further care and
direction to accomplish Our intention in a matter of such high consequence. And
therefore being informed, that albeit the discreetest of Our Subjects do now
accept Our Commands, not with conformity and obedience alone, but with
alacrity and cheerfulness, as tending to no private end, but to the general
good; yet there want not many that do daily put in ure sundry sleights and
inventions, to the disturbance and impediment of that general reformation,
which We so much affect, under pretense of euading the Letter, though not the
sense of Our former Proclamations. And albeit some of them, notwithstanding
their sleights and subterfuges, have been censured in Our high Court of
Star Chamber, yet others having not tasted of that severity, do hazard
themselves to incur the like: Howsoever, to make offenders in this kind
vnexcusalbe, We do hereby publish and declare, That as We are resolved to
cherish and comfort the dutifulness of such as apply themselves to the
conformity desired; So We will extend the severity of Our Justice to all
them, that by subtle euasions shall endeavor to frustrate Our command. And
therefore being given to understand, That the progress of this so glorious a
work is now chiefly hindered through the supportation and strengthening of
ruinous and old Buildings, unfit to be continued, by digging of Cellars, and
bringing up new Brick walls, by erecting new Chimneys and Staire-cases, by
placing pieces of Timber, by setting on new Roofes and Rafters, and thrusting
out of Dormers, knitting and fastening together the said new Additions unto the
old Timber by bars and crampes of Iron, and other like devices, whereby the
old deformity is not only continued, but increased.

We do hereby straightly charge and command, That no person or persons
whatsoever within Our said City of London, or within two miles from any the
Gates of the said City, do presume or attempt to do any of the things before
recited, or any other thing whatsoever of like nature, tending to the
hinderance of Our said intended Work, unless he shall be thereunto licenced
and allowed by Our Commissioners for Buildings.

And further We do hereby straightly charge and command, That no person or
persons whatsoever within the limits aforesaid, do at any time hereafter
presume or attempt to erect, cover, ouerlay or enclose any Houels or other
Sheds of Timber, with Reeds, Faggots, Hay, Straw, Boards, or other materials,
or do raise up any wall, pale or bank of earth, to which Sheds may be added:
Or do repair or new make into the streets, any manner of Bulkes, Stalles,
windows, doors, or other offensive issues: Or do alter or change the use of
any dwelling house or other building to any more noisome or offensive use, end
or purpose, then the same was employed before the time of the demolishing or
altering the same. By all which, and especially by the said pretenses of
repair and alterations, Our Royal intention of Reformation is much hindered
and prevented. Our will and pleasure therefore is, That all such as shall
hereafter presume to offend in any the premises, under pretense of repairing
decayed houses, or addition or alteration of dwelling houses or other
Buildings, or otherwise, having not first had the approbation of Our said
Commissioners, shall be deemed as persons opposing Our Royal commandments,
and be proceeded against in Our high Court of Star Chamber, according to the
quality of their several offenses.

And whereas by Our former Proclamation, all Houses and Buildings, to be
reedified or new made within the limits aforesaid, were to be built of brick,
or brick and stone, We being desirous that the like good order and decency
should be observed hereafter within five miles of any the gates of Our said
City, Do hereby straightly charge and command, That no person or persons do
hereafter presume, to erect, reedifie, or set up any house or Building within
the said distance of five miles from any the ^^tes of Our said City, unless
he do make all the utter walls of the same of Brick, or Brick and Stone; And
that all houses and Buildings to be erected within the said City of London, or
in, or adjoining to any open street of any Town or Village out of the said
City within the limits of five miles aforesaid, shall be built according to
the form and proportion hereafter in these presents expressed, viz. Every
whole story of and in such Houses and Buildings, and all and every the rooms
of such whole Story, shall be of the height of ten foot of Assize at the
least, and every half Story, of and in such Houses and Buildings, shall be of
the height of seven foot and a half at the least: And that the forefront and
all outward and division walls betwixt house and house, and the Iambes, heads
and soyles of the windows, shall be of Brick, or of Brick and Stone, and the
windows (being of Timber) not to be put in until the Iambes and heads
aforesaid, be finished and bear of themselves.

And if the said Buildings do not exceed two Stories in height, then the walls
thereof shall be of the thickness of one Brick and half a Brickes length from
the ground unto the uppermost part of the said walls. And where the Building
shall be of the height of three Stories, the walls of the first Story shall be
of the thickness of two Bricks length, and from thence unto the uppermost part
of the wall, of the thickness of one Brick and half a Bricks length, and so
proportionably if there shall be more Stories.

And that in building of the said Houses, there shall be no Iutties or
Iutting, or Cant windows, either upon Timber Ioystes, or otherwise, but the
walls to go direct and straight upwards, and at the setting off a Water-table
to be made. Also the form of the windows of every whole Story to be of more
height then breadth, to the end the rooms may receive air for health, and that
there be sufficient Peers of Brick, not less then half the breadth of the
windows between them for strength. And likewise the windows of every half
Story to be made square or near thereabouts.

And that all Shops and Street doors be made with Pillasters of Stone, or
Brick, and the heads of the Shop windows cut in wedges, with Arches over them
to sustain the wall above, and that the Pillasters of Stone be in breadth
fifteen inches at the least, and as thick as the wall of the Story.

And lastly, that none do raise the first floor to gain height in their
cellars, so as they are forced to make steps into the street.

And to the end this Our pleasure hereby signified and published, may be the
better executed, We do hereby require and authorize Our said Commissioners
for Buildings, and every or any of them, and all and every Justice, or Justices
of Peace, respectively to commit to Ward or Prison, all such persons as shall be
found to offend in any of the premises, contrary to the intent of this Our
Proclamation. And We do further require and command, and give authority unto
all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Constables, Headboroughes, and other
Our Officers and Ministers, without any further or other Warrant, to make stay
of, and restrain all irregular Buildings and proceedings contrary to Our
command hereby, or by any former Proclamation concerning Buildings published.
Wherein if any shall be so bold to proceed notwithstanding this Our gentle
admonition, Our pleasure then is, that Our Attorney General for the time
being, do from time to time inform against such persons in Our High Court of
Star Chamber, as wilful contemners of Our Royal Command.

Given at Theobalds the seventeenth day of July, in the eighteenth year of Our
Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the three and
fiftieth.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. ANNO DOM. M.DC.XX.


