By the King.
A Proclamation for restraint of the disordered trading for Tobacco.
WHereas We, out of the dislike We had of the use of Tobacco, tending to a
general and new corruption both of men's bodies and manners, and yet
nevertheless holding it of the two more tolerable, that the same should be
imported amongst many other vanities and superfluities, which came from beyond
the Seas, then permitted to be planted here within this Realm, thereby to
abuse and misimploy the soil of this fruitful Kingdom, did by Our
Proclamation dated the thirtieth day of December now last past straightly charge
and command all and every person and persons, of what degree or condition
soever, That they or any of them by themselves, their servants, workmen or
laborers, should not from and after the second day of February then next
following, presume to sow, set or plant, or cause to be sown, set or planted
within this Our Realm of England and the Dominion of Wales, any sort or kind
of Tobacco whatsoever, and that they, or any of them, should not maintain or
continue any old stocks or plants of Tobacco formerly sown or planted, but
should forthwith utterly destroy and root up the same. And whereas We have
taken into Our Royal consideration as well the great waste and consumption of
the wealth of Our Kingdoms, as the endangering and impairing the health of Our
Subjects, by the inordinate liberty and abuse of Tobacco, being a weed of no
necessary use, and but of late years brought into Our Dominions, and being
credibly informed, that diverse Tobacconists, and other mean persons taking
upon them to trade and adventure into the parts beyond the Seas for Tobacco, to
the intent to forestall and engrosse the said commodity, upon vnmerchantlike
conditions, do transport much Gold bullion and Coin out of Our Kingdoms, and
do barter and vent the Staple commodities of Our Realm at vnder-values, to
the intent to buy Tobacco, to the discredit of Our native merchandises, and
extreme enhansing of the rates and prices of Tobacco, and the great
disturbance and decay of the Trade of the orderly and good Merchant: We taking
the premises into Our Princely consideration, and being desirous to put a
remedy to the said inconveniences, which We have long endeavored, though
with less effect then We expected, have resolved to make some further
redress, by restraining the disordered traffic in that Commodity, and
reducing it into the hands of able persons that may manage the same without
inconvenience, whereby the general abuse may be taken away, and the necessary
use (if any be) may be preserved. We do therefore not only by these presents,
straightly charge and command, That Our said Proclamation restraining the
planting of Tobacco, be in every respect observed and performed according to
the tenor thereof, upon the penalties therein contained; but also that no
person or persons whatsoever, Englishmen, Denizens or Strangers, (other then
such as shall be authorized and appointed thereunto by Letters Patents under
Our great Seal of England) do import or cause to be imported into this Our
Realm of England or Dominion of Wales, or any part of them or either of them,
any Tobacco, of what nature, kind, or sort soever, after the tenth day of July
next ensuing the date hereof, from any the parts beyond the Seas, upon pain of
forfeiture to Us of all such Tobacco so to be imported contrary to the true
meaning of these Presents, and upon such further pains and penalties as by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or by the severity or censure of Our Court
of Starrechamber may be inflicted upon the offenders, for contempt of this Our
Royal command. And likewise that no Master, Merchant, or Purser of any Ship or
other Uessell, do at any time or times after the said tenth day of July,
presume or attempt to take into their ships to be imported into this Realm and
Dominion, or either of them, any sort, manner, or quantity of Tobacco
whatsoever, but only to the use of such person and persons as shall be so as
aforesaid authorized and appointed under Our great Seal of England to import
the same, and which shall be by them, their deputies, servants or factors
delivered to the said Masters, Merchants or Pursers of ships to be imported,
upon the pains and penalties aforesaid.

And to the intent that no such offender may color or hide his offense and
contempt, by shadowing the Tobacco to be brought in, contrary to Our pleasure
before expressed, under pretense of former store, We do hereby signify and
declare Our will and pleasure, and do straightly charge and command, That all
and every person and persons which now have, or hereafter shall have within or
near the Cities of London or Westminster, in their hands, custody or
possession, any Tobacco heretofore imported, or hereafter and before the said
tenth day of July now next ensuing to be imported into this Realm, amounting
to the quantity of ten pounds weight or above, shall before the said tenth day
of July now next coming, bring the same unto the house commonly called, The
Hawke and Feasant, situate in Cornehill in the said City of London, and shall
cause the same to be there sealed and marked by such person and persons, and
with such mark or Seal as by Us shall be for that purpose assigned and
appointed, without giving any Fee or allowance for the said Seal or mark.

And to the intent that the Tobacco to be hereafter imported by Warrant or
Authority under Our great Seal, may be known and distinguished from such as
shall be secretly and without Warrant brought in by stealth, We do likewise
charge and command, that all such Tobacco as from and after the said tenth day
of July shall be imported by force of any such Warrant or Authority and none
other, except the old store aforesaid to be sealed as aforesaid, shall be
sealed and marked with such Seal and mark as aforesaid. And we do hereby
prohibit all person and persons from and after the said tenth day of July, to
buy, utter, sell or vent within the said Kingdom and Dominion, or either of
them, any Roll or other gross quantity of Tobacco whatsoever, before the same
be so as aforesaid marked or sealed, upon pain of forfeiture unto Us of all
such Tobacco so bought, uttered, sold or vented contrary to the intent of
these Presents, and upon such further penalties as by Our Laws, or by the
censure of Our Court of Starrechamber may be inflicted upon the offenders, as
contemners of Our Royal command.

And for the better execution of this Our Pleasure, We do hereby command all
and singular Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, Waiters, and other officers
attending in all and every the Ports, Creekes, or places of lading or vnlading,
for the taking, collecting, or receiving of any Our Customs, Subsidies or
other duties, to take notice of this Our pleasure; and We do hereby command,
and give power and authority unto them, and every or any of them, from time to
time, as well to search any Ship or other Uessell or Bottom, riding or lying
within any Port, Haven or Creek within their several Charge and place of
attendance, for all Tobacco imported contrary to the intent of this Our
Proclamation, and the same being found, to seize and take to Our use, as also
to take notice of the names, and apprehend the bringers in, and buyers of the
same, to the end they may receive condign punishment for their offenses, upon
pain that every of the said Officers which shall be found negligent, remiss or
corrupt therein, shall lose his place and entertainment, and undergo such
pains and penalties as by Our Laws, or the censure of Our said Court of
Starrechamber may be inflicted upon them for the same.

And likewise We do hereby will, ordain and appoint, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for such person and persons, as shall be so as aforesaid
authorized and appointed by Letters Patents under Our great Seal, to import
Tobacco by himself or themselves, or his or their Deputy or Deputies, with a
lawful Officer to enter into any suspected places at lawful and convenient
times, and there search, discover and find out any Tobacco imported, uttered,
sold or vented, not marked or sealed as aforesaid, contrary to the true
meaning hereof, and all such Tobacco so found, to seize, take away and dispose
of, and the owners thereof, or in whose custody the same shall be found, to
inform and complain of, to the end they may receive punishment according to
Our pleasure before herein declared.

And further We do by these Presents will and require all and singular Mayors,
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Bayliffes, Constables, Headboroughes, Customers,
Comptrollers, Searchers, Waiters, and all other Our Officers and Ministers
whatsoever, That they and every of them in their several places and offices be
diligent and attendant in the execution of this Our Proclamation, and also
aiding and assisting unto such person and persons, and his and their Deputies
and Assigns as We shall so as aforesaid authorize and appoint to import
Tobacco, as well in any search for discovery of any act or acts to be
performed contrary to the intent of these Presents, as otherwise in the doing
or executing of any matter or thing forth accomplishment of this Our Royal
Command. And lastly Our will and pleasure is, and We do hereby charge and
command Our Attorney general for the time being, to inform against such
persons in Our Court of Starrechamber from time to time, whose contempt and
disobedience against this Our Royal command shall merit the censure of that
Court.

Given at Our Manor of Greenwich the nine and twentieth day of June, in the
eighteenth year of Our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland
the three and fiftieth.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. ANNO DOM. M.DC.XX.


