DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation for better furnishing the Navy, and Shipping of the Realm,
with able and skillful Mariners.
THE Kings most Excellent Majesty, considering how much it imports the honor,
safety, and wealth of this Realm, that the navigations of the same be
carefully continued and maintained, and that there be skillful Mariners, and
Seafaring men at all times in readiness, to furnish, as well his Majesty's own
Royal Navy upon all occasions, as the shipping of his subjects, And
understanding, that the Mariners and Seafaring men of this Realm, have of late
years in great numbers, without any license or sufficient warrant, put
themselves into the service of foreign Princes and States, and of Strangers
borne, whereby both his Majesty's Navy and the Realm in general, are likely to
be deprived of their service, when there shall be any needful use thereof, if
some timely remedy be not provided, to meet with so great an inconvenience; And
weighing, that it is a principal part of the allegiance and duty of a subject,
to attend the service of his liege Sovereign and Country: His Majesty does
therefore straightly inhibite and forbid, that no Mariner or Seafaring man,
Ship-wright, or Ship-Carpenter whatsoever, being his Majesty's subject, do at
any time hereafter without express license of his Majesty, or of the Lord
Admiral of England, for the time being, in writing, enter, or attempt, or go
about to enter into the service of any foreign Prince, or State, nor to be
employed out of this Realm in any service whatsoever, unless it be in the
service of his Majesty, or of some of his Highness own liege Subjects, upon
pain of his Majesty's indignation and displeasure, and the uttermost severity
of his Majesty's Laws, to the exteuded against them, that contrary to their
duty to hid Majesty, and this their native Country, shall so contemptuously
withstand this his Royal command, in a matter of such weighty consequence, by
withdrawing themselves from that duty and service, which by the Laws of God
and man, they owe to their Sovereign and Country, And his Majesty does like
wise command all his Officers, Ministers, and Subjects whatsoever, not only
(as much as in them is) to hinder any such, as shall attempt any thing against
his Royal proclamation; but, from time to time, to make known all such
offenses and offenders, to the Lord Admiral, for the time being, that a speedy
course may be taken for the severe punishing of them, to the example of others.

Given at the Court at Windsor, the sixth day of August, in twentieth year of
his Majesty's Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the six
and fiftieth.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXII.


