An abstract of his Majesty's Letters Pattents granted to George Wood, for the
sole Printing of Lynnen-Cloath as follows.
I R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
WHERE AS THE KINGS most Excellent Majesty being informed of an invention for
printing upon Lynnen-cloath, was graciously pleased by his Highness Letters
Partents bearing date the five and twentieth day of October now last past, in
the Seventeenth year of his Reign of England France and Ireland etc. And of
Scotland the Three and Fiftieth. Did give and grant by the said Letters
Pattents unto George Wood for the term of one and Twenty years full and sole
license, liberty, power, and authority, to use, exercise, practice, and put
in execucion within his Dominions of England and Walls, the Printing of
Lynnen-cloath, with an inhibition therein contained, that none other then the
said George Wood his Deputies or Assigns should use the same with Press or
Screwe, or by force of Hand, or stroke of Hammer, or with any other Ingine or
Instrument whatsoever, that should leave any impression of culour or culours
behind it, or to buy sell utter or put to sail within his Majesty's Realms or
Dominions or any part of them any Lynnen-cloath knowing the same to the
Printed by any person or persons other then the said George Wood his Executors
Administrators Deputies Assigns or Servants as well upon pain of forfeiture of
all such Lynnen-cloath so printed to his Majesty, as of all instruments and
tools used or to be used about the printing of the same and them to have
defaced and made unuseful as upon pain of his Majesty's heavy indignation,
and upon such further pains and pennalties and imprisonments as by the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm can, or may be inflicted upon the offenders, for
their contempt and disobedieuce in breaking and contemning his Majesty's
commandment and Prerogative Royal. And for the better execution of the said
grant and preuelidge, his Majesty Did by the sad Letters Pattents for Him his
Heirs and Successors, give and grant full and free Power and Authority unto
the said George Wood his Executors Administrators and Assigns that he the said
George Wood his Executors Administrators and Assigns by himself or themselves
or any of them or by his or their or any of their Deputies Factors or Servants
should or might from time to time and at all times, during the term aforesaid
of Twenty and one years, with the assistance of a Constable or some other
Officer to enter and go into all and singular place and places where any
probability or likelihood might be for the finding out of the said offenses
and their to search for all such Lynnen-cloath as should be by any person or
persons Printed bought or sold contrary to the true intent and meaning of the
said Letters Pattents. And that upon the finding out of, and discovery of all
such offenses it should and might be lawful to and for the said George Wood
his Executors Administrators and Assigns and Deputies as well to seize take and
carry away to the use of his Majesty his Heirs and Successors all such Lynnen
cloth as shall be so Printed uttered or sold contrary to the true meaning of
the said Letters Pattents as also to seize and take all manner of Instrument
tools and implements used and to be used for the purposes aforesaid and the
same to deface break and make unuseful or otherwise to dispose of as he or
they should think meet.

Therefore it is thought fit, to give notice to all persons in general of his
Majesty's erpresse commandment. And if any hereafter shall have occasion of
use any Cloth printed, and that the buyer and buyers may not incurr his
Majesty's displeasures, nor bring upon themselves the pains penalties and
imprisonment, that may be inflicted as aforesaid.

Therefore they may repair to Hunny Lain in Cheapside, over against Bow
Church, where they shall be reasonably dealt withal for the buying of such
things ready Printed, or for the Printing of them.

God save the King.

