BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for the adjournement of part of Michaelmas Term.
THE King our Sovereign Lord considering the great and general infection of
the Plague which at this present is in the Cities of London and Westminster,
and other places near adjoining, and how perilous it might be to His loving
Subjects, if they should be enforced to repair thither for their suites and
causes before such time as it shall please Almighty God of his goodness and
mercy to remove or ease that heavy visitation. His Majesty therefore of His
especial grace and favor to His people: and for their better safety and
preservation, is pleased to adiourne part of the Term of Saint Michael now
next coming: That is to say, from the Vtas thereof unto the fourth Return of
the same Term called Mense Michaelis, which His Majesty signifies to all
and singular His loving Subjects of this His Realm, to the intent that they
and every of them which has cause or Commandment to appear in any of His
Highness Courts at Westminster, in, or at any day or time, from and after the
said Vtas of Saint Michael, may tarry at their dwellings, or where their
business otherwise shall lie, without resorting to any of the said Courts for
that cause, before the said Mense Michaelis next coming, and that without
danger of forfeiture, penalty, or contempt to incur toward His Highness in
that behalf. And nevertheless His Majesty's pleasure is, that two of His
Justices, That is to say, of either Bench one, shall the first day of
Michaelmas Term next, called Octabis Michaelis, according to the ancient
order of the Laws, keep the Essoines of the said Octabis Michaelis, at which
Vtas of Saint Michael, Writs of adiournament (which His Majesty hereby
Commands the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England to make forth, shall
be directed to the said Justices, giving them authority to adiourne the said
Term of Saint Michael, (That is to say) from the Vtas thereof, until the
fourth Return, as before is said: And the said adiournament shall be made in
the first day of the said Vtas, commonly called the day of Essoines. And
further His Majesty's pleasure is, That all Matters, Causes, and Suites
depending in any of His other Courts between party and party, as in his
Highness Courts of Chauncery, Star Chamber, and Exchequer, Courts of Wards
and Liueries, Duchy of Lancaster, and Court of Requests shall have
continuance, and the parties shall have day from the da^e of these presents,
until the said fourth Return as before is said. Provided always, and His
Majesty's pleasure and Commandment is* That all Collectours, Receivers,
Sheriffs, and other Accomptants, and all other persons that should, or ought
to account, or pay any sum, or sums of money in any of His Majesty's Courts
of Exchequer, Courts of Wards and Liueries, and of His Duchy of Lancaster,
or in any of them, or to ^nter into any account in any of the said Courts,
shall repair unto His Majesty's House of Richmond, where His Highness has
appointed such Officers and Ministers, as for that purpose His Majesty has
thought expedient, and there to pay and do in every behalf, as though no such
Proclamation of adiournement had been had or made. And His Majesty's further
pleasure and Commandment is, that all Sheriffs shall return their Writs and
Process against all such Accomptants and Debtors, at the days therein
appointed. And if any person, or persons, who ought to account, or pay any
sum, or sums of money to His Majesty in any of the Courts and places
aforesaid do make default therein, that then His Highness Writs and Process
shall be awarded and sent forth against every such person and persons, and
the same to be duly and orderly served, and returned by the Sheriffs and
Officers thereunto appointed in such like manner and form as the same should
have been if this present Proclamantion had not been made. And if any
Sheriff or other Officer shall make default, or be negligent in serving,
executing, or returning of any the Writs and Process aforesaid, that then every
such Sheriff and other Officer shall incur such pains and penalties as by
the said Courts, or any of them shall be taxed and assessed, Willing and
Commanding all and every His Majesty's Sheriffs, Officers, Ministers and
Subjects, to whom it does, or shall appertain to observe and keep their
assemblies and apparances with all their Returns and Certificats in His
Highness said Courts at Westminster in Mense Michaelis next coming, then and
there to be holden and kept, and there to do their Offices and duties in every
behalf in like manner and form as they should, or ought to have done if this
present Proclamation had not been had or made, as they will answer to the
contrary at their perils.

Given at the Court at Tichfeld the fourth day of September, and in the first
year of His Majesty's Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland. God save
the King.
Printed at Oxford by I. L. and W. T. for BONHAM NORTON, and JOHN BILL,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. ANN. M.DC.XXV.


