WHereas it has pleased Almighty God to call to his mercy our late Sovereign
Lord, King James, of blessed memory, by whose decease the Imperial Crowns of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, are solely and rightfully come to the High
and mighty Prince CHARLES: We therefore, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of
this Realm, being here assisted with those of his late Majesty's Privy
Counsel, with numbers of other principal Gentlement of quality, with ye Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of London, do now hereby with one full voice,
and consent of tongue and heart, publish and proclaim, That the High and
mighty Prince CHARLES, is now by the death of our late Sovereign of happy
memory, become our only Lawful, Lineall, and Rightful Liege Lord, CHARLES by
the grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, etc. to whom we do acknowledge all faith, and constant obedience, with
all hearty and humble affections; Beseeeching God, by whom Kings do Reign, to
bless the Royal King CHARLES, with long and happy years to Reign over us.

God save King Charles. Io. Gore Mayor. G. Cant. Io. Lineoln, C. S. James Ley.
H. Mandeuille. E. Worcester. G. Buckingham. Arundell and Surrey. Pembrooke.
Henry Kent. F. Rutland. T. Lincoln. Dorset. W. Salisbury. Montgomery. Warwick.
Will. Denbigh. C. Anglesey. Clare. Kellie. Clanricard. Andeuer. Henry Rochford.
Ol. Grandison. Geo. London. R. Dunelm. Theo. Howard. Edw. Conway. Delaware.
Scroope. Charles Stanhope. G. Carew. F. Broke. G. Baltimore. T. Edmonds. Io.
Sucklin. Robert. Naunton. Alb. Morton. Rich. Weston. Iul. Caesar.


Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. 1625.


