BY THE KING.
THE Kings most Excellent Majesty taking into his Princely consideration the
great and dangerous increase of the Plague in and about the City of
Westminster, where his Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer has been hitherto kept,
and willing as much as is possible to prevent the further danger, which might
ensue as well to his own Officers, which are necessarily to attend the same
Receipt, as to other his loving Subjects who shall have occasion either for
receipt, or payment of moneys to repair thither: has therefore taken order for
the present remove of the receipt of his said Exchequer from thence to his
Majesty's house at Richmond in the County of Surrey: and has thought fit by
this his Proclamation to publish the same, to the end, that all persons whom
the same may concern, may take notice whither to repair upon all occasions
concerning the bringing in, or issuing of his Majesty's Treasure at the receipt
of his Exchequer. Willing and requiring all Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Collectors,
and all other officers, Accomptants, and persons whatsoever, who are to pay in
any moneys into the said receipt of his Majesty's Exchequer, or otherwise to
attend the same, to keep their days and times at Richmond aforesaid, and
there to do, pay, and perform in all things as they should, or ought to have
done at Westminster, if the said receipt of Exchequer had continued there. And
this to be done and observed until his Majesty shall publish and declare his
further pleasure to the contrary.

Given at the Court at Ricot the one and thirtieth day of Iulie in the first
year of his Majesty's Reign of great Britain, France, and Ireland.
God save the King.
Printed at Oxford by I. L. and W.T. for Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1625.


