I R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
WHereas there is and has been yearly, and every year, on Festiual dies, and
others, great store of the Silver and guilt Plate belonging to the Kings
MAJESTY, the PRINCE, and Nobles of this Realm lost, the Arms defaced by
evil disposed persons, broken in pieces, moulten into Lumpes, and cast into
Ingots, and sold to diverse Goldsmiths, and others, to the great Damage and
Detriment of His MAJESTY, and the persons aforesaid: And whereas also there is
now very lately taken off, and lost from the Communion Table, in His MAJESTY'S
Chapel at Whitehall, two Silver Basins double Guilt, Chased, having the Arms
of Queen MARY, and M. R. engraven and enameled on the Bosse in the Bottomes of
them:

THese are therefore in His MAJESTY'S Name straightly to charge and command all
Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Wardens of the Cinque Ports, Goldsmiths,
and Finers, of what nature or kind soever, Constables, Bayliffes,
Headboroughs, and other His MAJESTY'S, Officers and Subjects, to whose hands
any such Silver Plate, with the Arms defaced, either broken in pieces, moulten
into Lumpes, cast into Ingots, or any other ways disfigured, and suspected, or
found to be in any wise belonging to His MAJESTY, or the Persons aforesaid,
either by Examination, Circumstance, or Confession shall happen to come; That
you, and every of you, do make return of all and every such Silver and Plate,
as aforesaid, into His MAJESTY'S Office of His Iewell-House, and the
Examinations and Confessions of the Parties apprehended therefore, into the
Office of His MAJESTY'S Green-cloth: And hereof fail not, as you will answer
the contrary at your perils.

From Whitehall this Fourteenth of February, 1623. Richmond, Lenox. Pembroke.
T. Edmonds.


Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXIII.


