CHARLES, By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
TO Our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin, William Earl of Northampton,
President of Our Council within the Dominion, Principality, and Marches of
Walls, greeting.
KNOW ye, that for the great and singular trust and confidence, that We have in
your approved fidelity, wisdom and circumspection, We have assigned, made,
constituted, and ordained, and by these presents do assign, make, constitute,
and ordeine you to be our Lieutenant within the Principality and Dominions of
South Wales and North Wales, (Our Counties of Glamorgan and Monmouth only
excepted) the Marches thereunto adjoining, and the several Counties of
Worcester, Hereford, and Salop, and in all corporate and privileged places
within the Limits or Precincts of the Principality, Dominions, Marches, and
Counties aforesaid, or any of them, as well within Liberties as without: And by
these presents do give full power and authority unto you, That you, from time
to time may levy, gather, and call together, all and singular Our Subjects, of
what estate, degree or dignity, they or any of them be, dwelling or
inhabiting within the Principality, Dominions, Marches and Counties aforesaid,
as well within Liberties as without, meet and apt for the Wars, and them from
time to time to try, array, and put in readiness; And them also, and every of
them after their abilities, degrees and faculties, well and sufficiently from
time to time, to cause to be armed and weaponed; And to take the Musters of
them from time to time, in places most meet for that purpose, after your
discretion: And also the same Our Subjects so arrayed, tried, and armed, as well
Horsemen, Archers, and Footmen as other men of Arms, of all kinds and
degrees, meet and apt for the Wars, to lead, and conduct, as well against all
and singular Our enemies, as also against all and singular Rebels, Traitors,
and other offenders and their adherents against Us, Our Crown and dignity,
within the said Principality and Dominions of North Wales and South Wales, the
Marches of the same, and Counties and places aforesaid, and every of them from
time to time, as often as need shall require by your discretion: And with the
said enemies, Traitors and Rebels from time to time, to fight, and them to
invade, resist, suppress, subdue, slay, kill, and put to execution of death by
all ways and means, from time to time by your discretion: And to do, fulfill
and execute from time to time, all and singular other things, which shall be
requisite for the leuying and government of Our said Subjects, for the
conservation of Our person and peace, so by you in form aforesaid to be
levied, and to be led: And further to do, execute, and use against the said
enemies, Traitors Rebels, and such other like offenders and their adherents
before mentioned from time to time, as necessity shall require by your
discretion, the Law called the Martiall-Law, according to the Law-martial: And
of such offenders apprehended, or being brought in subjection, to save whom you
shall think good to be saved, and to slay, destroy, and put to execution of
death, such, and as many of them as you shall think meet, by your good
discretion, to be put to death. AND further, Our will and pleasure is, and by
these presents We do give full power and authority unto you, that in case any
Invasion of Enemies, Insurrection, Rebellion, Ryots, Routs, or unlawful
assemblies, or any like offenses, shall happen to be moved in any place of
this Our Realm, out of the limits of this Our Commission, that then, and as
often as need shall require, by your good discretion, or as you shall be
directed from Us by any special commandment, you, with such power to be
levied within the limits of your Lieutenancie, as you shall think requisite,
or as shall be directed from Us, as is aforesaid, shall repair to the place,
where any such Invasion, Rebellion, unlawful assembly, or Insurrection shall
happen to be made, to subdue, repress and reform the same, as well by battle,
or other kind of force, as otherwise by the Laws of Our Realm, and the
Law-Martiall, according to your discretion. AND further, We give unto you full
power and authority for the execution of this Our Commission, to appoint and
assign within the Principality and Dominions of South Wales and North Wales,
the Marches thereunto adjoining, and the Counties aforesaid, from time to time
Muster-masters, and Prouost-Martials, as you in your discretion shall think
convenient, to use and exercise that Office, in such cases as you shall think
requisite to use the said Law-Martiall. WHEREFORE We will and command you Our
said Lieutenant, that with all diligence ye do execute the premises with
effect. AND forasmuch as it may be, that there shall be just cause for you to
be attendant upon Our person, or to be otherwise employed in Our service,
whereby this Our service of Lieutenancie committed to your fidelity, cannot be
by you in person executed, in such sort as We have appointed the same;
THEREFORE We give unto you, for your better aid and assistance, and for the
better performance and execution of this same Our service, full power and
authority to appoint, assign and constitute by your writing, under your hand
and Seal, within every several Shire and County of the said Principality and
Dominions of South Wales and North Wales, and the other Counties aforesaid
respectively (except before excepted) from time to time, so many persons of
quality, as to you Our said Lieutenant shall seem meet and convenient to be
and the other Counties aforesaid respectively (except before excepted) from
time to time, so many persons of quality, as to you Our said Lieutenant shall
seem meet and convenient to be your Deputies in the said Shires and Counties,
and all Corporate and Privileged places within the same. AND by this Our
present Commission, We give unto every two or more of your said Deputies, so
being by you appointed and assigned as aforesaid, full power and authority in
your absence, to do and execute, in every County, where they are deputed and
assigned to be your Deputies, as aforesaid, and in all corporate and
privileged places, within the Limits or Precincts of the same County, as well
within Liberties as without, all and such, and so much of every thing and
things, before by this Our present Commission, assigned and appointed by you to
be done and executed, and so far forth as by you in your said writings of
deputation, shall be to them prescribed and appointed to be done and executed.
AND Our further pleasure and commandment is, That your said Deputies shall
immediately after your writings of deputation to them made, as aforesaid, take
charge and care to see every such point and thing of this Our Commission, fully
and perfectly executed in your absence, as by you in your said writings of
deputation shall be to them prescribed and appointed to be done and executed.
AND the better to enable them so to do, ye shall deliver to every two of your
said Deputies, so appointed and deputed for the said several Counties as
aforesaid, a true transcript of this Our Commission, subscribed with your hand:
And whatsoever you alone being present, shall do by virtue of this Our
Commission, or in your absence your said Deputies, or any two or more of them,
shall do according to the tenor and effect of your said writings of deputation
to be made, as is aforesaid, the same shall be by these presents discharged
against Us. Our Heirs and Successors. AND further, We will and command all
and singular Justices of Peace, Majors, Shiriffes, Bailiffes, Constables,
Headboroughs, and all other Our Officers, Ministers, and Subjects, meet and apt
for the Wars, within every of the said Shires and Counties, and all corporate
and privileged places, within the Limits or Precincts of the said Shires and
Counties, and every of them as well within Liberties as without, to whom it
shall appertain, That they, and every of them with their power and servants,
from time to time shall be attendant, aiding, and assisting, counselling,
helping, and at the commandment of you, and of your said Deputies, or any two
or more of them respectively, as aforesaid, in the Shires and Counties
aforesaid, and for the execution hereof in all points, as appertains, as they
and every of them tender Our pleasure, and will answer for the contrary at
their uttermost perils. PROVIDED always, that this Our present Commission, or
any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend to the County of
Gloucester, the City of Gloucester, or County of the same City, or to any of
them, or to the County Palantine of Chester, or to the City of Chester, or to
any part thereof, or to the Counties of Glamorgan, or Monmouth, or to any of
them, or to any part of them, or any of them. IN WITNESS whereof, We have caused
these Our Letters to be made Patents.

WITNESS Our self at Westminster, the ninth day of May, in the first year of
Our Reign. Per Dominum Custodem magni Sigilli Angliae, virtute War. Reg.
EDMONDS.


