BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for the avoiding of all intercourse between His Majesty's
Royal Court, and the Cities of London and Westminster, and places adjoining.
HIS Majesty having taken a resolution that Himself and His Royal Consort the
Queen and their Courts shall very shortly remove first to His Castle of
Windsor, and after to his Honor of Hampton Court, and there to settle: and
foreseeing that the vicinity of those places to the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof, and the Borough of Southwarke and Town
of Lambeth, which long have been, and yet are so grievously infected with the
Plague, is apt to draw an intercourse between those Cities and places and the
Court, which may bring extreme peril to the sacred Persons of their Royal
Majesty's, unless it be very carefully avoided. For the preventing therefore of
so great and so apparent a danger, wherein all his Majesty's good and loving
Subjects have so large an interest. His Majesty does straightly charge and
command, That no person or persons of what degree or quality soever do presume
to go or repair directly or indirectly from the said City of London or
Westminster, or either of them, or the suburbs of them, or the Borrough of
Southwarke or Town of Lambeth unto the Court, or to go from the Court unto
the said cities of London or Westminster, or the Suburbs of them, or the said
Borrough of Southwarke, or Town of Lambeth, or either, or any of them, and
return back to the Court again upon pain of his Majesty's heavy
displeasure, and of such further punishment as can by Law or by his Majesty's
prerogative Royal be inflicted upon them for so high a contempt. And if any
Servant to his Majesty, or to the Queen his Royal consort in any office or
place whatsoever, shall offend herein, and either in their own person have
recourse to and fro, or wittingly suffer any other to have recourse or access
unto them from those cities or suburbs thereof, or places aforesaid, His
Majesty does hereby signify and publish his determinate purpose and
resolution, That every such offender shall not only ipso facto forfeit and
loose the Office or place he holds, without any hope or expectation of favor
now or at any time hereafter, but shall also incur the heaviest and severest
punishment which can be inflicted upon them. And his Majesty does straightly
charge and command all his loving Subjects to be careful in the due execution
of his Royal will and pleasure herein, not only in their own persons, but in
all others as much as in them lies, and this to be strictly observed and
continued until his Majesty shall see cause to enlarge this restraint again,

Given at our Court at Salisbury the seventeenth day of October, in the first
year of our reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland. God save the King.
Printed at Oxford by I. L. and W. T. for Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1625.


