JAMES By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting.
WHEREAS We have been informed, as well by a lamentable Petition on the behalf
of fifteen hundred of our loving Subjects, English men, remaining in miserable
servitude and subjection in Argier, Tunis, Sally, Tituane, exhibited to the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Our last Parliament-assembly, thereby
pitifully craving some good mean to be taken for their relief and redemption,
As also by an order taken and set down, the seven and twentieth day of May,
1624, by the said Lords then in Parliament assembled; thereby ordering, that
Letters Patents should be made for their relief, to the effect in these
presents following: The humble and lamentable complaint of above fifteen
hundred poor Captives souls, now under the miserable oppression of the Turks
in Argier, Tunis, Sally, and Tituane, Who lamentably show, That being
surprised in one hundred and fifty of his Majesty's subjects Ships by Turkish
Pirates, and now remaining in the said Ports, and held in miserable slavery,
and sold from party to party, and kept in chains of Iron, their food, bread
and water, to their extreme grief, some these three years, some more, some
less; not only to the great damage of themselves, but of their poor wives
and children, who are all ready to starve and perish for want of means for
their sustentation: And they further most lamentably complain, that most of
the youthfuller sort are of late forced and compelled by intolerable and
insufferable punishments and torments, to deny their Savior, and turn to
their Mahumetan Religion, and to deny their own King and Country, which (God
knows) is to their great grief, and utter discomfort for ever, unless their
relief and freedom may be purchased and obtained by the favorable and pious
consideration and assistance of this Honorable Assembly, without which they
are like to be all utterly ruined both in body and soul, and their poor wives
and children likely (through extremity and want) miserably to perish. NOW the
lamentable complaint and cry of so many poor souls, and the grievous torments
they now sustain for their conscience sake, being well weighed and considered
of, by this great and grave Assembly, They humbly upon their bare knees, for
Christ Jesus sake, most humbly desire, that (out of the bowels of compassion)
your Honors will be pleased to take some speedy course and means for the
freeing of them out of the merciless hands of those cruel Infidels; all
relief and comfort heretofore sent them by their poor wives and friends
being detained and kept from them; by reason whereof they are enforced to
grind corn in bestiall manner like horses, for to get some food to preserve
their wretched lives, with infinite miseries, not here mentioned for breuities
sake, and the great and extreme necessities of their poor wives and children:
And they with all their wives and children, being many hundreds in number,
shall daily pray for the happy success of your Honors in all your enterprises.

UPON the reading of which Petition, it is, this seven and twentieth day of
May, 1624. ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in this present
Parliament assembled, That Letters Patents be granted for a Collection
throughout the whole Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, for redemption
of those miserable Captives; the said Letters Patents to be granted upon
commendations from the Lords of the Parliament, upon Petition preferred to
their Lordships: The said Letters Patents, with printed Briefes to be sent to
the Lords Bishops in their several Diocesses, within each Province, and their
Lordships to send the Briefes to all the Ministers of every Parish within their
Diocese: Which Ministers by especial exhortation, are to stir up the
charity of their Parishioners, for a liberal contribution toward this so
charitable a work: The money in every Parish to be collected by the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor; who presently after the Collection,
shall declare publicly in the Church what is collected, and the same sum to
be put on the backeside of the Brief, with their and the Ministers hands to
it: and then the Church wardens and Overseers of the poor, or one of them, to
deliver the same Collection to some such Minister in every Deanery, as shall be
nominated by the Lord Bishop for the receipt of the same: And those Ministers
to deliver the same within ten days after the receipt thereof, to the Lord
Bishop of the Diocese; and every Bishop to deliver ever the Collection made in
his Diocese to his Metropolitan: And the Metropolitan of York, to transmit
what is collected within his Province, to the Archbishop of Canterbury, unto
whom by order of the House, all the money to be collected for this use, is to
be delivered; who, with the advice of six Lords of Parliament, and the Lords
of His Majesty's Privy Council, is to dispose of the said money so collected,
for relief and redemption of the Captives, as is specified in the Petition and
not otherwise. Especial commendations to all Majors, etc. and this to continue
for one whole year. And by way of example, the Lords of Parliament are now
ready to lead the way by ^^^^ing in their several ranks, (and so do order)
forty shillings of every member above the degree of a Baron: And those of the
degree of Barons (Lords Spitituall and Temporal) twenty shillings apiece, to
be presently paid into the hands of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, to be
disposed of, as the rest of the moneys to be collected for the use above
mentioned. And it is further ordered, That absent Lords may not be exempted
from this Contribution, but that the Lords that have their Proxies deposite the
same for them. And it is also ordered, that all be done without any charge or
reward to any person for the same, Ex. H. Elsing Cler. Parliamentorum. AND
whereas also the said Lords having perfectly understood, and duly considered
the woeful and pitiful estate of those poor men, and in commiseration of
them, have freely of themselves paid down presently every of them above the
estate of a Baron, forty shillings a piece, and every other of the estate of a
Baron, being Spiritual or Temporal Lords, twenty shillings, to be paid into
the hands of the most reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, toward this so charitable an action, as by the said Order more at
large appears: KNOW ye therefore, that We also above all other, most grieved
at the pitiful and woeful estate of the said poor men Our subjects, and much
commiserating the same, and much rejoicing in the forwardness of Our said
Lords, toward the performance of so christian and charitable an action, whose
good example We earnestly desire, that all other Our loving subjects of quality
would follow in this behalf, according to their degrees, of Our princely
grace, do ratify and much approve their said Order so set down, and in
confirmation, and for the execution thereof do grant, that according to the
said Order, Collection may be made of the charitable devotion and liberality
of all Our loving subjects, throughout Our Realm of England, and Dominion of
Wales, in all places whatsouer, toward the relief and redemption of Our said
poor subjects the Captives aforesaid, to be executed in manner and form
following: That is to say, We will, grant, appoint, and require, that Walter
Dobson, Gentleman Apparitor to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, or
his Deputy or Deputies named and appointed by him, in writing under his hand
and seal, shall and may procure to be printed so many Briefes of these Our
Letters Patents, as may suffice for the accomplishing and performance of this
good work, and shall carry and show these Our Letters Patents under Our great
Seal, to the said Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and shall also leave with his
Grace so many of those printed Briefes, as there be Churches of Chapels,
wherein public divine Service is usually said, within the circuit or precinct
of the several Provinces of Canterbury and York. AND We require every of the
said Lord Archbishops to receive the said Briefes, and with all speed to
distribute unto each Bishop within his Province, and to send so many unto the
Archbishops of York, as may serve to be dispersed within the Diocesses of his
Province, the said Briefes to be sent by the said Bishops, to the Minister or
Curate of every Parish Church and Chapel within their several Diocesses. AND
We also will and require every Minister or Curate of any Church or Chapel,
to whom such printed Briefes shall be delivered, that without any long delay,
upon some Sunday or Holiday, when the Parishioners be fully assembled to hear
divine Service, they publicly declare in their several Church or Chapel
unto the Congregation there assembled, the tenor of these Briefes, with an
especial exhortation to them, to yield their liberal and extraordinary
contribution to so charitable a work. AND We also will and require you the
Church wardens and Overseers of the poor, to make diligent Collection of the
charitable devotion of the people in the said Church or Chapel so assembled,
and that after your Collection so made, you do publicly declare in the
Church, the whole sum of money so by you collected, and then procure the same
sum to be set down upon the backeside of the Brief, under your own hands,
and the hand of the Minister of the said Church or Chapel: And then you the
said Church wardens, or Overseers, or one of you, after the receipt of the same
money collected, shall deliver the sum collected, with the said Brief, unto
such Minister of the Deanery, where the said Collection shall be made, as the
Lord Bishop of the said Diocese, shall assign or appoint to receive the same:
And the Bishop of every Diocese, is hereby authorized to name and appoint a
Minister in every Deanery, to receive the said Collections accordingly. AND We
also require you the said Minister, which shall be so appointed to receive the
said money from the said Overseers, that you receive the same, with the
foresaid Brief, and that within ten days after the receipt thereof, you pay
and deliver the same, with the Brief, whereby the same has been collected,
unto the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, where such Collection is made. AND We
also require you the Bishops of every Diocese respectively, that you receive
of the said Minister, the said money, with the Brief whereby the same has
been collected, and deliver over all the said Collections made within your
Diocese, with the foresaid Briefes, to the Metropolitan of the Province,
wherein the Collection shall be made. AND We likewise require you the said
Archbishop of York, that you without delay, do transmit to the said Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, all the sums of money collected within your
Province, with the Briefes, whereby the same has been collected, with him to
remain, until the same be disposed of in such fort, as by the foresaid Order
of the seven and twentieth of May, 1624. the same is to be disposed of; Any
Statute, Law, Ordinance, or Provision, heretofore made to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

IN WITNESS whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents, for
the space of one whole year next after the date hereof to endure.

WITNESS Our self at Westminster the nine and twentieth day of June, in the two
and twentieth year of Our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of
Scotland he seven and fiftieth. STEWARD.


