HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
By the King. A Proclamation for settling the Plantation of Virginia.
WHereas the Colonie of Virginia, Planted by the hands of Our most dear Father
of blessed memory, for the propagation of Christian Religion, the increase of
Trade, and the enlarging of his Royal Empire, has not hitherto prospered so
happily, as was hoped and desired, A great occasion whereof his late Majesty
conceived to be, for that the government of that Colony was committed to the
Company of Virginia, encorporated of a multitude of persons of several
dispositions, amongst whom the affairs of greatest moment were, and must be
ruled by the greater number of Votes and Voices; And therefore his late
Majesty, out of His great Wisdom, and depth of Judgment, did desire to
resume that popular government, and accordingly the Letters Patents of that
Incorporation, were by his Highness direction in a Legal course questioned,
and thereupon iudicially repealed, and adjudged to be void; wherein his
Majesty's aim was only, to reduce that government into such a right course,
as might best agree with that form which was held in the rest of his Royal
Monarchy, and was not intended by him, to take away, or impeach the particular
Interest of any private Plantor, or Aduenturer, nor to alter the same,
otherwise then should be of necessity for the good of the public: And whereas
We continue the like care of those Colonies and Plantatious, as Our late dear
Father did, and upon deliberate advice and consideration, are of the same
Judgment that Our said Father was of, for the government of that Colony of
Virginia; Now lest the apprehension of former personal differences, which have
heretofore happened (the reviving and continuing whereof We utterly disallow,
and strictly forbid) might distract the minds of the Plantors and Adventurers,
or the opinion, that We would neglect those Plantations, might discourage men
to go or send thither, and so hinder the perfecting of that work, wherein We
hold the honor of Our dear Father deceased, and Our own honor to be deeply
engaged; We have thought fit to declare, and by Our Royal Proclamation to
publish Our own Judgment, and resolution in these things, which by Gods
assistance We purpose constantly to pursue. And therefore We do by these
presents publish and declare to all Our loving Subjects, and to the whole
world, that We hold those Territories of Virginia and the Sommer-Ilands, as
also that of New England, where Our Colonies are already planted, and within
the limits and bounds whereof, Our late dear Father, by His Letters Patents,
under His great Seal of England, remaining of Record, has given leave and
liberty to His Subjects to plant and inhabit, to be a part of Our Royal
Empire, descended upon Us and undoubtedly belonging and appertaining unto Us;
And that We hold Our self, as well bound by Our Regal office, to protect,
maintain, and support the same, and are so resolved to do, as any other part
of Our Dominions:

And that Our full resolution is, to the end that there may be one uniform
course of Government, in, and through all Our whole Monarchy, That the
Government of the Colonie of Virginia shall immediately depend upon Our Self,
and not be committed to any Company or Corporation, to whom it may be proper to
trust matters of Trade and Commerce, but cannot be fit or safe to communicate
the ordering of State-affaires, be they of never so mean consequence: And that
therefore We have determined, That Our Commissioners for those Affairs, shall
proceed according to the tenor of Our Commission directed unto them, until We
shall declare Our further pleasure therein. Nevertheless We do herby declare,
That We are resolved, with as much convenient expedition, as Our Affairs of
greater importance will give leave, to establish a Council, consisting of a
few persons of understanding and quality, to whom We will give trust for the
immediate care of the Affairs of that Colony, and who shall be answerable to
Us for their proceedings, and in matters of greater moment, shall be
subordinate and attendant unto Our Privy Council here; And that We will also
establish another Council to be resident in Virginia, who shall be subordinate
to Our Council here for that Colonie; and that at Our own charge We will
maintain those public Officers and Ministers, and that strength of Men,
Munition, and Fortification, as shall be fit and necessary for the defense of
that Plantation, and will by any course that shall be desired of Us, settle and
assure the particular rights and interests of every Planter and Aduenturer, in
any of those Territories, which shall desire the same, to give them full
satisfaction for their quiet and assured enjoying thereof.

And lastly, whereas it is agreed on all sides, that the Tobacco of those
plantations of Virginia and the Summer Islands (which is the only present
means for their subsisting) cannot be managed for the good of the Plantations,
unless it be brought into one hand, whereby the foreign Tobacco may be
carefully kept out, and the Tobacco of those Plantations may yield a certain
and ready price to the owners thereof; We do hereby declare, That to avoid
all differences and contrariety of opinions, which will hardly be reconciled
amongst the Planters and Adventurers themselves, We are resolved to take the
same into Our own hands, and by Our servants or Agents for Us, to give such
prices to the Planters and Adventurers for the same, as may give them
reasonable satisfaction and encouragement; but of the manner thereof, We will
determine hereafter at better leisure: And when We shall have concluded the
same, We shall expect, that all Our loving Subjects will readily conform
themselves thereunto.

And in the mean time, because the importation and use of foreign Tobacco,
which is not of the growth of those Plantations, or one of them, will visibly
and assuredly undermine and destroy those Plantations, by taking away the
means of their subsistence, We do hereby strictly charge and command, That
Our late Proclamation, bearing date the ninth day of April last, entitled, (A
Proclamation touching Tobacco) shall in all points and parts thereof, be duly
and strictly observed, upon pain of Our high displeasure, and such further
penalties and punishments, as by the said Proclamation are to be inflicted upon
the offenders. And We do hereby advise all Our loving Subjects, and all others
whom it may concern, not to adventure the breach of our Royal Commandment in
any of the premises, We being fully resolved, upon no importunity or
intercession whatsoever, to release or remit the deserved punishment of such,
as shall dare to offend against the same, seeing We hold not Our Self only,
but Our people interested therein.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the thirteenth day of May, in the first
year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. ANNO DOM. M.DC.XXV.


