royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
By the King. A Proclamation for restraint of killing, dressing, and eating of
Flesh in Lent, or on Fish-dayes, appointed by the Law, to be hereafter observed
by all sorts of people.
WHereas diverse good Laws and Statutes, have heretofore, with great care and
providence been made and enacted for the due observation of Lent, and other
days appointed for Fishdayes as well for the sparing and increase of Flesh
victual, as for the maintenance of the Navy and Shipping of this Realm, by
the encouragement of Fishermen to go to the Seas for the taking of Fish, which
Laws, and politic Constitutions, have from time to time been seconded and
quickened by sundry Proclamations, and other Acts and Ordinances of State in
the tunes of Our Royal Predecessors; And whereas, notwithstanding so many good
provisions heretofore had and made in that kind, We have observed, that the
inordinate liberty usually taken by all sorts of people, to kill, dress and
cate Flesh in the Lent season, and on other days and times prohibited, is
become so inueterate an evil, that it will require more then ordinary care to
suppress the same.

We therefore, much affecting the reformation of so great and growing an evil,
which is so great an enemy to the plenty of this Our Kingdom, Have thought
fit thus timely, (the better to take away all pretenses of excuse) to express
Our self and Our Royal Commandment in this behalf: Whereof without future
declaration of Our pleasure in this kind, We shall expect, and do require
from all Our Subjects, that due notice be taken, and that a strict and
continued obedience and conformity be yielded thereunto, both for the present,
and in all succeeding times.

And therefore We do straightly charge and command all and every person and
persons whatsoever, to whom it may appertain, carefully to provide and see,
that these Orders following may be duly observed and put in execution, upon
pain of Our high displeasure, and such penalties, as by the Laws of this Our
Realm may be inflicted upon the Offenders, for their contempt or neglect of Us
and Our Laws, whereof We shall show Our Self most sensible.

And first, whereas we find, that the chiefest cause of these disorders has
grown from the Licenses that have been granted to Butchers to kill and utter
Flesh contrary to Law, and that by Our Laws, no Mayor, Justice of Peace, or
other person of what degree or quality soever, can grant any License in this
kind; And that the Lords and others of Our Privy Council, do by Our
direction forbear to grant the same, or give way thereunto; Our will and
pleasure is, upon the penalties provided by Law, and such further punishment to
be inflicted upon the offenders, as shall be thought meet, that no such
License shall be granted for the killing or uttering of Flesh; And, that no
Butcher, or other person whatsoever, do by color thereof; kill, utter, or put
to sale any Flesh contrary to the Laws established and provided in that
behalf.

And for the avoiding of such inconveniences hereafter, Our will and pleasure
is, That the Lord Mayor of Our City of London, and every other Officer and
Justice of Peace, shall call before them, and send for any of the servants of
any Inholders, Victualers, Cooks, Alehousekeepers, Tauerners, and keepers of
Ordinary tables, and such others that utter Victuals, and to examine them upon
their corporal Oaths, what Flesh is, or has been during the Lent season, or
other days prohibited by the Law, dressed, killed, uttered, or eaten in their
houses, which if they shall refuse to do, then to commit to prison the said
servants so refusing upon their Oaths to declare the truth.

That the Lord Mayor shall also yearly before Lent, or at the beginning
thereof, cause all Inholders, keepers of Ordinary tables, Victuallers, Alehouse
keepers, and Tauerners within the City and Liberties thereof, to appear
before him, or such persons as he shall appoint meet for that purpose; And
shall take Recognizances with sufficient Sureties of every of them in good
sums of money, (Viz) One hundred pounds of the Principal, and their sureties
thirty pounds a piece, to Our use, not to dress any Flesh in their houses in
the Lent time, or at other times prohibited, for any respect, nor suffer it to
be eaten contrary to Law. The like Recognizance with Sureties shall be taken of
the like parties upon like penalties by the Justices of Peace of Our City of
Westminster, and the Liberties thereof, and every of the said Recognizances to
be certified into Our Exchequer.

And for the Butchers, and others that come with Victual or Flesh out of the
Country into the City, Our pleasure is, That the Lord Mayor shall cause
certain persons to watch at the Gates and other like places in the Suburbs,
where Flesh may be brought, to view and search, and to intercept the same: And
if any of those Watchmen shall be found negligent and corrupt in his Charge,
then he to be committed to prison during the whole Lent.

And to the end that Fishermen may employ themselves to Sea with better
encouragement then heretofore, and that the Fishmongers may furnish themselves
with such store from time to time hereafter, as shall be expedient, as well for
the provision of the City, as for selling the same at reasonable Rates, We
will that they take notice of this Our Commandment and constant resolution for
observance of Lent, and Fish days, both now and hereafter, as by Law is
required.

And furthermore, as We think it fit, that every man should be a rule of order
and abstinence in his own house, as well in respect of the public, as of his
private case and benefit: So We straightly charge and command all Inholders,
keepers of Ordinary tables* Victuallers, Alehouse keepers, and Tauerners, not
to make any Supper for any person or persons whatsoever, upon Friday nights
either in Lent or out of Lent, nor to suffer any meat to be then dressed
uttered, sold, or eaten in their houses, upon pain of such punishment, as is
due to those that shall contemn Our Royal pleasure and Commandment.

And forasmuch as upon further advice and consideration had, that the restraint
of killing and dressing of Flesh is no sufficient remedy for the mischief,
valesse there be better care also taken to suppress the unlawful and
inordinate eating of Flesh in the time of Lent, and on other days and times
prohibited, wherewith our Subjects have accustomed themselves, rather for
delicacie then for necessity, It is therefore our Roall will and pleasure, and
accordingly, We do hereby straightly prohibit and forbid all Our Subjects, of
what degree or quality soever within this Realm, to eat any manner of Flesh in
ye time of Lent, or on other days now usually observed as Fish days, without
a special License first obtained from the Bishop of the Diocese, or such
other as by the Law have power to give License in that behalf, according to
Our Laws in that case provided, (which We will and command shall be sparingly
granted, and in cases of necessity only) upon pain of our High displeasure,
and to be proceeded against by Our Attorney general in Our Court of Star
chamber, as contemners of Our Royal commandment, and upon such further
penalties, as by the Laws and Statutes of Our Realm may be inflicted on
those that shall wilfully offend in this kind.

And as these Orders are to be executed in Our City of London, and places
near to the same, so it is Our express pleasure and Commandment, That our
Justices of Peace in all Shires within their Rule, and all other Majors,
Bailifes and chief Officers in Towns Corporate or in any Liberties within
their Precincts, shall cause the same to be observed and performed in like
manner; and that no manner of Toleration, Favor, or Conniuencie be used by any
Justice of Peace, or other Officer, contrary to the true meaning of this Our
Proclamation, as both they that shall presume wittingly so to tolerate the
offense, as also the party himself offending, will answer the same at their
uttermost perils; Our Commandment being, That Our Laws in this case shall be
hereafter severely executed upon all Offenders whatsoever:

Further charging and Commanding the Lord Mayor of Our City of London, the
Justices of Assise in their several Circuits, the Majors and the chief
Officers of all other Cities and Towns Corporate, Justices of Peace, Lords of
Liberties, and all other Officers and Ministers within the several Counties of
this Our Realm, that they and every of them fully obey this Our pleasure, and
cause and compel the same to be obeyed and executed by others, as they will
answer the contrary at their uttermost perils.

And for the due execution of the premises in all other the Counties of this
Our Realm, as well as in Our Cities of London and Westminster, We do hereby
straightly charge and command all Our Justices of Peace within the same Counties,
as well within Liberties as without, That yearly, and every year hereafter
before Lent, they cause to come and appear before them, all Inholders, Cooks,
Tauerners, Alehouse-keepers, Butchers, and others Victuallers whatsoever, and
to require and take of them to Our use, several Recognizances, with Sureties,
for observation of the premises, (viz.) The Principals in ten pounds, and
their two Sureties in five pounds a piece: And if they shall refuse or neglect
to enter into such Recognizances, then the said Justices shall suppress such
persons so refusing, from victualling any more, and shall also cause them
forthwith to become bound by Recognizance with Sureties to Our use, (viz.) The
Principals in twenty pounds, and their two Sureties in ten pounds a piece, not
to victual, or sell Beer or Ale from thencefoorth; which if they shall refuse
to do, then the said Justices to commit to prison all such persons so refusing
to enter into such Recognizances, until they shall submit themselves, and
become bound as aforesaid. And further, for all such Inholders, Cooks,
Tauerners, Alehouse-keepers, Butchers and other Victuallers, as shall not
appear before the said Justices, as aforesaid, That they may immediately send
forth their Warrants, or grant Process against them, and every of them so
making default, to appear and answer their contempt at the next general
Sessions of the Peace.

And further, for the more due punishment of Inholders, keepers of Ordinary
tables, Cooks, Butchers, Victuallers, Alehouse-keepers, Tauerners, and such
like, who shall forfeit their Recognizances by killing or dressing of Flesh, or
suffering it to be eaten in their houses in the Lent time, and other
Fish-dayes; And to the end that the same may be as well taken in due form of
Law, as duly certified into Our Exchequer, We do will and require all
Justices of Peace, as well within Liberties as without. That at such times as
they shall meet within their several Divisions, for the taking of such
Recognizances, that they give notice to the Clerks of the Peace, or their
deputies, to attend them for that purpose; Of whom we will require a strict
account for the Legal taking and returning of the same Recognizances into Our
said Exchequer.

And because these Directions are for better observation of Order, and due
keeping of the Lent according to Our Laws, which Our Ministers and Officers
are to see executed of Office, without making the same grievous to Our People,
by taking of excessive Fees for their entering into Recognizances to observe
these Orders, whereof many have complained: We therefore straitely charge and
Command, that no Towne-Clerke, Clerk of the Peace, nor other Officer, shall,
or do presume to demand or take any Fee or Reward above the sum of twelve
pence for taking any such Recognizances as aforesaid, nor shall give any Fee or
Reward for returning the same into Our Exchequer.

And lastly, for that the Fishmongers (upon the observation of the aforesaid
Orders) may perhaps take occasion thereby, to inhaunce the prices, as well of
Fresh, as of Sea Fish, We do therefore hereby further charge and Command al
Fishmongers whatsoever, That they sell and utter their Fish at moderate and
usual rates and prices; And that all Justices of Peace, Majors, Bailiffes, and
other Our Officers, as well within Liberties as without, to whom it shall
appertain, shall from time to time take such order with the said Fishmongers,
that Our Subjects be not grieved by any such enhancement or increase of prices
upon Fish, upon pain of Our high displeasure, and such further punishment as
may be inflicted upon them by Our Laws.

Given at Our Court at Hampton Court., the 25. day of January, in the second
year of Our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXVI.


