royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
By the King.
A Proclamation commanding the repair of Nob^ men, Knights, and Gentlemen of
quality, unto their Mansion Houses in the Country, there to attend their
services, and keep Hospitality.
THe Kings most excellent MAJESTY, taking into His R^consideration, that the
ancient honor of this Realm, has (...) years exceedingly decayed, by the
neglect of Hospitality, and good (...) keeping, for which this Nation in former
ages has been mu^ ^nowned, which has been occasioned by the too frequent
resort (...) ordinary residence of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Knights (...)
Gentlemen of quality unto Cities and Towns, especially into near about the
Cities of London and Westminster, which draws it also many other great
inconveniences, of necessity ensuing b^ absence of so many persons of quality
and authority from their C^treys, whereby those parts are left destitute both
of relief and government, and the Cities (...) Towns, especially those of
London and Westminster, are ouerburthened with Inhabitants (...) Resiants: And
His Majesty calling to mind, that the celebration of the feast of Christmas
approaches, which is the fittest time for the exercising of the Charities of
the wealthier sort, (...) thought fit, according to the example of His dear
Father of blessed memory deceased, to pu^ and declare, and He does hereby
publish and declare His Royal will and pleasure to be, and (...) by these
presents straightly charge and command, as well all His Lords Spiritual and
Tempo^ as also all deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, and Gentlemen of
quality, who (...) Mansion Houses in the Country, wherein they and their
families have usually dwelt, (ex^ such as are of His Highness privy Counsel,
or bear Office about the persons, or Court of (...) self, or of His dearest
Consort the Queen) That they and every of them immediately upon the (...) of
this present month of November, depart from the Cities of London and
Westminster, and o^ Cities and places, with their Families and Servants unto
their several Countries, to at^ their service there, and to keep Hospitality
as appertains to their degree and calling, v^^ pain not only of His
Majesty's most heavy indignation and displeasure, and disablement to (...) any
such places of trust under His Majesty, but also of such further censure and
punishment (...) may be inflicted upon them for their disobedience and
contempt, or neglect of this His Ro^^ Commandment, whereof as His Majesty
intends to take a strict and severe account, so does hereby require and
command, as well the Lords and others of His Privy Counsel, as (...) all other
His Officers and Ministers whom it shall any way concern, to take order that
all (...) as shall offend may receive condign punishment, without toleration
or conniuencie.

Given at the Court at White Hall the three and twentieth day of November, in
the second year of (...) Majesty's Reign of Great Britain, France and
Ireland.
Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent MAJESTY. M.D.C.XXVI.


