C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation prohibiting the use of Snaffles, and commanding the use of
Bittes for Riding.
THe Kings most Excellent MAJESTY, taking into His Princely thoughts, the
present state of these times and how necessary it is, that all His loving
Subjects should be provided, for their own defense, and the defense of the
Realm, upon all occasions, and sudden events; And finding by experience, that
such horses, as are to be employed for Service, are more apt and fit to be
managed by such as shall ride them being used to the Bittes, then to the
Snaffles: His Majesty therefore, by the Advice of the Lords, and others of His
Privy Counsel, has thought fit, and does hereby straightly charge and command,
that no person or persons whatsoever, of what degree or condition soever, other
then such only as His Majesty, in respect of their attendance upon His Royal
Person in times of disport, or otherwise, shall license thereunto, shall from
henceforth in riding, use any Snaffles, but Bittes only, upon pain of His
Majesty's high displeasure, and upon such further Pains, Penalties, and
Imprisonments, as by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm of England, or by
His Majesty's Prerogative Royal, can or may be inflicted upon the offenders,
for their contempt of His Majesty's Royal Commandment in that behalf.

Given at His Majesty's Court at White Hall, the twentieth day of November in
the third year of His Highness Reign of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXVII.


