C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surrounded by a garter and
surmounted by a crown
CHARLES, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith etc.
To all to whom these presents shall come greeting.
Whereas, we by our Commission under our great Seals of England, bearing date
with these presents, have given power and authority unto our Commissioners
therein named or mentioned, or any two or more of them (amongst other things)
to grant License and Licenses to such fit person and persons as shall have
occasion to travel beyond the Seas, and which shall be desirous to go forth
of this Kingdom, at our Port of our City of Br^stoll, or at any other Port,
Haven or Creek, between our said City of Bristoll and Bewmawrice, or at the
Port of Bewmaurice, or at any other Port, Haven, or Creek between Bewmawrice
and our City of Chester, or at the Port of Chester, or at any other Port,
Haven, or Creek between our City of Chester and Leuerpool^, or at our Port
of Leuerpoole, or at any other Port, Haven, or Creek between Leuerpoole and
Workington, and before their going forth to examine them of their names and
surnames, and the place of their birth and abode, their state, degree,
vocation, trade, mystery, or occupation, and the true cause or causes of their
going over, together with the place or places wither they intend or are to go*
and the time that they intend, or are like to stay, and tarry before their
return, and all other questions that in the discretions of our said
Commissioners, according to the occasions they should think fit of. All which
persons and their answers in the points aforesaid, or what else in the
discretions of our said Commissioners, should be thought fit to be demanded of
them and of the time of their passage, Our will was, that our Commissioners
should cause an orderly and per^^ct entry to be made into a book by such
Clerk or Clerks as we had nominated or appointed, or should nominate and
appoint thereunto, under our Great Seals of ^^gland, or his or their deputy or
deputies, which book might be extant upon all occasions, as by our said
Commission, amongst diverse other things therein contained more at large it does
and may appear. Now know ye that we to the end this our pleasure may be the
better executed, we do hereby authorize and of Our e^^eciall grace, certain
knowledge, and mere motion, have willed, ordained, constituted and granted,
and by these presents for us our Heirs and Successors, do, will, ord^^^,
constitute, and grant, that for ever hereafter there shall be one certain
Office to be called and termed as hereafter in these presents is in that
behalf mentioned and expressed. And we do hereby for us our Heirs and
Successors erect create and make an Office to be and be called the Office of
Clerk of us our Heirs and Successors, for writing and entering of Licenses and
passes to be granted by any Commissioners to any persons going out of this
Realm, from the Port of B^^^^^^l, B^wm^^r^c^, Chester and Leuerpoole. And that
for ever hereafter there be and shall be one or more officer or officers by us
our Heirs and Successors from time to time nominated, constituted, and
appointed, which shall be and shall be called the Clerk or Clerks of us our
Heirs and Successors, for writing and entering of Licenses and passes to be
granted by any Commissioners to any persons going out of this Realm from the
Ports of Bristoll, Bewmawrice, Che^ter and Leuerpoole. And our further will and
pleasure is and we do hereby for us our Heirs and Successors ordain and
appoint that the said officer and officers do from time to time by us our
Heirs and Successors, to be named and appointed (and none other person and
persons whatsoever) by himself or themselves, or his or their sufficient
Deputy or Deputies shall have the writing, Registring, and entering into
several books firmly bound and made up of the names and surnames, place of
birth and abode, state, degree, vocation trade, mystery and occupation of all
and every persons or persons which by virtue of our Commission aforesaid, or
any other Commission or Commissions hereafter to be made or granted to the
same or like purpose, shall be licensed or permitted to pass out of this
Realm at the aforesaid Port of Bristoll, or at any other Port, Haven or Creek
between B^istoll and Bewmawrice, or at the Port of Bewmawrice, or at any other
Port, Haven or Creek between Bewmawrice and Chester, or at the Port of
Chester, or at any other Port, Haven or Creek, between our Cities of Chester
and Leuerpoole, or at the Port of Leuerpoole, or at any other Port, Haven or
Creek between Leuerpoole and Workington aforesaid, and the causes of their
going over, together with the place or places whither they intend to go, and
the time that they intend and are like to stay and tarry before their return;
and other their answers in the premises, together with the passes themselves.
And because it is requisite that the said Officer or Officers, their Deputy
and Deputies should have some convenient recompense for their labor, care and
pains to be bestowed and taken in the execution of the said Office, wherein
our Princely care so far extends it self, as that we will not any of our
Subjects be unduly exacted upon. We do therefore hereby for us, our Heirs
and Successors, ordain, constitute and grant that it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said Officer and Officers, and his and their Deputy and
Deputies, to demand take and receive for the execution of the said Office, and
for his and their pains and labor to be taken in the premises of every
person, who shall p^sse beyond the Seas, as aforesaid, the fee, reward or sum
of six pence; and has heretofore v^ually been taken for the like, and not in
any sort to exceed the same. K^ow ye also further that we for the better
execution of this our will and pleasure, reposing trust and confidence in the
fidelity, diligence, understanding and discretion of our wel-beloued Subjects
Patricke Craford and Matthew Birkenhead, Gentlemen: Of our especial grace,
certain knowledge and mere motion, have given and gran^ed, and by these
presents for us, our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant unto the said
Patricke Craford, and Matthew Bi^kenhead, the said Office of Clerks of us our
Heirs and Successors, for writing and entering of Licenses and Passes to be
granted by any Commissioners to any persons going out of this Realm from the
Por^ of B^^stoll, Bewmaw^^ce, Chester and Leuerpoole. And them the said
Patricke Craford and Matthew Birkenhead, the first and present Clerk and
Clerks of us our Heirs and Successors for writing and entering of Licenses and
passes to be granted by any Commissioners to any persons going out of this
Realm from the Ports of B^^st^^l, Bewmaw^^ce, Chester, Leuerpoole and
Workington, to do and execute all things in manner aforesaid to the said Office
belonging or appertaning, or herein mentioned to be thereunto belonging or
appertaining, or by the Officer or Officers before said to be done and
performed, we do hereby for us our Heirs and Successors, nominate, make*
ordain, create, constitute, and appoint by these presents. To have, hold and
enjoy the said Office with the appurtenances to the said Patricke Craford, and
M^thew Birkenhead, and to execute and exercise the same as well by himself or
themselves, or his or their sufficient Deputy or Deputies, during the natural
lives and the na^urall life of the longer liver of them, together with the
foresaid fees, rewards, and sommes of money, in as large and ample manner as we
can or may give, grant or dispose of the same. Requiring, charging, and
commanding by these presents for us, our Heirs and Successors, that no person
or persons whatsoever, other then the said Patricke Craford, and Matthew
Birkenhead, and other then the Officer and Officers by us, our Heirs and
Successors to be nominated, constituted, and appointed according to the tru^
meaning of these presents, and his and their Deputy and Deputies do
entermeddle or deal in the said Office, or do, or execute any thing or things
thereunto belonging, or herein or hereby mentioned or intended by the Officer
or Officers aforesaid to be done, executed or performed upon pain of the
indignation and displeasure of us our Heirs and Successors, and upon such
further pains and penalties as by the Laws and Statutes of this our Realm,
may be inflicted upon them for their disobedience and contempt in that behalf.

Nevertheless, to the intent that We, our Heirs and Successors may be from
time to time satisfied of all proceedings to be had in the premises. Our
further will and pleasure is, and we do hereby for us, our Heirs and
Successors, require and command that as well the said Patricke Craford and
Matthew Birkenhead, as all others who shall succeed them in the said Office,
their Deputy or Deputies shall yearly once in every year return and
certify in one or more book or books, under their hand or hands writing, all
things by them or any of them to be entered or Registered by virtue of this our
grant into the Office of the Remembrancer of the Exchequer of us, our Heirs
and Successors there to be extant upon all occasions. And lastly, We do hereby
for us, our Heirs and Successors, straightly charge and command all and
singular Justices of peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables,
Head-boroughes, and all other the Officers, Ministers and Subjects of us, our
Heirs and Successors whatsoever, to whom it shall or may appertain, to be
ayding, helping, and assisting unto the said Patricke Craford, and Matthew
Birkenhead, and all others which shall succeed them in the said Office, their
Deputy and Deputies and every of them in the execution of the said Office, and
of our will and pleasure herein expressed in all things, according to the true
meaning of these presents, as they tender the pleasure of us our Heirs and
Successors, and will avoid the contrary at their perils. Although express
mention of the certainty of the premises, or of any of them, or of any other
gifts or grants by us or any our Progenitors or Predecessors to the said
Patricke Craford, and Matthew Birkenhead, heretofore made in these presents, is
not made, or any Statute, Act, Ordinance, provision Proclamation or restraint
to the contrary thereof heretofore had, made, ordained or provided, or any
other thing cause or matter whatsoever in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness whereof, We have caused these our Letters to be Patents.

Witness Our selfs at Canbury, the five and twentieth day of May, in the sixth
years of our Reign. Per bre. de priuato Sigillo. Wolse^ey.


