C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation against the making, or using of any Nets or Engines, for taking
of Phesants and Partridges.
HIS Majesty having found the great decay, and scarcity of the game of
Partridge, did lately publish his royal pleasure by Proclamation, for
preventing those ways, and means, that contrary to the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, are frequently practiced, for destroying the same. But now
perceiving that it has not yet produced that reformation which he expected; He
is pleased further to signify His Princely Will, and Commandment in that
behalf; And does therefore hereby straightly charge, and command, That no
person, or persons, of what degree, or quality soever, shall at any time
hereafter presume to make, use, or keep, in his, or their house, or elsewhere,
any Tunnellnet, Hoopnet, Broadnet, Sheetnet, or any other sort of Nets,
Trannels, Lowbels, Engines, Snares, or instruments whatsoever now devised, or
practiced, or which hereafter shall be devised, or practiced, for the getting,
or taking of Phesants, or Partridges, either by day, or by night, upon pain of
His Majesty's high displeasure, and such punishment as His Court of
Star Chamber shall think meet to inflict upon such delinquents, for their
contempt of his Majesty's Commandment in that behalf. And to the end His
Majesty's said royal pleasure herein may be hereafter more duly observed; His
Majesty does hereby expressly require, authorize and command, as well all and
every the Justices of Peace in their several Counties, as the master of His
Majesty's Hawks for the time being, That upon request to them, or any one of
them, from time to time made, by any person, or persons that shall endeavor
the preserving of the said game, or the finding out of the said Nets, Snares,
Engines, setting-Dogs, or other devices for taking of Phesants, or Partridge:
They make forth their Warrants for the searching of any houses, or other
places, where any such Nets, Engines, Snares, setting-Dogs, or other devices
shall be suspected to be had, made, or kept. And that thereupon it shall be
lawful to every such person, or persons, having such Warrant, or Warrants, to
enter into, and make search in any such houses, or places, where he or they
shall understand, or suspect any such Nets, Snares, Engines, setting-Dogs, or
other devices to be so made, used, or kept; And the same there found, to seize,
take, cut in pieces, and utterly destroy at his and their pleasures. And his
Majesty does further straightly charge and command all Majors, Sherifes, Justices
of Peace, Constables, Officers, and ministers of Justice whatsoever, to take
special care for the due execution of His Majesty's said royal Will and
Pleasure herein declared. And lastly, that all such persons as shall be found
offenders in the premises, may be severely punished, for such their contempts,
His Maiestly does expressly charge and require, That upon complaint or
information thereof made to His Attorney general for the time being, they be
proceeded against in the Star Chamber, that they may receive condign
punishment according to their demerits.

Given at Our Palace of Westminster the eleventh day of December, in the tenth
year of Our Reign.
Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and by the assigns of JOHN BILL.

Anno Domini, 1634.


