HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT

By the King. A Proclamation for the better ordering the Transportation of
Clothes, and other Woollen Manufactures into Germany, and the Low Countries.
WHereas We have taken into Our Princely consideration the manifold benefits
that redound to this Kingdom, by the Manufacture of Woollen Clothes, and the
Transportation, and Venting thereof in Foreign parts: And finding, how much
good government, and managing the said Trade in an orderly way, will conduce to
the increase and advancement of the same: We, for the better settling of order
therein for the time to come, have thought fit, with the advice of Our Privy
Council, to declare Our Royal pleasure herein: And do therefore hereby
strictly will and command, that no person or persons, Subject or Subjects, of
this Our Realm of England, shall at any time from, and after the Feast of the
Purification of the blessed Virgin Mary now next coming, Shipp, Transport,
Carry, or Convey, or cause to be Shipped, Transported, Carried, or Conveyed,
either from Our City and Port of London, or from any other City, Town, Port,
Haven, or Creek of this Our Realm of England, by way of Merchandise, any
white Clothes, colored Clothes, Clothes dressed, and died out of the Whites,
Clothes called Spanish Clothes, Bays, Kerseys, Perpetuanoes, Stockings, or any
other English Woollen commodities, unto any the Cities, Towns, or places in
Germany, or the seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands, save only, and except
to the Mart, and Staple-Townes of the Fellowship of Merchant-aduentures in
those parts for the time being, or to one of them.

And further, to the end that the said Trade may be hereafter reduced and
continued in an orderly and well governed course; We do hereby declare Our
Royal pleasure to be; That the Fellowship of Merchant-aduenturers, shall admit
into the freedom of their said Trade, all such Our Subjects dwelling in Our
City of London, and exercised in the profession of Merchandise, and not
Shopkeepers, except they give over their Shops, as shall desire the same, for
the Fines of fifty pounds apeece, if they shall take their Freedom before the
Feast of Saint John the Baptist now next coming: And that the said Fellowship
shall likewise receive, and admit into their Freedom, such Our Subjects of the
Out-ports of this Our Kingdom, as being exercised in the Trade of Merchandise,
shall desire the same, paying them five and twenty pounds apeece for their Fine
or In-come; if they shall take their said Freedom before Michaelmas next: And
that the sons, and servants of such as shall be so admitted, as aforesaid,
shall pay to the said Fellowship at their several admissions thereinto, the
sum of twenty nobles apeece: And that all such persons, as shall not accept,
and come into the said Freedom before the days herein prefixed, shall pay the
double of the Fines before limited respectively, in case they shall afterward
desire to be admitted into the said Fellowship.

And Our further will and pleasure is, and We do hereby command and inhibit
all, and every Our Subjects, not being free of the said Fellowship of
Merchant-aduenturers, that they, or any of them, shall not presume to Trade in
any of the forenamed Commodities into any of the parts, or places of Germany,
or the Low Countries, from, or after the said Feast of the Purification of the
blessed Virgin Mary next ensuing, upon pain of Our high displeasure, and of
such punishments, as Our Court of Star Chamber, whom We especially charge with
the execution of Our Royal pleasure herein, shall think fit to inflict for
such contempts.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the seventh day of December, in the tenth
year of Our Reign of England Scotland, France, and Ireland.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of John Bill. 1634.


