C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation to summon all such as hold of His Majesty by Grand Sergeanty,
Escuage, or Knights Service, to do their Services against the Scots, according
to their Tenures.
WHereas the Kings Majesty intends forthwith in his own person, or by his
Lieutenant, with an Army Royal, to go in war against the Scots (by Gods
assistance) to repress their Treasons and Rebellions: and for that end has
already begun His journey toward the Northern parts of this Kingdom, His
Majesty therefore does hereby require, and straightly charge and command, all
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Baronets, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, and all
others, of what estate or condition soever, who hold of His Majesty by grand
Sergeanty, or hold of His Majesty, or of any of His Wards by Escuage, or
Knights Service (and are thereby bound to go in their own persons, or to find
others for them to go with His Majesty, or His Lieutenant in the said war,
against the said Rebels) That they take knowledge of this His Majesty's public
Summons, and with all meet expedition after the publishing hereof, and at the
farthest before the twentieth day of September next, be ready furnished with
Horse and Arms for performance of their said Services, at the Town of New
castle upon Tyne, or at such other place where His Majesty's said Army shall
then reside; from thence to go with His Majesty, or His Lieutenant, in War
against the said Rebels: And hereof they may not fail, under the penalties of
the Law, and as they tender the Service of His Majesty, and the safety of the
Kingdom.

Nevertheless, for such as do so hold of His Majesty, or of His said Wards,
who upon just occasions shall seek to be spared and dispensed with, for their
attendance and service in this expedition, His Majesty is graciously pleased,
and has authorized the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of His Exchequer
for the time being, or any two or more of them (whereof the Lord Treasurer, or
Chancellor to be one) upon Fines to His Majesty's use, to admit to
Composition, and Compound with such of those Tenants, as they shall think fit
to be spared and dispensed with for this present Service, whom His Majesty
does hereby declare shall be freed and exempted accordingly: So as they shall
make their said Compositions before the said twentieth day of September next,
whereby His Majesty may be provided of other meet persons in their turn to
perform the said Services.

Given at the Court at Whitehall the twentieth day of August, in the sixteenth
year of His Majesty's Reign.
Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1640.


