royal blazon or coat of arms DIEV ET MON DROIT


CHARLES by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
defender of the Faith, etc.
To all and singular Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deanes, and their
Officials, Parsons, Uicars, Curates, and to all Spiritual persons; And also to
all Justices of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Constables, Churchwardens,
and Headboroughes; And to all Officers of Cities, Boroughes, and Towns
corporate; And to all other Our Officers, Ministers, and Subjects whatsoever
they be, as well within Liberties, as without, to whom these presents shall
come, greeting.
Whereas we are credibly given to understand, that by reason of grievous
visitation in this time of the great Contagion of the Plague amongst Our poor
Subjects, in the Cities of London and Westminster, and Borough of Southwarke,
and parts adjoining, the inhabitants of some Parishes and places are brought
into such distress, as that the Parishes are not able of themselves to support
and relieve the poor of the said Parishes, and to provide for the infected,
and for the necessary watching and warding of the houses which are shut; And
albeit, the Justices of Peace have done their best endeauours, by taxing the
Parishes and Towns adjacent, to supply these wants and necessities; yet so
many difficulties have occurred, that although for the time past they have
provided in some competent measure, yet by the continuance of the Infection,
they find the burden to grow every day more and more heavy: Whereof Our self
being informed on the twenty fifth of September last, have with the advice of
Our Council, thought fit, that for the present, a Collection should be made of
the charitable Beneuolences of well disposed people, within the Cities of
London and Westminster, and in the Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, and
Borough of Southwarke, and to the Benevolence of all Cities, Towns Corporate,
Villages, and Privileged places within the said Counties, not extending the
same further for the present; because it is hoped, that by Gods goodness, the
Infection will abate (the Winter season, and cold weather now approaching)
before it shall be needful to pray the aid of more remote Counties; Not
doubting, but that all good Christians, duly considering the misery, and
pitiful calamity, which so many poor distressed and dejected Christians do
undergo by such an inevitable and grievous visitation, will in their own
pious commiseration of their great extremity, be herewith moved, out of the
bowels of compassion, and forward, as feeling members one of another miseries,
freely and willingly to extend their liberal Contributions toward the relief
and comfort of a number of wretched creatures in this their great necessity.
KNOW YE therefore, that We well weighing the woeful and lamentable estates of
Our said poor and distressed Subjects, and commiserating the same, of Our
especial grace, and Princely compassion do order and grant, that a Collection
be made of the charitable devotions, and liberalities of all Our loving
Subjects, within the several Counties, Cities, and Towns Corporate above
named, for, and toward the relief and succor of the said poor inhabitants
of London, and other Infected places adjoining: Which Collection, We will,
grant, appoint, and require, shall be ordered in manner and form following:
That is to say, We will, grant, appoint, and require all and singular Parsons,
Vicars, Curats of the several Churches and Chapels within the said Counties,
Precincts, Cities, Villages, and Towns Corporate above mentioned, with all
possible speed to publish, and recommend this Collection to the charity of all
well disposed persons within their Churches and Precincts, with an especial
exhortation to the people, for the better stirring up of their liberal and
extraordinary Contributions in so good and charitable a deed. And We will and
command, that you the Churchwardens of every Parish within the Counties,
Cities, and places aforesaid respectively, to take a care of the furtherance of
the said Collection: And if any householder, or parishioner be absent when these
Our Letters Patents shall be there published, you the said Churchwardens, to
go to the habitations of such persons, and to ask their charity for the
purpose aforesaid: And what shall be by you so gathered, to be by the Minister
and your selves, endorsed on the backside of these Our Letters Patens, or the
Copy or Brief hereof, in words at length, and not in figures, with your names
subscribed thereunto: And the sum and sums of money so gathered and
endorsed, to be paid over as is hereafter mentioned. And lastly, Our will and
pleasure is, that the moneys Collected in Surrey, be paid over to the hands of
Sir Thomas Grymes Knight, and Edward Bromefield Esquire, Justices of Peace in
the said County of Surrey, for the present relief of Southwarke, Newington and
other places adjacent as stand in need by reason of the Infection. And the
moneys collected in Middlesex, to be paid to the hands of Thomas Gardener
Esquier, Recorder of London, and to John Herne Esquier, two of the Justices of
Peace for the County of Middlesex, or to either of them, for the present
relief of Westminster, and other places in Middlesex adjacent, or near to the
Cities of London and Westminster, as stand in need by reason of the Infection.
And the moneys Collected in London, to be paid to the Lord Mayor there for the
time being, and by him to be delivered ever, as there shall be any remainder at
the end of his year, to his Successor: Which moneys so Collected in London,
to be, upon conference between the said Lord Mayor and Recorder of the City of
London, disposed as shall be most needful, not only for the relief of such
places, as by reason of the Infection, do, or shall stand in need, in London,
Westminster, and Middlesex, but also as occasion and necessity shall require,
shall out of the same add thereunto to the aid and relief of Southwarke,
Newington, and other places in Surrey, in manner and form before recited,
according to the true meaning of Our gracious intention by these Our Letters
Patents, Any Statute, Law, Ordinance, or provision heretofore made to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. IN WITNESS whereof We have caused these
Our Letters to be made Patents, for the space of four whole months, next
after the date hereof to endure.

WITNESS Our self at Copt-hall, the seventh day of October, in the twelfth
year of Our Reign. Dawe.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1636.


