C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation commanding the repair of all Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, and
others, unto their Houses and Lands in the Northern parts, by the first day of
March next, and there to abide for the service and safeguard of their Country.
THe Kings most excellent Majesty understanding that diverse of the Nobility,
Gentry, and others of the Northern parts, who have houses and lands there, are
now abiding in and about London, and in other Southern parts of this Kingdom;
And holding it necessary, that (according to the Laws and Customs of the Realm,
and constant practice of all former ages in times of danger) they should at
this present be required to repair to, and reside upon their Lands in those
parts; Is pleased (out of His Princely care to provide for the safety of His
Kingdom and people) to declare His Royal pleasure herein: And therefore His
Majesty (with the advice of His Privy Council) does hereby straightly charge
and command, That all Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, Knights, Gentlemen, and
others whatsoever, who have Houses and Lands in the Counties of York,
Lancaster, Chester, Stafford, Leicester, Darby, Rutland, Lincoln, Nottingham,
Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, and Bishopric of Duresme, or in the
Counties and Towns of Kingston upon Hull, and New Castle upon Tyne, or any of
them (except such of the Nobility as shall attend His Majesty's Person in
obedience to His Letters, and such Officers, and others, who are likewise to
attend His Majesty's Person and other special services) Do forthwith and
without delay, with their Families and Retinue, repair to their several Houses
and Lands there, so as they fail not to be there resident and abiding in their
persons, with their said Families and Retinue, well arrayed and furnished with
good and sufficient Arms, according to their several degrees and qualities,
for the defense and safeguard of those parts, by or before the first day of
March now next coming at the furthest, and there during His Majesty's pleasure
so to continue, to attend the service and defense of their Country, upon pain
of His Majesty's most heavy indignation and displeasure, and of such further
censure and punishment as may be by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm
inflicted upon them for their disobedience and contempt or neglect of this His
Royal Commandment, wherein the public is concerned: Whereof as His Majesty
intends to take a strict and severe account, so he does hereby require and
command as well the Lords and others of His Privy Council, as all other His
Officers and Ministers whom it shall any way concern, to take order that all
such as shall offend, may receive condign punishment without toleration or
connivence.

Given at the Court at White Hall the nine and twentieth day of January, in the
fourteenth year of His Majesty's Reign.
Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1638.


