DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King.
A Proclamation concerning Tobacco.
HAving been heretofore informed, that through the immoderate taking of Tobacco,
provoking the takers thereof to excessive Drinking and other inconveniences,
the health of many of Our Subjects had been much impaired, which had the rather
been occasioned for that no restraint had been made of the number, nor regard
had of the quality of those that sold Tobacco by Retail but persons of the
meanest condition had promiscuously used to Retail the same, keeping no order
or assize therein: Whereupon We out of Our Princely care, to repress all such
excesses, and to prevent such future inconveniences as might occur thereby, did
by the advice of the Lords and others of Our Privy Council, resolve to
regulate the ungoverned Selling and Retailing of Tobacco, and to reduce the
same into some good order; and that none but men of sufficiency, and such as
should bring certificate of their meetnesse, should from thenceforth be
permitted to sell or utter Tobacco by Retail, and those only in certain fit
places, and to a certain number in every such place, which places and number We
did by the like advice of the Lords, and others of Our Privy Council, appoint
accordingly: And afterward by Our Proclamation, dated the thirteenth day of
March, in the ninth year of Our Reign, for the reasons therein expressed We did
straightly charge and command, that none should from thenceforth presume to sell
or utter Tobacco by Retail, until they should have obtained Our License in
that behalf.

In conformity whereunto, diverse of Our loving Subjects have since taken
several and respective Licenses under Our great Seal of England, to sell and
utter foreign Tobacco by Retail, in such respective Cities, Towns, and places,
as in the same Licenses are expressed, rendering to Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, such Rents as in and by Our said Licenses are respectively reserved
in that behalf: By which means not only the before mentioned excesses have in
some good measure been repressed, and many inconveniences prevented, but also
some small addition and improvement has been made to Our Revenue.

But notwithstanding the Premises, diverse ill affected persons, endeavoring
for some small advantage to themselves, to bring the Retailing of Tobacco to
that confused and ungoverned liberty it had before, have in contempt of Our
said Proclamation presumed without Our License to vent and utter Tobacco by
Retail, as well in London, and the parts adjacent, as in diverse other Cities,
Towns, and places of this Our Realm, thereby discouraging, and in some sort
disabling Our said Subjects, who have taken Our Licenses, as aforesaid, to pay
their Rents thereon reserved, and likewise dis*heartning others (that is to
say) some from suing forth the Licenses for which they have respectively
contracted, others from contracting with Our Agents appointed in that behalf;
and the better to color their practices, have spread abroad, especially within
Our City of London, and the parts adjacent, false reports and rumors, as if We
intended to desist from Our aforesaid course of reformation: which their
practices and bold attempts We have just cause to take in ill part, and not to
suffer the same to pass unpunished.

Yet because some of Our Subjects, through the false reports and rumors so
spread abroad, as aforesaid, may make some doubt of Our Royal intention in the
Premises, therefore We have thought meet hereby to declare and publish to all
Our people, that We will not leave unfinished so great a work begun with such
advice and care, and so much tending to their health and welfare, neither will
We suffer Our Revenue in any part thereof by the wilful opposition of some few
refractory persons to be impaired.

And therefore We do hereby straightly charge and command all Our loving
Subjectts, that none of them do from henceforth presume directly or indirectly,
to sell, utter, or deliver any Tobacco by Retail, in any place or places within
Our said Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Barwick, or any of
them, without Our special License under Our great Seal of England, to be
obtained in that behalf.

And We do likewise will and command all Pedlers who wander up and down, not
making their constant abode in any one place, and all and every other
Interloper or Interlopers whatsoever, that none of them do from henceforth
directly or indirectly, sell, utter, or deliver any Tobacco by Retail, or under
color or pretext of giving Tobacco, do by themselves, or any other, take or
receive any recompense for the same.

And whereas diverse of Our Subjects, who are licensed to retail Tobacco in
their own houses only, do notwithstanding retail Tobacco in Fairs and Markets
abroad, to the prejudice of such persons as are licensed to sell Tobacco in
those places, Our will and pleasure is, and We do hereby straightly charge and
command that from henceforth they and every of them do forbear to sell, utter,
or deliver Tobacco by Retail, in any other places then according to the purport
and true meaning of their respective Licenses under Our great Seal.

And whereas We are informed that much English Tobacco, which through the
coldness of the climate and unaptnesse of the soil not coming to perfect
maturity, is altogether unwholesome to be taken, and other Tobacco adulterate
and mixed with rotten fruits and other corrupt ingredients is daily sold and
uttered to Our people; We do hereby charge and straightly command, that no person
whatsoever within Our said Kingdom of England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales,
and Town of Barwick, or any of them, do from henceforth presume to buy, sell,
or utter, directly or indirectly, any Tobacco of the growth of Our Kingdoms of
England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Barwick, Islands of Jersey,
Garnsey, and Man, or any of them, or any mixed or adulterate Tobacco
whatsoever: And the better to prevent the great abuse offered and done to Our
loving Subjects in the sale of English Tobacco, We do also straightly charge and
command that no person whatsoever do at any time hereafter plant, or cause to
be planted, any Tobacco within Our Kingdoms of England and Ireland, or either
of them, or within Our Dominion of Wales, or Town of Barwick, or within Our
Islands of Jersey, Garnsey and Man, or any of them, and that all Tobacco
already planted, and now growing there, be presently displanted and utterly
destroyed.

And to the end the doing hereof be not in any wise omitted or neglected, We do
charge and command all Constables, Tithingmen, Headboroughs, and other Officers
within their several limits and jurisdictions, carefully to see the same
executed accordingly.

And further, We do will and command all Justices of Peace, Majors, Sheriffs,
and other principal Officers in their several places, within the compass of
their several jurisdictions and authorities, upon complaint to them made, to
cause the same to be duly performed without partiality, as they and every of
them will answer their contempts at their perils.

And We do further will and command, that no Tobacco whatsoever be from
henceforth imported, landed, or unladed to, in, or at any other Port, Haven,
Creek, or place within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Port and
Town of Barwick, or any of them, then to, in, or at Our Port of London, without
special warrant to be obtained from Our Lord high Treasurer of England for the
time being in that behalf: And that all Merchants, Masters, and Owners of any
Ship or Ships, and other persons whatsoever within or under Our obedience, do
take notice of Our Royal command and pleasure herein, and do carefully and
duly observe the same accordingly.

And We do hereby straightly charge and command all Our Subjects to yield their
due obedience in all and singular the Premises, as they tender Our pleasure,
and will answer the contrary at their peril.

Given at Our Court at White Hall the five and twentieth day of March, in the
fourteenth year of Our Reign. God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1638.


