ARTICLES CONCLVDED at Paris the xxiiij. of February 1605. stylo Angliae: By
Commissioners of the High and Mighty Kings, James by the grace of God King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. And Henry the
Fourth most Christian French King, and King of Nauar, for the more commodious
intercourse in traffic between their Subjects.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most excellent
Majesty. 1606.

blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family, with a crown above
COMMISSIONERS
For the King of Great Britain, etc. Sir THOMAS PARRY Knight, Ambassador
resident in France.
For the French King: Andrew Heralt Sieur of Maisse. Iean de Thumery Seiur of
Boyssise.

ARTICLES CONCLVDED AT PARIS the xxiiij. of February 1605, by Commissioners of
the High and Mighty Kings, JAMES by the grace of God King of GREAT BRITAIN,
FRANCE and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith, etc. And HENRY the Fourth most
Christian French King, and King of NAVAR, for the more commodious intercourse
in Traffic between their subjects.
FIRST, It is agreed, and concluded, that the Conuentions or Articles contained
in this treaty shall not be taken or reputed any way to derogate from the
former Treaties; But that the said Treaties shall remain, and be in their
first force and virtue, except in those points only in which they are by this
present Treaty altered.

2 And for the better increasing, and confirming of the Amity and good
Intelligence between the said Princes; It is further agreed, that in all the
Provinces, Cities, Ports, and Havens within either of their Kingdoms and
Dominions, commandment shall be given, That the subjects of the one and the
other Princes respectively be kindly and lovingly entreated, and be suffered
freely and safely to exercise Merchandise, and to traffic the one with the
other without any offense or molestation; and that they be not hereafter for
any cause or occasion whatsoever unjustly vexed contrary to the Laws and
Customs of the place unto which they shall resort, or where they shall abide:
and the Magistrates and Officers on either part shall be enioined to see that
all the premises be duly observed and executed, as every one of them (where
the contrary shall be suffered) will answer in his own proper name, and as a
private person, to the party grieved, his expenses, damages and interest.

3 It is likewise agreed and accorded, That all Customs, Taxes, and
Impositions which now in either Kingdoms are raised, to the use of the Kings,
by their Customers, Farmers, and Deputies (as the conditions of affairs at
this time requires) shall be continued prouisionally until the same may be
either abolished or moderated; which both the said Princes will seriously
endeavor to effect, as their estates shall permit. And to the end that in the
mean time the said Taxes, Customs, and Impositions may on both parts be
better known, as also that it may appear, what is to be paid of right, there
shall be Tables made and set up in public places, as well at ROAN, and other
Cities in FRANCE, as at LONDON, and other Cities of GREAT BRITAIN where need
shall be, that thereunto recourse may be had, when question or doubt shall
arise of any of the said Taxes, Customs, and Impositions in either of the
kingdoms.

4 As touching Impositions and Taxes, which are required in some Cities to the
particular use and commodity of the said Cities, under pretext of Grants to
them made by the Kings and Princes; It is agreed and accorded, that diligent
inquiry shall be had thereof, and that the Majors and Escheuins or Sheriffs
of the Cities of ROAN, CANE, and BVRDEAVX, and of others to whom it may
appertain, shall forthwith deliver up unto the Council of the French King
their said Letters and Grants, by pretense whereof they raise and continue
such Taxes and Impositions, to the end that the same being seen and viewed,
may be cancelled, and made void, if they have not been made orderly and upon
just causes; and that in the mean season the said Majors and Escheuins or
Sheriffs shall be prohibited, to suffer to be taken either more then is due,
or any thing otherwise than it ought by the said Grants; neither that they do
any way exceed the conditions contained and prescribed in them, upon pain of
death, and the payment also of four fold for that which shall be so exacted.
The like whereof is to be performed in the City of LONDON, and in other the
Cities of GREAT BRITAIN, if it be found that any such thing has been exacted
there.

5 It is also agreed that the Merchants of FRANCE traffiquing into ENGLAND
shall not be constrained hereafter to give other Caution or Bond than
Iuratorie Caution, or an oath for the sale of their Merchandises, or for the
converting or employing of the moneys growing thereupon into other wares;
neither shall they be driven for obtaining of further respite, or for their
discharges to other cost or expense in that behalf.

6 Also it is agreed that the French Ships may have free access to the Keys
of the City of LONDON and other ports and havens of GREAT BRITAIN, and being
there, may lade and unlade their Merchandise, and let their ships to freight
with like liberty, and freedom as the English do in FRANCE, without constraint
to unload their Ships or Vessels into others, or without other let or
impediment whatsoever: and also that in all other things like liberty, and
equality of trade shall be kept, and observed on both parts as much as may be.

7 And because it is impossible to set down in writing a sufficient provision
and remedy to every particular grieuance, or difficulty which may arise in
commerce, and namely in respect of the qualities of Merchandise, which are to
be transported to and from the one and other kingdom, as also in respect of
the abuse which by the malice, negligence or want of skill of Traders sometimes
may be committed; It is agreed that in the City of ROAN there shall be named
and appointed by the Christian King two Merchants of good credit and
reputation, being skillful and of good experience, which with two English
Merchants of good condition and quality to be named by the Ambassador of the
Kings Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN etc. residing for the time in FRANCE, shall
jointly receive, and hear the complaints and controversies of the Merchants of
GREAT BRITAIN that may arise by the Commerce, and traffic either at ROAN or
other Ports and Havens of that Province, and the same they shall forthwith
according to equity and right (having a respect to this present Treaty)
speedily finish and compose: as also the Kings Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN is to
name two English Merchants of good reputation and experience, which likewise
taking unto them two French Merchants of like quality to be named by the
Ambassador of the French King residing in ENGLAND for the time shall do the
like, and shall provide speedy remedy to all the complaints which may happen by
reason of the said traffic or co^merce. And if these four cannot agree, then
by mutual assent between themselves they are to choose and take unto them a
fifth, the same being in ROAN a French man; in LONDON an Englishman; and so by
the consent of the greater number of them the judgment shall pass. And to the
end that this office may with better effect be executed, there shall be given
unto them on either part Commissions with necessary authority to perform the
same: And in case any great difficulty do arise, so as it shall be convenient
or necessary to certify either of the Princes thereof, the said Merchants
named and appointed in manner aforesaid shall take care to advertise the
Council of the Princes respectively thereof, to the end that they may give
speedy remedy without loss of time and great charge of expenses. The like
order shall be established and observed at BVRDEAVX and CANE and other places
of Mart, and Market, and Cities in FRANCE, and the same also shall be observed
in the Cities of GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND, that so those Persons which shall
be named and appointed to undergo these Offices, in the said places may
according to the aforesaid form determine of the complaints and difficulties
which may happen by reason of Commerce and traffic between them.

8 And for the better accommodating of the said Merchants trading in the
kingdoms and Dominions of either of the said Princes, and for easing the
labors and charges of them which are appointed to this Office, so far forth
as may be, it is agreed that the said Merchants as well English as French unto
whom this authority shall be committed, which hereafter shall be called
Conseruators of Commerce and traffic, shall be named and appointed from year
to year, and shall take oathe in FRANCE before the Prior and Consuls as well
in the City of ROAN as in the other Cities in which such Conseruators ought to
be appointed, and likewise in LONDON, and in other Cities of GREAT BRITAIN
and IRELAND where need shall be, that is to say, that they shall well and
faithfully perform this Office and authority committed unto them, and that
during the time aforesaid so often as occasion shall require they shall
diligently intend this business, and that they shall therein afford their
labor freely, requiring nothing of the subjects for that cause, except where
the party shall desire a copy of the Acts in writing, in which case the
taxation of the said writings shall be made by the said Conseruators
moderately and according to reason.

9 Moreover it is agreed that all excessive fees, wages, charges and smaller
duties and paiments, which Officers and Ministers of diverse places do now exact
of the said Merchants, namely Searchers and Waiters, Laders and Vnladers,
Packers, Porters, and generally all other such kind of Officers, and public
Ministers shall be ordered and moderated by the said Conseruators, and a
reasonable rate of their duties shall be set down which shall be presented to
the Kings Council in either of the kingdoms, and the same by them being seen
and confirmed, shall afterward be published and set up in writing severally in
Towns and places accustomed, to the end that the Merchants on either part may
be certain and assured of that which ought by them in such case to be paid.

10 Also the said Conseruators shall inform themselves particularly of the
liberties, and privileges which are pretended, and challenged by some Cities
to be due unto them and their Inhabitants in the Kingdoms and Dominions of
either of the Princes, and they shall likewise inform them of the commodity
and incommoditie thereof, which being done they are to advertise their Princes
on both parts, that by the advice of their Council the same may be moderated
according to equity, and reduced to the ancient uses of the said places and
Cities.

11 The said Conseruators shall also have charge to look unto the waights and
measures which are in the towns of either of the kingdoms, to the end that
there be no fraud, or abuse suffered therein by negligence or deceit of
inferior Ministers, and as for the Merchandises brought out of either of the
said Princes Kingdoms, or from other places, they shall determine and order,
which of them are subject to visitation, and are to be accounted as lawful or
unlawful, and which not.

12 And forasmuch as the principal complaint made by the Ambassador of his
Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN etc. and by the Merchants of ENGLAND is against an
Arrest or Judgment given in the Council of the French King, bearing date the
one and twentieth of April, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six
hundred, containing an Order touching the Workmanship and quality of Woollen
clothes to be brought into FRANCE by the English Merchants, especially into the
Provinces of NORMANDY, the lesser BRITAIN, and GVVYEN; the said French King
being desirous to give contentment unto his good brother the King of GREAT
BRITAIN, at the instance and motion made for the same diverse times by his
Ambassador, and being willing also to further the co^merce of Draperie or
Woollen Clothes, (so as no detriment may thereby redound unto the public) is
pleased that the said Arrest and Judgment be revoked, and does himself revoke
and abrogate the same, and from henceforth discharges the Merchants of
ENGLAND from the confiscation or forfeiture, imposed as well in the same
Arrest, as in all other Arrests and Ordinances made for, and concerning the
said Draperie or Woollen Clothes, and does permit and grant unto the said
Merchants of ENGLAND, that if any Woollen Clothes hereafter being faulty, and
ill made, be brought by them or any of them, to be vented in FRANCE, that they
may notwithstanding carry the same back again out of FRANCE. And forasmuch
as the said English Merchants, upon the difference, which may grow for the
quality and good or ill condition of their Clothes, be much troubled and
hindered through loss of time, and the staying of their Clothes to their
damages; It is agreed, and accorded, that the said Conseruators of commerce
deputed in manner aforesaid, if at any time such complaint be brought unto them,
shall upon due consideration of the making, and of their value, and of the
price of the Clothes judge and determine which of them are to be accounted
lawful and saleable, and which are to be rejected and sent back, as fault
and ill made: in which case, the said French King does commit the whole
consideration, and determination thereof, to the honesty, and conscience of
the Conseruators, and will ratify and allow what they shall do therein, and
touching those Clothes which shall be adjudged to be sent back as faulty,
nothing shall be hereafter required by his Officers for transporting of them
forth of the kingdom.

13 It is further accorded, and concluded, That the liberty and freedom of
commerce in transporting of whatsoever Merchandises, whether they be
Manufactures or Wares unwrought, shall according to this Treaty and other
precedent Treaties be maintained in both the Kingdoms, and that no restraint
or prohibitions shall be made on either side to the contrary: and if any have
been made of late, the same shall be revoked, except notwithstanding those
Merchandises which have been in former times prohibited to be brought and
transported forth by special Laws and Statutes in either of the Kingdoms:
All which kind of Merchandises, that they may be certainly known, are to be
comprehended in writing, and delivered to the said Conseruators of commerce on
either side, and publicly set up in manner aforesaid.

14 Moreover it is agreed, That if there do happen any Ship to go from GREAT
BRITAIN into FRANCE, or from FRANCE into GREAT BRITAIN, laden with greater
quantity of Merchandise, than for which the Custom and other duties has
been justly paid; in that case the said quantity only shall be subject to
confiscation, and the residue of the said Merchandises shall be freely
discharged: Notwithstanding if amongst the said Merchandises there be found any
Wares which by the Statutes and Ordinances of the Kingdom from whence they are
to be transported, may not lawfully be carried; in that case, the Ordinances
and Statutes of the said Kingdom are to be observed.

15 Likewise it is agreed and accorded, That the Merchants and Inhabitants of
the Islands of GERNESEY and IERSEY, may freely and safely trade and traffic in
the Kingdom of FRANCE, and in the parts thereof, and that they shall have and
enjoy the like privileges and liberties there, as the Subjects of the French
King do enjoy in the said Islands, paying notwithstanding all duties in every
place appertaining unto the Princes.

16 The Subjects of his Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN, shall receive in all their
causes and suits, ready and expedite justice in FRANCE, and the Officers and
Ministers of the Ports of NORMANDY, the lesser BRITAIN and GVYEN, shall be
charged kindly and friendly to entertain them. And if any matter of greater
moment and importance do arise, the French King inioineth his Council to take
upon them the knowledge thereof themselves, or to delegate or appoint Judges
indifferent, and not suspected; As also the like order shall be taken by his
Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN toward the Subjects of the French King, abiding
within his Kingdom, and requiring justice there.

17 The Subjects of the French King entering into the Ports of the Kingdom of
GREAT BRITAIN, shall not heereeafter pay any thing more for Cockets, then the
natural Subjects of the said Kingdom are accustomed to pay.

18 And if it shall happen that any of the Subjects of either of the said
Kings, by storm or tempest, or for fear of the enemy, shall be compelled to
cast anckor in any Port, Road or Haven, appertaining to the said Kings
respectively, they shall not be urged to pay any Custom, or other duties,
either at their entrance or departure, for their Merchandises, so casually
brought in. Provided always, that the Master of the Ships, or the Factor of
the Merchants, do the same day wherein any such Vessel shall so arrive, or
the next day after the arrival, certify the Officers or Customers of the
place, to whom it appertains, the true occasion of the said arrival, and
also that they (being required) shall exhibit their Charter parties, and be
enioined to put forth, and depart from thence so soon as the wind may serve
them, or the peril be removed: And if it happen whilst they so remain in
the Port, that upon necessity they be compelled to sell their Merchandises,
or any part thereof; then they shall pay to the Customer or Farmers, such
duties as are to be answered for, to the quantity only of that which they
have sold; and it shall be lawful unto them freely to transport the rest.

19 And the French King being desirous to make it more appear how greatly he
esteems of the amity of his good Brother, the Kings Majesty of GREAT
BRITAIN, and his willingness, lovingly and favorably to entreat his said
Brothers Subjects, abiding and trading in FRANCE, and how much he favors
this mutual intercourse and Commerce between their Subjects, although the
right of Aubeyne is woorthilie accounted amongst the most ancient privileges
and prerogatives of the Kingdom; nevertheless, he is pleased to permit and
grant to the English Merchants and their Procurators or Factors, and to all
other the Subjects of the Kings Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN, full liberty and
right to make their last Wills and Testaments, accordingly; and according to
their good liking, to dispose as well living as dying, of their Merchandise,
Moneys, Debts and of all other their mooueable goods, which either they have or
ought to have, in any the Dominions and places of the said French King; and
also that whether they die Testate or Intestate, their Heirs may have and
enjoy their goods, etc. according to the Laws of ENGLAND, so as hereafter
their goods shall not be held confiscable by the right of Aubeyne.

20 Likewise it is agreed, and accorded, That the Subjects of the French King
may in the same manner freely make their Testaments, and according to their
pleasure may either at their death, or while they live, dispose of their goods
in ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, and in other the Lands and Dominions of the
Kings Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN; And that after their deaths, whether they
shall die Testate or Intestate, their Heirs either named in the Testament or
otherwise succeeding by Law, shall according to the Laws of FRANCE have and
enjoy the same goods. Provided nevertheless, that the Wills and Testaments or
Rights to succeed ab Intestato, as well of the Subjects of the French King as
also of the Kings Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN, shall be lawfully provided in
the place where the parties deceased and died, whether the same shall happen in
FRANCE, or in the Kingdom of GREAT BRITAIN, or elsewhere within either of
their Kingdoms.

21 And until such time that justice may be done in causes of Piracie and
Depredation pretended to have been committed on the one side or other, for
which order shall be taken with as much expedition as may be; It is concluded,
that all Letters of Mart and Reprisals, which by either of the Princes before
this time have been granted, shall be suspended; and that the same Reprisals
shall not hereafter be executed, until such time as it shall so be determined
by decree of the Council of the one and other Prince; and that hereafter no
such Letters of Mart or Reprisals shall be granted by any of the said Princes,
but that the Ambassador resident in either places shall be first advertised
thereof. And also after the same have been deliberatly considered on in the
Council of the Princes from whom they are to be obtained, and confirmed by the
Kings Great seal, and together with all other solemnities observed, which are
requisite in such cases.

22 It is agreed further, and accorded, That this Treaty shall always be
understood according to the propriety and true signification of the words
therein contained; and that it shall admit no such interpretation as may in any
part let or hinder the force and effect thereof expressed in the plain and
simple words; but that all subtilitie of understanding, which for the most part
subuerteth the true meaning of the parties being taken away, that which in good
faith is done and expressed in this Treaty shall fully and sincerely be
accomplished and performed.

23 Last of all, it is agreed and accorded, That this present Treaty shall in
all things be firmly and sincerely kept during the continuance of the League
and Amity between the said Princes and their Successors.

24 In all and singular which Articles before in this Treaty expressed, and
between us the forenamed Deputies couenanted and concluded by virtue of our
Commissions, and by the authority therein to us given, whatsoever has been
done, the same wholly shall be understood to be submitted to the will and
pleasure of their Majesty's. And we the Deputies of the French King have
promised, and do promise, That his Majesty will ratify and approve, and by
his authority will confirm all and singular the said Articles by Letters
patents signed with his hand, and sealed with his Great seal; and that the
same shall be verified and approved in the Courts of his Kingdom, where, and
when need shall require: The which Letters of Confirmation and Ratification the
said French King shall cause to be given and delivered in sufficient and
auailable form, within the space of three months from the day of these
presents, unto the Ambassador of the Kings Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN,
residing with his Christian Majesty in FRANCE, he having sufficient power and
authority to receive the same. In like manner, we the aforesaid Ambassador and
Deputy of the Kings Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN have also promised, and do
promise, That whatsoever the said French King is before bound in this Article
to accomplish and perform on his part, the Kings Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN,
etc. will on his part likewise do and perform; and will also ratify and
approve this present Treaty within that same time, and in the same form and
manner as it is promised, if it so seem good and acceptable to their Majesty's
on both parts.

In testimony of all which things, and of every one of them, we the
Commissioners deputed, have every one of us to this present Treaty subscribed
with our own hands; and by putting thereunto our seals have confirmed the
same. Given at PARIS the xxiiij. day of February, in the year from the
Nativity of our Lord God 1605.


