ANNO XVI. Caroli Regis.
An Act for the preventing of Inconveniences happening by the long intermission
of Parliaments.
WHereas by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, the Parliament ought to be
holden at least once every year, for the redress of Grievances, but the
appointment of the time and place for the holding thereof has always
belonged, as it ought, to His Majesty and His Royal Progenitors. And whereas
it is by experience found, that the not holding of Parliaments accordingly has
produced sundry and great mischiefs and inconveniences to the Kings Majesty,
the Church and Commonwealth, for the prevention of the like mischiefs and
inconveniences in time to come;

Be it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, with the consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, that the said Laws and Statutes be from henceforth duly kept and
observed, and your Majesty's loyal and obedient Subjects, in this present
Parliament now assembled, do humbly pray, that it be enacted; And be it enacted
accordingly, by the authority of this present Parliament; That in case there be
not a Parliament summoned by Writ under the great Seal of England, and
assembled and held before the tenth day of September, which shall be in the
third year next after the last day of the last meeting and sitting in this
present Parliament, the beginning of the first year to be accounted from the
said last day of the last meeting and sitting in Parliament, and so from time
to time, and in all times hereafter, if there shall not be a Parliament
assembled and held before the tenth day of September, which shall be in the
third year next after the last day of the last meeting and sitting in
Parliament before that time assembled and held; the beginning of the first year
to be accounted from the said last day of the last meeting and sitting in
Parliament; That then in every such case as aforesaid, the Parliament shall
assemble and be held in the usual place at Westminster, in such manner, and by
such means only as is hereafter in this present Act declared and enacted, and
not otherwise, on the second Monday which shall be in the month of November
then next ensuing. And in case this present Parliament now assembled and held,
or any other Parliament which shall at any time hereafter be assembled and held
by Writ under the great Seal of England: or in case any Parliament shall be
assembled and held by authority of this present Act: and such Parliaments, or
any of them shall be Prorogued or Adjourned, or continued by Prorogation or
Adjournment, until the tenth day of September, which shall be in the third year
next after the last day of the last meeting and sitting in Parliament, to be
accounted as aforesaid, that then in every such case, every such Parliament so
Prorogued or Adjourned, or so continued by Prorogation or Adjournment, as
aforesaid, shall from the said tenth day of September be thenceforth clearly
and absolutely dissolved, and the Lord Chancellor of England, the Lord Keeper
of the great Seal of England, and every Commissioner and Commissioners for the
keeping of the great Seal of England for the time being, shall within six days
after the said tenth day of September, in every such third year as aforesaid,
in due form of Law, and without any further Warrant or Direction from his
Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, Seal, issue forth, and send abroad several
and respective Writs to the several and respective Peers of this Realm,
commanding every such Peer that he personally be at the Parliament to be heid
at Westminster, on the second Monday which shall be in November next following
the said tenth day of September, then and there to treat concerning the high
and urgent Affairs concerning His Majesty, the State, and derence of the
Kingdom and Church of England: and shall also Seal, issue forth, and send
abroad several and respective Writs to the several and respective Sheriffs of
the several and respective Counties, Cities, and Boroughs of England and Wales,
and to the Constable of the Castle of Dover, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports,
or his Lieutenant for the time being, and to the Major and Bailiffs of Barwick
upon Tweed, and to all and every other Officers and Persons to whom Writs have
used to be directed, for the electing of the Knights, Citizens, Barons, and
Burgesses, of and for the said Counties, Cities, Cinque Ports, and Boroughs of
England and Wales, respectively, in the accustomed form to appear and serve in
Parliament to be held at Westminster on the said second Monday, which shall be
in November aforesaid, which said Peers, after the said Writs received, and
which said Knights, Citizens, Barons, and Burgesses chosen by virtue of the
said Writs, shall then and there appear and serve in Parliament accordingly.
And the said Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, Commissioner and Commissioners
aforesaid, shall respectively take a solemn Oath upon the holy Evangelist for
the due issuing of Writs, according to the tenor of this Act, viz. in haec
verba.

YOu shall swear, that you shall truly and faithfully issue forth and send
abroad all Writs of Summons to Parliament for both Houses, at such time and in
such manner as is expressed and enjoined by an Act of Parliament, Entitled, An
Act for the preventing of inconveniences happening by the long intermission of
PARLIAMENTS.

Which Oath is forthwith to be taken by the present Lord Keeper, and to be
administered by the Clerk of the Crown to every Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper,
Commissioner and Commissioners aforesaid, and that none of the said Officers
respectively shall henceforth execute any the said Offices before they have
taken the said Oath. And if the said Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or any the
said Commissioners shall fail or forbear so to issue out the said Writs,
according to the true meaning of this Act, then he or they respectively shall,
beside the incurring of the grievous sin of perjury, be disabled, and become by
virtue of this Act incapable, ipso facto, to bear his and their said Offices
respectively, and be further liable to such punishments as shall be inflicted
on him or them by the next or any other ensuing Parliament. And in case the
said Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, Commissioner or Commissioners aforesaid,
shall not issue forth the said Writs as aforesaid: or in case that the
Parliament do not assemble and be held at the time and place before appointed,
Then the Parliament shall assemble and be held in the usual place at
Westminster, in such manner, and by such means only, as is hereafter in this
present Act declared and enacted, and not otherwise, on the third Monday which
shall be in the month of January then next ensuing. And the Peers of this
Realm shall by virtue of this Act be enabled, and are enjoined to meet in the
old Palace of Westminster, in the usual place there, on the third Monday in the
said month of November, and they or any twelve or more of them, then and there
assembled, shall on or before the last Monday of November next following the
tenth day of September aforesaid, by virtue of this Act, without other Warrant,
issue out Writs in the usual form, in the name of the Kings Majesty, His Heirs
or Successors, attested under the hands and Seals of twelve or more of the
said Peers, to the several and respective Sheriffs of the several and
respective Counties, Cities, and Boroughs of England and Wales, and to the
Constable of the Castle of Dover, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, or his
Lieutenant for the time being, and to the Major and Bailiffs of Barwick upon
Tweed, and to all and every other the said Officers and persons to whom Writs
have been used to be directed, for the electing of the Knights, Citizens,
Barons, and Burgesses, of and for the said Counties, Cities, Cinque Ports, and
Boroughs, to be and appear at the Parliament at Westminster aforesaid, to be
held on the third Monday in January then next following: All and every which
Writs the Clerks of the Pettibag, and other Clerks to whom the writing of the
Writs for Summons to the Parliament, does and shall belong, or whom the said
Lords, or twelve or more of them shall appoint, shall at the command of the
said Lords so assembled, or of any twelve or more of them, make and prepare
ready for the Signature of the said Lords, or any twelve or more of them, under
pain of the loss of their Places and Offices, and of such other punishment, as
in the next, or any other ensuing Parliament, shall be inflicted on him or
them. And it is enacted, That the said Writs so issued shall be of the same
power and force to all intents and purposes, as the Writs or Summons to
Parliament under the great Seal of England have ever been or ought to be. And
all the Messengers of the Chamber or others who shall be appointed by the said
Lords, or any twelve or more of them, are hereby required faithfully and
speedily to deliver the said Writs to every person and persons, Sheriff,
Officers, and others to whom the same shall be directed: which if the said
Messengers or any of them shall fail to perform, they shall forfeit their
respective Places, and incur such other pains and punishments as by that or
any other ensuing Parliament shall be imposed on them.

And it is also further enacted, That all and every the Peers of this Realm
shall make their appearance, and shall assemble on the said third Monday in
January, in such manner, and to such effect, and with such power, as if they
had received every of them Writs of Summons to Parliament, under the great Seal
of England, in the usual and accustomed manner. And in case the said Lords, or
twelve or more of them, shall fail to issue forth such Writs, or that the said
Writs do not come to the said several Counties, Cities, Cinque Ports, and
Boroughs, so that an election be not thereupon made; And in case there be not
a Parliament assembled and held before the three and twentieth day of the said
month of January, and so from time to time, and in all times hereafter, if
there shall not be a Parliament assembled, and held before the said three and
twentieth day of January; then in every such case as aforesaid, the Parliament
shall assemble, and be held in the usual place at Westminster, in such manner,
and by such means only as is hereafter in this present Act declared and
enacted, and not otherwise, on the second Tuesday which shall be in the month
of March next after the said three and twentieth day of January: At which
Parliament the Peers of this Realm shall make their appearance, and shall
assemble at the time and place aforesaid, and shall each of them be liable unto
such pains and Censures, for his, and their not appearing and serving then and
there in Parliament, as if he, or they had been summoned by Writ under the
great Seal of England, and had not appeared and served, and to such further
pains and Censures, as by the rest of the Peers in Parliament assembled, they
shall be adjudged unto.

And for the better assembling of the Knights, Citizens, Barons, and Burgesses
to the said Parliament, as aforesaid; It is further Enacted, That the several
and respective Sheriffs of their several and respective Counties, Cities, and
Boroughs of England and Wales, and the Chancellor, Masters and Scholar of both
and every of the Universities, and the Major and Bailiffs of the Borough of
Barwick upon Tweed, shall at the several Courts and places to be held and
appointed for their respective Counties, Universities, Cities and Boroughs,
next after the said three and twentieth day of January, cause such Knight and
Knights, Citizen and Citizens, Burgess and Burgesses of their said Counties,
Universities, Cities and Boroughs respectively, to be chosen by such persons,
and in such manner, as if several and respective Writs of summons to Parliament
under the great Seal of England had issued, and been awarded. And in case any
of the several Sheriffs, or the Chancellor, Masters and Scholars of either of
the Universities, or the Major and Bailiffs of Barwick respectively, do not
before ten of the Clock in the forenoon of the same day, wherein the several
and respective Courts and places shall be held or appointed, for their several
and respective Counties, Universities, Cities and Boroughs as aforesaid, begin
and proceed on according to the meaning of this Law, in causing Elections to be
made of such Knight and Knights, Citizen and Citizens, Burgess and Burgesses
of their said Counties, Universities, Cities, and Boroughs as aforesaid, then
the Freeholders of each County, and the Masters and Scholars of every of the
Universities, and the Citizens, and others having voices in such Election
respectively, in each University, City and Borough, that shall be assembled at
the said Courts or places to be held, or appointed, as aforesaid, shall
forthwith, without further Warrant, or direction, proceed to the Election of
such Knight or Knights, Citizen or Citizens, Burgess or Burgesses aforesaid,
in such manner as is unsal in case of Writs of Summons issued and awarded.

And it is further enacted, That the several and respective Sheriffs of their
several and respective Counties, and the Constables of the Castle of Dover, and
Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, or his Lieutenant for the time being
respectively, shall after the said three and twentieth day of January, and
before the eighth day of February then immediately next ensuing, award and send
forth their Precepts to the several and respective Cities and Boroughs, within
their several Counties, and likewise unto the said Cinque Ports respectively,
Commanding them respectively to make choice of such Citizen and Citizens,
Barons, Burges and Burgesses, to serve in the said Parliament, at the time and
place aforesaid: Which said Cities, Cinque Ports, and Boroughs respectively,
shall before the last day of the said month of February, make election of such
Citizen and Citizens, Barons, Burgess and Burgesses, as if Writs for Summoning
of a Parliament under the great Seal of England had issued and been awarded.
And in case no such Precept should come unto the said Cities, Cinque Ports, and
Boroughs respectively, by the time herein limited; Or in case any Precept shall
come, and no election be made thereupon before the said last day of February;
That then the several Citizens, Burgesses, and other persons that ought to
elect and send Citizens, Barons, and Burgesses to the Parliament, shall on the
first Tuesday in March, then next ensuing the said last day of February, make
choice of such Citizen and Citizens, Barons, Burgess and Burgesses, as if a
Writ of Summons under the great Seal of England had issued and been awarded,
and Precepts thereupon issued, to such Cities, Cinque Ports, and Boroughs:
Which Knights, Citizens, Barons, and Burgesses so chosen, shall appear, and
serve in Parliament at the time and place aforesaid, and shall each of them be
liable unto such pains and Censures, for his and their not appearing and
serving then and there in Parliament, as if he or they had been elected and
chosen by virtue of a Writ under the Great Seal of England; and shall be
likewise subject unto such further pains and Censures, as by the rest of the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses assembled in the Commons house of Parliament,
he or they shall be adjudged unto. And the Sheriffs and other Officers and
Persons to whom it appertains, shall make returns, and accept and receive the
Returns of such elections in like manner as if Writs of Summons had issued, and
been executed as has been used and accustomed. And in default of the Sheriffs
and other Officers respectively in not accepting, or making return of such
elections, it shall and may be lawful, to and for the several Freeholders and
other persons that have elected, to make returns of the Knights, Citizens,
Barons and Burgesses by them elected, which shall be as good and effectual to
all intents and purposes, as if the Sheriff or other Officers, had received a
Writ of Summons for a Parliament, and had made such returns. And that such
Elections, Precepts and Returns shall be had and made at such times, by such
persons, and in such manner as before in this Act is expressed and declared,
according to the true intent and meaning of this Law; Any Writ, Proclamation,
Edict, Act, Restraint, Inhibition, Order or Warrant to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. And in case any person or persons shall be so hardy to advise,
frame, contrive, serve, or put in execution any such Writs, Proclamation,
Edict, Act, Restraint, Inhibition, Order, or Warrant thereupon; then he or they
so offending shall incur and sustain the pains, penalties, and forfeitures,
limited, ordained, and provided in and by the Statute of Provision and
Praemunire made in the sixteenth year of King Richard the second, and shall from
thenceforth be disabled during his life to sue or implead any person in any
Action real or personal, or to make any Gift, Grant, Conveyance, or other
disposition of any his Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or Chattels,
which he has to his own use either by Act executed in his life time, or by his
last Will, or otherwise, or to take any Gift, Conveyance, or Legacy to his own
use, or to take any benefit of any Gift, Conveyance, or Legacy to his own use.
And if any Sheriff, Constable of the Castle of Dover, or Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, shall not perform his duty enjoined by this Act, then he shall
lose and forfeit the sum of one thousand pounds; and every County, City,
Cinque-Port, and Borough, that shall not make election of their Knights,
Citizens, Barons, and Burgesses respectively, shall incur the penalties
following (that is to say) every County the sum of one thousand pounds, and
every City which is no County, two hundred pounds, and every Cinque-Port and
Borough the sum of one hundred pounds. All and every of which several
Forfeitures, and all other Forfeitures in this Act mentioned, shall and may be
recovered in any of the Kings Courts of Record at Westminster, by and in the
name of the Lord Major of the City of London for the time being, without naming
the Christian name or surname of the said Lord Major for the time being, by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoin, Protection,
Wager of Law, Aid, Prayer, Privilege, Injunction or Order of Restraint shall be
in any wise prayed, granted or allowed, nor any more than one Imparlance. And
if any person after notice given, that the Action depending is grounded or
prosecuted upon or by virtue of this Statute, shall cause or procure any such
Action to be stayed or delayed before Judgment, by color or means of any
Order, Warrant, Power or Authority, save only in the Court wherein such Action,
as aforesaid, shall be brought or depending, or after Judgment had upon such
Action, shall cause or procure the Execution of or upon any such Judgment to
be stayed or delayed by color or means of any Order, Warrant, Power or
Authority, save only by Writ of Error or Attaint; that then the said persons
so offending shall incur and sustain all and every the pains, penalties, and
forfeitures limited, ordained, and provided in and by the said Statute of
Provision, and Praemunire, made in the sixteenth year of King Richard the
Second: And if any Lord Major of London shall at any time hereafter commence or
prefer any such Suit, Action or Information, and shall happen to die or be
removed out of his Office before Recovery and Execution had; that yet no such
Action, Suit, or Information sued, commenced, or preferred, shall by such
displacing or death be abated, discontinued or ended, but that it shall and may
be lawful to and for the Lord Major of the City of London next succeeding in
that Office and Place, to prosecute, pursue and follow all and every such
Action, Bill, Plaint or Information for the Causes aforesaid so hanging and
depending, in such manner and form, and to all intents and purposes as that
Lord Major might have done which first commenced or preferred the same. The
fifth part of all and every the Forfeitures in this Act mentioned shall go and
be to and for the use and behoof of the City of London; and the other four
parts and residue to be employed and disposed to and for such only uses,
intents, and purposes, as by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in
Parliament assembled shall be declared, directed, and appointed. Provided, That
in case the Freeholders of any County and Inhabitants, or other persons having
or claiming power to make election of any Knights, Citizens, Barons, or
Burgesses, shall proceed to making of election of their Knights, Citizens,
Barons, and Burgesses, which Election shall afterward fall out to be afterward
adjudged or declared void in Law by the House of Commons, by reason of equality
of voices, or misdemeanour of any person whatsoever; then the said County,
City, Cinque-Port, or Borough, shall not incurr the penalties in this Law, so
as an Election de facto be made.

And it is further enacted, that no Parliament henceforth to be assembled,
shall be dissolved or prorogued within fifty days at the least, after the time
appointed for the meeting thereof, unless it be by assent of His Majesty, his
Heirs, or Successors, and of both Houses in Parliament assembled: And that
neither the House of Peers, nor the House of Commons shall be adjourned within
fifty days at least, after the meeting thereof, unless it be by the free
consent of every the said Houses respectively.

And be it further enacted and declared by authority of this present
Parliament, that the Peers to be assembled at any Parliament, by virtue of this
Act, shall and may from time to time, at any time during such their assembly in
Parliament, choose and declare such person to be Speaker for the said Peers, as
they shall think fit: And likewise that the said Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses to be assembled at any Parliament, by virtue of this Act, shall and
may from time to time, at any time during such their assembly in Parliament,
choose and declare one of themselves to be Speaker for the said Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons assembled in the said
Parliament, as they shall think fit: which said Speakers, and every of them,
as well for the said Peers, as for the said House of Commons respecitvely, shall
by virtue of this Act be perfect and complete Speakers for the said Houses
respectively, and shall have as full and large power, jurisdiction, and
privileges to all intents and purposes, as any Speaker, or Speakers of either
of the said Houses respectively, heretofore have had, or enjoyed.

And it is further enacted and declared, that all Parliaments hereafter to be
assembled by authority of this Act, and every member thereof, shall have and
enjoy all Rights, Privileges, Jurisdictions, and Immunities as any Parliament
summoned by Writ under the great Seal of England, or any Member thereof might,
or ought to have: And all and every the Members that shall be elected, and
chosen to serve in any Parliament hereafter to be assembled by authority of
this Act, as aforesaid, shall assemble and meet in the Commons House of
Parliament, and shall enter into the same, and have voices in such Parliament,
before, and without the taking of the several Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, or either of them; any Law or Statute to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, That if the Kings Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, shall
at any time during any Parliament hereafter to be assembled by authority of
this Act, as aforesaid, award or direct any Commission or Commissions, unto any
person, or persons whatsoever, thereby giving power and authority to him or
them, to take and receive the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, of all or any
the members of the Commons house of Parliament, and any the members of that
House, being duly required thereunto, shall refuse or neglect to take and
pronounce the same, that from thenceforth such person so refusing or
neglecting, shall be deemed no Member of that House, nor shall have any voice
therein, and shall suffer such pains and penalties, as if he had presumed to
sit in the same house without election, return or authority. And it is likewise
provided and enacted, that this Statute shall be publicly read yearly at every
general Sessions of the peace, to be held next after the Epiphany, and every
Assizes then next ensuing, by the Clerk of the Peace, and Clerk of the Assizes
for the time being respectively; and if they or either of them, shall neglect,
or fail to do the same accordingly, then such party so neglecting or failing,
shall forfeit the sum of one hundred pounds. And it is lastly provided and
enacted, that His Majesty's royal assent to this Bill shall not thereby
determine this present Session of Parliament, and that all Statutes and Acts of
Parliament, which are to have continuance unto the end of this present Session,
shall be of full force after His Majesty's assent, until this present Session
be fully ended and determined: And if this present Session shall determine by
dissolution of this present Parliament, then all the Acts and Statutes
aforesaid, shall be continued until the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament.


