ENGLAND'S Great Interest IN THE CHOICE OF THIS New Parliament; Dedicated to
all her FREEHOLDERS and ELECTORS.
SInce it has pleased God and the King to begin to revive and restore to us
our Ancient Right of Frequent Parliaments, it will greatly concern us, as to
our present Interest, and therein the future Happiness of our Posterity, to act
at this time with all the Wisdom, Caution and Integrity we can. For besides,
that it is our own Business, and that if by a neglect of this singular
Opportunity we desert our selves, and forsake our own Mercies, we must expect
to be Left of God and good Men too; It may be there has never happened, not
only in the memory of the living, but in the Records of the dead, so odd and so
strange a Conjuncture as this we are under: It is made up of so many unusual
and important Circumstances (all affecting us to the very Heart) that whether
we regard the long sitting of the late Parliament, or its abrupt and most
unexpected Dissolution, or the Prorogation of the last and its surprising
Dissolution, or the strong Jealousies of the People, and that universal
agitation, that is now upon the spirit of the Nation, and the Reasons and
Motives thereof (so far as we can reach them) there seems never to have been a
time, wherein this Kingdom ought to show it self more serious and diligent in
the business of its own safety.

To be plain with you, All is at Stake: and therefore I must tell you, That the
Work of this Parliament is,

First, To pursue the Discovery and Punishment of the Plot: for that has been
the old Snake in the Grass, the Trojan Horse with an Army in the Belly of it.

Secondly, To remove and bring to Justice those Evil Counselors, and Corrupt
and Arbitrary Ministers of State, that have been so Industrious to give the
King Wrong Measures, to turn Things out of their Ancient and Legal Channel of
Administration, and Alienate his Affections from his People.

Thirdly, To Detect and Punish the Pensioners of the former Parliament, in the
Face of the Kingdom. This Breach of Trust being Treason against the Fundamental
constitution of our Government.

Fourthly, To secure to us the Execution of our Ancient Laws by New ones, and
among the rest such, as relate to Frequent Parliaments, the only true Check
upon Arbitrary Ministers, and therefore feared, ^ated and opposed by them.

Fifthly, That we be secured from Popery and Slavery; and that
Protestant-Dissenters be eased.

Sixthly, That in case this be done, the King be released from his burdensome
Debts to the Nation, and eased in the business of his Revenue. And let me be
free with you, if you intend to save poor England, You must take this General
Measure, viz. To guide and fix your Choice upon Men, that you have reason to
believe are Well Affected, Able and Bold to serve the Country in these Respects.

The Words of the Writ (at least, the Import of them) are, To choose Wise Men,
fearing God, and hating Covetousness; and what to do? says the same Writ, To
Advice the King of the Weighty Matters of the Kingdom. Let us not then play the
Fools or Knaves, to Neglect or Betray the Common Interest of our Country by a
Base Election: Let neither Fear, Flattery nor Gain Bias us. We must not make
our Public Choice the Recompense of Private Favors from our Neighbors; they
must excuse us for that: the Weight of the Matter will very well bear it. This
is our Inheritance; all depends upon it: Men don't use to lend their Wives, or
give their Children to satisfy Personal Kindnesses; nor must we make a Swop of
our Birthright, (and that of our Posterities too) for a Mess of Pottage, a
Feast or a Drinkingbout; there can be no Proportion here: and therefore none
must take it Ill, that we use our Freedom about that, which in its Constitution
is the Great Bull-wark of all our Ancient English Liberties. Truly, our not
Considering what it is to choose a Parliament, and how much all is upon the
Hazard in it, may at last Loose us fatally by our own Choice. For I must needs
tell you, If we Miscarry, it will be our own Fault; we have no Body else to
blame: For such is the Happiness of our Constitution, That we cannot well be
destroyed, but by our selves: and what Man in his Wits would Sacrifice his
Throat to his own hands?

We, the Commons of England are a great part of the Fundamental Government of
it; and Three Rights are so peculiar and inherent to us, that if we will not
throw them away for Fear or Favor, for Meat and Drink, or those other little
present profits, that Ill Men offer to tempt us with, they cannot be altered or
abrogated. And this I was willing to give you a brief hint of, that you may
know, what Sort of Creatures you are, and what your Power is, lest through
Ignorance of your own Strength and Authority, you turn Slaves to the Humors of
those, that properly and truly are but your Servants, and ought to be used so.

The First of these three Fundamentals is Property, that is, Right and Title to
your own Lives, Liberties and Estates: in this every man is a sort of little
Sovereign to himself: No man has power over his Person to Imprison of Hurt it,
or over his Estate to Invade or Usurp it: only your own Transgression of the
Laws, (and those of your own making too) lays you open to Loss; which is but
the Punishment due for your Offenses, and this but in Proportion to the Fault
committed. So that the Power of England is a Legal Power, which truly merits
the Name of Government: that which is not Legal, We see it daily in
Westminster- Hall, as well as in Parliamentary Transactions.
is a Tyranny, and not properly a Government. Now the Law is Umpire between
King, Lords and Commons, and the Right and Property is One in kind through all
Degrees and Qualities in the Kingdom, Mark that.

The Second Fundamental, that is your Birthright and Inheritance, is
Legislation, or the Power of making Laws; No Law can be made or abrogated in
England without you. Before Henry the Third's Time, your Ancestors, the
Freemen of England met in their own Persons, but their Numbers much
increasing, the Vastness of them, and the Confusion that must needs attend
them, making such Assemblies not practicable for Business, this way of
Representatives was first pitched upon as an Expedient, both to Maintain the
Commons Right, and to avoid the Confusion of those mighty Numbers. So that now,
as well as then, No Law can be made, no Money levied, nor not a Penny legally
demanded (even to defray the Charges of the Government) without your own
Consent: then which, tell me, what can be freer, or what more secure to any
People?

Your Third Great Fundamental Right and Privilege is Executive, and holds
proportion with the other two, in order to complete both your Freedom and
Security, and that is Your share in the Judicatory Power, in the Execution and
Application of those Laws, that you agree to be made. Insomuch as No man
according to the ancient Laws of this Realm can be adjudg'd in matter either of
Life, Liberty or Estate, but it must be by the Judgment of his Peers, that is,
Twelve men of the Neighborhood, commonly called a JURY; though this has been
infringed by two Acts made in the late long Parliament, one against the Quakers
in Particular, and the other against Dissenters in General, called An Act
against seditious Conventicles, where persons are adjudged Offenders and
punishable without a Jury: which it is hoped, this ensuing Parliament will think
fit in their Wisdoms to repeal, though with less Severity, then one of the same
Nature ( as to punishing men without Juries) was by Henry the Eighth, who for
executing of it hanged Empson and Dudly.

Consider with your selves, that there is nothing more your Interest, then for
you to understand your Right in the Government, and to be constantly Jealous
over it; for your Well-being depends upon its Preservation.

In all Ages there have been Ill Men, and we to be sure are not without them
now, such as being conscious to themselves of ill things, and dare not stand a
Parliament, would put a Final Dissolution upon the very Constitution it self to
be safe, that so we might never see another.

But this being a Task too hard to compass, their next Expedient is To make
them for their Turn, by directing and governing the Elections; and herein they
are very Artificial and too often Succesful; which indeed is worse for us then
if we had none. For thus the Constitution of Parliaments may be destroyed by
Parliament, and we, who by Law are Free, may hereby come to be made Slaves by
Law. If then you are Free and resolve to be so, if you have any regard to God's
providence in giving you a claim to so excellent a Constitution, if you would
not void your own Rights, nor lay a Foundation of Vassallage to your unborn
Followers, the poor Posterity of your Loins, for whom God and Nature, and the
Constitution of the Government have made you Trustees, then seriously weigh
these following Particulars.

I. In your present Election Receive no man's Gift or Bribe to choose him; but
be assured, that he will be false to you, that basely tempts you to be false to
your Country, your self and your Children. How can you hope to see God with
peace, that turn Mercenaries in a matter, on which depends the Well-being of an
whole Kingdom for present and future times? since at a pinch One good Man gains
a Vote and saves a Kingdom; and what does any County or Burgess-Town in England
know, but all may depend upon their making a good Choice? But then to sell the
Providence of God, and the dear-bought purchase of your painful Ancestors for a
little Money (that after you have got it, you know not how little a while you
may be suffered to keep it) is the mark of a Wretched Mind: Truly such ought
not to have the power of a Freeman, that would so abuse his own and hazard
other men's Freedom by it: he deserves to be cast over Board, that would Sink
the Vessel, and thereby drown the Company embark't with him.

Honest Gentlemen will think they give enough for the Choice, that pay their
Electors in a constant, painful and chargeable Attendance; but Such as give
Money to be chosen, would get Money by being chosen, they design not to serve
you, but themselves of you; and then fare you well. As you will answer it to
Almighty God, I entreat you to show your Abhorrence of this Infamous Practice:
It renders the very Constitution contemptible, that any should say, I can be
chosen, if I will spend Money or give them Drink enough; and this is said not
without reason, Elections, that ought to be serious things, and gravely and
reasonably performed, being generally made the occasions of more Rudeness and
Drunkenness, then any of the Wild May-games in use among us.

Thus by making men Law-breakers, they are it seems made fit to choose
Lawmakers, their Choice being the purchase of Excess. But must we always owe
our Parliaments to Rioting and Drunkenness? and must men be made Incapable of
all Choice, before they choose their Legislators? I would know of any of you
all, if in a difference about a private property, an Horse or a Cow, or any
other thing you would be as easy, indifferent and careless in choosing your
Arbitrators? Certainly you would not; with what reason then can you be
unconcerned in the Qualifications of men, upon whose fitness and Integrity
depends all you and your Posterity may enjoy? Which leads me to the other
Particulars.

II. Choose no Man that has been a Reputed Pensioner; it is not only against your
Interest, but it is disgraceful to you and the Parliament you choose. The
Representative of a Nation ought to consist of the most Wise, Sober and Valiant
of the People, not Men of mean Spirits or sordid Passions, that would sell, the
Interest of the People that choose them, to advance their own, or be at the Beck
of some great Man, in hopes of a Lift to a good Employ: pray beware of these.
You need not be straightened, the Country is wide and the Gentry numerous.

III. By no means choose a Man that is an Officer at Court, or whose Employment
is durante beneplacito, that is, at Will and Pleasure; nor is this any
Reflection upon the King, who being one Part of the Government, should leave
the other free, and without any the least Awe or Influence to bar or hinder its
proceedings. Besides, an Officer is under a Temptation to be byast; and to say
true, an Office in a Parliament man, is but a softer and safer word for a
Pension: the Pretense it has above the other, is the danger of it.

IV. In the next place, Choose no Indigent Persons, for those may be under a
temptation of abusing their Trust to gain their own ends: for such do not
Prefer you, which should be the end of their Choice, but Raise themselves by
you.

V. Have a care of Ambitious men and non-Residents, such as live about Town and
not with their Estates, who seek honors and preferments above, and little or
never embetter the Country with their Expenses or Hospitality, for they intend
themselves and not the Advantage of the Country.

VI. Choose no Prodigal or Voluptuous Persons, for besides that they are not
Regular enough to be Lawmakers, they are commonly Idle; and though they may
wish well to your Interest, yet they will lose it rather then their Pleasures;
they will scarcely give their Attendance, they must not be relied on. So that
such Persons are only to be preferred before those, that are Sober to do
mischief; whose debauchery is of the mind: Men of Injust Mercinary and sinister
Principles, who, the soberer they be to themselves, the worse they are to you.

VII. Review the Members of the last Parliaments, and their Inclinations and
Votes, as near as you can learn them, and the Conversation of the Gentlemen of
your own Country, that were not Members, and take your measures of both, by
that which is your True and Just Interest at this Critical time of the day, and
you need not be divided or distracted in your Choice.

VIII. Rather take a Stranger, if recommended by an unquestionable Hand, than a
Neighbor Ill-affected to your Interest. It Is not pleasing a Neighbor, because
rich and powerful, but Saving England, that you are to eye: Neither pay or
return private Obligations at the cost of the Nation; let not such Engagements
put you upon dangerous Elections as you love your Country.

IX. Be sure to have your Eye upon Men of Industry and Improvement. For those
that are Ingenuous and Laborious to propagate the Growth of the Country, will
be very tender of weakening or impoverishing it: you may trust such.

X Let not your Choice be flung upon Men of Fearful Dispositions, that will let
good Sense, Truth and your real Interest in any point sink, rather than
displease some one or other great Man. If you are but sensible of your own Real
Great Power, you will wisely choose those, that will by all just and legal ways
firmly keep and zealously promote it.

XI. Pray see, that you choose Sincere Protestants; men that don't play the
Protestant in Design, and are indeed Disguised Papists, ready to pull off their
Mask, when time serves: You will know such by their Laughing at the Plot,
Disgracing the Evidence, Admiring the Traitors Constancy, that were forced to
it, or their Religion and Party were gone beyond an Excuse or an Equivocation.
The contrary are men that thank God for this Discovery, and in their
Conversation zealously direct themselves in an Opposition to the Papal
Interest, which indeed is a Combination against good Sense, Reason and
Conscience, and to introduce a blind Obedience without (if not against)
Conviction. And that Principle which introduces Implicit Faith and Blind
Obedience in Religion, will also introduce Implicit Faith and Blind Obedience
in Government: so that it is no more the Law in the one than in the other, but
the Will and Power of the Superior, that shall be the Rule and Bond of our
Subjection. This is that fatal Mischief Popery brings with it to Civil Society,
and for which such Societies ought to beware of it, and all those that are
Friends to it.

XII. Lastly, Among these be sure to find out and cast your favor upon Men of
large Principles, such, as will not sacrifice his Neighbor's Property to the
frowardness of his own Party in Religion: Pick out such men, as will Inviolably
maintain Civil Rights for all that will live soberly and civilly under the
Government.

Christ did not revile those that reviled him, much less did he persecute
those, that did not revile him. He rebuk't his Disciples, that would have
destroyed those that did not follow and conform to them, saying; To know not
what Spirit ye are of; I came not to destroy men's Lives, but to save them.
Which made the Apostle to say, that the Weapons of their Warfare were not
Carnal, but Spiritual. This was the Ancient Protestant Principle; and where
Protestants persecute for Religion, they are false to their own profession, and
Turn Papists even in the worst sense, against whom their Ancestors did so
stoutly exclaim, Read the Books of Martyrs of all Countries in Europe, and you
will find I say true: Therefore beware also of that Popery. Consider, that such
Partial men don't love England, but a Sect; and prefer Imposed Uniformity
before Virtuous and Neighbourly Unity. This is that Disturber of Kingdoms and
States, and till the Good Man, and not the Opinionative Man be the Christian in
the Eye of the Government, to be sure, while force is used to propagate or
destroy Faith, and the outward Comforts of the Widow and Fatherless are made a
Forfeit for the peaceable Exercise of their Consciences to God, he that fits in
Heaven and judges Righteously, whose Eye pities the Oppressed and Poor of the
Earth, will withold his Blessings from us.

O lay to heart the grievous Spoils and Ruins that have been made upon your
harmless Neignbours for near these twenty years, who have only desired to enjoy
their Consciences to God according to the best of their understandings, and to
eat the Bread of honest Labor, and to have but a Penny for a Penny's worth
among you. Whose Ox or Ass have they taken? whom have they wronged? or when did
any of them offer you Violence? yet Sixty pounds have been distrained for
twelve, two hundred pounds for sixty pounds. The Flocks been taken out of the
Fold, the Herd from the Stall; not a Cow left to give Milk to the Orphans, nor
a Bed for the Widow to lie on; whole Barns of Corn swept away, and not a penny
returned; and thus bitterly prosecuted even by Laws made against Papists. And
what is all this for? unless their worshipping of God according to their
Conscience; for they injure no man, nor have they offered the least Molestation
to the Government.

Truly, I must take liberty to tell you, If you will not endeavor to redress
these Evils in your Choice, I fear, God will suffer you to fall into great
Calamity by those you hate. You are afraid of Popery, and yet many of you
practice it: for why do you fear it, but for its Compulsion and Persecution?
and will you compel or persecute your selves, or choose such as do? If you will,
pray let me say, You hate the Papists, but not Popery. But God defend you from
so doing, and direct you to do, as you would be done by: that choosing such as
love England, her People and their Civil Rights, Foundations may be laid for
that Security and Tranquillity, which the Children unborn may have cause to
rise up and bless your Names and Memories for. Take it in good part, I mean
nothing but Justice and Peace to all; and so conclude my self,

Your Honest Monitor and Old England 's True Friend, PHILANGLUS.

FINIS.

