THE Abridgement OF THE CHARTER OF THE City of London; Being every FREE-MAN'S
PRIVILEGE.

Exactly Translated from the Original Record, and rendered faithfully into
English according to the said Record it self, from the time of William the
Conqueror, and other Kings and Queens of ENGLAND, to the time of our now
Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the Second: Comprehending the whole Charter, only
the Words of Form left out.

Of great Use and Benefit to all Citizens of the said City in general, and
other Persons, being Foreign Merchants.

London, Printed in the Year 1680.

TO THE READER.
IN this Abridgement of the Charter of the City of London, the Reader may well
think all things else needless only the Title, knowing of what great Use and
Antiquity the same is, and may be to every Citizen of this Famous City, if not
to others.

It will be unnecessary here to give the Reader an Account of the first
Foundation of this Famous City of London, or how at first it came to take that
Name; but shall leave him to those Famous Antiquaries, who at large have set it
forth, viz. the Learned Cambden, Stow, Speed, and diverse others, to whom I
refer the Reader.

As to the next, which is the Antiquity of this Charter, I think it need not be
questioned; For the first beginning of it shows its Antiquity: which was the
first Grant from William the Conqueror, and his Son William Rufus, the which I
do not think amiss to recite in the same Saxon Words as the Grant was made, to
satisfy the Reader, which follows after in English.

William King great William Bishop and Godfregis Portere and eall the Borough
waren bind London Franchisce et Engliste and ichkyd eth ye Ick yill ye great
be ealbra yeara taga ye die yegret yer an en Edwardis dage King end ick yill
yett sulke child be his fader yrfun achter his fader dage and ick uel geyolyan
that eugage Man oath doigyran gbede god ye be held.

Englished thus:

William, King, Greet William, Bishop, and Godfrey Porters, and all the
B^^gesses in London, French and English. And I grant you that I will, That you
do enjoy all the Laws that you enjoyed in King Edward's days: And I will that
each Child be his Fathers Heir, and I will not suffer that any man do you
wrong; and God you keep.

By this Charter in the Saxon Tongue, the Reader may see how Ancient, and of
what great Antiquity the Charter of this Famous City of London is, which you
see that Edward the Confessor granted to the City of London, but what that was,
or what it did contain, is not Extant; but for certain long before him there
was Charters granted both by the Romans, Saxons, and Danes, although Antiquity
has worn them out; but it may suffice that it is almost six hundred years ago
since the first granting of this Charter. Therefore what has been said
already, I think may satisfy the Reader how Ancient Charters are, and
especially this of the City of London.

But now, to this present Charter of which we treat, the which has been with
great Industry and Pains most carefully and exactly Abridged from the Roll it
self, some perhaps may suspect the truth of it; But if any such there be, they
may be well satisfied, if they take but any part of the same (for a little
Charge, and no great Pains) at the Chapel of the Rolls, if they please to make
search for the same, they will find that generally they are Vere and cum
Authoritate dicta.

Some may wonder, why this Charter of the City of London (if of so great Use to
every Citizen) has been kept in the Dark, and not divulged for the Intent it
was granted? It is truth, it has still lain in the Breasts of the Great Ones
to keep them to themselves; for, if any Benefit or Profit should arise by any
of the Grants and Gifts in this Charter, to be sure it must be smothered, and
the Little ones must know nothing thereof; but if there were any Fine,
Punishment, or other Penalties by this Charter to be inflicted upon any
Freeman, to be sure he should know of that.

I am persuaded, that many of the Great Ones have heard of a Charter they had,
but what is contained in it they know nothing of, but by Hearsay. Now this
being made public, that every One, both Rich and Poor, may have the same
Benefit as the other, and that at a Small Price, and that the Poor by this may
receive the Benefit of the Charter, if any be due to them, as well as the
Punishment: for it would be very hard that any Freeborn Subject should suffer
for an Offense he never knew a Law against; but here, how many have suffered
under this Charter, that never heard of such an Offense? It is true, there are
several Offenses that are neither in the Statute Law, or by Charter; some there
be which are by the Common Law: so in Cities and Corporations there are the
Bylaws, which Bylaws commonly are confirmed by their Charter.

There is no question, but some in these Times will quarrel, and say, Why is
this published abroad now, and not before, for these are Troublesome Times, and
we have had Contentions enough lately, therefore let us live in Ignorance still?

This Objection may be answered very well by our English Poet.

When Civil Dudgeon first grew high,
And men fell out they knew not why,
When hard words, Jealousies and Fears,
Set Folks together by the Ears, etc.
But, I think, these are not Times to quarrel in, or to meddle with Government,
but all may be quiet if they will, for under a more Gracious and Merciful
Prince no People ever lived, if we know when we are well.

But I hope this present Small Book will be acceptable to all, although an
Abridgment, there being nothing left out that might be useful; but only these
words of Form, which would be tedious to the Reader to trouble himself withal,
and but swell the price of the Book. There is nothing of Dissension in it, it
being all Record it self, the which, I am sure, cannot err from the Truth.

I dare not at present say any more, for it is highly presumed the Book will
praise it self. All which I leave to the Judgment of the Judicious Reader; and
hope it may find good Entertainment amongst the worthy Citizens.

Farewell.
THE PRIVILEGES OF THE CITY of LONDON.
WILLIAM Conq. Chart. 1.
THAT every one enjoy all the Laws that they enjoyed in King Edward's days,
and that each Child be his Father's Heir after his Father's Death, and none to
do Wrong.

Chart. 2. HENRY 1.
Grants to the Citizens of London, to hold Middlesex to Farm for 300 l. on
Account that they place whom they will themselves Sheriffs, for keeping the
Pleas of the Crown, and none other to be Justice over them.

None of the Citizens to plead without the Walls of London, and to be free from
Scot and Lot.

If a Citizen be Impleaded, he shall discharge himself by Oath.

None to lodge within the Walls of the City by Force.

A Citizen to be Toll-free throughout England, and to hold their Sokes and
Customs; and a Stranger to give Custom to none but to whom the Soke
appertains.

He is not to be adjudged in Amerciaments of Money, but of 100 l. (meaning the
Pleas which appertain to Money.)

No Miskenning to be in the Courts of the City, and the Hustings to sit every
Monday.

Every Citizen shall enjoy his Goods, according to the Law of the City.

Debts owing in London, to be discharged in London, or else the Citizen to whom
the Debt is due may take their Goods.

The Citizens may Hunt in Chiltrey, Surrey, and Middlesex.

HENRY 2.
That none of the Citizens plead without the Walls, except in Foreign Tenures,
except Monyers.

To be acquit of Murder, and not to wage Battle, and to discharge themselves
of the Pleas of the Crown.

None to lodge by Force.

To be free from Toll throughout England.

No Amerciament but according to the Law of the City.

To be no Miskenning.

The Hustings to be kept once a Week.

Right is to be done to the Citizens of their Lands and Debts.

To have their Hustings kept wheresoever they had the same formerly.

The Citizens are to be Toll-free.

Also, for the Advancement of the said City, they are to be free of Bristol.

And confirms to them their Customs: to hold from him and his Heirs.

RICHARD 1. Chart. 1.
None to plead without the Walls (except Monyers.)

To be acquit of Murder, and none to wage Battle.

That they may discharge themselves of the Pleas belonging to the Crown.

None to take Lodgings by force.

To be free from Toll and Bestage throughout England, and all Seaports.

None to be adjudged of Amerciaments of Money, but according to the Law of the
City.

That there be no Miskenning in any Plea within the City.

The Hustings to be kept once a Week.

That Right be done according to the Custom of the City, of all their Lands
and Tenements, and of their Debts.

If any in all England shall take Toll of the men of London, after that, he
shall fail of Right; and the Sheriff of London may take his Goods therefore at
London.

To have their Hustings where they formerly had the same.

And confirms to them their Liberties and Free Customs, as they had the same
formerly. To hold of him and his Heirs.

RICHARD 1. Chart. 2.
That all Wears be removed in the Thames, and that none be put any way within
the Thames; and Quit-claims the Keepers of the Tower of London, who was wont to
receive of the said Wears; and they are not to exact any thing for the future.
And confirms the same.

JOHN, Chart. 1.
None to plead without the Walls, (his Monyers and Ministers excepted.)

Grants an Acquittal of Murder within the City, and in Portsoken, and none
shall wage Battle.

That they may discharge themselves of the Pleas of the Crown.

No man shall take any Lodgings by Force, or delivery of the Marshal.

Citizens of London to be quit from Toll and Bestage throughout all his Lands,
on this side, and beyond the Seas.

That none be judged for Amerciaments of Money, but according to the Law of the
City.

That there be no Miskenning in any Plea.

The Hustings to be kept once every Week.

Justly to have their Lands and Tenures, and Premises, and all other their
Debts, whosoever owe them; and that Right be holden according to the Custom of
the said City, of all their Debts due at London.

If any take Toll of the men of London, after that he shall fail of Right, may
take Goods therefore at London.

That they may have their Huntings as formerly.

To be free of Bristol, and Childwite, and of Teresgite, and Scotale, so as the
Sheriff, nor any other Bailiff may make any Scotale.

And grants the Customs they had in the Reign of Henry the First. To hold of
him and his Heirs.

JOHN, Chart. 2.
Confirms to the Citizens of London the Sherifwick of London and Middlesex, To
hold to them and their Heirs, of him and his Heirs, paying 300 l. at Easter and
Michaelmas, saving to them their Liberties and Free Customs.

A Grant to the Citizens of London.

That they make Sheriffs whom they will, and to present to the Justices of his
Exchequer, of those things (to whom the same belongs) whereof they ought to
Answer, and satisfy the Amerciament.

That the Sheriffs for the time being shall not be amerced above 20 l. for any
Offense they shall commit, but if they do any Offense that they ought to lose
their Lives, they shall be adjudged as they ought, according to the Law of the
City, and the Sheriffs to answer to the Justices of the Exchequer.

Because the Sherifwick of the City of London was in Ancient Times farmed at
300 l. he Confirms the same, To hold of him and his Heirs.

Forbids, that none do any damage to the Citizens of London; of those things
which to the Sherifwick do, or were accustomed to appertain, the same shall be
acquitted to the Citizens of London out of the Exchequer.

JOHN, Chart. 3.
The Wears in the Thames and Medway to be removed, and none to be put in the
Thames.

That no Keeper of the Tower Exact any thing for the Wears. And Confirms the
same.

JOHN, Chart. 4.
The Barons of London to choose a Major, who is to be presented to him or his
Justices, and the said Major to swear to be faithful to him; and at the end of
the year to amove him, and substitute another, or the same to return to Us or
our Justices. And Confirms the Liberties of the said City. Saving the
Chamberlainship to the King.

JOHN, Chart. 5.
Confirms, That the Guild of Weavers be no more in the City, nor shall be at
all maintained; but because it was a Custom yearly for them to pay 18 Marks,
they shall pay the King 20 Marks at Michaelmas into the Exchequer.

HENR. 3. Chart. 1.
Confirms the Sherifwick of London and Middlesex, they paying yearly 300 l.

That the Citizens of London may make, and amove Sheriffs when they will, and
to present them to his Justices, and if the Sheriff do not Answer the
Amerciaments, the Citizens of London shall; and if the Sheriffs commit any
thing whereby they ought to be amerced, they shall not be condemned to be
amerced to any more than 20 l.

If they do any Offense whereby to incur the loss of their Lives, they shall be
adjudged according to Law.

The Citizens to hold the said Sherifwicks at 300 l. per Annum.

That none presume to do any hurt to the said Sherifwick.

What the said King takes away, to be allowed on Account of the Farm.

HENR. 3. Chart. 2.
That the Barons choose a Major, who is to be presented to the said King, or
his Justices; and at the end of the year to amove him, and substitute another,
or to retain him still, so as he be presented.

To enjoy their Liberties, saving the Chamberlainship.

HENR. 3. Chart. 3.
Commands all Wears to be removed out of the Thames, or Medway.

And that the Keepers of the Tower do not exact any thing for Wears.

That great hurt has grown to the City and Realm by Wears. Confirms the same.

HENR. 3. Chart. 4.
No Citizen to plead without the Walls (except Monyers and Ministers.)

Acquits Murder within the City and Portsoken, and none shall wage Battle.

That they may discharge themselves of Pleas belonging to the Crown.

That no man may take a Lodging by Force, or by delivery of the Marshal.

The Citizens of London to be quit of Toll and Bestage.

None to be condemned of Amerciaments, but according to the Law of the City.

That there be no Miskenning in any Pleading.

That the Hustings be kept once a Week.

That Right be holden to them of their Lands and Tenures, according to the
Custom of the City.

That Pleas be there holden of all Debts which be lent at London, and Promises
there made.

If any take Toll he shall fail of Right; the Sheriffs of London, may take
Goods.

To have Hunting as formerly.

To be quit from Bristol, Childwite, and Teresgite, and of all Scotals, so that
the Shriff of London or any of the Bailiffs shall not make any Scotale. To hold
of him and his Heirs.

HENR. 3. Chart. 5.
That all the Warren of Stains shall be unwarrened, so that they and their
Heirs may have Liberty of Warren and Forest in the said Warren, without the
Contradiction of the Warrenner or Forester, and to be free of Exactions and
Commands. The same to be unwarrened.

HENR. 3. Chart. 6.
There is another Charter of the same King, concerning Queen Hythe, reciting a
Covenant made between the Earl of Cornwall, and the City of London, for certain
Exactions belonging to Queen Hythe; the said Earl granting for him and his
Heirs, that the said Major, and all the Majors after him, and Commonalty of the
said City, may hold the said Queen Hythe with all their Liberties, Customs,
etc. in Fee-Farm, paying yearly to the said Earl, his Heirs and Assigns 50. l.
(viz.) at Easter 25. l. and St. Michael Th'archangel. The King, allowing of the
said Covenant for him and his Heirs, Grants and Allows the same the 6th. of
February, in the 31th. Year of his Reign.

HENR. 3. Chart. 7.
There is another Charter of the said King, wherein he grants for him and his
Heirs, and confirmed it by Charter; That the Major and Citizens of London
should hold all their Liberties and Free Customs (which they had in the time of
King Henry his Grandfather, and his Ancestors Kings of England) for ever. The
said King granted to the Citizens, that every Major they should choose (he not
being at Westminster) they should present him to the Barons of his Exchequer,
that he may be admitted by them as Major; so that at the next coming of the
King or his Heirs to Westminster, he may be presented, and so admitted Major.
And the King Wills and Commands for him and his Heirs, that out of the Farm of
the said City, there be allowed to the Sheriffs of the said City yearly in his
said Account 7. l. at his Exchequer, for the Liber^y of St. Paul's; and that his
Citizens throughout all his Dominions, as well on this side, as beyond the Sea,
be quit of all Toll and Custom for ever.

HENR. 3. Chart. 8.
There is another Charter of the aforesaid King, bearing Date the 11th. day of
January, in the 50th. Year of his Reign; wherein he granted to the said
Citizens, that they might traffic with their Merchandises when they please,
throughout his Dominions, as well by Sea as by Land, without Interruption of
him or his, as they see expedient, quit from Custom, Toll, etc. And may abide
for their Trading wheresoever they please, till such time it shall be more
fully ordered by his Council, touching the State of the said City, Pro ut
Letters Patents.

HENR. 3. Chart. 9.
There is another Charter of the said King, wherein he granted to his Citizens
of London (for him his Heirs and Successors) whom of late has been received
into his Grace and Favor, after diverse Trespasses and Forfeitures of them and
their Commonalty to him, for the which, both for Life and Member, and all other
things belonging to the said City, they have submitted themselves to his Will.
That none of them be compelled to plead out of the Walls of the said City, for
any thing except foreign Tenures. And except his Monyers and Officers. And
except those things which shall happen to be done against his Peace, which
according to the Common Law of the Realm, were wont to be determined in the
parts where the Trespasses were done. And except Pleas concerning
Merchandising, which were wont to be determined according to the Law-Merchant
in Borough and Fairs. So yet notwithstanding that those Plaints be determined
in Buroughs and Fairs by four or five of the said Citizens of London that
shall be there present, saving to him the Amerciaments upon Pain of
Forfeitures. He also grants to the said Citizens acquittal of Murder in the
said City and in Portsoken, and that none of the Citizens may wage Battle. And
that for the Pleas belonging to the Crown, chiefly those that may chance within
the said City to discharge themselves of Pleas of the Crown, according to
ancient Custom of the City; except that upon the Graves of the Dead, for that
which they should have said if they had lived. It shall not be lawful to swear,
but instead of those deceased, which before their Deaths to discharge those
which concerning the things belonging to the Crown were called and received.
There may other free and lawful Men be chosen, which may accomplish that which
by the deceased should have been done if they had lived. And within the Walls
of the said City, none may take Lodgings forceably. He has also granted the
Citizens throughout all his Dominions wheresoever they come, to dwell with
their Merchandises. And also throughout all the Sea Ports, as well on this side
as beyond the Seas, which shall be free of all Toll and Customs, etc. except
every where his ancient Custom and Prices of Wines; That is to say, one Tun
before and another behind the Mast, at 20. s. the Tun, to be paid in such Form,
as he and his Ancestors have been accustomed to have the said Prices. And if
Toll or Custom shall be taken of the Citizens of London, the Sheriff may take
Goods therefore at London.

He also granted to them, that the Hustings be kept once a Week, and that only
by one Day, so as those things within the same day that cannot be determined
may continue till next Morning and no longer; and that Right be holden to them
for their Rights and Tenures within the same City, according to the Custom of
the said City; and Foreigners and Citizens may make their Attorneys as well in
Pleading, as Defending; and that there may not be Miskening in any other Pleas;
that is to say, if they have not declared altogether well, and of all their
Debts which were lent at London, and Promises there made, Pleas be there Held
according to the ancient Custom.

Further he granted to the City, that all be quit of Childwit and Jeresgive,
and from Scotale; so that our Sheriffs of London, nor any other Bailiff shall
not make any Scotale. And also that the said Citizens may justly have and hold
their Lands Tenures or Promises, and also their Debts whosoever shall owe them,
and that no Merchant or other forestall any Goods coming to London to be sold
upon Forfeiture of Imprisonment and the things bought. And that none put their
Goods to Sale before Custom be paid, upon Pain of Forfeiture. And that no
Merchant-Stranger, or other, do buy any Goods before they be weighed at the
King's Beam, upon Forfeiture of the said Wares.

And also that those Debts which of Contracts or Loan shall be due unto them,
shall be enrolled in the Exchequer, upon the Recognizance of those who shall
stand bound. Nevertheless, no Debt to be enrolled, but testified by six or four
Witnesses, who may be sufficient to answer as well for the Debt as for the
Damages, which any may have of such Recognizances, if the same happen to be
falsely done under their Names: And for every pound so enrolled, one penny to be
paid toward the sustentation of those who attend; To hold to them and their
Heirs, so long as they shall behave themselves well to the King and his Heirs;
together with their just and reasonable Customs heretofore had, so as the
Customs be not contrary to Law; saving in all things the Liberty of the Church
of Westminster. But, as touching Jews and Merchant-Strangers he will provide as
he sees expedient. Dated the 26th day of March, 1268.

EDWARD 1.
A Charter made by Edward the First to the City of London, dated April 18. Anno
Domini 1298. In which Charter is contained, That the Citizens of London have
been accustomed to present every Major before the Barons of the Exchequer, the
King not being at Westminster, that he may be admitted Major; The King, willing
to show more ample Favor to the said Citizens, Does Grant to them, for him and
his Heirs, the Major and Sheriffs, in absence of the King and Barons, to be
presented to the Constable of the Tower of London, yearly. Nevertheless, that
at the next coming of the King or his Heirs to Westminster or London, the Major
be presented and admitted, etc. And the King also Granted for him and his
Heirs, to the Citizens and their Successors for ever, quit and free of Pannage,
Pontage, and Murrage, throughout the Realm and Dominions. And that the Sheriffs
amerced for any Offense, shall be amerced according to the measure of the
Offense, as other the Sheriffs of our Realm have been amerced for the like
offense. And the Citizens to enjoy their Customs.

EDW. 2.
Letters Patents of Edward Son of Edw. King, etc. reciting, Whereas the Major
and good men of the City of London, have of late done the King Service with
Armed men, etc. going with the King through diverse parts of the Realm; The
King, willing to indempnifie the said Major and Citizens, Has granted to them,
for him and his Heirs, That the Aids so done, shall not be prejudicial to the
said Major and Citizens, and Successors, nor be drawn into Consequence or
Example. Test 12 Dec. 1322.

EDW. 3.
A Charter of Edw. the Third, by consent of Parliament, has Granted and
Confirmed to the Citizens of London, the Liberties underwritten, To have and to
hold to them, their Heirs, and Successors for ever: First, Whereas in the Great
Charter of the Liberties of England is contained, that the City of London may
have all the Ancient Liberties and Customs. And the said Citizens at the time
of making the Charter, from the time of St. Edward and William the Conqueror,
had diverse Liberties and Customs, as well by Charters as without Charter, by
Ancient Custom, whereby, in diverse the Circuits, and other the Courts of his
Progenitors, as well by Judgments as by Statutes were invaded: He grants for
him and his Heirs, that they may have their Liberties according to the Form of
the aforesaid Great Charter: And that Impediments and Usurpations to them in
that behalf made, shall be revoked and annulled. He further grants for him and
his Heirs, to the Citizens, etc. That the Major of the aforesaid City, which
for time, shall be one of the Justices to be assigned for the Goal delivery at
Newgate, and be named in every Commission thereof to be made. And that the said
Citizens may have Infamy, Theft, and Chattels of Fellons, of all those who
shall be adjudged before them within the Liberties of the same City, at the
aforesaid Goal to be adjudged. And whereas also by the Charters of his
Progenitors, it was granted to the same Citizens, that they should hold the
Sherifwick of London and Middlesex for 300 l. yearly to be paid at the
Exchequer. And they are now charged with 400 l. yearly, contrary to the Form of
the said Charters; He grants for him, etc. That the Citizens, their Heirs, and
Successors, hold the aforesaid Sherifwicks for 300 l. yearly, and that they be
acquitted the said 100 l.

Further grants for him and his Heirs, to the Citizens, their Heirs and
Successors, to bequeath their Tenements within the Liberties of the aforesaid
City, as well in Mortmaine, as in other Manner, as in ancient time they have
been accustomed to do. And whereas in a Charter of King Edw. his Father, made
to the said Citizens, is contained, that the Sheriffs of the said City, as
often as they shall be amerced for any Offense in the Court, should not be
amerced in other manner for Escapes than other Sheriffs wont to be in other
Counties on this side Trent. He grants that the Sheriffs of the said City shall
in no wise be amerced or charged for the Escape of Thieves in any otherwise,
than as the Thieves on this Side Trent; And that the Citizens shall not be
charged for the Custody of those that fly to the Churches within the aforesaid
Liberty; and that the Citizens may take away all the Wears in the water of
Thames, and Medway. The King Wills and Commands, that all Merchant-Strangers
coming to England, shall sell their Wares and Merchandises within 40 days after
their coming thither, and shall continue and board with free Hosts of London,
and other the Cities and Towns of England.

And also Wills and Grants for him and his Heirs, that the Marshal-Steward or
Clerk of the Market, of his Household or of his Heirs, shall not sit from
thenceforth within the Liberty of the said City, nor exercise any Office there,
nor any way draw any Citizen to plead without the Liberties of the said City,
of any thing to happen within the Liberties of the same. And that no Escheator
from henceforth exercise the Office, but that the Major for the time being, do
the Office of Escheator within the said Liberty; so that he take his Oath, that
he exercise the Office, and answer to the King and his Heirs, as he ought to
do; and that the Citizens be not compelled to go or send to War out of the said
City; and that the Constable of the Tower shall not make any Prizes of any
thing belonging to the Citizens, nor arrest Ships or Boats bringing Victuals,
etc. to or from the said City. And forasmuch as the Citizens in Fairs of
England, were wont to have amongst themselves Keepers, to hold the Pleas
touching the Citizens of the said City, and assembling at the Fairs, grants as
much as in him is, that the Citizens may have such like Keepers to hold such
like Pleas of their Covenants as of ancient time they had. Except the Pleas of
Land, and of the Crown.

He further Grants for Him and his Heirs, That the Sheriffs of London shall not
be compelled to take any Oath at the Exchequer, but upon the yielding up of
their Accounts. And Grants the Citizens all their Liberties and free Customs,
as of old time they were wont. And that they may record their said Liberties:
And that to the allowance of their Charters to be had in the Exchequer, and
other his Pleas whatsoever, one Writ shall suffice in all Pleas for every Kings
time. And that no Summons, Attachments, or Executions be made by any the
Officers whatsoever of him or his Heirs, by Writ or without Writ, within the
Liberty of the said City, but only by the Officers of the said City. And that
the Sheriffs may lawfully have the Forfeitures of Victuals, and other things,
and Merchandises, according to the Charter, and shall not be debarred thereof
hereafter. And that the Citizens shall be guided by the same Laws and Customs
as in the time of King John and King Henry. And if any thing was attempted
contrary to their Liberties and free Customs; He Wills, that they be not
prejudicial to them, but that they be guided as of old time they were. The King
Grants for him and his Heirs, that the said Citizens be taxed in Subsidies and
Contributions as other Commoners. And that they be quit of all other Tallages.
And that the Liberty of the said City shall not be taken into his hands, or his
Heirs, for any Personal Trespass of any Minister of the City. And that no
Purveyor, Taker, Officer, and other Minister of him or his Heirs, or of any
other, shall make any prices in the City or without, of the Goods of any
Citizen contrary to their Will. And that no Prices be made of Citizens Wines
against their Wills, but shall be quit thereof for ever. Also no Officer of the
King or his Heirs shall merchandise within or without the said City, of any
thing touching their Offices. Also grants that the Lands and Tenements lying
without of the Citizens, which have or shall be Ministers of the City, be bound
to keep the City harmless against him and his Heirs, of things which concern
their Offices. And that no Market shall be granted within seven Miles round the
City. And that all Inquisitions from henceforth, shall be taken by our Justices
or Ministers of the said City, in St. Martins le Grand; except the Inquisitions
in the Circincts at the Tower, and for the Goal Delivery at Newgate, and no
Citizen to be impleaded in the Exchequer, unless it concern the King. And
Grants the City all their ancient Liberties and free Customs. Dat. 6. Martii,
in the first year of his Reign. Anno 1327.

EDW. 3. Chart. 2.
Also other Letters Patents of King Edward 3. upon the Citizens Petition to the
King in Parliament concerning Robberies, Fellonies, etc. where the Robbers,
Fellons, etc. fly into Southwark, and cannot be attached by the Ministers of
the City, for Prevention of which, the King with the Parliament grants to the
City the said Village of Southwark to hold to them and their Successors for
ever, for a Farm and Rent to be paid yearly at the Exchequer, at the accustomed
times due and accustomed. Test 6. Martii, 1327.

EDW. 3. Chart. 3.
Another Charter of Edw. 3. in the Parliament at York, holden the ninth Year of
his Reign, wherein all Merchant-Strangers as well as English, should sell and
buy in all Cities and Towns in the Realm, except to the Enemies of the King and
Realm; yet nevertheless, because the Statutes as well in this as in other
Parliaments, it was granted and established, that the great Charter of the
Liberty of England in all and singular the Articles should be maintained. And
in the same Charter is contained, that the City of London may have it is ancient
Liberties, the King grants to the Citizens for him and his Heirs, that the
Citizens, their Heirs, and Successors, shall have all their Liberties and free
Customs, Test 26 die Martii, 1337.

EDW. 3. Chart. 4.
Another Stat. of Edw. 3. wherein he granted to the City, that the Sergeants of
London may bear Maces of Gold or Silver, or Silvered or garnished with the Sign
of his Arms in the City and Liberties; and also without the City to meet with
the King, his Mother, his Consort, or his Children, etc. And as often as any of
the Sergeants be sent to Foreign places without the City, to do their Office at
the Command of the King, or the Major, or Sheriffs, they may carry their Maces,
Test 10 Junii, 1355.

EDW. 3. Chart. 5.
Letters Pattents from King Edward 3. confirmed, that all Merchant-Strangers
coming into England, shall remain at Board with free Hosts, and not to keep
Houses. And that there be no Brokers of any Merchant, unless they be chosen by
the Merchants of the Mystery in which the Brokers exercise their Offices, and
to take their Oath before the Major of the City: And that Merchants who are not
free of the City, do not sell by Retail any Wares within the said City or
Suburbs thereof.

The Major and Aldermen, and Commonalty petition the King, that they have often
sued in Parliament, that they are impoverished by reason their Liberties
formerly granted are restrained; Therefore prays the King and Council to
ordain in Parliament, that the Merchants-Strangers may be restrained. The King,
with consent of Parliament, granted for him and his Heirs, that the Major,
Aldermen, and Citizens of the said City, and their Successors, upon condition
they put the said City under good Government, That no Stranger from henceforth
shall sell any Wares in the City or Suburbs by Retail, nor keep House, or be
Broker in the City or Suburbs; saving to the Merchants of High Almain their
Liberties. Test 4 Dec. in the fiftieth year of his Reign of England, and of
France the 37th.

HENR. 4.
A Charter of Henry the 4th. Dat. 25 Maii, 1399. Granting to the Citizens the
keeping of the Gates of Newgate and Ludgate, and all other the Gates and
Posterns of the City. And also the Office of gathering the Tolls and Customs in
Cheap, Billingsgate, Smithfield; and also the Tonnage, viz. the weighing of
Lead, Wax, Pepper, etc.

EDW. 4. Chart. 1.
A Charter of Edward the 4th for Preservation of the Peace and Governing of the
City, that they may have and hold all their Liberties and Customs as whole and
sound as ever they had.

And further Grants for him and his Heirs, That the Major, Recorder, and such
Aldermen as have been Majors, shall be Justices of the Peace, and keep, or
cause to be kept all Ordinances and Statutes made and to be made for the quiet
Rule and Government of the People, and for the good of the Peace by Land and
Water within the Liberty of the said City, and to chastize and punish according
to the Form of the Statutes. And also grants to the said Major and Citizens,
and their Successors, and the Recorder of the said City, and such Aldermen, or
four of the same, the Major, Recorder, and Aldermen, of whom such Major for the
time being, and his Successors to be one, be Justices for ever; To enquire,
hear, and determine of all manner of Felonies, Trespasses, etc. And also to
hear and determine, and execute all other things which shall pertain to other
Justices of the Peace within the Realm: Giving in command to the Sheriffs of
the said City, that they attend, counsel, answer, and aid the Justices, Major,
Recorder, and their Successors, as required, for conserving the Peace; Saving
to the City their Customs, etc. And the King being willing rather to enlarge
than diminish the Custom of the said City, has Granted to them and their
Successors, That when any Issue shall be taken in any Plea of or upon the
Custom of the City, between any Parties in pleading, or if any thing touching
the said Customs be moved before the Judges or Barons, etc. the same Major and
Aldermen by word of Mouth, and then there may be speedy Process by that Record
and Declaration, such Custom so alleged shall be allowed for a Custom. And
though the Major, etc. make not Use, or abuse the Customs and Liberties, no
Forfeiture to be taken therefore. As well Denizens as Aliens, and all abiding
within the City, to be contributary to Taxes, according to their Faculties, as
well as the Citizens.

Merchants of Almaine excepted.

Aldermen not to be put upon Assizes, Attaints, or Juries; Nor Collectors, or
Taxers, out of the City.

Southwark granted to the City of London, and Waifs and Estraies, Treasure,
etc. Assize of Bread, Execution, and Return of Writs by the City Officers.

The King's Clerk of the Market, nor the Sheriff of Surrey, to intermeddle.
Also a Fair for three days.

To carry to Newgate Thieves taken in Southwark.

Grants them all Liberties he had or should have in Southwark; the Right of the
Archbishop of Canterbury excepted.

EDW. 4. Chart. 2.
Tonnage and Weighing granted to the City; Weighing of Wool to be at
Leaden Hall, and no other place within three Miles.

EDW. 4. Chart. 3.
Liberty to purchase 200 Marks per Annum, in Mortmain, upon consideration of
remitting the King 1923. formerly lent.

Also Liberty to any to grant such Lands to the City in Mortmain, without any
other Writ ad quod damnum.

EDW. 4. Chart. 4.
A Grant of the Office of Packing (to the City) of all Woollen Cloths, and all
other Merchandises, for and in consideration of remitting the King 7000 l.
formerly lent.

This Charter was confirmed by Parliament, in the Third year of the Reign of
King Hen. 8.

Also the Grant of the Office of Portage of the Goods and Merchandises of all
Denizens and Aliens.

Also the Grant of the Office of Garbling of all Spices, and other Merchandises
coming to the City, which ought to be Garbled.

And also the Office of Gauging and Wine-drawing, for the carrying off of Wines
brought to the Port of the City, to be exercised by them and their Deputies.

And also the Grant of the Office of Coroner.

HENRY 7. Part of the Charter.
A Grant for the Merchandise of Foreigners bought and sold, forfeited to the
City.

Also a Confirmation to the City of the Customs of Foreign Goods bought and
sold.

Yet Strangers may buy things in the Gross for their own Use, but not to Sell
again.

HENR. 8. Chart. 1.
A Charter of Henry the 8th, Dated the 16th day of June in the 10th year of his
Reign, for all Inquisitions formerly taken in St. Martins, to be taken at
Guild Hall, or at any other place within the said City.

Except Inquisitions in Eyers, to be taken at the Circuits of the Tower of
London, and for the Goal Delivery at Newgate.

HENR. 8. Chart. 2.
Another Charter to the City, of the Office of Keeper of the Great Beam and
common Balance of Weight, for weighing of all Merchandises of A vou du pois,
and also all Weights whatsoever. And also Tronage, that is to say, the weighing
of Lead, Wax, Pepper, Dome, Madder, and all other such Wares, (confirmed to the
City) formerly granted them by King Henry the 4th.

The keeping of the Weights and Beams to be and remain at the Will of the
Commonalty of the City, to be kept in the custody of good sufficient men expert
in the same.

The Major, Commonalty, and Citizens ordained Keepers of the great Beam,
Balance, and Weights aforesaid.

And also to Make, Name, and Assign from time to time all and all manner of
Clerks, Porters, Servants and Ministers of the great Beam, and Balance, and of
the Iron Beam, and of the Beam of the Styll-yard, and the Weights aforesaid,
and also to remove any Officer or Minister, and to make, constitute and place
others in his or their Place, as often as to them shall seem expedient.

The same to be to the Use of the Major and Commonalty of the City, without any
Account to be delivered, made, given, or paid in this Behalf for the Premises,
or any of them.

EDW. 6.
For the Consideration of 647 l. 2. s. 1 d. paid to the Treasurer of the Court
of Augmentation by the Major and Commonalty of London, has granted to the said
Major, etc. several Messuages, Tenements, Closes, and Parcels of Ground in
Southwark in Com' Surrey; except the Capital House called Southwark Place, and
the Park, and the Buildings and Ground called the Antelope there.

And further grants to them the Lordship and Manner of Southwark, with the
Appurtenances in Com' Surrey, appertaining to the late dissolved Monastry of
Bermondsey, except before therein excepted.

And further grants to them the Manor and Borough of Southwark in the said
County, parcel of the Possessions of the Archbishop and Archbishopric of
Canterbury, and certain Rents thereout coming.

And further, Grants all Woods, Underwoods, and Trees, and the Soil and Ground
of the same, and the Reversion and yearly Profits thereof.

And also grants the Premises in as large manner as the Duke of Suffolk, or any
Abbot of Bermondsey, or Archbishop of Canterbury did enjoy the same, and as
largely as it came to Edward the Sixth, or Henry the Eighth.

And for the Consideration of 500 Marks, Has granted to the said Major and
Commonalty, in and through the Borough of Southwark, and the Parishes, St.
Saviors, St. Olives, St. Georges, and St. Thomas Hospital, Kent-street,
Blackman-street, and Newington, all Waifes, Strays, Treasure, found Goods of
Traitors, Fellons, Fugitives, outlawed Persons, Deodans. And that they shall
have the Assize and Assay of Bread, Wine, Beer and Ale, and all Victuals, and
things whatsoever set to Sale in the said Town, and what pertains to the Clerk
of the Market.

And the Punishment of all Persons selling Wine, Beer, Ale, and others
exercising Arts howsoever.

And all Forfeitures, Fines, and Amerciaments, and all other things whatsoever,
belonging to the said King and his Heirs.

And the Execution of Writs and all Warrants, and the Returns of the same.

And shall have there, and through all the said Town, Borough, and Precincts
one Fair to endure three days, ( viz. the seventh, eighth, ninth days of
September, together with a Pye-powder Court, to hear all Actions, Plaints and
Pleas; together with all Summons, Attachments, Arrests, Issues, Fines,
Redemptions, and Commodities, and other Rights thereto belonging, without any
Let or Disturbance. And may have throughout the aforesaid Precincts Views of
Frank-pledge.

And may take and Arrest all Felons, Thieves, and other Malefactors within the
same Precincts, and bring them to the Goal of Newgate, there to be kept till by
Law delivered.

And that they may have the same Liberties as the King should have, if it were
in his hands.

And also to hold all Pleas, Actions, and Personal Suits, and all Contracts,
and demands within the said Borough, before the said Major, Aldermen, and
Sheriffs, in the Guild Hall, and Hustings to be holden in like Actions, Bills,
Plaints, Process, Arrests, Judgments, Executions, and in such manner as the
same has been executed in the Court before the said Major, Aldermen, and
Sheriffs of the said City.

And that the Sergeants at Mace of the said City, may Execute any manner of
Process about such Pleas and Execution of the same, as it has been used in the
said City.

And the Jurors making Default before the Major and Sheriffs of London, Then
such men Impannelled and Summoned shall be amerced, and shall forfeit such
Issues upon them returned, and such Forfeitures to be levied by the Ministers
of the said City.

And also the Major, etc. to have cognizance of Personal Actions arising within
the Precincts of Southwark, and the Issues of such Suits shall be Tried in the
same Courts, before the Major, Aldermen, and Sheriffs, by the men in Southwark.

That the Major, etc. may choose two Coroners in Southwark, and the said
Coroners so elected, may have full power to Execute the Office of Coroner, and
no other Coroner to intermeddle in the said Borough, or Precincts thereof.

The Major for the time being to be Escheator in Southwark, and shall have full
Power to make his Precept to the Sheriff of Surrey, to execute such things
there as belongs to the Office of Escheator, and no other Escheator to
intermeddle.

The said Major to be Clerk of the Market in Southwark, and the King's Clerk of
the Market not to intermeddle.

The Major, Commonalty and Citizens, shall for ever enjoy within the said
Borough all Franchises, Tolls, Stallages, Pickages, and other Privileges
whatsoever, which the Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. enjoyed, and none of our
Sheriffs or Officers to intermeddle there.

All the Inhabitants of Southwark to be under Government and Correction of the
Major and Officers of London, as the Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City
ought to be.

The Major and Commonalty to have the like Jurisdiction as in the said City of
London.

The Major, Recorder, and such Aldermen as have been Majors, to be Justices of
the Peace in the said Borough and County of Surry.

The said Major, etc. to have Markets in Southwark, on Monday, Wednesday,
Friday and Saturday, and all things which to a Market appertains for ever.

Except the Jurisdictions, Liberties and Franchises over the Capital Message
and Park in Southwark.

And except the King's Bench, with the Appurtenances, so long as it shall be
used for a Prison, as it then was.

This grants not to the Prejudice of the Steward or Marshal of the said King's
House.

Nor to John Gate Knight, one of the Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, during
Life; which Premises are of 35 l. 14. s. 4. d. yearly Value.

To hold and enjoy the said Manors, Messuages, and Premises, with the
Appurtenances (except before excepted) to the said Major and Commonalty of the
said City for ever; to be holden as of the Manors of East Greenwich in the
County of Kent, by Fealty only in free Soccage.

And grants the Rents and Profits thereof from Michaelmas then last past, of
the said King's Gift without Account.

The said King to save harmless the said Major and Commonalty against all
Rents, Corodies and Sums of Money whatsoever, to be paid or charged on the
Premises.

Saving the Services thereby reserved, and the ancient Fee-Farm of 10. l. for
the said Borough, paid by the Major and Commonalty into the said King's
Exchequer.

Jacob. Chart. 1.
That the Major and Commonalty of London have ever had the Office of Bailiff,
and Conservation of the River of Thames, to be occupied by the said Major,
during his Majoralty or his Deputy (that is to say) from Stanes Bridge in Com'
Middlesex, to a place called Kendall, alias Yeuland, alias Yeuleete, toward
the Sea and East, and Medway, and on every Shore and Wharf of the same.

And to take the Fees and Profits belonging to the same.

And to measure Coals and Grain, Salt and Apples, and other Fruits, Roots,
Onyons and all other Wares and Merchandises, brought into the Port of London by
any Vessel, and to take the Profits and Fees thereof.

And they being hindered, supposing the same not anciently by any lawful Grant
to belong to them, whereas it plainly appears, that they lawfully and
rightfully ought to receive the same.

The said King confirms the Fees and Profits to the said Major, that they may
execute the Office of Bailiff, to conserve the said River of Thames, from
Stanes Bridge to Yeeuleet, and in Medway, and the Port of London, and every
Bank of Shore thereof.

And to receive the Fees and Profits thereof as Bailiff, to the the use of the
Major and Commonalty.

And to enjoy the Office of measuring of Coals, Grain, Fruits, Roots, Onyons,
and other Merchandises to be brought to any Port of London.

To receive the Profits thereof, to the use of the said Major and Commonalty,
without the Kings hindrance or any other, without Account to be made for the
same.

No other Water Bailiff to intermeddle.

And grants the said Offices notwithstanding any Non-User or Abuser of the
same, and without the Hinderance of any of his Officers any Charter past to the
contrary.

JAC. Chart. 2.
He thereby confirms all former Charters and Customs to the City of London.

And grants a Restitution of all Liberties as fully as all their Predecessors
enjoyed them, or ought to enjoy them.

That although the said Major and Commonalty have not used or abused their
Liberties and Customs, they may use the same for time to come, without Let or
Hinderance.

To hold the same by the like Services, Fee-Farm Rents and Sums of Money, as
the same were formerly held of the said King, or of any of his Predecessors.

And thouugh the Search and Surveying of Oil, Hops, Soap, Salt, Butter, Cheese,
and other such like things, brought to the Port of the same City of London to
be sold, and the Measuring of Corn of any kind, Onyons, Salt, Sea-cole, Fruit,
and Shellfish measurable, and used to be measured, and brought to the City of
London to be measured, has appertained to the Major and Commonalty of the said
City, and their Predecessors, to be executed by the said Major, according to
the Statutes made concerning the same.

He does Ratify and Confirm the same Search, Surveying and Measuring, in and
by all things as the said Major, and Commonalty, and Citizens, or their
Successors, lawfully had or enjoyed the same before, and to the said Major and
Commonalty by the said Charter.

Grants, That the said City and Liberties do extend through the Circuits of St.
Trinity Parish near Aldgate, or the Dukes-Place, Great St. Bartholomews, and
Little St. Bartholomews, near Smithfield, Black-Friars, White-Friars, and the
Liberty of Cold Harbourough.

That the Inhabitants be under the Government of the said City; Provided the
Inhabitants of Black and White-Friars be exempted from all Taxes, etc. except
setting out Soldiers, and cleansing of Lanes, etc.

The Inhabitants to be quit from the Offices of Constable, Scavenger, etc.
within the City.

The Freemen of the City inhabiting in Black and White Friars, are Eligible
into all Offices, as Major, Sheriffs, etc. as other Freemen are.

Grants, That all Persons who dwell within the City, although not Freemen,
(except the Inhabitants of Black and White-Friars) be Taxed for the Houses in
which they dwell, according to the Custom of the City, and the Officers levy
the same, (except before excepted) by Distress, etc. to the Use aforesaid;
Provided any such who are not Freemen, are unjustly grieved, the Chancellor to
moderate such Taxes, etc.

Grants, That the Major, Recorder, and Aldermen who have been Majors, be
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, the Major and Recorder to be of the Quorum, with
power to take Security for the Peace, and to commit the Refusers.

That no other Justices of the Peace shall intermeddle.

That the Sheriffs shall be attendant to the aforesaid Justices.

Grants, That the Major, etc. may enjoy all Treasure found within the Precincts
before granted to the City. And to have these Patents under Seal, without Fine
in the Hamper or other Fees, etc.

Dated at Hampton Court, the 20th of September, of his Reign over England, etc.
the 5th. and of Scotland the 42d.
JAC. Chart. 3.
Grants the Major, etc. to have the Measuring and Weighing of all Coals at the
Port of London.

And to receive as a Fee 8 d. per Ton, to the Use of the City.

The Merchant enjoined not to unload his Coals till the Major have notice, and
shall give direction for the unlading and weighing, or measuring thereof, that
the Major may be able to render a ready Account, that so the Profits arising
thereby may be paid to the Kings Officers.

The selling of Coals by Retail in Lighters prohibited.

No Coals to be sold in any other Vessel, than such, which first brought them
into the said Port, unless upon some Key, Port, or Wharf, near the River of
Thames.

Covenants, the said City may enjoy the Premises for ever.

If any Defect be in the said Charter, or any Doubt or Scruple arise, the City
upon Request may have other Letters Patents.

Dated 25 September. the 12th of England, of Scotland the 48th.
CHARLES 1. Chart. 1.
Grants to the Major and Commonalty of the City of London, in consideration of
their good Services, All and singular the Letters Patents, Charters, and
Confirmations of all and singular the Grants of his Predecessors, except, as
hereafter is excepted.) And grants all and singular Lands, Tenements, Offices,
Jurisdictions, Franches, Quittals, Immunities, etc. which the said Major, etc.
or their Predecessors, etc. and Ratifies and Confirms the said former Charters.

And also grants to the said Major, etc. and their Successors, that they be
fully and wholly restored to all and singular their Authorities, Jurisdictions,
Liberties, etc. in as ample manner and Form as they or their Predecessors had
used or enjoyed the same heretofore. And for the intent that no Ambiguity,
Controversy, doubtful Construction, or Question of or about the Premises, from
thenceforth might arise, but be altogether taken away, for the Considerations
aforesaid, Confirms the said Grant to the Major, etc. and their Successors, To
hold the same for the like Services, Fees, Fee-farm Rent, Sums of Money and
Demands, by which or what the same were formerly held. And recites that which
Henr. 6. by his Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster the 26th of
October, in the 23d year of his Reign, granted to the Citizens of the City,
etc. That the said Citizens and their Successors for ever, should have all
Soiles, Commons, Purpressures and Improvements in all Wastes, Commons, Streets,
Ways, and other places in the City and Suburbs, and in the Water of Thames,
with the Profits of the same, and that they may improve. And whereas by an Act
of Parliament made at Westminster in the 28th year of the said Henr. 6. it was
Enacted, That the said King should take, resume, and seize into his hands and
possession, all what he had granted, to hold and retain the same in the like
State he had them. And that all Letters Patents granted by the said King should
be void. And recites, that H. 7. by his Letters Patents bearing date the 23d of
July in the 20th year of his Reign, Confirms to the Major, etc. all former
Grants; And questions the Validity of both the Patents of H. 6. and H. 7. by
reason of the Act of Parliament concerning the Resumption, and by the same
takes away the Doubt. And grants to the said Major, Commonalty, and Citizens,
and their Successors, the same things in the said Patents mentioned. And grants
to the Major, etc. That the Major and Recorder of the City for the time being,
and the Aldermen who have been Majors, although they shall de dismissed of
their Majoralty, shall stand Aldermen, and that the three Senior Aldermen be
Justices of the Peace, although they have not been Majors. The Major, Recorder,
and Aldermen to be Justices of the Peace within the City of London, and
Liberties thereof.

And also grants to the Mayor, etc. That the Major and Recorder, and such
Aldermen, as aforesaid, or four of them, but the said Major, or Recorder to be
one, may hold Sessions of the Peace, to inquire after all manner of Murders,
Felonies, etc. And also to inquire after all unjust Weights and Measures, and
grants them full Power to Do and Execute all such things which the Justices and
Keepers of the Peace in any other County of England may or ought, by virtue of
any Statute or Ordinance, by virtue of any Commission to Execute or Do for the
keeping of the Peace. And that the Sheriffs of the said City and their
Successors be attending and aiding to the said Keepers of the Peace of the said
City, when they shall be duly required to do the same.

And also grants to the said Major all Recognizances to be taken and forfeited,
for not appearing at the Sessions. And also all manner of Recognizances taken
by Justices of the Peace, concerning the keeping and maintaining of Bastard
Children, and keeping the City from Inmates, suppressing of Alehouses, and
also the Forfeitures of Recognizances taken for the Appearances of Prisoners.
And also Fines and Issues of Jurors, and all other Fines, Issues, and
Amerciaments, together with Assessments, and Levies of the same, when, and as
often as need shall require. And then excepts all manner of Issues and
Amerciaments, called Fines and Issues Royal. And further grants the said Major,
etc. all Recognizances that are forfeited or to be forfeited, taken for the
Preservation of the River of Thames, without any Account to be made for the
same. And also grants them the Fines and Amerciaments that shall be imposed by
the Commissioners of Sewers, without any Account to be rendered for the same.

And also grants to the Major, etc. all those Fields called Inward Moor, and
Outward Moor, in the Parish of St. Giles without Cripplegate, St. Stephen in
Colemanstreet, and St. Botolph without Bishopsgate, or in some, or any of them.
And also West Smithfield, That they hold in the Field called Smithfield, Fairs
and Markets, and to receive and have Package, Stallage, Tolls and Profits
thereunto belonging, Waste Grounds and Streets reserved out of the Grant, to
hold the same in Common Burgage, and not in Capite, or Knights Service, and by
the same pardons all Issues from the Major, etc. And that no Writ of Ad quod
dampnum, to be procured, Issued, or prosecuted. And also pardons all manner of
Entries, Intrusions and Ingresses of the Major, Commonalty, and Citizens. That
this grant shall not lessen any Proclamation concerning Buildings in the said
City. What Encroachments that have been made upon any of the Church Walls
within the City of London, shall be subject to such Reformation as He or his
Privy Council shall appoint.

And also grants to the Major, etc. the Office of Garbling of Merchandises, and
also grants them Garblers, To hold the said Office, together with all the Fees,
Profits, and Emoluments belonging to the same, without rendering any Account for
the same. And for such Goods and Spices that heretofore have not paid any Fee,
and has not heretofore been Imported, such Fees to be settled by the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal, Steward of the Household, two of
the Justices of the King's Bench, or Common Bench, for the time being, or any
four of them at least, Except and reserving all such like Grants of the
Garbling of Tobacco. And grants to the said Mayor, etc. the Office of Gauging
of Wines, Oils, and other Merchandises, To have and to hold the said Office of
Gauger, with all and singular the Fees, Profits, and Emoluments, without
rendering any Account for the same.

And also grants to the said Major, etc. the great Standard, and Common
Balance, ordained to weigh between Merchant and Merchant, and also the Office
of Keeper of the great Balance, for the weighing of all Merchandise of Avoir
du pois, To have and to hold the said Office, with the Fees, Profits, Wages,
Rewards, and Emoluments thereunto belonging, without rendering any Account for
the same.

And also by the said Grant does Erect and Create through the said City and
Liberties thereof, and in and through the Borough of Southwark, a certain
Office called Outroper, or Common-Cryer, to and for the selling of
Household Stuff, etc. that such Goods may be sold by Outcry, which said Office
he grants to the Major, etc. to have and exercise the said Office by such
Officer as shall be admitted by the Major and Commonalty for the time being,
they being assembled in Common Council, or the major part of them, and that it
shall and may be lawful to and for the Major, Commonalty, or their Deputy, to
demand and take for the Use of the Major and Commonalty, the Wares and Fees
expressed in a certain Schedule hereunto annexed. And thereby charges and
commands, that no other Person do sell any Goods, Chattels, Housholdstuff, etc.
or other things in public claim, called Outcry, in the said City, or
Liberties of the same, and Borough of Southwark, under pain of his Royal
Displeasure.

And also grants to the Major, etc. and does thereby declare, the Relicts and
Widows of Freemen using Manual Arts and Occupations, as long as they shall
continue Widows, may be licensed to use and exercise the same Arts and Manual
Occupations in the said City, although they were not educated, by the space of
seven years as Apprentices, notwithstanding the Statute of the 5th of Queen
Elizabeth, or any other Statute whatsoever. And also, that no Market be kept
within seven Miles of the City.

And also grants to the Major and Commonalty, the Major, etc. by the mouth of
the Recorder, to record their Customs: and if at any time it shall happen that
the Custom of the City lie pleaded in any of his Majesty's Courts, that then
such Custom to be certified to the Court by the Mouth of the Recorder, and no
Jury or Enquiry thereon to be had, and thereupon they may proceed to the
Caption and Determination of the Plea.

And also grants to the Major, etc. Treasure found in the said City, or
Liberties of the same: and also waived and strayed Goods and Chattels of all
Felons and Fugitives, for Felonies committed in the City or Liberties thereof.
And also grants that the Major of the City may name to the Chancellor of
England two of the Aldermen of the City, one to be Justice of the Peace in
Middlesex, and the other in Surry, and shall be incerted with others in the
Commission.

And in the said Charter recites, that whereas several the Sons of Freemen of
the said City and others, who have served seven years Apprentiship, does refuse
to take their Freedom, but notwithstanding use the Trade of Merchandising,
whereby they obtain great Estates, and by not taking their Freedom, free
themselves from the Burden of public Office, for such Persons who do so
trade, or are Sons of Freemen, or served seven years as an Apprentice, is
prohibited to Merchandise before he has taken his Freedom, and is to bring a
Testimonial from the Chamberlain or under Chamberlain, that they are admitted
into the Liberty of the said City. And also commands, that no Merchant being a
Freeman of the City, shall take any Apprentice to serve him for less than
seven years, to be bound and enrolled according to the Custom of the said City,
and not otherwise. And recites an Act of Parliament, made in the third of King
James, that every Citizen and Freeman of the City of London, and every other
Person and Persons inhabiting, or which should inhabit in the said City of
London, or the Liberties of the same, being a Tradesman, Victualer, Labourer,
who then had or from thenceforth shall have any Debt or Debts owing to him or
them not amounting to 40 s. by any Citizen, or any other Person or Persons,
being a Victualer, Tradesman or Labourer, who does or shall inhabit within the
City or the Liberties of the same, may cause such like Debtor or Debtors, to be
warned or summoned by the Beadle or Officer of the Court of Requests at
Guildhal, London, for the time being, to be left at the Dwelling House of such
Debtor or Debtors, or by any reasonable Warning to be given to appear before
the Commissioners of the said Court of Request, as by the said Act appears. By
the same he constitutes, that there shall be a certain Office of a Clerk of the
said Court, and that he shall be appointed by the Major, Commonalty, and
Citizens assembled in Common Council, or the greater part thereof, to be Clerk,
there to write, enter, and register Warrants, Precepts, Processes, Acts,
Orders, and Executions of the Court; and for his Labor and Attentance to have
and receive the Fees and Wages expressed in a Schedule, or Table hereafter
mentioned or set down. And also grants them the Office of a Beadle of the said
Court, to be named and appointed by the Major, Commonalty and Citizens
assembled in Common Council or the greater Part of them. To summon all such
Persons to appear to answer such Persons appointed in the said Act, and to
serve and execute Warrats, Precepts and Processes of the said Court, and to
receive for their Wages and Labor the Fees expressed in a certain Schedule or
Table hereafter mentioned or set down.

And whereas diverse Burglaries, Felonies, Robberies, Clandestine Stealings, and
Thefts of Goods etc. was daily committed in the said City and Liberties, to the
grievous Damage of the People, for the better Discovery of such Offenders, and
of things lost, it is granted and constituted, that from thenceforth, there
shall be a certain Office of Register to be made to retailing Brokers for any
Goods etc. And grants to the Major, Commonalty, etc. to execute the said Office
by them or their Deputies; first to be admitted by the Major, and Commonalty,
and Citizens assembled in Common Council, or the greater Part of them. And that
it shall and may be lawful for them or their Deputy, to take and receive such
Fees as are in a Table hereafter mentioned, without any Account to be given for
the same

And also grants to the Major, Commonalty, etc. to expose and hang over the
Streets, Ways, and Allies of the said City, Signs and Posts of Signs, affixed
to their Houses and Shops, for the better finding out such Citizens Dwellings,
without Impediment, Molestation, or Interruption of the King or his Successors.

And also recites a Patent of Hen. 8th, dated the 13th of Jan. in the 28th year
of his Reign, of a Grant to the Major and Commnalty, etc. for the keeping,
ordering, and governing of an Hospital called Bethlem, and all the Manors,
etc. made and constituted by the said Letters Patents, to the said Major and
Commonalty for ever. And also for the better enabling and supporting of the
house of the Poor in West-Smithfield, confirms the Indenture made between the
said King Henry the Eighth, and the Major, Commonalty, and Citizens, and grants
them the Ordering and Government of the House or Hospital, called Bethlem, with
Manors, Lands, etc. thereunto belonging. To have and to hold the Custody and
Government of the said Hospital, and the Manors, Lands, etc. for ever, to the
Uses, Intents, and Purposes in the Charter of Henry the Eighth, But that the
Revenues, of the said Hospital be employed to no other Use, than charitable
Uses in the said Hospital.

And also does charge and command, that the said Major, Commonalty etc. do not
grant any of the said Manors, Lands, etc. not for above the Term, of 21 years,
to commence from the time of the making of it, reserving half of the yearly
Value, at least of such Manors, Lands etc. so Leases to be paid during the said
Term, to the Major, Commonalty, etc. to the Uses above mentioned.

And also grants to the Major, Commonalty, etc. That it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said Major, Commonalty, etc. to purchase to them and their
Successors, of any Person whatsoever five Acres of Land, lying and being in St.
Giles in the Fields in the County of Middlesex, being then in the occupation of
Margaret Pennel, although the same be held of the King in Capite, To have and
to hold to the said Major and Commonalty, etc. for ever. And also gives License
to all Persons that are concerned in the same, to sell, notwithstanding they
are held in Capite by Knights Service, and notwithstanding the Statute of
putting of Lands and Tenements in Mortmain. And also grants them full power to
build upon the said five Acres without License, notwithstanding any Statute to
the contrary.

And also does further grant to the Major, Commonalty, etc. That the recited
Letters Patents and the Inrolment, shall be in all things found valid, good,
sufficient, and effectual in Law, without further Confirmation, License or
Toleration to be procured or obtained, notwithstanding any Writ or Writs of Ad
quod dampnum being not issued out, returning before the making of the said
Patent, notwithstanding any Misnomer in any part of the said Grant.

And also grants to the said Major, Commonalty, etc. That they shall have the
Letters Patents made and sealed under the Great Seal of England, without paying
any Fine or Fee great or little, to the Hamper or otherwise.

Dated at Westminster the 18th day of October, in the 14th year of our Reign.
Fees taken by the Common Outroper.
FOR selling of Goods in every Shilling. For writing and keeping the Books, 1
d. per l. To the Crier for crying the Goods, 1 s.
Clerks Fees of the Court of Conscience in London.
For every Plaint 2 d. For every Appearance 2 d. For every Order 4 d. For every
Remittance to the Common Law 4 d. For every Precept or Warrant to commit to
Prison 6 d. For every Search 2 d. For every Satisfaction acknowledged on an
Order 6 d. For Warning every Person within the Liberty 4 d. For Warning every
Person without the Liberties 6 d. For serving every Precept or Warrant 4 d.
Fees taken by the Register of Broakers.
For the Bond to be entered into by every Broaker, Brogger and Huckster, to the
Chamber 8 d. For every Bargain, Contract, Pawn, for or upon which there shall
be lent or given 1 s. or above, and under 5 s. For every the like that shall be
lent 5 s. or more, and under 20 s. For every the like on which shall be lent 20
s. or more, and under 40 s. 1. d. For every the like on which shall be lent 40
s. or more 2 d.
CHARLES 1. Chart. 2.
There is another Charter of the said King, wherein he grants to the Major and
Commonalty of the City of London, the Office and Paccage of all Cloths, Wools,
Woolfells, Calves Skins, Goats Skins, Bales of Tin, and all other Merchandises
whatsoever to be packed, piped, barrelled or otherwise, out of the said Port,
to be transported beyond the Seas, as the Goods and Merchandises as well of
Aliens, and Persons born under Foreign Allegiance, wheresoever they should be
customed. And also the Office, as well for Surveying of Goods and Wares, of any
Merchant Alien, or Denizen, whose Father was or should be an Alien born beyond
the Seas to be brought in by the way of Merchandises, and also grants the
Billage of Goods and Wares of such Merchants aforesaid, within the Port of
London, in any Ship, Boat, Barge or Vessel whatsoever, all which was granted
for the several Charters of Edw. 4. in the first and 18 year of his Reign, and
also by a Charter of Hen. 8. in the third year of his Reign, and was confirmed
by Authority of Parliament. And also he confirms the said Grant to the Major,
Commonalty etc. for the Consideration of the Sum of 4200 l. and so confirms the
said Office to the Major, Commonalty, etc. And grants them the Fees annexed in
a certain Table hereafter. And furthermore grants them the Office of Paccage,
with all and singular the Fees Profits and Emoluments to the said Office
belonging or appertaining, annexed in a certain Table hereafter. And also to
exercise the said Office by their Deputy or Deputies without rendering any
Account for the same, and without incurring any Penalty or Forfeiture of the
said Office.

And that no Porter or Carrier, or any Person or Persons whatsoever, shall
presume or intermit, or intrude themselves to carry or lade any of the said
Goods or Merchandise from any Wharf without the special Approvement or by ^^nce
of the Major, Commonalty, etc. or their Officer^ (...) Deputies. And that such
Porter or Carrier that shall carry, shall be appointed by the Major,
Commonalty, etc. or their sufficient Deputies, and the said Porters to be paid
for their Wages, as the Table hereafter mentions, and no Account to be
rendered for the same, except the Rent hereafter reserved, and so confirms the
said Grant of Scavage, Paccage and Billage to the Major, Commonalty, and
Citizens of the said City for ever, without incurring any Penalty of the said
Offices of Employments, or either of them. And also that all Aliens and
Denizens shall from time to time, make and deliver to the Major, Commonalty,
etc. or their Deputies, or Collectors, Bills of Entry of all and every the
Goods Merchandises and Wares that shall from time to time be brought within the
Liberties and Franchises of the City and Suburbs thereof, upon Pain of further
Punishment, yielding and paying by the said Major, Commonalty, etc. at the
Exchequer at Westminster, 3 l. 6. s. 8 d. at the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, and the Annunciation of the Blessed Lady, the Virgin Mary, by equal
Portions every year to be paid. And further, that if any Merchant-Alien or
Denizen, shall at any time by any sinister way or false Practice, conceal such
Goods and Merchandises, whereby to defraud the said Major, Commonalty, etc. of
their Just Fees to them appointed and confirmed; That then it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said Major, and to and for the lawful Deputy or Deputies
of the said Major and Commonalty of the said City, to administer an Oath to
such Person or Persons, as he or they shall suspect to conceal such Goods and
Merchandises.

Dated at Westminster the 5th of September, in the 16th Year of our Reign.
THE Scavage Table OF RATES INWARDS.
A
Alum the C Weight qt. 112. l. ij d Amotto the C. qt. Five Score iiij d Apples
and Pears the little Barrel q Aquavitae the Hogshead vj d Argil White or Red
the C. Weight qt. 112 l. id ob
B
Babbies Heads the Dozen ob Bacon the C. weight qt. 112 l. iij d Bandstrings
the Dozen Knots q Balks Great the C. qt. Six Score xviij d Middle the C. qt.
Six Score. xiiij d Small the C. qt. Six Score. iiij d
Barlings the C. qt. Six Score iiij d Barley the Quarter qt. Eight Bushels ob
Barilla or Saffora the Barrel qt. C. Weight iiij d Basket Rods the Dozen
Bundles iiij d Bast Ropes the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ob Battery Basherows or
Kettles the C. Weight qt. 112 l. vj d Beef the Barrel i d Bell-Mettal the C.
weight qt. 112 l. ij d Beans the Quarter ob Blacking, or Lamb-Black, the C.
Weight qt. 112 l. iij d Bottles of all sorts the Dozen ob Boards Barrel Boards
the Thousand iiij d Clapboards the C. qt. Six Score i d Pipe-Boards the C. qt.
Six Score i d
Borattos or Bombasins Narrow the single Piece, not above xv Yards ij d Broad
the single Piece, not above xv Yards iij d
Books unbound the Basket or Maund viij d Bowe-staves the C qt. Six Score ij d
Brass Andirons, Lavercocks, Chafing-Dishes, and all other Brass or Latten
Wrought the C. qt. Five Score. iij d Brimstone the C. Weight 112 l. ob Bristles
the Dozen Pound ob Buckroms Of Germany the Dozen Pieces iij d Of France the
Dozen Pieces ij d
Buffins Liles and Mocadoes Narrow the single Piece, not above xv Yards i d
Broad the single Piece, not above xv Yards ij d
Bull-rushes the Load i d Burrs for Millstones the C. qt. Five Score iij d
Butter the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d
C
CAble-ropes for Cordage the C. Weight qt. 112. l. i d Cabinets Great the Piece
ij d Small the Piece i d
Caddas or Cruel Ribbons the Dozen Pieces; qt. each Piece xxxvj Yards i d
Candle Week the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d Candles of Tallow the Dozen Pound q
Capers the C. Pound qt. Five Score. ij d Capravens the C. qt. Six Score. iij d
Cards Playing Cards the small Groce, qt. 12 Dozen Pair ij d Wool-Cards the
Dozen Pair ob
Carpets Turkey, Persia, East India, and Venice, Long, the Piece. vj d Of the
same, or like sorts, Short, the Piece iiij d Carpets of all other sorts the
Piece ob
Cases For Looking-Glasses gilt from No. 3. to No. 10. the Dozen i d ob For
Looking-Glasses ungilt, the Dozen ob
Chamlets Moy-hair, and Turkey Grograms, each xv Yards i d ob Cheese the C.
Weight qt. 112 l. i d Cherries the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Cloth French
Woollen each Twenty Yards viij d Scarlet the Yard i d
Cochenele Silvester, or Campecha the Pound ob Of all other sorts the Pound i d
Combs of Box or Light Wood the Groce qt. xij Dozen q Copper Bricks or Plates,
Round or Square the C. Weight iiij d Copperas the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d
Coral Rough or Polisht the Mast qt. xxij l. ij d Cork the C. Weight qt. 112 l.
i d Cork the Dozen Pieces, for Shoe-makers q
D
DEal Boards of all sorts the C. qt. Six Score xij d Dogs of Earth the small
Groce qt. xij Doz. i d ob Durance of Duretty With Thread, each xv Yards i d ob
With Silk, each xv Yards ij d
Drugs Ambergris the Ounce i d ob Allosicatrina the Pound ob Barley Hull'd
the C. Weight, qt. 112 l. i d Carway and Comin-seed the C. Weight i d ob
China-roots the C. Weight qt. five Score xviij d Civet the Ounce 1 d Gum
Ammoniac the C. l. qt. Score vj d Musk The Ounce i d Cods the Dozen i d
Saunders White or Red the C. qt. Five Score vj d Treacle Common the C. qt.
Five Score ij d Turpentine Com. the C weight, qt. 112 l. i d

F
FEathers for Beds the C weight qt. 112 l. ij d Fish Cod-fish the C. qt. six
Score iiij d Cole-fish the C. qt. six Score i d Eeles the Barrel i d Eeles
Quick the Ship Lading x s. Herrings white or red the Last vi d Lings the C. qt.
six Score vi d Lub-fish the C. qt. six Score ii d Croplings the C. qt. six
Score i d Titlings the C. qt. six Score ob Sturgeon, The Firkin 1 d. The Keg ob
Salmon the Barrel i d ob
Flax the C weight qt. 11^ l. ij d Flax Undrest the C weight qt. 112 l. i d ob
Dressed or wrought the C weight qt. 112 l. iiij d
Frankincense the C. qt. 112. l. i d ob Fustians Barmillions the piece, or two
half pieces, qt. x^ yards each half piece ii d Naple Fustians, Tripe, or
Velver, the piece, qt. xv yards ii d
Furrs Bever-Skins the piece ob Bever-Bellies or Wombs the dozen iiij d Budge
tawed or untawed the C. qt. v score ii d Fox-Skins the C. qt. five score iiij d
Foins without Tails the dozen i d ob

G
GAlley-Dishes each 12 dozen i d Gauls the C weight qt. 112 l. ii d Glass for
Windows the Chest or Case iij d Glass, called Venice Drinking-glasses the dozen
ob Glasses Looking-Glasses Halfpenny Ware the Groce qt. 12 Doz. q Penny ware
the Groce, qt. 12 Dozen ob Of Steel small the dozen ob Of Steel large the Dozen
i d Of Crystal small the Doz. under No. 6. i d Of Crystal middle the Doz. No.
6. ii d Of Crystal the doz. Numb. 7, 8, 9, 10. iiii d Of Crystal the dozen
No. 11, 12. xviij d
Glass-Stone-plates for Spectacles rough, the dozen ob Glass-Plates or Sights
for Looking-Glasses unfoil'd Of Crystal small under No. 6. the doz. ob Of
Crystal No. 6. the dozen i d Of Crystal No. 7, 8, 9, 10. the dozen ii d Of
Crystal, No. 11, 12. the dozen 12 d
Gloves of Spanish Leather the dozen pair ob Grain for Dyers Of Scarlet Powder
the pound ob Of Sevil in Berries and Grain of Portugal, or Rotta the pound q
Grocery Almonds the C weight qt. 112 l. iii d Anniseeds the C weight qt. 112
l. ii d Cloves the C weight qt. Five score xviij d Currants the C weight qt.
112 l. iii d Dates the C weight qt. 112 l. iiij d Figgs the C weight qt. 112 l.
i d Fusses of Cloves the C. qt. five score viii d Ginger the C. qt. five score
xii d Liquorish the C weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Mace the C l. qt. five score ii
s Nutmegs the C l. qt. five score xviij d Pepper the C l. qt. five score vi d
Prunes the C weight qt. 112 l. i d Raisins of the Sun the C weight, qt. 112 l.
ij d Raisins great, or Malaga, the C weight qt. 112 l. i d Cinnamon the C weight
qt. five score xij d Sugar Refined, the C weight qt. 112 l. x d. Candy Brown or
White the hundred weight viij d Muscavadoes and White the hundred weight iiij d
St. Thome and Penellis the C weight ij d

Goats-Hair the C l. qt. five score vj d. Gunpowder the Barrel qt. 112 l. iii
d. Gum Arabic the C weight, qt. 112 l. ii d.
H
HAwks of all sorts, the Hawk ii d Hatts Beast or Straw-Hats the dozen q Beast
or Straw-hats plain the groce qt. 12 doz. i d ob Wool-fells the dozen i d ob
Demy-casters the piece ob Beaver-hats the piece ii d.
Headlings for Pipes, Hogsheads, or Barrels, the thousand ii d Heath for
Brushes the C weight qt. 112 l. i d Hemp undrest the C weight qt. 112 l. i d
dressed the C weight qt. 112 l. ii d
Hides Buff-Hides the piece ob Cow-hides or Horse-hides the dozen iii d
Honey the Barrel i d ob Horses and Mares, each Horse or Mare vi d Hops the
hundred weight qt. 112. l. ii d
I
INdico the C pound qt. five score ii s Indico Dust the C pound qt. five score
viii d Incle Wrought the dozen pound i d ob Roles the 12 pieces of 36 yards
each piece i d Unwrought the C l. qt. five score iiij d
Iron wrought the hundred weight qt. 112 l. i d Iron unwrought the Ton vi d
Iron Pots the dozen i d ob
L
LAttin Vocat Shaven Lattin the C weight qt. 112. l. vi d Black Lattin the C
weight, qt. 112 l. iii d
Lace Bone-lace of Thread the dozen yards ob Silk-Bone-Lace the pound qt. 16
Ounces ii d Silk-lace of all other sorts the l. qt. 16 Ounces i d
Lemonds The thousand i d Juice of Lemonds the Pipe vi d Pickled Lemonds the
Pipe iii d
Linseed the Quarter i d Leaves of Gold the C Leaves qt. five score q Leures
for Hawks the dozen ob Leather Bazel Leather the dozen Skins ob Hangings Gilt
the piece iii d Leather for Masks the dozen pound ii d
Lutes the dozen iiii d Lute-strings Catling the great Groce qt. xii small
Groce of Knots i d Minikins the Groce qt 12. doz. of Knots ob
Linnens British Cloth the C. Else. qt. Five Score ij d Brabant Cloth, Emden
Cloth, Flemish Cloth, Freeze Cloth, Gentish Cloth, Holland Cloth, Issingham
Cloth, Overisily Cloth, Rowse Cloth, Cow-field Cloth, or Platts, each xxx Else
ij d Callicoes or Dutties the Piece ob Cambricks the whole Piece qt. xiij Else
ij d Damask for Tabling Of Holland making the dozen Yards iiij d Of Slecia
making the dozen Yards ij d
Damask for Towelling and Napkenning Of Holland making the Dozen Yards i d Of
Slecia making the Dozen Yards ij d
Diaper for Tabling Of Holland making the Dozen Yards i d Of Slecia making the
Dozen Yards ob
Diap. for Towelling and Napkenning Of Holland making the dozen Yards i d Of
Slecia making the dozen Yards ob
French Canvas and Line, Ell and half quarter broad or upwards, the C Else qt.
Six Score iij d French or Normandy Canvas and Line, Narrow Vandales, or Vittry
Canvas, Dutch Barras and Hessens Canvas the C Else qt. Six Score ij d Gutting
and Spruce Canvas Drillinges Pack, Duck Hinderlands, middle good Headlock,
Muscovia Linen narrow, Hambrough Cloth Narrow, and Irish Cloth the C. Elis qt.
Six Score i d Hambrough and Slecia Cloth Broad the C. Else. qt. Six Score iij d
Poldavis the Bolt i d Lawns The whole Piece qt. xiij Else ij d Callicoe Lawns
the Piece ob French Lawns the piece ob
Lockrams the Piece of all sorts qt. 106 Else i d ob Southwick the C. Else qt.
Six Score i d ob Strasbrow Linen each xxx Else i d Linnens Striped or Tufted
Canvas, with Thread the Piece qt. xv Yards i d Striped, Tufted, or Quilted
Canvas with Silk the Piece qt. xv Yards i d
Littimus the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d

M
Malt the Quarter ob Magnus the hundred Weight qt. 112 l. i d Masks of Velvet
or Satin the Dozen i d Masts Great the Mast ij d Middle the Mast i d Small the
Mast ob
Mapps Printed the Ream i d Madder Crop Madder, and all other Bale Madder the
hundred Weight qt. 112 l. ij d Fatt Madder the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Mull
Madder the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ob
Meal the Last qt. xij Barrels iiij d Mocado Ends the dozen Pounds i d ob
O
OArs the hundred, qt. Six Score ij d Oats the Quarter ob Oil Civil Oil,
Majorca Oil, Minorca Oil, Province Oil, Portugal Oil, and Sallat Oil the Ton
ijs viij d Rape Oil and Linseed Oil the Ton ij s vj d Train Oil of Green-land
or New Foundland the Ton xvj d
Olives the Hogshead iiij d Onyons The hundred Bunches i d Seed the C weight
qt. 112 l. iij d
Oranges the 1000 i d Orchal the hundred weight qt. 112 l. i d ob
P
PAck-thred the hundred, qt. Five Score i d ob Pans Vocat Dripping or
Frying-pans the C. Weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Warming-Pans the dozen i d ob
Paper Brown the hundred Bundles vj d Of all other sorts each Five Score Reams
xx d
Pease the Quaater ob Pitch and Tar the Last iij d Plates Single, White or
Black the C Plates i d Double, White or Black, the C Plates ij d
Pomegranates the thousand ij d Pork the Barrel i d ob Pots Of Earth or Stone
covered, the C. qt. Five Score i d Of Earth or Stone uncovered, the C Cast qt.
a Gallon to every Cast, whether in one Pot or more ij d

Q
QUales the Dozen q Quicksilver the C Pound qt. Five Score x d Quinces the
hundred weight qt. Five Score ob
R
RApe-seed the Quarter i d Rozen the Ton viij d Rice the hundred weight qt. 112
l. i d Rye the Quarter ob Rims for Sieves the Groce qt. 12 doz. ob
S
SAffron the Pound ob Saffliore the hundred Pound qt. Five Score iiij d Salt
the Weigh ij d Saltpeter the hundred weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Says Double
Says, or Flanders Serges, the Piece iij d Hounscot Says, and Middle Says the
Piece ij d
Shumach the hundred weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Silk Vocat Bridges Silk,
Grenades, Naples, Organsile, Pole and Spanish, Satin Silk, Slear Silk, Fine
and Throne Silk, the Pound containing xvj Ounces, i d Raw China Silk, the pound
qt. xxiiij Oun. i d Ferret or Floret Silk, Fillozel, Sleave Silk course the
pound qt. xvj Ounces ob Raw Long Silk the Pound qt. xiiij Ounces ob Raw Short
Silk, and Raw Morea Silk the Pound qt. xxiiij Ounces q
Silk Stockings the Pair ob Silk Boradoes of Silk, Catalopha, China, Damask
Silk, Chamlet, China Grogram, Tabby Grogram, Phillosellas Narrow, Tabbies of
Silk Towers, Taffaty, the dozen Yards ij d Silk Grogram Narrow, Silk Say
Calunaucoes and Phillosellas Broad, the Dozen Yards iij d Silk Grograms Broad,
Caff or Damask the Dozen Yards iiij d
Silk wrought Sattins Bolonia, Lukes, Jean, and other of like making, the dozen
yards vi d Bridges Satin, China and Turkey Satin the dozen yards i d ob
Sarcenets Of Bolonia and Florence the dozen Else i d ob Of China the dozen
Else i d
Cypres Of Silk Broad the dozen yards ob Of Silk Narrow, each containing xxiiij
yards q
Taffaties Ell broad each dozen yards ii d China and Levant, each dozen yards ob
Velvets China Velvet, each dozen yards i d All other Velvets or Plushes each
dozen yards vi d

Skins Cordovant Skins the dozen ii d Goat Skins in the Hair the dozen i d Kid
Skins of all sorts the C. qt. five score iii d
Smalts the C pound qt. five score iiii d Spars Bonnispars the C. qt. five
score iii d Cantspars the C. qt. six score ii d Small Spars the C. qt. six
score i d
Stones Dog-stones the Last vi d Marble-stones the Ton viii d Millstones the
piece vi d Quern-stones the Last ii d
Sword-blades the dozen i d. Staves Pipe or Hogshead Staves the thousand vi d
Barrel Staves the thousand iii d Firkin Staves the thousand i d ob
Steel Long Steel, Wisp Steel, and such like the hundred weight qt. 112 l. ii d
Gad Steel the half Barrel iiij d
Succads wet or dry the hundred qt. five score x d Syder the Ton iiij d
T
TAllow the hundred weight qt. 112 l. i d Tapistry With Hair the C Flemish Else
qt. 5 score iiii d With Wool the C Flemish Else qt. 5 score vi d With Caddas
the C Flem. Else qt. 5 score xii d With Silk the dozen Flemish Else ii d
Tarras the Barrel q Tazels the thousand q Tykes of all sorts, the Tyke i d ob
Thread Bridges Thread the dozen l. i d Outnal Tred the dozen l. i d Whited-brown,
or piecing Thread, the 12 l. id ob Sisters Thread the pound ob Lions or Paris
Thread the Bale qt. C Bolts viii d
Tobacco Spanish Virinus, Brazil Tobacco, the C. qt. five score ii s St.
Christophers Tobacco, or the like, the C. qt. five score ii d
Tow the C weight qt. 112 l. ob Tyles vocat. Pan-tyles, or Flanders Tyles the
thousand ii d
W
WAx the C weight qt. 112 l. iv d Wainscot the C qt. five score xi d Whale-fins
the dozen fins i d Wheat the Quarter Eight Bushels i d Woad Island Woad the Ton
xii d Tholose Woad the hundred weight qt. 112 l. i d
Wood Box-wood the thousand pieces ii d Brazil or Fernando Buck-wood the
hundred weight qt. 112 l. iii d. Brazeletto or Jamiaca Wood the hundred weight
qt. 112 l. i d Fustick the hundred weight qt. 112. l. ob Red or Guinny Wood the
C. qt. 112. l. ii d Sipeet-wood of East India the C. qt 112 l. i d
Wool. Beaver Wool the pound i d Cotton wool the hundred qt. five score iii d
Irish Combed the C. qt. five score iv d Uncombed the C. qt. 112 l. ii d
Estridge Wool the C weight qt. 112 l. iii d Polonia wool the hundred weight
qt. 112 l. iii d French Wool the hundred weight qt. 112 l. ii d Lambs wool the
hund. weight qt. 112 l. iii d Spanish Wool the hund. weight qt. 112 l. iiii d
Red Wool the pound q
Wire, Vocat Lattin Wire, and all other Wire the hundred weight iiii d Wine
Eager the Ton vi d Wines Gascoyne and French Wines and all other Wines of the
Growth of the French King's Dominion, the Ton ii s Rhenish Wine the Awm vi d
Muskadel, and all other Wines of the Growth of the Levant, the Butt xii d Sack,
Canaries, Malagaes, Maderaes, Romneys, Bastards, Tents and Alicants, the Butt
or Pipe xii d

Y
YArn Cable yarn the C weight qt. 112 l. i d Camel Grogram, or Moyhair yarn the
C. qt. five score xviij d Cotton yarn the C. qt. five score iiij d Irish yarn
the pack qt. Four hundred weight at six score to the C. vj d Raw Linen yarn
Dutch or French, the C. qt. five score iiij d Spruce or Muscovia yarn, the C
weight at 112 l. ij d

All other Goods not mentioned in this TABLE, shall pay for Scavage Duties
Inward, after the Rate of One Penny in the Pound, according as they are
Expressed or Valued in His Majesty's late Book of RATES. And all other not
Expressed therein, shall pay the same Rates, according to the true Value.

THE BALLIAGE DUTIES OUTWARD.
BEER the Ton iiij d Canvas the hundred Else at six score ij d Coals the
Chaldron i d Drapery Broad Cloth the piece i d ob Kersies of all sorts the
piece ob Perpetuannos the piece ob Stuffs Woollen or Worsted the single piece
ob Stuffs Woollen or Worsted the double piece i d
Dying Commodities Cochinele the C. qt. five score vij d Indico the C. qt. five
score iiij d Wood of all sorts for Dyers the C weight qt. 112 l. i d
Fustians English making each 15 yards ob Grocery Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, or
Cinnamon the C. qt. five score vi d Pepper or Ginger the C. qt. five score ii d
Raisins the Piece or Frail ob Raisins of the Sun the C weight qt. 112 l. i d
Iron The Ton unwrought vi d Wrought the C weight qt. 112 l. i d
Lamprones the thousand o b Lead the Fodder vj d Saffron the Pound ob Salt the
Wey ij d Saltpeter the C weight qt. 112 l. i d Silk Raw or Throne the Pound
qt. sixteen Ounces q Skins and Furrs Bever-skins the C. qt. five score xviij d
Badger-skins the C. qt. five score vi d Coney-skins Black the C. qt. five score
ij d Cat-skins the C. qt. five score is ij d Calve-skins the C. qt. five score
ij d Fox-skins the C. qt. five score vi d Fitches the Timber i d Morkins the C.
qt. fix score ii d Ouer-skins the C. qt. five score vj d Sheep or Lamb-skins
the C. qt. six score ij d Squerril-skins the thousand i d
Tynn or Pewter the C weight qt. 112 l. ij d Wax the C weight qt. 112 l. ij d
Wool of all sorts the C weight qt. 112 l. ij d
Other Merchandise, Liquid and Dry, that are not particularly rated in this
Table, shall pay Balliage-Duties Outward by their Bulks as follows:
A Great Pack, Truss or Fardel, containing betwixt fifteen or twenty Clothes,
or other Goods to that proportion. xviij d An ordinary Pack, Truss or Fardel,
containing in Bigness about 10 or 12 Clothes, or 12 or 14 Bays, or to the like
proportion, in Freezes, Cottons, or other Goods xij d A Bale containing three
or four Cloths, or four or five Bays, or the like proportion, in other Goods vj
d For a great Maund or great Basket viij d For a small Maund or Basket, Poize
three hundred weight or under viij d For a Hamper or Coffer, Poize two hundred
weight or under iij d For a But or Pipe viij d For a Hogshead or Puncheon iiij
d For a Barrel i d For a Firkin ij d For a Dry Fatt viij d For a Drum Fatt iiij
d For a Bale vj d For a great Chest or great Case viij d For a small Chest or
Case, Poize three hundred weight or under iiij d For a small Box ij d For a
great Trunck vj d For a small Trunk, Poize not above two hundred weight iij d
For a Bag or Sack iiij d For a Seron iij d
THE PACKAGE TABLE OF RATES.
A
ARnetto the hundred, qt. five score iij d Aquavitae the Hogshead iiij d Argal
white or red the C weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Ashes Ashes, Potashes the Barrel,
qt. two hundred weight ij d Soap Ashes the Last xij d
Aule Blades for Shoo-makers the thousand ob
B
BArrilla or Saffora the Barrel. qt. two C weight iiij d Beer the Ton vj d
Birding-Shot lead the C. weight qt. 112 l. ij d Books the Maund xij d Bottles
of Glass covered with Leather, the dozen i d Brimstone the C. weight qt. 112 l.
i d Brushes the dozen ob Broken Glass the Barrel q Buttons Vocat Brass, Steel,
Copper, or Lattin Buttons the great Groce qt. xij small Groce i d Hair Buttons
the great Groce i d Silk Buttons the great Groce ob Thread Buttons the great
Groce. q
Buckweed the Quarter i d Buckromes of all sorts the dozen Pieces ij d
C
CAps for Sailors, Monmouth and others the doz. i d Canary Seed the Bushel ob
Cloaks Old the Piece ob Copperas the C weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Cochenele
Silvester or Campecha the pound ob Of all other sorts the pound i d
Cobweb Lawns each fifteen yards i d
D
DRugs vocat Assatetida, Gum Armoniack, Gumlack, Olibanum, and Sassafras Wood,
the C. qt. five score vj d Cassia Fistula the C. qt. five score viij d Cassia
Lignea the C. l. qt. five score viij d Cubebs the C. qt. five score vj d Rubarb
the pound i d Scamony the pound i d

E
ELephant Teeth the C. qt. five score iiij d Estridge Feathers the pound
undrest ob
F
FIlings of Iron, called Swarfe, the Battle ij d Flasks of Horn the dozen i d
Flax dressed the hundred weight qt. 112 l. iiij d Flax undrest the C weight qt.
112 l. ij d Frankinscence the C weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Fish Herrings full or
shotten the Last vj d Stock Fish of all sorts the Last vj d
Fustians English Million the piece, containing two half pieces of fifteen
yards the piece i d Venetian, English make, each fifteen yards i d

G
Gauls the C weight qt. 112 l. ij d Glue the C weight qt. 112 l. i d Glovers
Clipping the Maund or Basket i d ob Grains Scarlet Powder, and of Sevil in
Berries, and Grain of Portugal or Rotta the C l. ij s vj d Grain French or
Guinny the C l. iiij d
Garble Of Cloves the C. qt. five score iiij d Of Almonds the C weight qt. 112
l. i d Of Ginger the C l. qt. five score i d Of Mace the C. qt. five score ix d
Of Pepper the C. qt. five score iij d
Gloves Buck-Leather the dozen pair i d Gloves with Silk Fringe and faced with
Taffaty the dozen pair i d Gloves lined with Coney or Lamb-skins, or plain, the
dozen pair ob
Grocery Vocat Almonds the C weight qt. 112 l. ij d Anniseeds the C weight qt,
112 l. ij d Cloves the C weight qt. five score xij d Currants the C weight qt
112 l. iij d Dates the C weight qt. 112 l. iiij d Figgs the C weight qt. 112 l.
ob Ginger the C weight qt. five score ix d Licorish the C weight qt. 112 l. i d
ob Mace the C pound qt. five score xviij d Nutmegs the C l. qt. five score xiij
d Prunes the C weight qt. 112. l. ob Raisins great and Malago the C. qt. 112 l.
i d Raisins of the Sun the C weight qt. 112 l. ii d Sugar Candy the C weight
qt. 112 l. viij d Sugar of St. Thome and Pannellis the C weight qt. 112 l. iii
d Sugar of all sorts the C weight qt. 112 l. vi d Cinnamon the C l. qt. five
score xii d

H
HEmp the C weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Hatts Bever Hats the piece ii d
Demi-casters the piece i d Felt Hatts plain the dozen i d ob Felt Hatts lined
or faced the dozen ii d
Hair Coney hair the hundred qt. five score iiij d Hair of Goats or Kids the
hundred weight qt. five score iiij d Ox or Cow-tail Hair the C weight qt. 112
l. ob
Horns Ink-horns the small Groce qt. 12 dozen ob Horns of Lanthorn the thousand
Leaves ii d Tipps of Horns the thousand i d
Hops the hundred weight qt. 112 l. ii d
I
INdico of all sorts the hundred l. qt. five score xii d Indico Dust the
hundred l. qt. five score vi d India Hides the hundred qt. five score xviii d
Irish Rugs the piece i d Iron the Ton unwrought vi d Iron wrought the hundred
weight i d Iron Spurs the dozen pair i d Ivory Combs the dozen pound ii d
K
LOndon Knives ordinary the small Groce iii d Sheffield Knives the small Groce
i d ob Shoo-makers paring Knives the small Groce ob
L
LAce Bone-lace of Thread the dozen yards ob Silk-lace the pound qt. sixteen
Ounces i d ob
Lamparns the thousand i d ob Lead the Fodder viij d Lemonds pickled the Pipe
iii d Lemonds Juice the Pipe vi d Linseed the Quarter ob Linen Callicoe the
piece ob Cambricks two half pieces qt. xiii Else i d ob Damask for Tabling of
all sorts, the 12 yards ii d Damask for Towelling and Napkenning, of all other
sorts the dozen yards i d Diaper of all sorts for Tabling, the 12 yards i d
Diaper for Towelling and Napkenning of all other sorts, the dozen yards ob
Lawns the piece qt. xiii Else i d ob Linen Cloth, called Brabant, Emden,
Flemish Freeze, Gentish Holland, Isingham, Overisilis and Rows Cloth, each 30
Else ii d French or Normandy Canvas the C Else qt. six score iii d Dutch
Barras, Hessens, and Vitry Canvas the hundred Else qt. six score iii d Canvas
tufted, stripped or quilted with Copper, Silk, or Thread, or such like, the
Piece qt. fifteen yards i d
Linen Shreds the Maund ii d
M
MAdder, all but Mull Madder, the C weight qt. 112 l. ii d Mellasses the
Hogshead iiii d Mustard Seed the C weight qt. 112 l.
N
Nails Chair Nails, Brass or Copper the 1000 ob Copper Nails, Rose Nails and
Saddle Nails, the Sum qt. 10000 ob

O
OKer Red or Yellow the C weight qt. 112 l. i d Onion-seed the C weight qt. 112
l. iiij d Orchal the C weight qt. 112 l. i d Oxe-Bones the thousand i d
Oxe-Guts the Barrel^ ij d Oil Civil Oil, Majorca Oil, Minorca Oil, Province
Oil, Portugal Oil, Linseed Oil, or Rape Oil the Ton xvj d Train or Whale Oil
the Ton viij d

P
PAper printed, or Copy Paper, the C Reams qt. five Score xviij d Pewter the C
weight qt. 112 l. iiij d
R
RApe-seed the Quarter i d Rape Cakes the thousand ob Red Lead the C weight qt.
112 l. i d Red Earth the C weight qt. 112 l. ob Rice the C. weight qt. 112 l. i
d Rozen the Ton vj d
S
SAffron the pound i d Salt the weigh ij d Saltpeter the C. weight qt. 112 l.
ij d Seahorse Teeth the C. weight qt. five score x d Sea Coals the Chaldron
iiij d Stockings Childrens Stockings the dozen pair ob Kerksey or Leather
Stockings the 12 pair i d Silk Stockings the pair ob Worsted Stockings the
dozen pair ij d Woollen knit Stockings the doz. pair i d ob
Shumack the C weight qt. 112 l. ij d Skins and Furrs Badger-skins the C. qt.
five score vj d Bever-skins the C. qt. five score ij s vi d Cat-skins the C.
qt. five score iiij d Calve-skins the C. qt. five score viii d Coney-skins
gray, tawed, seasoned, or stag the C. qt. six score ij d Coney-skins Black the
C. qt. six score ii d ob Elk-skins the piece ob Fitches the Timber i d
Fox-skins the C. qt. five score viii d Jennet-skins Black, seasoned, or Raw ob
Kid-skins the C. qt. five score ii d Lamb-skins tawed or in Oil the C. qt. six
score vi d Morkins tawed or raw the C. qt. six score iiii d Otter-skins the C.
qt. five score viii d Rabbet-skins the C. qt. five score i d Sheepskins the C.
qt. six score vi d Sheep-pelts the C. qt. five score iii d Squerril-skins the
thousand iii d
Silk of all sorts raw the l. of xvi Ounces i d Silk Nubs, or Husks of Silk the
C l. qt. xxi Ounces to a pound iiii d Silk English Throne the l. qt. xvi Ounces
i d Silver vocat Quicksilver, the hundred containing five score viij d Slip
the Barrel i d Stuffs vocat Buffins the Piece broad qt. 14 yards ii d Buffins
the piece narrow qt. 14 yards i d Bridgewaters the Piece ii d Carral the Piece
i d Cametians the Piece qt. 25 yards ii d Chamblets or Grograms the Piece, qt.
about fourteen or fifteen yards ii d Damasellours, or Damasins the piece ii d
Durance the piece i d Dimaty, each 30 yards i d Floramedas the piece i d
Fugaratoes the piece ii d Hangings of Bristow, or stripped Stuff, the piece iiii
d Lindsey-woolsey the piece i d ob Liles the Piece, Broad or Narrow, not above
15 yards ii d Mockadoes double the piece qt. 28 yards ii d Mockadoes single or
tufted the piece qt. fourteen yards i d Moy-hair the piece qt. about 15 yards i
d ob Messellawny the piece qt. 30 yards i d Perpetuanoes the Piece Ell Broad ii
d ob Paragon or Paropas the piece ii d Piramides or Maramuffe the piece narrow
i d Piramides or Maramuffe the Broad piece ii d Rashes of all sorts the piece,
about 24 yards iiii d Says, called Hounscot or Mild the piece iii d Says of
all other sorts, the piece ii d ob Serges double the Piece yard broad qt.
twenty four yards iii d
Soap Hard Castle the C weight qt. 112. l. ii d The Barrel iii d
Spectacles without Cases the Groce 12 dozen ob Succads wet or dry the C l. qt.
five score viii d
T
TAllow the hundred weight qt. 112 l. i d Tapistry With Hair the C Flemish Else
qt. 5 score iiij d With Wool the C Flemish Else qt. 5 score vi d With Caddas
the C Flemish Else qt. 5 score xij d With Silk the dozen Flemish Else ij d
Taffaty Taffaty Ell Broad the dozen yards ij d Silk Taffaty Broad the dozen
yards iiij d Silk Taffaty Narrow the dozen yards ii d
Thread White or Brown, or colored, the doz. yards i d Thread Points the great
Groce ob Tiffany each dozen yards i d Tobacco Spanish Tobacco the C. qt. five
score ii s Of all other sorts the C. qt. five score vi d
Tyn Tyn unwrought the C weight qt. 112 l. iii d ob Tyn wrought the C weight
qt. 112 l. iiii d

V
VElures English the single piece ii d English the double piece ii d
Vinegar of Wine the Ton ii d ob
W
WAX English Wax the C weight qt. 112 l. iv d English Hard Wax the C weight qt.
five score viij d
Woollen Bays single the piece ii d Bays double the piece iv d Bays called
Minikin Bays, the piece vi d Broad Cloth the short piece qt. 24 yards vi d
Broad Cloth the long piece qt. 32 yards viii d Cotton of all sorts the hundred
Goads vi d Devonshire Dozens the Piece i d Fizadoes the piece iii d
Drapery vocat Kersies of all sorts the piece ij d Lists of Cloth the thousand
yards vi d Northern Dozens the single piece iij d Northern Dozens the double
piece vj d Penny-stones the piece ij d Spanish Cloth English making each 20
yards vj d
Wastcoats Of Kersey or Flannel the Dozen ij d Of Woollen Knit the Dozen iiij d
Of Worsted Knit the Piece ob Wrought with Cruel the Piece q Wrought with Silk
the Piece i d
Wool Cotton Wool the C. qt. five score iij d Estridge Wool the C Weight qt.
112. l. ij d French Wool the C. Weight qt. 112 l. ii d Spanish Wool the C.
Weight qt. 112 l. iiij d
Worm-seed the hundred pound, qt. five score vj d Wood Box-wood the C Weight
qt. 112. l. ob Brazel-wood the C. Weight qt. 112 l. iij d Ebony-wood the C
weight qt. 112 l. i d ob Fustick-wood the C weight qt. 112 l. ob Red-wood the C
weight qt. 112 l. i d ob
Wines French Wines of all sorts the Ton viij d Muskadels and Wines of the
Levant, the Butt vj d Sacks, Canaries, Maderoes, Romneys and Hullucks, the Butt
or Pipe vj d
Cotton Yarn the C. qt. Five Score iiij d Grogram or Moyhair Yarn the C. qt.
five score xviij d Raw Linen Yarn of all sorts the C weight qt. five score
iiij d
All other Goods not mentioned in this TABLE shall pay for Paccage-Duties after
the rate of One Penny in the Pound, according as they are expressed or valued
in His Majesty's late Book of Rates; and all other not expressed therein shall
pay the same Rate, according to their value.

For every Entry in the Packers Book, for writing Bills to each Entry Outward,
as usually they have done xii d

The Strangers shall pay the Laboring Porters for making up of their Goods, at
their own charge, as always they have done.

The Strangers shall pay the Waterside Porters, belonging to the Paccage
Offico, such Fees and Duties, for Landing and Shipping their Goods, as they
have usually paid within these ten years last past.

The PACKERS Waterside PORTERS TABLE of DUTIES FOR Landing Strangers GOODS,
and the like DUTIES or RATES to be paid unto them for Shipping out their GOODS.
IMPRIMIS, for a Butt of Currants xvj d For a Carratel of Currants viij d For a
Quarter Roll of Currants iiij d For a Bag of Currants iiij d For Pieces of
Raisins the Ton xx d For a Barrel of Raisins iiij d For all sorts of Puncheons
vj d For a Barrel of Figgs ij d For Tapnets and Frails of Figs per Ton xx d For
Brazil or other Wood for Dying, per Ton xx d For Iron the Ton xiiij d For
Copperas the Ton xiv d For Oil, Wine, or Vinegar per Ton xiv d For Hemp and
Flax the Last xx d For loose Flax and Tow the hundred weight ii d For a great
Bag of Tow viij d For a small Bag of Tow iv d For a great Bag of Hops viij d
For a Packet or little Bag of Hops iv d For Packs, Trusses, Flats, or Maunds
per piece viij d For a great Chest viij d For a small Chest iv d For all Cases,
Barrels, or Bales per piece iv d For a Bale of Madder viij d For a Bale of
Ginger, Shumack, qt. 400 weight viij d For a Faggot of Steel i d For any
Serrions the Piece iv d For a Fat of Potashes viij d For a Last of Sope-ashes
xii d For a Last of Pitch or Tar xii d For a Last of Fish xii d For Wainscots
the C. qt. six score v s For Clapboards the hundred qt. six score vj d For Deal
Boards the hundred qt. six score xvi d For a great Mast v s For a middle Mast
ii s vi d For a small Mast xv d For great Balks the C. qt. six score v s For
middle Balks the hundred qt. six score ii s vi d For small Balks the hundred
qt. six score xv d For a Millstone v s For a Dog-stone ii s vi d For a
Woolf-stone ii s For a Yard-stone iij d For a Grindle-stone xii d For a
Step-stone or Gravestone viii d For Quern-stones the Last xii d For
Emry-stones the Ton xiiij d For x C weight of Holland Cheese xii d For Rozen
the Ton xiiii d For Woad the Ton xiiii d For a Chest of Sugar vi d For half
Wainscots the hundred qt. six score ii s. vi d For raw hides the hundred qt.
five score v s For Bonnispars the hundred qt. six score vi d For small Spars
the hundred qt. six score iiii d For Ends of Bonnispars the hundred qt. six
score ix d For a Horse, Gelding, or Mare ii s vi d For Allom the Ton xx d For
Heath for Brushes the C weight qt. 112 l. i d For Iron Pots the dozen iii d For
Rings of Wire loose, the Ring ob For Pipe-staves the thousand ii s vi d For
Rhenish Wine the Awm vi d For Bur-stones the hundred qt. five score ii s vi d
For half Packs of Tazels the piece iiii d For Wicker Bottles the dozen ob For
Stone the hundred containing five score i d For loose Fish the hundred landing
iii d For a Barrel of Salmon ii d For a Barrel of Stubb Eeles ii d For a Bundle
of Basket-Rods ob For a Ton of Cork xx d For a thousand of Oxe-bones xii d For
a thousand Tips of Horns vi d For a thousand of Shank-bones xii d For Brimstone
the Ton loose xv d For a Fodder of Lead xiiii d For Rimes for Sieves the Load
xij d For a Load of Fans xij d For a Load of Bulrushes viij d For a hundred
Ream of Paper loose xii d For a Barrel of Tarras ii d For a Barrel of Ling ii d
For a Keg of Sturgeon ob For Iron Backs of Chimneys the Piece i d For a C
weight of Elephants-teeth i d For Copper and Iron Plates per piece ob For an
hundred small Barrels of Blacking xii d For a dozen of Scales i d For a hundred
of Oars ii s vi d For every xx Sugar Flags iiij d For a Barrel of Shot iiij d
For a Bundle of Canes i d For a Cage of Quails iiij d For a Cage of Phesants
iiij d For a Winch of Cable Yarn iiij d For a Firkin of Shot ij d
All other Goods not mentioned in this Table, shall pay Portage-Duties as other
Goods, do of like Bulk or Condition herein expressed.

Mo^^ this Character qt. signifies containing; o^ stands for Halfpenny and
not (Sixpence) q stands for a Farthing, i d a Penny, v^ for Six pence, and
xviij for Eighteen Pence, th^^gh^^ these Tables.

CHARLES 2. Chart. 1.
Now his present Majesty, at the humble Petition of the Major, Commonalty, and
Citizens of the City of London, of his special Grace and certain Knowledge, and
mere Motion, and for diverse good Causes and Considerations him thereunto
especially moving, does confirm all and singular the Letters Patents, Charters
and Confirmations, Restitutions, Customs, Ordinances, Explanations, Articles,
and all other things whatsoever in the said Letters Patent, Charters, Grants,
and Confirmations, or any of them, contained, recited, specified, confirmed,
explained or mentioned; And all and singular, the Lands, Tenements, Offices,
Jurisdictions, Authorities, Privileges, Liberties, Franches, Freedoms,
Immunities, Liberties, Customs, and Hereditaments whatsoever, which the said
Major, Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London or their Predecessors, by
the name of the Major; Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London; or by the
name of the Major, Aldermen, Citizens and Commonalty of London; or by the name
of the Major and Citizens of London; or by the name of the Major and Commonalty
of the City of London, or by the name of the Citizens of the City of London; or
by the name of the Barons of London; or by the name of the Barons of the City
of London, or by any other Name whatsoever, by Reason or Force of the said
Letters Patents, Charters or Confirmations before mentioned, or of any Use or
Uses, Prescription or Prescriptions, or any other lawful Means whatsoever, at
any time or times heretofore have had or reasonably used or exercised (except
as before is excepted) and ratifying for him and his Successors (as much as in
him lies) accepting and approving them and every of them to the said Major and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid and their Successors,
does ratify and confirm by the said Letters Patents, To have, hold, enjoy and
exercise all and singular the Premises aforesaid (except before excepted) to
the said Major and Commonalty, and Citizens of London aforesaid, and their
Successors for ever, as fully, freely, and entirely, and in as ample manner to
perform, as the same are before mentioned, to be given and granted or as the
same, otherwise by Use, Prescription, or any Legal way or Right whatsoever,
have heretofore respectively had, obtained, or enjoyed, as if the same were
separately, singly, and nominally, in and by these said Letters Patents
expressed, named, declared, granted, and manifested. And further, he Wills by
the said Letters Patents, and does for him, his Heirs and Successors, grant to
the Major, Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid, and their
Successors, that these Letters Patents shall be, in and by all things according
to the true Intent thereof, good, firm, valid, and effectual in the Law,
notwithstanding any misnaming, or any ill or false naming or Recital in the
same contained; or any Statute, Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation, or
Restriction heretofore, in any wise had or made. And grants etc. that no Fine
be paid to the Hamper, although express mentioned, etc.

Dated at Westminster the 24th day of June, in the 15th year of his now
Majesty's Reign.
FINIS.

