THE Natural History OF THE Chalybeat and Purging Waters OF ENGLAND. With their
particular ESSAYS and USES.

Among which are treated at large THE Apoplexy and Hypochondriacism.

To which are added, Some Observations on the Bath Waters in Somersetshire.

Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester.

By Benjamin Allen, Med. Bac.

LONDON Printed* And Sold by S. Smith and B. Walford, at the Prince's Arms in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1699.

TO THE Right Honorable CHARLES Earl of Manchester, Baron of Kimbolton, Lord
Mandevill, AND One of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
THAT this Treatise waited for a share in the Ceremony of receiving your
Lordship from Venice, Arguments are not wanting; for besides the Interest that
I bear by living within your Influence, There is a common Obligation to appear
in the general Train of those that gratefully attend your Return from your
Embassy, from a just Sense of the Blessings these Kingdoms receive from your
Employment, and your Country by your Return and Presence. But that I inscribe
it to your Lordship's Name, I am more necessarily* induced, in that it is not
easy to find so fit a Patron and so great a Judge: Your Greatness that
impowers you to countenance a Book, has a Brightness more than common to your
own Quality, and has all the Worth and Beauty, that Integrity, Virtue and
Goodness can give it. As a Judge how you are Qualified, I shall not attempt;
but only observe your Lordships excellent Temper to be so great a Help, as that
just Notions of things are not to be had without. As a Character is better
waved, Justice being seldom done in Dedications; so I am happy that it is not
the least part of your Character, that your Excellencies have a Foundation
above that of common Applause. However you need it not, I had the Honor to
observe your Lordships first Years, possessed of the Esteem of one who had a
Fame for Learning, among those that are acknowledged to be the greatest Masters
of it in Europe; and now your Riper ones in the nearest Employment of the
greatest of Princes.

The Subject, My Lord, gives you a Right to it; who accounts the noblest
Subject is to know a Man's self, and who makes the Practice of doing Good your
Pleasure: And the Touches I have given at Humane Nature, your Lordship's
several Travels abroad have given you a particular Palate for. I have offered
somewhat at the two grand Problems, the Mechanism of Life, and Use of
Respiration, and at the Distinct Notion of Humane Nature. But I own the
Thoughts are shattered, and not exact, What your Good Opinion Supports, I shall
set above the Rate of common Estimation; so what your Judgment condemns, shall
lose all Value and Concern with me: However it gives me an Opportunity to
signify, that I am,

My Lord, Your Honors Most Humble and Devoted Servant Benjamin Allen.

THE PREFACE.
THE Knowledge of the Specific Seat, and Nature of the Disease, and Energy of
the Remedy, as it gave the Rise and Increase to Medicine, so is what the Art of
Physic consists in, and its Excellency depends on. This is evident in (...),
and appears in every Disease and every Remedy; The Jaundies are known to
Physicians to admit of a various Cure, as Trouble, Obstruction of the
Catamenia, Fevers; or an Indisposition of the Intestines may produce them. The
Exactness requisite to this, is further seen in the ill Success that attends
the empirical Use of the Cortex in Pthises and Fevers, without distinction of
the Nature of the Symptom, and Propriety of the Medicine. Howfar the best
Methodists fall short, that sit down short of this Inquiry, is experienced in
Fevers, wherein, the taking Indications indiscriminately, without respect to
the Nature of the Cause, could never be made consistent with success, by the
most judicious and happy Practicer which that Method has yet produced.

The present Subject is one of the noblest in Physic, not only for its
Generosity and Universality, but for their extraordinary Virtue in some, and
those very many and various Diseases, wherein they are the most constant and
sole Remedy: And that these Waters are liable to the same Inconvenience, I have
been induced to believe, by their frequently ineffectual and improper Use, and
the Neglect of so certain a Remedy, which I have observed in some Diseases,
wherein the Patients must be supposed to have dropped for want of them:
Instances of which I shall have occasion to glance at presently. I shall
therefore make no Apology for my advancing somewhat toward so great a
Desideratum. As to what has been done on this Subject, by the Inquiries which
some of our greatest Naturalists who have engaged themselves (...) it have
made, I need only say, that neither their Principles have been discovered, nor
the Nature of the Salt or Spirit of each Water have been distinctly examined,
whereby as they have been wide from either, so they advanced only loose
Conjectures at some unknown Principle; the most particular Inquiry by the very
accomplished Physician and industrious Naturalist Dr. Martin Lister, to whom
the World is obliged for what he has published, and my self what he was
pleased civilly to communicate to me, of the Condition of the Scarburgh Spring,
takes notice of the Condition of the Wells so far, as to observe the
Efflorescence of their Earth, and their ferreous Stone, which he observes to be
an attendant on all our Mineral Springs and Baths, as I remember without
distinction, and though rightly judging the Salt a Native of the Soil where it is
found, yet on the same Account neither arrived at the Nature of the Principles
of this Salt, nor its differences, nor traced its reason and Derivation. The
Chalybeat Waters which were reducible to a few general Heads, I have given only
Samples of, to both I have preserved their experienced Virtues, and to the
Purging ones, suggested some from their Nature; and in this Account I find one
Benefit that results, that besides helping to the distinct Nature of each
Water, I have discovered, or at least made useful, some Waters of the same
Virtues with the justly celebrated ones, whose distance made them still wanting
to other parts of the Kingdom, as those of Scarborow and Knaresborow are. My
account of the reason of the Operation of the Waters, is so wild and imperfect,
as to be nauseous to my self, and afford me no other satisfaction, than that I
have hinted what ought to be done; yet because an insight into this, promotes
the understanding of the Nature of the Diseases, and in what their Cure must
consist, and so the true place of the Use of the Waters; the Hints I give being
somewhat informing, instead of troubling the Reader with the Reasons of so
great Negligence, I shall choose to induce him to forgive it, by giving them a
little light here, that may a little clear my sense in this matter. Both the
Chalybeat and Purging Waters have some Virtues in common to restore the
Appetite, remove nauseousness of the Stomach, Pains of that and the Head, to
cool, to allay Flatulencies, and the Cramps and disorderly Motions in the Body,
and flatness of the Spirits that attends them: And this the Nature of the
Principles well accounts, which are thus far the same; for as Water, the common
Vehicle in both, demands Consideration, as being most unfermentative, and so a
great assistant in suppressing Flatulencies from ill Concoction, and other
Failings of the parts occasioned by fermented Liquors; so the main Principle of
the Purging Waters, I have detected to be a Chalybeat Juice. These Waters,
where they can reach and pass, and suit by their grossness, seem to answer the
Specific Nature of the Chalybeat in some measure. On this account these
sometimes succeed in the Cure of a Diabetes, as my honored Friend, and learned
and complete Physician, Dr. Clopton Havers informed me, upon a Case I consulted
him in; and as the Learned Dr. Grew has recommended them; which is (...)
peculiar Province of the light Chalybeat ones, as being a Disease of the
Glands, which else these are unserviceable in. The Purging Waters by their
grossness, have therefore their Effect chiefly on the Viscera and first ways,
which their Salt qualifies them to cleanse and exterminate. Thus they are found
to cure Head-achs, Vertigo's, Cramps, Colicks, and the Jaundies, when their
Cause or Fomes is in the Stomach or Bowels, or is Hypochondriacal. They are
suited to the Diseases likewise that attend the grand Climacterick, as I call
that of 49, by joining, correcting and exterminating the Faeces of the Chyle,
which then is grosser and more Alkalisate and wants discharge: As to
differences of the Salts of these Waters, as well of the heavy Chalybeats,
experience made them of weight with me; having, beside what I mention in its
place, observed the Jaundies cured more generally by those whose Salt was
affine to common Salt, and that elder Persons received most Benefit from those
that were Chalybeat, and that the particular Constitution required a distinct
regard to the Salt: Of what power unheeded differences of Salts are in our
Bodies, besides experience, I found it so reasonable, in that Vi^rioline, and
common Salt, and Niters, precipitate each other, that it farther proved it self
by the successful use this directed me to make of it in Fluxes of Blood,
immoderate Flux of the Catamenia, and some other Diseases of this Year, which
by many reasons I judged to be Nitrous, wherein I found Chalybeat Preparations
to be the only effectual Remedies, which were so unlikely, as commonly in the
Chlor^sis promoting such a Flux, that I found it pretty hard to persuade some
to the use of it. And the proper use of the more Acid Chalybeat Waters in
Fluxes of Blood make them a peculiar. The Virtues of those and the Atramentous,
appear in their place. The last of these are least efficacious and most
numerous, the Instances of that at Leez Place, and at the much honored Sir
Edward Southcot Bar. his Seat, are sufficient for Examples. The light
Chalybeats are the most abstracted of this kind, and so fit to the Recesses of
Nature which the others cannot reach, and to show the power of the Mineral. The
Virtues of these in various affects of Body and Mind, and Hypochondriacism
which produces them are constant: The Diseases are so odd which these and only
these do cure, that they ought to be specified, and shall be done under these
Heads; The first drawn from the part affected, which is the Glands, and this
Rule is so extensive, as to hold in all Diseases of the Kidneys, and Glands of
the Joints. Their happy use in the first, I received Information of from the
before mentioned Dr. Havers, which I found confirmed by this surprising Effect
upon their very first taking, that, instead of passing, they stopped their Vrin,
which was little to be expected from so powerful a Diuretic as they else are
found to be: And the perfect Cures of the Gout by these Waters are frequent,
and have been well attested to me. A second Mark or Head, The Diseases they are
Specific in, is characterised by the Nature of the Waters, and Diseases they
Cure, as the Waters clear, depurate and suppress exorbitant Fermentations, and
as Diseases are produced by the Luxury of the Feculency of the Chyle, and
effort of fermented Liquors, among which are the Diabetes and the Gout, which
are often produced by the use of fermented Liquors, which by how much the
staler the Beer is, the more sure the Mischief, and are incurable, without
altering the Drink in great measure: To which I may add, that the Gout is said
never to have assaulted any Drinker of Water; and many Indispositions are under
this Head, which are thus pointed at by the Cause. A third Consideration that
points at the Cases these Waters are proper in, is the Occasion and time of the
Disease, and brings us all the Diseases at the Climactericks. A fourth regards
the Spring and part of its Origin, which is the Brain and Mind, and indicates
all Diseases of any kind, produced by Trouble and Grief. The Cure of the
Fistula and Fevers may make other Heads, and give a rise to greatly
improveable Thoughts. Now in order to the just and ready use of these Waters,
that promptuary of Experience can only be certain that nicely digests
Observations, and specifies the Cases; this only can readily point out the
Remedy, and hinder their improper Administration, and discover Cases wherein
they are effectual, which may be so remote to our sense of them, as never would
encourage our attempting the Application of the only proper Remedy. And this I
insist on the more, because I have had reason to believe, this escape to have
been even from the generality of Physicians. This may be particularly instanced
in a Dropsy, wherein the Waters are very improper, and often hasten the end of
the Patient; and yet in the same Disease, when it proceeds from grief of Mind,
they are a reasonably certain, and the only Remedy; I say in this I have more
than once known a Patient dye under the fruitless Application of a regular
Course of Physic; for a Dropsy, when the successful use of the Waters in the
same case obliged me to conclude the ill Success to be owing to the want of
distinguishing the Disease, and knowing the proper Remedy, next under that
Providence that disposed the Concealment: Besides Diseases from this Cause are
irregular and various, and not bear any other method of Discovery or Cure.
Distempers of the Climactericks are as numerous, and their Cure seems to depend
as much on the same Discovery; and I have often seen Consumptions at 21 and 49
cured by the dexterous Application of Chalybeats, the Waters chiefly in the
Cure of which by common Methods and Intentions their Physicians had labored
unsuccessfully: And as this helps us to the Knowledge and Cure of many Diseases
that else lie concealed from us, so it assists our Judgment in making due and
true Prognostics: And I have been pleased with the evidence of Art, when I
could not readily cure a Disease, viz. an Epilepsie that came on at 27 in the
true Prediction of its declining and departure at 30; and of the Diseases that
assaulted at 14, superceded at 18.

The Apoplexy which is cured by the more acid Chalybeats, and relieved by the
light ones, transcends the common Notions of the other glandular Diseases, as
it is an Affection of the very Root of Life it self, and requires a particular
Consideration in order to inform us how and where this Remedy is proper; for
although it is evident, that it is an Affection of the medullary part of the
Brain, whence Sense and Life is distributed; yet with submission to better
Judgment, I conceive the Accounts of this Disease are at a loss about the
Production of it, when they come to the immediate Cause, and the long Excursion
this Enquiry demands, as it is unavoidable, so is so seasonable also, by reason
of the Increase and Frequency of this Disease here especially in the Country,
where this Year it has insulted more than ever, that I question not but the
Acceptableness of the Disquisition will excuse it. I shall distinctly view the
Nature of an Apoplexy, and Disposition it consists in; The Causes of it; The
Differences; and lastly, The suitable Intentions and Indications. The general
Phenomenon upon Dissection of those that dye of this Distemper, being an
Effusion of Blood upon the Brain, Authors do generally agree in placing the
Production of this Disease, in an Obstruction made at the Brain, and must be
allowed to be produced in the Cortical part, and conceive this to be made by
some Congestion in the Blood Vessels, and which the Learned Dr. Cole supposes
may be of viscous or serous Matter, as it is either in quantity, or freshly
excited, or else Polypous Concretions, or any other obstructing Matter, to
admit which, the Brain is pre-dispos'd by its Laxity or Openness; in which
likewise, the bare Distention of the Arteries may suffice to produce it. I
shall with all Deference to those great Authors, and particularly the last,
humbly offer my Conception, though more grossly, yet as it appears to me, and
best explains the Benefit of the Mineral Waters in this Case, thus, That an
Apoplexy is a Disease of the Cortex cerebri, not founded in any Obstruction,
though often attended by them, but consisting in the Ruin of its mechanical
Crasis and Temper, which is such as Steel restores, and Niters destroy, the
Causes and Nature of which, is common to other Glands, and produces a
Paroxysm, by a Hamorrhage or Admission of Flatulent Parts consequential to
this; which Distemper the Suicus nutritious may arrive at, either by Age or
Qualities contracted upon Congestion, and grossness of the Chyle, or receive by
Particles communicated from the Air, or all jointly; besides violent Causes,
and so may truly be said to be seated not in the Sanguinary Vessels, but
Glandular Ducts. But as they wrongfully charge the Blood Vessels with the
cause, in that an Apoplexy may be produced without any of this, as is clear
from Dr. Willis's Instance; so they seem encumbered in the explaining the Reason
of the Abolition of Sense and Motion; and in the place and nature of this
Congestion; the Mistakes in the Nature of this Distemper, seem to me to be
owing to the ill Notion of Animal Mechanism, and use of the Brain, wherein they
suppose a Circulation or passage of Animal Spirits, so necessary to Life, as
that the Interruption of them suffices to abolish it. The Difficulties of
which way of Solution, are taken notice of by all the Writers on this Subject,
rather than explained. My Sense in this Matter I shall give, by considering,
first, the Inconveniences the Brain can suffer without this Deprivation. 2ly,
The Vital Mechanism of the Brain: And 3ly, The necessary Cause or Reason of its
Production, as appears in the Brain. And to be brief, first, it appears from
the Dissections in Wepfer, Willis, and others, that all the passes of the
Animal Spirits, at once, cannot be obstructed; nor a Compression of the Brain
and Cerebel, nor an Inflammation of the Brain, or its Meninges, produce it;
there are as just Exceptions lie against plenty of Blood; nor is it from Stones
generated. Abounding Serum may be without it, and Water beap'd within the
Cranium and Ventricles. And Plater's Instance proves, that a Carnous,
Schirrhous and Fungous Tumor on the Corpus Callosum, produced Stupidity and
Death without an Apoplexy.

2ly, I shall consider the grand Design of the Brain, and its vital Mechanism,
of which, though it be inextricable in its private and more recluse Motions,
yet thus much appear. Although Animal Mechanism is compound, and Respiration is
necessary to the Motion of the Blood, to which the Lungs are accordingly
framed, and upon which Motion Life depends; yet as the Pulse of the Heart is
performed by the Nerves, so the Air Atmospherical, upon whose obstructing or
fixing, so as to hinder its Elasticity, Life so suddenly cease in some
Animals, seems to act only on the Nerves, as in those that have membranous
Lungs, where no more Blood circulates in their Lungs, than is necessary for the
supply of the part; whereby the Air seems to serve the Circulation in other
Animals, for greater force and greater Heat; for those Animals first named, are
colder, and live long without Food, and so both Air; and the Niter of it, is
useful with equal Pace, and in equal Degree, to the Motion necessary at the
Lungs, to the fury of the Circulation of the Blood, and to the Nourishment to
be consumed; and it is observable, that the Par vagum and intercostal Nerves,
which are the Instruments of involuntary Motion, serve both Lungs and
Ventricle. The use then of this Heat in the Blood, seems to prepare a due
Elasticity in the Chyle, that is, to serve the Brain or parts of it, be it the
Spirituous part in what sense soever, being accommodated to some Disposition of
the Brain; for in the external Air there is, besides all this (but answerable
to this) a due degree of Elasticity, or quantity of elastick parts, or
compressure of them necessary to Life, which is proportioned to the coldness of
the Animal perhaps, but certainly adapted to the Spring of Life in the Brain,
as is seen in Fish which live by the Air, yet dye in the open Air; and is
confirmed in Whitings which swim deep in the Water, and so with us are not
liable to be taken by Nets, and dye instantly upon being taken out of it. The
Brains of Animals are accordingly adapted to this use, those who use the
greatest force of the Air, as Birds, have the Cortical part vastly larger in
proportion than men, no doubt to separate the Air, and perhaps corroborate the
Brain, and their Lungs fixed accordingly; and Fish have least Brain and Cortex
too. The Nature of Life, and use of the Brain, being thus stated to consist in
the justice of a Spring; it is easy to conceive, that the enlarging of the
Elasticity in the Brain, as well as without, is enough to destroy the Mechanism
of Life. Now though we know not the work of this within the Brain, yet it is
difficult to believe, and not agreeable to Experience, to allow any other cause
that deprives Life so suddenly as some elastick parts, that can communicate too
large a Degree or Scope to it, which the Blood conveighing so much Air may
easily do, which the difficulty of Respiration thereon depending evidences. By
this alone may we understand, to account for the appearances of the disorders
of the Brain upon Dissection, which now come to be considered: As this will
reach and account for those Apoplexies that show no Stoppage, nor Irruption at
the Brain, as those of old Age, and gives a reason why they attend the Old and
not the Young: So we shall find those Instances wherein the Brain is forced by
the Blood, confirm this account. It is observable from the Dissections of all,
that the confirmed Apoplexy is produced by the Effusion of Blood at the Basis
of the Brain out of the Carotid Artery, especially the anteriour Branches of
it, and at which place all that have time complain: And though generally the
Effusion of Blood is large on this occasion, yet it is observable to my
purpose, that the breaking in of the Blood only on one side should take away
Life; and which is more, that the quantity of two spoonfuls of Blood at the
Base of the Brain should as well effect it; in both which Instances or cases,
the Effusion supposing a Stoppage of the Spirits, could not so soon have
produced it. And as the last named Case of Fernelius came upon a stroke on the
Eye, so the like has happened on a stroke on the Neck by a fall, in that
History of Wepfer.

And although this Consideration of the Vital Spring in the Brain, does not
exclude other ways by which it may suffer, beside the giving it too much Scope,
which I here assign, yet I see no reason to entertain any other, since other
Causes are either impossible, or not constantly produce this Disease; and since
(excepting the Case of old Age, which requires a distinct Explication) it is
ever produced by a Rupture of the Vessels, as an imperfect one by admission
only of unfit and rapid but small parts. Again, to proceed further in the
Inquiry into the Nature of this Disease, by informing our selves how this
Rupture comes to pass, we are to consider, that it appears that the Condition
the Blood Vessels receive, by the Stoppage of the Canal by the grumous Blood,
or ^ccidental hardness or cl^sure of it barely considered by nature, are
rendered ineffectual to be the occasion of this Disorder; the reason therefore
of it, is to be had without, as the Vessels may be jointly respected or
affected where they are more minute. The Nature of this is to be sought from
what the Compages and Affection of the part afford: Now how truly the Brain,
understood as a Gland, accounts for this, must be proved by the Disorders those
Bodies suffer, and the Analogy they bear to each other. That the Affections are
common, it evident from the Calculi, Varicous Knots and Hydatides, found in
Apoplectick Brains at the Secretions, as at (...) Plexus Choroides. The
justness and genuineness of this account, appears farther in the part and cause
of this Disease, in that the Rupture it made principally at the anteriour
Branches of the Carotid Arteries nearer the Origin of the Brain, where
accordingly those that are seized complain; and that the ruptur'd Vessels are
those that have gone a Compass, and descend from the Anfractus of the Brain.
The reason of this last, is to be understood by the Observations of Bellini and
Malpighius, who inform (...) that the Winding of Glandular Vessels, and so of
the Anfractus of the Brain, is to give the Blood time to stop and separate
through the Glandular Pores. And (...) ^his solves the Reason partly, why the
Rupture is not, where the Blood comes, with greater force; so the Imbecility of
the part has hence a Reason, and points at the occasion of it, in that it is
where the greater part in proportion of the Chyle, or nutritious Juice, must
therefore be deposited, which when weighed together, with the Consideration
that the Error of the Chyle induces all Diseases, and allows the Effects of
the Air, and that the Fit so often seizes after full Meals, and that this
Disease keeps pace with the Affectio Hypochondriaca, if not increased in time
together with it; and that its so often being induced by trouble of Mind,
evidences the same analogous Cause and Reason, are natural, and to me
convincing Arguments. How this Rupture of the Arteries comes upon an
Obstruction or heaping of Chylous parts in the Glands, comes next to be
examined: It is observed by Wepfer, in his second Dissection, that the Brain
there was much intenerated, where the Effusion of Blood was made; but whether
the Laxity of the Brain, or Openness of the Pores, of the Tabuli, or Siphons,
that receive the Chylous part of the Blood, rendered the Brain liable to this
Irruption, is questionable and not to be answered; so provided we know the
Nature of the Parts that occasion this, is not material. I own the Uses of the
Blood in joynt-service with the Nervous parts to be another Inquiry. The
Delatoryness of the Glands, when obstructed in producing a Rupture of the
Blood Vessels, be it in the Iaundies, Asthma, or Dropsy, and the liableness of
the Glands to alteration, especially upon exclusion of new saline parts from
the Blood, to preserve as well as supply them, induce me to believe much herein
to be owing to some Quality they may conceive, if not sufficient to corrode the
Artery, at least to destroy their own Crasis. Accordingly I shall now consider
the Cause without us, that induces this Disposition to this Disease, as
sufficient to direct us, which is the Air. Though I have some Reasons that draw
me to an Opinion, that the Particles which compose, or are bore in our
Atmosphere which variously affect our Bodies, are so gross, as to allow a
Conception of their operating, on the score that they are Effluvia, either of
the constant or new produced Bodies in the Earth, but owe their Energy to some
Quality depending on the various Figure or Disposition, or other alteration
they are liable to receive in the Atmosphere: Yet not to argue from so
questionable Principles, I shall rather endeavor to demonstrate the Nature of
the parts of it by their effect, and as they appear the occasion of this
Disease. And this Distemper making so extraordinary insults at particular
times, it is reasonable to examine the Disposition of the Air, whereon depended
the Increase of the Disease, and wherein it consists. The grand increase of it
upon the great Frost 1683, appearing sufficiently by the Bills of Mortality,
lead the Learned Dr. Cole to do so good Service to this Inquiry as to observe
it, and makes it a Phenomenon, the Solution of which is no small Direction.
But as I think the Constipation or Obstruction made by admission of the Nitrous
Particles not satisfactory, without accounting for the new Capacity they have
obtained beyond what they have in other Frosts, and the Difficulties of
admitting them; so it seems evident to me, that the rise of this Disease or
first increase is of a longer date. And to offer my sense of this matter, the
Apoplexy seems to me to be one of the fixed temporary Diseases, which as they
result not from the immediate Changes of Season and Weather, so are rooted in
some more subtle parts of the Air, which Weather and Season may assist by
giving them a liberty of exerting themselves, and likewise a supply. And
because I never yet observed any sudden leaps ordinarily, though I nicely
observed the Air as I could, made in the Production of new Diseases; I was
ready to judge from the rise of this at the declension of the Rickets, that the
actors of both were parts of equal subtilty, and not much differing in Nature.
And I confess the Experiment of the Marbles seem to favor a Notion, that there
is differing degrees of Subtilty in our Atmosphere it self, and so in the parts
lodged in it. I shall not attempt determining, though there is great reason to
believe the matter to be Nitrous by its Effect, and its Cure. The Reason of
this Disease, and Nature of the Condition of the Air producing it, is probably
more clearly to be seen in the Observation of the particular times of the grand
Efforts of the Air in producing it; in which we ought to observe the general
Effects of the Air on all Bodies, and carry on the Inquiry by the Effects and
Power it exerts on Animal ones. And because this evidence or detection of the
parts affecting is liable to exception, that differing Diseases are produced
often at once by differing parts or distinct qualities in the operating Body,
and especially in so mixed a one: And again, as the more subtle cause is
unknown, so if we discover the Particles of the Air, or disposition of it, that
conveighs the pa^^ss, we have small advantage. I must observe, that I am of
Opinion, that the Nature of the Air, and the Disposition of it, to which
Diseases owe their rise, are more discoverable, than they at first thought give
hopes of, and that in so great a measure, as to make the Knowledge serviceable
in the known Diseases. And any Man, I think, will be reconciled to my Opinion,
that will take the trouble of tracing Diseases in conjunction with the Air and
Seasons; for the Difficulties are in great measure solved, by barely
distinguishing between the Diseases produced by single Seasons, and observing
the constant tenor of the Humor or diseasy matter, and how it receives
alterations from variety of Seasons, and that as the place of the Disease is
partly or chiefly owing to the first, so the Nature to the last of these.

That the present case depends on these evident Causes, may reasonably be
concluded, not only from the increase of it jointly with these, but also that
it traced in its containing and procatarctick Causes, which require no more to
explain, than what the common effects of the Air in other Diseases exhibit, and
the nature of the Air thus considered accounts for. The first time to be
considered, and which assists us in the discovery of the Cause of this
Distemper from the occasion of its Increase extraordinary, is the great Frost.
To avoid prolixness, I shall only observe, that as that can never determine the
matter to the Brain, nor account for the increase of this Disease at so great a
distance, and is contradicted by experience; so the incidence of such a Season
may give a lift to this Disease, on other Considerations than the conveighing
of the Frosty and grosser nitrous parts, and that may be of more subtle or
distinct Parts, that may be contained or mixed with them, that may better
account for this Phenomenon, which must be supposed to be vastly supplied by
so great a Frost, which may be allowed either to feed the more subtle, or
increase them by the Precipitation and Congestion of the Parts they bring, and
separate and leave. Indeed the grand Continuation of the Increase, makes this
Deduction necessary, both of its Subtilty and Nature. The last of these must
most disclose it self at the time of its abounding in the highest degree, and
this must be fixed at this present Year School, the reason of which I shall now
examine; that I rightly fix the Inundation and Exorbitancy of the invading
Matter on this, or this and the last Year, I need not endeavor to evince,
being so extraordinary, as that the like number of Apoplecticks were never yet
observed in this or past Ages; and indeed by the generality of the Vertigo's
that have invaded, which must be referred to the same assault, may be said
truly to be Epidemical. That the matter concerned in this is nothing obscure,
or besides what is evident and obvious appears, in that first the other
Distempers raging at the same time were uniform, and differed only in place,
the matter of which is plainly enough Nitrous, but particularly (because the
Nature of that differs) its Qualities consist in Acidity, such as will not
preserve from but promote Putridness, Subtilty to penetrate, and Liquibility to
flow with the Juyces; which Qualities appear easily in the Effects in both the
Chronical and Acute Diseases of those Years last past: It much illustrates this
account, to observe the steps made in the producing this general Disposition in
the Air, which I must here but touch at, without explaining. It is very notable
that a Glandular Acidity attended the Diseases in 94; Epilepsies in Children,
and Nervous Rhumatisms in the Grown, advanced with the great Mealdews in 95,
both seated in the Membranes and at the Head. In 96 remarkable for sudden
Changes of Heat and Cold, raged Epilepsies, Vertigo's, and lax Tumors and
Ulcers of the Throat, that came as Colds. Through the Subtilty and Increase of
this matter, which seemed fitted to weaken the containing parts (the
unseasonableness of the preceding Year reasonably assisting) it obtained
admittance at the latter end of the Year (which was wet and windy) to the
Interior Glands, as I call those that serve Life it self. And now appears an
odd Distemper, that seized with Faintness, and Inquietude, and Deliquiums, and
a yellowness of the Skin, and dry Cough. Upon Dissection of one of these
Bodies, I discovered a recluse Abscess in the Lungs, invested with a tough
Coat, and containing thick Pus, without any opening external, or into the
Bronchiae, but was fed by a small Duct from the largest Gland of the Lungs,
which Gland was grumous, and looked and felt like powdered Chalk. The Pancreas
was in the same state, which occasioned the yell^^^ess as I conceive, and the
Thymus emaciated. And by this insight I cured others of the same Disease by
Emulsions of Alkalys, first to remove the Acidity, and then by a Sudorifick
Decoctum amarum, and closing the Course with Chalybeats. At the very same time
Apoplexies insulted in a strange degree, and Colds affecting the Head: These
all held in 97, which ending in a long and gentle Frost, upon this in 98. This
Disease became Epidemick, in that it seized so frequent, and was the issue of
other Diseases, and from the general invasion of Vertiginous cases. Acute
Diseases of this Year proved to me the Matter to be an Acid Nitre disposed to
corrupt and exulcerate, by which the Diseases seized usually with a Catarrh,
and ended with some Abscess. Putrid Fevers began with the Spring and
Catarrhal, yet reigning from the declining Summer; great fluor of the Blood
appeared at the same time, with Dysenteries, Gripes, and ill-natured putrid
Pains in the sides: To all which the Cures happily succeeded that were directed
by this reason of them, and confirmed to me, that the matter in the Air was
advanced to that Nature, as to be more disposed to Putridness and
Corrosiveness, which I therefore assert to be the Nature of the Air in the
present case; in many these Vertigo's and Pains in the Head blinded the sight
almost; my opinion that in this the Nature of the Niter consisted, and that it
flowed together with grosser parts of the Air, was favored by the Observation
of the Retinue of his Excellency the Earl of Manchester in their return from
Venice this Spring; who upon their passing the Seen, suffered from the Wind
which blew in their face, an unusual effect of common Cold, which was a Tumor
of the whole Face, and universal Scabbiness agreeable to the before observed
Qualities of it. I shall only add one Particular more, which is, that I have
observed that those places that have been most troubled with Apoplexies, have
been level and moist, so as in one Village so situate, these that died went off
mostly on a sudden.

Having thus asserted the containing Cause of this Disease, and shown the
Procatarctick to proceed from a Congestion of Chyle in this as in other Glands,
and to consist in the spoiling of its due Temper and Crasis, by inducing a
Corrosive and Nitrous Quality: The Disposition to this Distemper, appears
likewise to be contracted by Replentia and Otium, and which ruins the Tone and
Temper of the Glands the same way, but soonest thick Fermented Liquors,
especially the stalest: The dexterous Effect of these in all Diseases of the
whole Glandular kind, is sufficiently known. How much by this Observation we
may hope to have this Disease within our power, though we cannot mend the Air,
may be understood by considering that the Air has no power to change our
Bodies, but as it has a Delinquent Chyle to work on, as I note afterward. But
as this plainly exhibits the best method to prevent, so also that the Chalybeat
Waters are the best Cure. Their power in Diseases of the Glands, to remove
Obstruction, and restore the due Crasis and Temper of them, I have shown; and
as the Steel is the only proper Body to do this, which mechonically serves our
Life, at least in preserving this Tone and Crasis, which Alkalys and Niters
destroy: So it seems to affect the Glands only, since in a Chlorosis it is not
easy to conceive the so sudden raising the Blood by so small quantity of even
a Tincture of Steel otherwise, but to keep to experience as it appears that in
these Distempers of the Glands, the Chalybeat Waters are the only Remedy; and
as the light sort deobstruct best, so the more Acid sort are peculiar in this
Disease, more powerfully resisting and correcting the Nature of the Chyle, and
rendering it more fluxile and suppressing Haemorrhage, and to strengthen and
make firm the Brain, which is observable in their Virtues recited. But to
remove a Disposition to this Disease, the Time, or State, or cause of it, may
either make the use of these Waters exceptionable, or require a particular
regard either before, or in Conjunction with them, I shall consider the
differences thence arising, and the distinct regard they claim; that these may
be distinguished with some certainty, and may be of use to direct us, there is
the highest reason to believe, that since in all the Cures recited by Authors,
the Nature of the Disease is ever found answerable. Now considering that an
Apoplexy consists in the Admission of parts to the Brain, that either are
Aerial, as is what the Blood conveighs, or Elastick and Flatulent, as is the
Matter in the Aged; and that the admission of both is owing to the Crasis and
Temper of the Brain, as of the other Glands destroyed or degenerated; which is
performed in the Chyle by the Air, or degeneracy of the Juice by other means,
as may abundantly be proved to be the Case of Hemorrhages in general; we are
hereby helped to understand the reason of the variety of the Remedies that have
been observed to set aside Apoplectick Fits. And although in a Case of such
danger, Applications are justly made of universal Intention, yet they usually
succeed as they attend the State and Nature of it, as well as are commanded by
the strength of the part; and Intentions are thus best urged, that respect the
Matter as confirmed when Old: 2ly, When capable of Revulsion by Bleeding, when
that confines it, as in the Plethorick, by Vomits in full Feeders: 3ly, By
promoting the Secretion by Catharticks, as in the Phlegmatic Blisters, etc.
4ly, By thinning and lessening the Flatulency of the Matter, and driving it
forward either into the Secretory Vessels, or at worst through the Brain, on
which strong Apoplectick Waters are observed to effect, when the Fit is without
a Procatarxis, or changes into a Hemiplegia, being small in quantity. Again,
Bleeding may be the only Remedy which ought to be urged, from the Nature of the
Disease impelling, joining and indicating, as a Disposition to Haemorrhages, or
stopping of one; and thus I have more than once, by Bleeding chiefly, made an
Apoplexy remove, and change it self into a Gout in the Foot.

Lastly, Some Cures have been performed by Medicines that regard only the
Nature of the Matter, by resisting the Flatulency and Coldness of it, and
perhaps by strengthening the Brain withal. And that is to be further and more
nicely considered; for beside the general Intentions which the State of the
Matter requires to be particularly insisted upon, with reference to the Fit,
either to be removed or prevented; There are also some Conditions of this
Disease, particularly to be respected in curing a Disposition to it, which it
receives from the Constitution of the Part, Confirmedness of the Matter,
Quality of the Matter, and lastly, the Causes original or concurring of this
Distemper: For although these Waters are experienced a complete if not sole
Remedy in the two common Cases of Apoplectick Persons, a Haemorrhagious
Disposition, and a Sanguinary Plethora, as likewise in a total Intemperature
producing them; yet a preparatory Course, or Medicines conjunctly applied, may
be necessary: First, In old Age, by warming Cephalic Medicines, or moisture of
the Brain, in which astringent Chalybeats, as Crocus Martis astringens,
recommended by Dr. Cole, or Ens Veneris, which I more use. Secondly, If
inveterate, or from confirmed Hypochondriacism, where the Brain may be
calculous by a previous course of the Light Chalybeat Waters. Thirdly, The
Matter may be Cold and Flatulent, as the Case recited by Sennertus, in which
rotulae of Ol. Carui and nuc. moschat. succeeded, if we consult the genius of
the Humor in the advanced degree of it of this present Time, it may be proper
to take off the Acidity by Alkalys, in which Coral ought to have a share joined
with Carminatives and Discussers of Flatus; and to back these with Astringents
and Purgers interposed. Which I may confirm by an Observation I have made in
some that I have cured; that upon the first removal of the Fit, the Humor
removed into some other part as the Feet, and appeared in a puffy cold Humor.
And in others I have found an Apoplexy to proceed from the bare translated
Matter of the Rheumatick Pains, and thus in most of those that are taken; and
as this accounts well why Cold should increase them, so that the Cause is the
same, appears in that this Catarrhal Matter, when it falls on the Lungs or
Bowels, has usually produced Blood, as I find daily. And this I observe the
rather, because it clears my proof of the Matter to be Natural, and that the
increase of this Disease is owing to an increase of the same Matter in the Air,
its Subtly Coldness, Flatulency, and Corrosiveness, which the Coldness and
Moisture of this and the preceding Years favor. The last regard is to the
Causes concurring to the Production of it, as the Chlorosis, stopping of wonted
Flux or Haemorrhages.

The Course to be applied in all these appears in Authors, and need here only
to be intimated. Where none of these are coincident, besides general Evacuation
to be premitted, only good Detersives may be recommended; the most successful
of which, that I have observed, I have named afterward.

The Affectio Hypochondriaca, which I have observed to be relieved by them all,
but when confirmed to be cured by the light Chalybeats, and secured by the more
acid, to which the Purging Waters elected according to the requisite Qualities
ought to precede, needs no Address to show their place beside the reciting
their Symptoms. What is necessary to contribute to the Cure or Continuance of
it, being a change of the Course of Living to a more natural one, instead of
particularizing I choose to illustrate, by showing the antecedent Causes of it,
and that it is a Disorder of the Recrements of the Chyle. As this is a Cardinal
Distemper, of them, I have enlarged the thought not unusefully to the other
turns these receive at the several grand Points of Man's Life, and the Diseases
thereon depending: And though I could not be particular in the Explication of
this, yet the mistakes about Humane Nature are such, even of seemingly sound
Persons, but are very unhappy in the Hypochondriacal; I have offered somewhat
notwithstanding at the general Reason of the Distemperature of Body and Mind,
and the universal Efficacy of this congested Matter. I am of Opinion that by
this thought, more of a just Notion of our Nature may be retrieved, and of the
Efficacy of Mineral Acids in contradistinction from others, how they confirm
our Nature, and particularly why Steel, and how and on what Account, and what
the Temper of the Glands, and so of the Brain, consists in. The Nature and
Qualities of the Air, proved by its Effects, both ought and might be, I fancy,
better cleared, and the Truth and Excellency of this Method be proved in the
Acute Diseases likewise, wherein. I have found it of happy Use; which I hint,
to encourage the Prosecution of it, because I have observed Fevers themselves
to have enough of their reasons appear to distinguish the Success of the
Observer of them; but as these either want place or room here, so instead I am
obliged to excuse the whole discoursive part of this Book, and particularly the
Impertinencies and Imperfections of it, being only casual, and written raptim,
and much of it never read over by me till printed; and were designed but as
Hints, and beside the design of the History; so that the great Precipitation
with the Impediments, made much or all of it so far from being exact, as to be
thoughtless almost: In which part I reckon the Enumeration of the Sentiments of
Authors of Apoplexies, and the distinction of soms Symptoms: And in what I
offer to the Learned Dr. Cole, of the Seat of the Disease, it is Oscitanter,
and is submitted to his Judgment; my Intent being to explain and carry on the
Inquiry, not to oppose. In my examining the Waters I was exact to the best of
my Skill, and had it performed at the Springs, trusting only to the procuring
Barnet, Stretham and Upminster, the last of which was sent me by the
unquestioned hand of Mr. Jefferys of Brentwood. And least an Objection should
lie against the cleanness of my account of the Pyrites found in the Purging
Wells, in that the common Copperas stone should be found mixed with them at
Harwich at the base of the Loamy Cliff, I must observe that they are only found
among the gravelly lays that fall from the top, and that be it, however it
suffices to my purpose, that these Stones are only a common Base of this sort
of Earth, as well where are no Purging Springs, as where there are, and so not
of a foreign Original.

Lastly, Why I publish any thing so loose and unaccurate, I can only say, that
the Discourses which were written off hand, had not the leisure for Thought,
that the experimental part had (which was in good measure done before I left
Cambridge, and so before I entered on Practice) neither had I a prospect of an
Opportunity to perfect. And all my Thoughts I offer no otherwise, than with
Submission to better Judgment to correct.

A Supplement to Page 90.
FOR particularly, besides the Arguments drawn from the Excellency of our own
Mineral Waters, and their more distinct appositeness to several Cases, which
recommend the Use of our Waters in their lieu, as being more abundantly useful
to us, so there are some Objections that lie against the use of the German Spa
with us, which it is not amiss to advise the Reader of. For not only the Waters
suffer so much by their long passage, as at best to retain but a diminished
Proportion of their Virtue equal to their Tincture of Steel; but also that
Water, which by reason of its long retaining the Tincture, is sent abroad, and
is medicinally drank with us, if it did retain its Chalybeat Power (which it
seldom does till it is used) is of the heavy and less effectual sort in the
more nice Cases, and its Salt approaching to an Alkaly, and scarcely curdles
with Soap or liquid Salt of Tartar, not so much as our gravelly Pump-water, nor
disturbs a Solution of fine Silver in Spirit of Niter so much: And to this
agrees the Observation of the French Academists. All which I offer to be
considered and examined by Physicians, who may get it more fresh than mine
were, and observe their Use.

ERRATA.
PAge 36. Line 23. Observed by, add Dr. Lower. p. 67. dele quin. p. 69. for
pents read pends. Where Mr. Simson is mentioned, read Symonds. p. 113. at the
bottom before unacquainted dele not. p. 113. l. 12. after at one, insert end.
p. 115. for fessil read Fissil. p. 116. l. 15. after hand, add except Salts a
little more mixed, as those of Kensington and Woodham-Ferrys. p. 126. l. 15.
after Acidity, for of read and. p. 134. l. 15. for Camellae read Lamellae.

To the Class of North-hall Water, where the Nature is determined to resemble
Spirit of Salt, add, and to partake of Spirit of Vitriol, and may be a peculiar
in the Stone and Stoppage of Urine.

The Colchester Selenites was found in a Bed of bluish Clay, as my Worthy
Friend Mr. John Luffkin of that Town since informed me.

And other escapes may be, that the Reader may easily correct.

THE Natural History OF THE Chalybeat and Purging Waters OF ENGLAND.
The Introduction.
THE Method which I thought reasonable to take, to get an Account of these
Waters, and which affords the Minutes of this History, was the examining the
several Wells and particular Matter of them, and tracing their Earths and
Springs by the help of their proper Signs, and then to add to these the Essays
of the Waters: And the Universality and Accuracy of this Inquiry have
distinguished it, by the Success of a clear Discovery of their Principles. I am
not ignorant that this History, as it is an exact Examination of the Nature and
Origin of Waters so much in use, and as it may advance and he helpful to a
General History of Mineral Waters, needs nothing to recommend it; yet Use being
the Design of this Treatise, and because to give the Reader a View of the
Benefits proposed by it may facilitate the understanding of it, I shall show
that the Usefulness of this Inquiry is fully proportioned to the Difficulty of
attaining it. For besides the Satisfaction to the Drinkers of them, which
arises from the Knowledge of their Principles, the Effects of the Chalybeat
and Purging Waters of England are so great, and the Cures performed by them in
Obstinate and the less understood Distempers are so very extraordinary, that
(were their Natures better understood) we must expect no inconsiderable
Advantage from the proper Use of so Noble a REmedy: Since this would direct us
not only to the more certain Use of them, but advance our Understanding to the
Discovery of other Distempers, in which they might succeed and help us to avoid
all that ill Success that attends their improper Administration. How necessary
such Exactness is to the understanding their Natures, will appear sufficiently
if we consider what vastly different Qualities are found to be in the Waters
reputed of the same Species, which yet may be owing only to the Variety of the
Salts with which they may be impregnate; of which Variety I shall give some
particular Instances, because it is of great Consequence, and has hitherto
been unheeded. The Virtues of the Chalybeat Waters have been as yet so much
attributed to the Metalline parts or Steel, that (setting aside the Vehicle of
Water, the Benefit of which is taken notice of by some) in the Choice of these
nothing usually is consulted but the Quantity of Steel evidenced in the depth
of its Tinging with Galls, and yet in this so uniform a Species, it is easy to
discern that Variety of Nature and Effects, that will oblige him who observes
it, to allow so much to the Menstruum of it, or the Salt that is added (either
in its Quantity or Quality) as is sufficient to constitute Medicines of a quite
different Nature. Hypochondriacal Cases (in which the Intention seems most
General) the Light sort claim as their Province to relieve; and I never knew
the Heavy ones used in, but with the ill success of aggravating the Distemper
with an uneasy Heat, and with very little of the good Effects that attend the
light ones. The Propriety of these Waters in some other Distempers, as
Obstructions of several Parts, upon the account of their lightness and
thinness, and particular sort of Spirit, appears likewise in the Chapter of
their Virtues. The heavy Waters that have more of the Mineral of Iron, but
clogged with Salt, have different references according to the differing Nature
of the Salt, and quantity of Mineral they bear, whereof the Nitrous (for such
some prove to be) regard properly that heavy and black Crasis of the Blood of
the Melancholic; for I distinguish the Melancholy, properly so called, which
has its Root in the Constitution, from the affectio Hypochondriaca: The other,
which have a Salt of the same Vitriolick Nature with the Spirit, are a peculiar
in those cases which I call Climacteric of elder Persons and some others, which
require the enriching of the Blood, and the help of a Salt more effectual,
gross, and lasting, than is the light Spirit. And as some cases may require the
same Vitriolick Salt to help the Appetite and restrain Flatulencies, where the
Blood as it needs not, so bears not much of the body of the Steel, [For such
is the case in some Persons past Fifty, of a florid Complexion, and who breed
Blood fast] so a Water that is thus qualified, of which I have given an
instance, may be reputed another Species, and for its real use deserves well to
be distinguished. The Salts which these weighty Waters extract from the Soil,
it is likely may vary very much, yet having not found any of them to contain
Saltpetre, and the difference of their Virtues depending chiefly on their being
more or less Alkalisat, I ^ay not so much ^^ight on those lesser Qualities, as
to distingu^^ (...) Waters by them, though I take notice of the^ (...) the
Essays of the Waters: But there are other Qualities that Waters may derive from
the places where they run, which are less sensible, and may lie in some Motion
or Texture (rather than in any Accession of Particles) that a particular
Distemper or Constition, besides what a tender one might, may receive an
Impression from; these are Coldness and Hardness: And these are so
considerable, as to be allowed by some Physicians rationally enough, to have
been the Cause of an Epilepsie, that seized a Gentlewoman, whom I knew, upon
drinking for a Chlorosis a Water that issues from a Stone Quarry. Again, as the
Waters have d^^^erent Effects from their different Qualifications, so they have
some Effects in common from their common, or general, or more Essential ones.
That which I shall take notice of here, is the Prevention of the Generation of
the Stone; because their Pretention that makes them here Competitors, is a
Propriety of this Kind of Mineral Waters, which is explained in this History,
and confirms it, and was never before discovered or understood. The Purging
Waters owing their Virtues wholly to their Salts, are much more various in
their Nature, and the Ignorance of the different Nature of these Salts, has
made their different Effects unquestioned, and so hitherto to escape
Observation; and though the Subtilty and Fluxilness of some of these Salts, and
not of others, may seem to most Men too slight to deserve Consideration, and
has neither been observed nor inquired into; yet it is most certain, that those
very Qualities give the Waters a different Capacity. Epsom and Acton (which
both bear only this kind of Salt, that neither admits of Christallizing, nor
abides the Warmth of a Temperate Hand) on this Account, as they are more
Effectual in Grosser Bodies, so in Leaner in the very same Cases prevail not,
nor agree: And on the same Score, I have found them Effectual in some old
Cholicks and Cramps, where the Passages and Vessels that wanted cleansing were
very small, or the Matter glutinous or viscous. The same Qualifications which
these Waters have for deterging, and are conspicuous in the Galling of the
Arcus and Urinary Passage, that attends often the Operation of these Waters,
above what is usually observed in drinking the others, may reasonably enough
have an advantageous Use likewise in Ulcers of the Kidneys in a cautious and
judicious Hand; and they often have been by me observed to be successful in
some Obstructions of them; which together with the Inconvenience of an
Ischuria, that sometimes attends their improper or unseasonable Use, makes this
Consideration to merit our Attention, and besides, the Softness of the Salt I
am speaking of, may give rise to a Thought, that some emollient or relaxing
Quality may be communicated in some cases, as in Melancholy for example, above
what other Waters can be expected to exert. But besides the Qualities now
considered, this History will inform us of Differences of the Salts of these
Purging Waters in more essential Qualities* and that these are almost as many
as the Waters; whereof some few stand at such a distance, as Alkalys and
Sea Salt; and their Virtues are so proportionably distant, that till I
considered, that the Knowledge of the first, assisted me in the Observation of
the latter, I was apt to wonder how so frequent Instances should slip the
regard of even the most considerable Men, it is familiar for Scorbutic
Indispositions, to be relievd by one Water and aggravated by another. I have
known Instances of a Scorbutic Scabies, and a Leprous Disease, each increased
by drinking the Water of Brentwood-weal, which abated upon the use of Woodham
Ferrys. And this is the clearer and fairer Example, because both these Diseases
have been effectually cured by Lambeth Water. And I may observe, that this
makes much for the Validity of this Account, that the discoverable Qualities of
the Salts of these Waters, so justly correspond with their experimented
Virtues; for which reason in treating of those Waters now named, I have opposed
or compared the Qualities of them to each other. Indeed, though the clear and
convincing Detection of their Differences, and of the Salts they bear relation
to, be only subject to nice Essays; yet they confess to the bare Taste wide
differences, some being Bitter, more Saline some, some Sweet, some Insipid, or
near the Taste of common Water, some have a Vitriolick Sweetness, some are
Austere, etc. which hitherto has escaped Observation: So that Mineral Waters
seem one of the greatest as well as the most useful Branches of the Materia
Medica. In sum, It is by the understanding their Origin and Nature, that we
can ascertain Rules and distinguish Errors in taking them, readily discover
their proper Uses, and by directing to other Cases and Distempers in which they
may be applicable on the same Reason and Account, may improve and advance their
Virtues: And besides, the least piece of Service this does in the recording
their Uses, and giving those Signs, that may direct the Discovery of other
Wells, with the advantage of an Example to direct the proving them, is not
inconsiderable. The Benefit of all this, that I may not seem to abound in my
own Sense, I shall give in the words of the Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society. All which being considered, Numb. 51.
we cannot but add, That whoever discovers such Healing Waters, and publicly
prescribes the safe and right Use of them, does really distribute larger and
nobler Alms, than if he built and endowed a Savoy; for this prolongs Life, and
restores Health (which is sometimes better than Life) both to Rich and Poor, to
Natives and Strangers, to Neighbors and Travelers.

According to this Design, the History of these Waters will come under these
three Heads; The General History of them; The Essays of the several Waters, and
then their Uses. I shall treat of these two Kinds of Waters distinctly, and
observe that order, that Repetition may be avoided, and the former parts of the
Discourse may enlighten the latter.

Of the Nature of Common Water.
THere are many Questions, which seem to lie in my way to be discussed, as of
the Origin of Springs, Nature and Origin of Mineral Juyces and Vitriols; Of
the Causes of the Heat of the Earth, etc. which the following History makes to
disappear. I shall therefore avoid the Prolixity caused by such Disputes, and
only make some Remarks on the Affections and Nature of Simple or Common Water,
which may help us to the better conceiving of the Nature of Mineral ones.

1. Waters receive their Salts of the Earths they wash.

2. Common Water holds no Metalline parts, nor will receive any; Mineral Acids
being necessary for Vitriols: And though gravelly Waters, just at their
Eruption, will take so much of an Iron as with Galls will make Ink, yet that
the Acidity belched up at those places is a distinct thing, and not of the same
Original, is evident, in that the Water looses that Quality a few Yards from
the Spring, and then ceases to take any discoverable Parts or Qualities from
either Iron, or Copper, or Brass.

3. All Waters flow on a Loam, or fat heavy Earth, such as Tiles are made of,
and there is a dead heavy sort of it, known by its Blackness, Weight and
Stonyness, which is the common Floor of Springs, and is therefore called in
Norfolk the Pan of the Earth, beyond which no Pumpmaker expects to find Water,
or attempts to dig for it: All the Earth above this approaches to a Nitre,
being so much the more Nitrous, by how much more it is wrought on by the Sun
and Air: Nitre being received as a Name for any Native Salt of the Superficial
Earth, by the Sun and Air produced or separated, which is void of Metalline
Parts and Nature, and in differing Climates is advanced toward an Alkalisat or
Urinous Salt, in proportion to the Heat of the Country, and Situation of the
Soil. And I never found any Metalline Bodies or Juyces yet, but what were
embraced in Stone or Loam, and not in Clays.

4. Hence Waters that wash this upper Soil, or Rivers and Springs that lie in
Clays, are Saline; Gravelly Waters yield little besides some stony parts,
unless they have washed off some Salt from Neighboring Soils; which discovers
its Original in the Essays.

5. Not to take notice of the Qualities of Humecting or Moistning, etc. the
most considerable Affection of Water is, that it is void of Elasticity and
igneous Particles, and unapt to Fermentation.

Yet these Observations of mine, I offer not otherwise, than to submit them for
better Judgment and Experience to inquire into.

The Waters under Examination are the Saline, namely, The Purging ones, and the
Acidulae or Chalybeat ones: Of these first.

PART I.
Of the Chalybeat Waters of England.
THE Chalybeat Waters are preferable not only for Antiquity of Discovery, but
also for Virtue, being an effectual Refuge for many deplorable Diseases that no
other Remedy prevails in: They are quick Springs, ever flowing in a Sand or
Gravel. I shall first state their Characteristicks, or Signs by which they are
distinguished from other Waters; and then explain those Circumstantial Signs,
and their Reasons, in an account of their Nature.

Their Characteristicks are,

1. To show the Mineral they bear (which is Steel) in their Taste, and with
Galls, to evidence it in the blew or purplish black Color proper to Vitriols
of Iron, as also by dropping a Ferrugineous Ocre at the Spring.

2. The second is, The Lightness of the Spirit that holds the Tincture, which
vanishes upon exposing to the Air, and leaves the Water without the Mineral
Tincture. The lightness of this Spirit so affects those Waters of this kind
that are more void of Salt, as to render them lighter than Rainwater distilled.

3. The Spring ever proceeds from a Rock usually consisting of gravelly Stones
cemented together.

4. If it join any other common Water immediately near the Fountain, it thence
incrusts the Stones and Sticks, which it washe^, with a Mortar-like crust The
notice of this Incrustation has made many Learned Men, and particularly Dom^
Panarolus, Part 2. Obj. 16.
erroneously to entertain an ill Opinion of the Water, because (as he observed
in that four Miles from Rome, extra Portam hostiensem vulgo S. Pauli) of the
stony Matter the Water leaves where it passes, and this through the Mistake
that this Matter is in the Water at the Spring.

5. To bear an Oily or Bituminous Film on it like a Scum.

6. To give a Green upon the Mixture of Syrup of Violets.

These Waters differ on account of the Salt of the Water, in the Quantity or
Quality of it, or proportion of the Steel they bear; and so may not have the
second Qualification which is proper to the simple ones. For the Nature and
Reason of these Waters, we must examine these particulars, not only since most
of them are the Indexes, but also are effected by the Essential Properties of
these Waters; and show the Metalline parts, and the Nature of the Menstruum or
Spirit. The Metal is evident from the blew black they take with Galls, from the
Taste, and lastly the Okar which it casts out at the opening of the Spring,
which calcined with Salt, and exposed to the Air, shows none of the Verdigreese
Color that Hungarian Vitriol gives upon the same Trial. The Menstruum, or
Spirit, is a distinct thing from the Salt of them, and of a differing Original,
being contrary in Nature, not held by it, and being found in those Waters that
want the Salt, for the Salt of those that have any, is washed from the Earth by
the Water, and the Spirit is only a Steam that comes along with the Gravel. The
Spirit, or Menstruum, that bears this Tincture, is Volatile, and continues not
with the Water many hours, (scarce well one in the light sort) though well
cork'd up. What effect Hermetick Seal might have, I never had encouragement to
attempt, as never believing that a fair Trial, where the power of the Fire came
so near and so naked, and the Chalybeat Waters that abound with Salt are often
Nitrous, and so may mortify the Spirituous Acid, which may make it in vain
looked for in the Receiver: This I mention for caution sake; for that this
Spirit is Volatile, yet that it can be detained by a cover of Oil for ten days,
I lately tried with a Light Chalybeat at Felstead. The Original of this Vapor
is pointed out to be low, and to proceed with all Gravel; as is evident in free
Springs, that upon laying Iron at the Eruption of them, will Tinge with Galls,
which power the Water loses at a Rods distance; but in these it is less in
Quantity.

The Nature of this Spirit is Vitriolick: They disturb not a Solution of
Sublimate in fair Water, and with Lignum Nephriticum thicken a little with a
Cloud, but do not the least change yellowish as Pump-water and Nitrous, but
near that of a Solution of Vitriol, or its Spirit upon the same, though scarce
so clear, because all these Waters have a touch of the Salt of the Soil, as
appears in the green with Syrup of Violets. They all likewise render a Solution
of Sal Saturni in fair Water milky, by which the Spirit is distinguished from
Saltpetre or its Spirit. Note, That though these Trials are fairly made, only
in the lighter simpler Waters, in order to make a Judgment of them, yet they
hold in the heavier Waters, except that Trial with Lignum Nephriticum, in which
they discover their Salt, by the yellow color they give. Now the Nature of
Salt of Vitriol appears upon examination, to differ very little from common
Salt (if any thing) more than in the Qualities impressed in it by the Metal;
and it is worth our notice, that Vitriols and Nitres precipitate each other,
being the Product of two several Regions; which will enlighten to the
Understanding the next Particulars observed to attend these Waters.

The Earth and Soil of these Springs, is ever a Sand or Gravel, and the Water
issues from, or rather makes, a Rock of cemented Stones, which are never to be
found, but where the Water is Vitriolick. This sort of Rock is open to view at
Tunbridge, and has never yet failed, where the Ground in which these Springs
are found has been opened, as at Notly, Felstead, and other lesser Springs. I
am apt to think that Iron may have a particular Qualification for the cementing
of Earth and Stone, but that I may follow my subject more closely, I shall only
consider it as the next Particular illustrates it.

These Waters, when they join another Water, at least a gravelly one, ever they
have ran so far as to lose their Spirit, precipitate a Mortar-like substance,
wherewith they incrust the Stones and Sticks they pass over. That this stony
Matter is precipitated out of other Waters which flow into it by the Virtue of
this Water, and proceeds not from the Chalybear Water it self, beside the
Argument that may be drawn from the Lightness in weight of the Chalybeat,
appears fully demonstrated at many Springs, indeed* at all, where the rill of
common Water runs along the side of the Soil whence the Chalybeat issues,
especially when it is in a Meadow (as it was at Felstead where I first observed
it) no Incrustation or Precipitation of stony Matter being to be found either
in the Meadow where the Chalybeat lies, or above before the other Water joins
it. The Water I now named, is one of the light sort, being near ten Grains in
seven Ounces lighter than common Water, and the Water that joins it a hard
gravelly one, which with Tincture of Logwood gave a Rasberry red as Acids,
which is not amiss to mention. The Reason which I intimated above, to be from
the differing Natures of Nitres and Vitriols, may help make this intelligible.
The Lightness in weight of the Chalybeat Waters, that as they are void of Salt,
may properly enough be said to be more simple, is owing to the same Cause, and
proves the same thing, being not from difference of the Season, as is usually
judged, which can never make it lighter than even that Rainwater distilled,
that must render it so; but from the Depuration it has received by the
Precipitation of the Earthy parts: And the Property is the same by which these
Waters even in Human or Animal Bodies Cure the Stone, by removing the
Disposition to it, as well as early Precipitation of the Matter; and this
Virtue in the Waters is so constant, as to have made them Famous in this
particular. The last considerable Sign and Attendant of these Waters, is the
Bituminous Scum appearing on them, how far the fatness of the Earth of these
Waters is assisting in separating this Spirit, or whether it is the Effect of
it, is not plain, nor very material to learn: That it is of the Nature of
common Salt, to assist in the Separation of Oily parts, is evident in pickling
Roses, and distilling Oils, but whether it be from this, or the Putridness of
the Soil and Earth, I shall submit, and leave.

These Waters differ not only in Degrees of Hardness and Coldness, which is
best taken notice of in the Examination of each Water, but may be distinguished
into these two Heads.

1. The Light ones, which have more of the Spirituous Parts of the Vitrioline
Spirit, and more Simply.

2. The Heavy ones, that contain a Salt approaching to a Nitre, or is Nitrous.

Of the Heavy ones first, and then I ascend to the Lighter, which thereby may
be illustrated.

The First Class.
Chalybeat Waters that contain a Nitrous Salt, and equal at least common Water
in weight.
THE Salt of these Waters I conclude to be owing to the Soil, because it is
found to be of the same Nature, and has some Differences, but those being
small, I omit, and forbear insisting upon them.

In the general Design of the use of Chalybeats, these Nitrous Waters are not
so Effectual, and the more Nitrous the worse, by which I mean, the more
Alkalisat; which is easily proved, by the early Precipitation of the Black, and
the change toward a Green, which is the Effect of Alkalys with Ink, though at
first they change the Blew Black into a Purple. The Characteristick Notes of
these Waters, beside the weight, are, to drop the Inky color they receive with
Gall, to take a high color with Lignum Nephriticum, and when the Water has
stood to be effete, it will not precipitate Silver out of Spirit of Nitre. I
have not found any of this kind so fully Nitrous or Alkalisat, as to trouble a
Solution of Sublimate, much less to precipitate it Yellow, (both which indeed
are inconsistent with Vitriols) nor any that bear a Salt of the Nature of
Saltpetre.

A Water in a Field adjoining to the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester's
Place, at Leez in Essex.
THis Spring is in a Gravel, and is so small as to be considerable, only in
that it is in a breeding Pond. This Water disturbs not a Solution of Sublimate
in fair Water, it rendered milky a Solution of Sal Saturni, by which it
distinguished it self from Saltpetre, but yet not much more than Saltpetres
second Salt does. With Lignum Nephriticum it gave a pale Yellow and not fine,
exactly the color of small Beer, which at four days end precipitated so as to
leave just the top of the Liquor clear. The Water kept till it had lost its
Spirit, and with that its power of striking black with Gall (which was 24
hours) essayed with Gall, was thick and dirty white, which precipitated in the
former Experiment, showing an Affinity with common Salt, in this with Nitrous.
It is much of the weight of common Water, and takes a blew black with Galls.

The Water at Witham in Essex, in Sir Edward Southcot's Ground.
WITH Gall a deep Purple turning to Ink, not very clear; and with Lignum
Nephriticum a faint dull reddish. I judged this to have more of the nature of
the Salt of common Water, and that the Spirit of this Water to be a little
finer than the other sort, which give a direct Black with Gall, because
distilled Acids give this Red. The Red that Alkalys give turns greenish upon
standing, these Waters are all inclined to the same.

The Chalybeat Water of Knarsborough in Yorkshire.
KNarsborough Water, as Dr. French relates, is of a Vitrioline Taste and Odor;
The Water rises in a moorish boggy Ground (within less than half a Mile from
which, there is no considerable Ascent) and springs directly up from the
Sandy bottom. It is of the same weight with common Spring Water: The color
with Syrup of Violets is much the same as in the Chalybeat Waters at Islington
and Hamstead; not so intense as in Tunbridge or the German Spa, as the Learned
Dr. Tancred Robinson, my Informer, proved it at the Spring. And as this color
is not so deep as that made by Vitriols, so the residuous dark colored Earth,
after Evaporation, was insipid. The pitch of the Volatility of the Spirituous
part of this Water is observable, in that it tinctured with Powder of Galls at
two days end, and suffered not by Warming, yet lost that Quality wholly in
Distilling. Neither does this Water coagulate Milk: The Redness that this Water
takes with Galls, is effected by spirituous or distilled Acids, unmixed with
gross Salt, of the Soil of a Foreign Nature, which would disturb the Color;
and the larger Proportion of the Acid to the Steel, or the very small quantity
of the last may effect it. But the Quantity of the Acid Spirit must be judged
here to be considerable. For the Nature of the Acidity, I have before
distinguished it by the Effects, and so need here only observe it to be
Vitrioline, or of the Nature of Spirit of Vitriol; which is Essential to the
Precipitations.

Marks-Hall Water in Essex.
THIS Water joining another in crusts, as do the rest, it is much the same with
the preceding, containing little Steel, but a large share of an Acid not so
Fugitive, as where it is in less quantity or ill coupled with a Salt: It gave a
bright Red a very little purplish, not so deep as the preceding. The Color it
advanced with Gall, it lost again two days after, without Precipitation of any
Ferrugineous parts, in which it differs from other Chalybeats. It rendered a
Solution of Sal Saturni troubled, but not very milky, much as the rest; and it
tinctured a high Yellow with Lignum Nephriticum as do Nitres, and a little
clouded: It weighed likewise as the other, just the weight of common Water.

Ilmington Water in Warwickshire.
THIS Water of Ilmington being of the same heavy kind, and which (as I observe
above) require less Accuracy, I shall give the Examination of it, out of Dr.
Derham's Account of it: With Syrup of Violets it turned Green; with Galls
Purple, like Martial Vitrioline Waters: It exceeded common Water in weight near
half a Dram in a Pint, being weighed in a dry Season. Indeed it is much the
heaviest of this kind in England, (for it purges not as he informs us p. 53.
but by Urine.) However, That it cannot vie with the lighter Chalybeats in
Virtue, I shall explain in treating of their Virtues.

The Water in an open Bottle dropped its Ocre, and with that its power of
Tinging with Galls in twelve hours time (that is) a great part of it, which it
did not begin to do in a Bottle well stopped under a Fortnight, p. 88.

It yielded a Salt of an irregular shape, upon the residue after distilling
Acid Spirits, wrought with great Effervescence, and not Alkalysat, p. 82.

The Salt was pale, and would not flagrate, p. 60. nor coagulate Milk, p. 77.
The Earth like Red Ocar, and is contained in great quantity, a Quart yielding
near a Spoonsul.

It appears hence, that the Salt of this Water is of an Alkalisat Nature, and
that it differs from the Salt of Fat, Mellow or Loamy Earths, which Purge, as
we shall find in the latter part of this History.

Aylesham Water in the County of Norfolk.
THIS Water is in a Gravel, it has prevailed in Fame and Resort over Oulton
Water in the same County, which is a lighter and far more effectual Water,
partly from the more convenient Situation of the place, and partly from the
wrong Estimate that is made of Chalybeat Waters, by those that jndge of their
Goodness by the depth of their Tinging with Galls. It is heavier a little than
ordinary Gravel Water; with Galls or Oken leaves takes a blew black, and makes
a direct Ink; as do those Waters whose Salt has somewhat of the Nature of
common Salt.

That the Metalline parts of these Waters are purely Chalybeat, I informed my
self not in all but in some, as that at Leez, and some other smaller ones, by
exposing to the Air the subsident Okar, lightly calcined with Sea Salt, which
would discover Copper if any were in it; and besides by the color they give
upon Trials with Gall, the blew black color being proper to Vitriol of Iron.

The lesser Springs of this kind are very numerous, in Gravelly Countries
scarce a Village without one; upon the preceding Instances of them, I shall
make Observation of their differences, and the Classes they must be reduced
into, whereinto yet I did not adventure to digest them, lest in the Sense of
others the difference should appear only gradual.

These weighty Waters are either, 1. the more pure and simple Acidulae, which
bear less of the Steel; retain their Acidity longer, and have not their color
with Gall dark or disturb^d, as the other sort, nor contain any Salt
collectible; of this sort seems Knaresborough, and (which is yet the higher of
this kind) Marks hall Water, which gives a thin and bright Red with Gall,
scarce beyond a Rasberry, and loseeh its quality of Tinging without
Precipitation of Okar, is of a pleasing acid Taste, as it were winy, and yet
gives not the proof with Lignum Nephriticum that Vitriols do, or Spirit of
Salt, but thickish reddish and cloudy, as the Seminitrous Salt shot in Cellars.

Or 2ly Atramentous, which give a full Black with Gall, and with respect to the
color they give, they are either bluish or reddish; the reddish, as that at
Wittham, kept a Week, will be thickish and turbid with Gall, but disturb not a
Solution of fine Silver in Spirit of Nitre, which the Leez Water (which gives a
blew black) being more related to common Salt, did in a great measure
precipitate.

Another difference that is considerable in these Waters, is the bulk or
quantity of Salt they contain, as the Illmington Water proves, which is not
only much heavier than other Waters, but varies in its Effects, and equally to
the grossness of the Salt, neither reaches the recesses of Nature so far, nor
passes so well.

To obviate some Objections, I shall observe, that the Reason why these Waters,
which are equally with the other sort capacitated to precipitate the earthly
parts out of gravelly Water, are not likewise equally qualified with Lightness
by the same Vitrioline Spirit, is, because the Salt of these Waters is so far
Vitrioline, as to be apt to join a Chalybeat Acid and consist with it; but yet
to be separated by Heat; and is in some small measure of Nature, the same with
that which is an Ingredient in Vitriols; for the Liquor of Vitriols, if boiled
with too great a Fire, will precipitate their Ferrugineous parts, which the
Boylers cure by adding more Iron to it: And these Waters, after they have
dropped the Okar, and cease to tinge Galls, with Iron will become Atramentous
again, the first Alteration being chiefly performed by the Mortification of the
Esurine Salt by the Nitrous: For besides the Argument drawn from the not
abiding of the Steel in these Waters, the Nitrous Nature of the Salt is
conspicuous in its high color it takes with Lignum Nephriticum which Vitriols
give not; nor do the light Chalybeat Waters, that proceed from a Ground where
the Soil is Fat and Bituminous, as I observed that at Felstead to be, and which
yields little or no Salt.

Of the Waters that are Light and purely Chalybeat.
I Have cleared the Reason of the Lightness of these Waters, and with that have
asserted the Nature of the Spirit to be Vitrioline; since all those Waters are
found to be so, where these Incrustations are found. And as the weighty Waters
take a full high yellow Tincture from Lignum Nephriticum, so this light sort
take no slain with the same Wood, but retain their color, only disturbed with
a light white Cloud flying in it. Lignum Nephriticum makes no alteration in a
Solution of Vitriol, nor in Water sharpened with Oil of Vitriol. These Waters
do not well conserve their Virtue two hours, which yet will scarce be lost in
ten days, if headed with Oil. They all give a purplish Red with Galls, which,
upon standing a while, turns to a purplish Black.

Tunbridge Water in Kent.
THIS Water gives a deep Green, with Syrup of Violets, as Vitriols do; and in
the quantity of about seven Ounces and a quarter, weighed ten Grains lighter
than a River-water near me, (which was lighter than Spring Water) and as much
lighter than Rainwater, and about four Grains lighter than the German Spaw, to
which it is preferable on that account. The Ground above and about this Spring,
is a cemented Rock; and the Spring is large, of long use, and much celebrated
and frequented.

Wellenborow Water in Northamptonshire.
THIS Water weighed at the Spring eighteen Grains lighter than common Water, in
a quantity of about twelve Ounces; with a few drops of Tincture of Logwood,
gave a Black; with Syrup of Violets, a deep Green; with Syrup of Cloves,
blackish; with Galls a Violet.

Islington Water.
THIS Water, as the rest, makes no Alteration in a Solution of Sublimate, and
with Sal Saturni dissolved in fair Water became milky a little, and a little
curdled, and not clear as with a Saltpetre; with Lignum Nephriticum it remained
pale, but clouded a little with a thickish dusky White, near a Rainwater, and
weighed two Grains lighter than Tunbridge Water in the same quantity, which I
thought might be owing to the difference of the Season.

Felstead Water in Essex.
THIS Water lies in a Moor, the bottom whereof is a cemented Rock, the Earth
where the Spring rises, is Fat and Bituminous, or Unctuous and very
Ferrugineous, no Incrustation in the boggy Hole where the Water stands, but the
Water that passes through the Meadow begins to incrust as it touches this
Ground: It is of the same weight exactly with Tunbridge, it becomes milky with
a Solution of Sal Saturni, and with Lignum Nephriticum suffered no stain, but
only a milky cloud swimming in it. This is but a small Spring, scarce more than
a Land-drain.

Of the Virtues of the Chalybeat Waters.
THE Virtues of Steel are so very great and large, and in many cases so
contrary, as not to be explained by what are grossly called the first, second or
third Qualities; but to help us to a Notion of them, we must consider the
Essence of this Mineral in its Affections, that are apparent. And thus we may
conceive of it, as a hard body of the Mineral Kingdom, and so qualified with
Firmness, which is apt to enrich the Blood, being easily convertible into Fat
or Sulphur, the nature of whose Sulphur, is to preserve Fluid Bodies, and the
Temper of whose Acid Spirit, is such as raises, and yet restrains or rather
adjusts the Fermentation of our Stomach, Soluble, Friendly to our Nature, and
some-how Correspondent to the Mechanism of the Air we live in by its Magnetism;
and then we may intelligibly add the more Simple, and other evident Qualities,
as cooling, potential Heat, Drying, Balsamic or Healing Quality, etc. which I
shall take notice of under these Heads, in these Waters.

1. They Invigorate the Blood and Juyces as a Chalybeat.

2. They Astringe.

3. They Incide and Attenuate by their Acidity.

4. The Acidity is Connatural, and agreeable to the Ferment of the Stomach, and
other Offices, which these Waters promote.

5. On the same account, and partly in that it is Sulphurous, it is a Fraenum,
or Curb, to Fermentations and Flatulencies, and performs more effectually what
Oxycrate does in the Vapors in Women, and Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol in Men,
whence the Acid seems adjusted to the Temper of our Bodies, which can preserve
the just Fermentations, as it destroys or reduces Exorbitant ones.

6. They depurate the Juyces of foreign or grosser parts, lodged with the
Nourishment in the Body, as is evident in the Stone; which is but the same
thing which they effect in gravelly Waters at their Springs.

7. The Acid being Spirituous, passes where other Medicines cannot, and so are
Diuretic and Exterminate, and discharge the offensive Matter by Urine; and the
rest it Volatilizes.

8. The Vehicle of this Mineral and Spirit, is not apt to Elasticity or
Fermentation.

And on the account of these Qualifications, the Chalybeat Waters warm,
strengthen, heal, open Obstructions, absterge, invigorate, and thus are
capacitated to stop Fluxes of all sorts, and remove many Diseases, among which
the Stone and Affectio Hypochondriaca stand at the Head.

But although all the sorts of Chalybeat Waters have some Qualifications in
common, as to invigorate the Blood, and cleanse the Viscera; yet as they differ
in their Salt, so likewise in their Virtues; which I shall particularly treat
of.

The Virtues of the Acidulae.
Which Name I would make proper to those Waters that are lightly Chalybeat.
THese have a fine Acidity, not collectible into a Salt, the residue upon
Distilling, being an Insipid Ferrugineous Earth; and as I said before, give
only a Claret red with Gall. That which is proper to this sort of the Chalybeat
Waters, is, That they are free of any gross Salt, and have plenty of a
Vitrioline Acid, with little of the body of the Steel, and that Acid more fixed
than in the light Chalybeats. In order to understand the Benefit of this, I
shall observe that there are Cases that require a Water so qualified, either on
the Score of the Distemper, or Constitution of the Patient, such as we commonly
call Complexion; in which a quantity of Steel may do more harm, than the
Vitrioline Spirit can do good. And this must be allowed me, to be in all Cases
and Persons, where the Blood offends in quantity, Floridness and Fluxilness, by
every one that observes the power Steel has to heat and invigorate the Blood in
the Chlorosis. And when I consider the opposite Nature of Chalybeat Acids, and
Nitrous Salts, as I observed before, I fancy I have a clear Reason for all
this. One Case that the Body of Steel agrees not in, is that Indisposition of
fresh-colour'd florid-complexion'd Persons, about the last grand Climacterick,
as I call that of 49, who are liable to Fluxes of Blood, or great Tumultuations
of it. It is very easy to discover the Alkalisat state of the Blood in aged
Persons, by only tasting the Urine, which in those grows almost Caustic. The
Diseases that this sort of Water is a peculiar in, are Apoplexies, Phrensies
and Fluxes of Blood; and because the first of these is a Distemper that has
strangely raged of late, and extraordinarily this last Winter, beyond what has
been observed perhaps ever before, to explain the reason of it, so much as to
give light to the Effect of these Waters, may be no unacceptable a Digression.

Of the Apoplexy.
THE Reason of an Apoplexy, and the Cause of so sudden a Deprivation of Life,
that great Judge, the Prince of Physicians, Hippocrates, resolves into a
Stagnation or Station of the Blood, whereby all Motion and Action of the
Spirits is taken away; understanding the Blood to be Spirituous, and as not
only supplying Matter to the Animal Spirits, but continually Cherishing and
Preserving them in their Natural Disposition. And he supposes this Station of
the Blood in an Apoplexy, to be in the Vessels of the Neck and Breast chiefly,
and that its Motion is stopped either by sharp Humors, or a Plethora, or an
Afflux of cold Humors; the last of which he makes not so sudden.

The Sense of the Greeks and the Arabians, I shall give in the words of
Avicenna, transcribed out of Joh. Jacob. Wepferus.

Apoplexia reddit membra sensa and motu carentia, propter angustiam afficientem
ventriculos (seu medium and imum; utrumque enim vocabulum Arabicum significat)
cerebri, and canales spiritus sensitivi and moventis. Et Paulo inferius:
Angusta haec fit vel propter compressionem seu incubationem, vel repletionem,
compressio autem, fit, si corripiatur eo quod ipsum, sc. cerebrum vel dolor
afficit, vel laedit, seu molestia aliqua vexat, vel contrahit, seu constringit,
sive sit qualitas ei adjuncta affixave celeriter spissans medicamentorum, sive
frigus vehemens. Repletio autem est vel cum tumore, vel sine tumore. Repletio
cum tumore est, si contineatur illic materia, occludatque partini extensione,
partim repletione. Haecque est ex speciebus Apoplexiae gravissimae ac ejusdem
notae, sive illa, sc. repletio a materia calida, sive frigida eveniat. Quae est
sine Tumore, contingit vel a superfluitate in ipso cerebro, aut cavitatibus
ejus, aut in propinquis canalibus spirituum ex cerebro; estque haec
superfluitas humor sanguineus subito in ventriculos effusus, aut humor
Phlegmaticus, atque haec, superfluitas nempe, est frequentior and Potior: vel
accidit in canalibus Spirituum ad cerebrum, dum interdum Venae and Arteria ex
vehementi repletione and abundantia sanguinis obstruuntur, nec Spiritus, sc.
vitalis, transitum habet, noc cunctatur, seu cessat indignari, seu turgere and
effervescere: acciditque hoc, quod in ligatura arteriarum duarum Carotidum, seu
soporalium, cum amissione sensus and motus, contingit, and quando (...) simile
obtingit a causa Primitiva, seu interna, effectum eundem producit.

The Physicians for many Ages since then, in an Apoplexy, accused only the
Straightness and Coarctation of the Ventricles of the Brain, distorting the
Sense of the Ancients, and cherished their Opinion with the Fancy, that the Use
of the Ventricles, was either to generate, or collect and distribute the Animal
Spirits. But after that the Varolian Method in cutting the Brain began to be
practiced, the Ventricles were discharged from these Uses, by Platerus,
Bauhi^^* Spigelius, and others; but most happily by D. Caspar Hoffmannus, and
had assigned to them only the Office of Receptacles of the Excrements. Against
him, the former Uses of them, the Famous Anatomist Joh. Riolanus fill.
endeavored to maintain: The ground that his Argument proceeds upon is, That
the Animal Spirit is made out of the Vital, and that this is deduced by the
Carotid Arteries to the Basis of the Brain; and then that the Ventricles are
aptly situate to this end, to receive and conveigh the Spirits into the fourth
Ventricle as a Cistern, that thence they may be distributed into the Nerves.
And so he carries it on, At Nervorum septem Conjugationes propagantur ab illis
eminentiis quat ^^r, quarum duae majores formant clauduntque latera
Ventriculorum anteriorum; aliae duae constituunt latera quarti ventriculi,
cujus tectum partesque anticas and posticas efformat duplex Scolicoidis
Apophysis. And for the conveyance of the Blood thither, A reti mirabili
numerosam sobolem ramorum arteriosorum, undequaque per durum matrem spargi, qui
sanguinem suum depo^ant in sinum tertium: ab eo sinu depromi innumeros rivulos,
qui sparsi per exteriores anfractus cerebri, roris instar, destillent sanguinem
arteriosum superne deorsum: praeterea per torcular, venam magnam Galeni, seu
sinum quartum sanguinem and Spiritus ad ventriculos deduci. But all this with a
violent Strain to Reason and Anatomical Truth, much Indistinctness and
Inconsistency with himself; What means the destilling of the Blood, the
Sponginess of the Eminencies that conveigh the Spirits to the Nerves? The
Spirits sometimes confined to the Ventricles; sometimes diffused to the whole
Brain. What else is his allowing the Ventricles to receive the Excrementitious
Moisture, which he had separated for a nobler use; his deriving the Blood into
the Plexus Choroideus, from the Sinus quartus, with the pernicious Consequence
that would attend it if it were so. With other slips of like nature, Et quie
praeterea Spirituum Animalium opifex esset in corpore, ex minutissi^is venulis
and arteriolis tenuissima membrana and exiguis glandulis composito? Vnde
suppeteret mattria? Qua via distribuetur Spiritus in Nervos null^ modo ipsi
continuous, quibus sedibus includetur, ubi necessarium, huc illucve
depromendus? But of the Office of the Ventricles, and Seat of Animal Spirits,
we receive better Information from Ho^^mannus, who against him argues.

1. Ibi fit Spiritus ubi Actio. At vero in corpore fit. Corpus enim agit non
accidens.

2. Spiritus si agere debet, oportet sub imperit anim^ maneat, sc. in vasis.

3. Ventriculi cinguntur interius pia matre.

4. Ab exitu Spirituum in palatum.

5. Ventriculos cum Nervis non esse continuos, sed cum corpore.

6. Ventriculos habere aliud officium and incongr^um.

The Arguments are fairly laid down at large in Wepferus; and are nevertheless
valid; though I see no reason altogether to be satisfied in the Uses here and
generally assigned the Ventricles, since as it is observed by that Curious
Anatomist Dr. Ridley, no Water can be expressed from the Glandula Pituitaria,
nor has it any aperture discoverable into the Palate, which confirms this, that
he never found Water in the Infundibulum, either in the Sound or Unsound. For
besides that, there is a Parity in the Reasons of the Use of them by him
assigned, or that well can be assigned, the Vesicae found in the Ventricles of
vertiginous Cattle, and the great quantity of Water, In puero integre mentis
munia obeunte, mentioned by Tulpius, and cited by the foresaid Author, evacuate
the Nobility of their Office. And Galen, whose Notion in this Matter is not
consistent, yet relates, Adolescentem Smyrnensem ad alterutrum ventriculorum
usque vulneratum, semet oculato test, superstitem permansissie. And again
observes, In soporibus and Epilepsia ventres magis, corpus cerebri minus affici
solet; in Apoplexia vero corpus magis. And this easy to be cleared in the
Formation of Brains of Brutes. Wepferus, by the help of Dissections, detects
the Seat of this Disease in the Brain it self, considering the whole Compage in
Contradistinction only to the ventricles, and asserts a true Apoplexy to be
generated, Ab effuxu Spirituum totali ad instrumenta sensus and motus
praepedito, quod fiet ob principii omnium Nervorum vel Obstructionem vel
compressionem subito factam, unde denegatis Spiritibus Animalibus, quamvis
abundent ^^^les, Apoplexia sequitur. And this Stoppage, according to him, may
be either at the Pores of the Medulla that admit the Arteries, or are open to
them; or those through which they are distributed into the Nerves. This
Hypothesis labors under many Difficulties, suggested both from Reason and
Experience; for as it is necessary that the Seat of the Animal Spirits should
be exempt from any foreign Intrusion, so Nature seems to have secured it, like
the Palace of Princes, by previous passes. Neither does the Brain appear liable
to the Inconveniences that other Secretory Glands are from their own Acidity,
or Admission of less prepared or grosser Juyces, which procure their
Obstructions. And accordingly we do not find, that a Colluvies of Serum, or a
Scrumous Brain to have induced this Distemper: And even in that plainer case,
which is allowed, where an Apoplexy proceeds from a Plethora, and a Weakness of
the Brain, I have always found some farther Explication necessary; as to
account why so sudden, why not in all Ages and Seasons, and the like. And on
the other hand, that the Brain cannot want a sufficient Afflux of Blood,
Nature, as in other parts, so here, has made provision, as by Anatomy appears.
Our great Dr. Willis has in my Judgment cleared this Point, by two Instances,
one of an Obstructed Artery, without an Impediment to the Course, or at least a
sufficient Afflux of the Blood; The other of an Apoplexy, without any
appearance of Obstruction or disorder in the Brain: And more closely tr^cing
the Seat of this Distemper to the Origin^ of Sense and Motion, has fixed it in
the Medit^llium cerebri. And besides that, there is the Spring of Life, there
is good reason to excuse the Cortical part, since Instances are frequent, in
Authors unquestionable, of Portions of it taken out at Wounds of the Head,
without any pernicious Consequence. And therefore whereas Dr. Cole is pleased
to suppose, that the Seat of the Distemper, as where the Cause that
influentially occasions the Defection of Natures due Actings first fixes it
self; I do not see it essential to this Distemper, to be an Affection of this
part; but with deference to that very Learned and Excellent Physician, must
observe that the Enemy sometimes escapes this Secretion, without leaving any
marks of its footing; and therefore am inclined with Dr. Willis to place it In
aut prope cerebri Meditullium, upon the entrance of which it exerts its power.
But if he pleases to consider the Cortical part as it is Secretory, and as it
is first affected in a gradual or habitual Apoplexy, I think that must be
allowed. Dr. Willis then proceeds to induce a Profligation of the Spirits, to
solve the sudden and light assault of this Distemper. An Apoplexy he
distinguishes into Accidental and Habitual, which he considers sine
Procatarxi, or with an Antecedent Cause. The Causa conjuncta and proxima aut
est magna Solutio continui alicubi intra aut prope cerebri meditullium
contingens, propter quam, poris obstructis aut compressis, emanatio omnis
supprimitur, vel est ingens as subita spirituum in Cerebro degentium
profligatio aut extinctio. [Another Species that may be temporary, he supposes
an Affection of the Cerebellum.] The Solutio continui is either from Blood, an
Aposthem, or 3ly, a Serous Colluvies. The reason of an Extemporaneous Apoplexy,
he assigns in the Conjunct Causae, In Paroxysmo materiam congestam in ambitu
cerebri prius aggestam and dispersam demum in Meditullium ejus d^scendre,
ibidemque spiritus omnes adoriri and in ipso emanationis suae font supprimere
and prosternere, et si non plane constat, utrum illud efficiat aut medullae
poros tantum infarciendo, aut Spiritus istos profligando iisque narcosin
infligendo, verisimile utroque modo. His Procatarctic. Sanguis in vitio vel
cerebrum in crasi imbecillum and secundum poros and meatus ejus laxum and
solutum nimis, materiam morbificam absque repudio admittit. That happy Author,
the abovementioned Dr. Cole, in his Treatise occasioned by the late Frequency
of Apoplexies, by his Inquiry into the Materiae Morbificae indoles, has not a
little illustrated the Cause of this Distemper. His Sense, as I understand it,
is this, From Observation made of the Weekly Bills of Mortality, he dates the
Era of their Increase from 1683. Upon which Substratum he naturally deduces
the Cause of this Distemper from Cold, and observes that to account for it very
well. In order to the understanding the Nature of Cold, he reduces the Notion
of it to these Considerations.

1. That Sensible Qualities, though they are not among the general Affections
of Matter, as Motion, Rest, Bulk, Figure, etc. yet are consequent to it, but
determined by these, and associated to somewhat that has Perception.

2. As Cold makes an Impression on our Sensories, so it requires Motion; and it
is not Motion simply, but considered with some adjunct, viz. Motion in such or
such a Degree, and with relation to Sensitive Beings that constitutes Heat.

3. The Transmission of these Impressions to the Soul, requires a Motion in our
Organs, but such a one as may keep up a due Crasis in both the Fluid and
Consistent Substances, that make up the Organ for the performing the Functions
appointed.

4. That these Congenial Motions seem not properly Objects of our Perception,
but rather Instruments of Transmission of those others from without, which
recede from these Degrees, or are otherwise Circumstantiated: Though these
deflecting from their due Proportion, may, by affecting the Soul differently
from what they use to do, excite her to take notice of them too.

5. That these mean Motions are to us a Standard of all others.

From all which, our Author deduces Cold to be a Check of that degree, which
belongs to the Parts of, and Fluid Substances in our Sensories of Touching; and
Heat to be an Acceleration; and the Bulk and Figure of the Bodies that cause
either to be considerable. The Retardation which makes the Nature of Cold, may
be occasioned by increase of bulk and change of Figure, by Adhesion. 2 By
altering the due Contexture of the Vessels. 3. If the affecting Bodies be of
such a Figure and Texture as to be flexible. 4. By Interposing they may fill
the Spaces, and may be the present Case. Now as Conical or Pyramidal Figures
solve this Phenomenon best, so he gives the Nitrous parts of the Air those
Figures, from des Carte's Notion, and Lewenhook's Microscopical Autopsy. To
enquire how our Bodies and Brain are affected by these, he observes the Air to
affect as Liquors.

1. The Blood, into which it is admitted by the Stomach, by the Lungs and Pores
of the Skin; and on which it operates partly by the Insinuation of its
Elastical and other Irregular Particles, partly by the Interposition as well as
Lancination of the Nitrous Ra^ous Parts, which promotes the Comminution of it,
whereby the Crasis of it may be altered, if such Air be admitted as shall
over-check this Agitation.

2. The Nervous Juice, which he supposes liable to Impressions, in some degree
analogous to what are made on the Blood from Substances mixed with it. He
supposes some of the admitted Substances of the Air may be deposited into the
Nerves at their Original; or that it must communicate with the Blood, in
receiving some of the Viscous parts produced in it by the Air; and that some
more subtle Particles must be admitted through the Pores. To which the same
worthy Author adds, That he conceives them in some due Proportion necessary to
the due Spiritualization of this Juice. Again, The solid parts are liable to
the same Inconvenience, and to retain them longer.

Lastly, The Brain may be affected not only by the Mediation of the Blood, but
also by the Airs affecting the Mammillary Processes, or the Ears, or the
Extremities of the Nerves in all parts of the Skin. And this pressure of the
Air may be unequal, some part of it being moved with greater Violence, where is
greater Dilatation, or a part kept warmer: And this Injury of Air, Tenderness
and ill Digestion, through want of Exercise, makes the Body obnoxious too. And
thus the Brain may suffer in that Continuity, due Confirmation and Repletion of
its parts, wherein this Author supposes the tone of the parts to consist. So
that in the Author's own words, as well as Sense, The part affected may either
be the whole Brain, or any considerable part of it, and either the Cortical or
Medullar, but especially (or at least first) the Cortical, from whence the
disaffected Matter is transmitted to the parts of it which lie deeper, where
the Animal Spirits principally exert themselves; the Nature of the Distemper to
consist in the sudden Abolition of the due Excrasie and Distribution of th^^
thence; the immediate Cause, most usually (when unavoidably fatal) an Effusion
of Blood out of its Vessels upon the Substance of the Brain. Though I conceive
(says he) a bare (...) of the Arteries there may occasion it, as also may
perhaps a Congestion of Viscous or Serous Matter, when it comes to a
considerable degree, and becomes freshly excited; or else Polypous Concretions,
or (if we can suppose it) any other obstructing Matter deposited in it, may at
last produce it; and the Pre disposition of the Brain to it, to consist usually
in the more than ordinary Laxity or Openness of it. And whatsoever either first
causes a Congestion of Blood, or 2ly, otherwise so Indisposes it, that it
cannot readily and duly circulate through its usual Vessels in the Brain; or
3ly, disaffects the Brain, whether by weakening its Tone, or altering the
Figures of its passages, or straitning them too much, may occasion Apoplexies:
And the greater Urgency or Violence of such antecedent Causes, may introduce a
greater Frequency of them than ordinary.

Thus I have given the Notions of this Distemper distinctly, for these Reasons;

1. It sets the Distemper, as we do a Picture, in all Lights, to try which way
we may see it best. And,

2. As it prepares to the understanding of Apoplexies, so in my further
Inquiry, in many particulars, Repetition will be saved, and less intelligible
Parentheses avoided.

3. We may, by this means, observe the Specific Symptoms of this Distemper,
and what hints they gave these Authors.

Information being not to be gained by Controversy, I shall not inspect the
Particulars of these Accounts, in which they are not Satisfactory, as why,
after that Frost, and not preceding ones, why the Era should be then fixed,
and yet the Increase began long before. Why the Head should be affected, and
not other parts rather; it being necessary to account for the Reason, why Air
afflicts one part particularly, as we see the Fauces and Throat at the Alps,
the Lungs at Rome. So likewise of the Changes of the Distempers which are
temporary, and many other things; but shall offer some Observations, which I
submit to the Judgment of the last cited Author and others, which, if approved,
give a more natural account, and may carry on the Inquiries; and they are such
as answer two Questions or Inquiries.

1. Of the Reason of the sudden and accidental Death.

2. That may inform us of the Indoles of the Morbifick Matter, and how much is
observable in the Air that can answer for this.

My Notion, as to the first of these, is deduced from these Considerations.

1. That the Motion of the Blood is necessary to Life.

2. That this is owing to Respiration.

3. That Respiration is necessary to Life.

4. Both Motion of the Blood, and Necessity of Respiration, consist in the
Elasticity of the Air.

5. I observe, that besides the Atmospherical Air, that is exhausted by a
Pneumatick Engine, there is a finer Elastick Air or Matter contained in this
Atmospheric Air, which in an exhausted Receiver hindered the parting of the
Marbles, which is Elastick too, the pressure being ad modum, or in Proportion
to the force that is capable to separate the cohering Bodies, and may be
surmounted by a force superi^^^ to it.

6. There seems to be a Nitre in the Air, necessary to maintain and share in
produci^ the Elasticity of the grosser Atmosphere, which being consumed, an
Animal dies.

7. There are certain Termini and fines of the Tenuity and Grossness of the
Air, on this side of which, or beyond, the Air becomes (...) for the
Respitation of Animals. Thus Fish that die in an open Air, yet are choked for
want of it, if a Pond Freeze; and accordingly are provided with Pipes, that
strain the (...) Matter, and are stronger, and not liable to the Inconvenience
from the force and weight of the Water. And lastly, as the Matter drawn is
finer, so there is no need of the Contraction and Opening, or Conquassation of
the Air, to get the Matter out they want, which is strained by the Water.

8. I observe, that Animals which have a Crasis of Blood, to which less Nitre
is requisite, as they can be long without Food, so can live a considerable time
without Air, as Tortoises, Adders, etc. and therefore have membranous Lungs, in
which no more Blood circulates, than is required for their Nourishment, and so
not the whole Blood, as in those that have fleshy Lungs.

9. This Elasticity is requisite to Life, as it keeps in a Springy Motion, and
so Life ceases, either upon a Stoppage of the Air Externally, as in a Glass, or
Internally, as we see is the Effect of Damps, which by some, and those great
Men, have, by mistake, been conceived to contain Poisonous Matter, and to
perform it on that account, but the contrary is evident, since in Pump-wells
the Water is wholesome, and a new built House, from the Lime and Mortar, shall
have the same.

10. On the same Reason, Animals dye in the exhausted Receiver, upon the
unbending the Spring, by Exhaustion. And it is worthy remark, that Animals
taken out before expiring, are not recovered by admission of the Air, which
affects not soon enough the lesser or remoter Springyness. Acad. del cimento.

11. That the Parts and Juyces of Animals are Elastick, appears to me asserted
in the Experiments of the Honorable Mr. Boil.

12. That Air is admitted to the Blood, I need no other Argument, but that the
Blood continues to follow upon Bleeding.

13. That the Air is not admitted to the Brain and Nerves, or to any of the
Specific Juice of the Animal, I argue again from the like reason.

From all which I deduce, that an Apoplexy is produced by the admission of Air,
or Elastick Parts, to the Medulla or Corpus Callosum of the Brain And that this
Air and Lethiserous parts are admitted by the Mouth, and so by the way of the
Stomach, appears plainly, in that the Fits usually seize immediately upon
plentiful Feeding. For the Glutinous parts of the Chyle are a fit Vehicle, as
being, if ill concocted, Flatulent and Elastick, as I shall farther
demonstrate, when I come to the Affectio Hypochondriaca.

And I must take notice of the Consistency of this Notion, which is confirmed
by that Affection so often passing into this Distemper.

That this sudden Death comes not from the other Causes I named, is evident
from many Reasons, which I have not room here for: The most difficult
Phoenomenon to be solved, that appears to me, is the Apoplexy seizing Faemellae
upon the difficulty of Eruption of the Catamenia, at the second Septenary. To
which we can only say, that the Plethora is apparent, and the Weakness of the
Brain, though we see not how the Brain, and Genus Nervosum, is concerned in
this, nor know its Motion; for I allow the antecedent Causes of a Turgid Blood,
and a weak Brain, to have place in this Distemper. This my Hypothesis, I think,
naturally consequent to the just Notions of the Air and Brain, and well
accounts for the Spuma at the Nostrils and Mouth, and for the Difficulty of
Breathing, or Cessation of Respiration attended with an entire Pulse, which
thus may be carried on, and the main Design of Respiration cease. This gives
the reason of the Distention of the Lungs in the Apoplectick that is mentioned
by Wepferus, if the Elasticity of the Internal parts of the Lungs, can but be
supposed to do the same that the removing of the Incumbent Atmosphere in an
exhausted Receiver did on some Animals, in which the Academy del Cimento
observed the Lungs to swell, and to Forth at the Mouth: And thus we may solve
the Difficulty observed by the Ancients, why this Distemper affects only the
Chest or Breast. The only thing that we want to be satisfied of is, secondly,
what that is in the Air that induces this Distemper now to be so rise, whence
we may come at the Indoles materiae morbisicae. And that I may not enter into
that vast Field, of the Cause of Seasons, and the like Effects, which are taken
into the Hand of God's particular Providence to manage, I shall confine my self
to be guided by these few Remarks:

1. That no Affections of the Air, or Qualities in it, depend on any Mixture of
Mineral Vapors, because they precipitate immediately; neither do we find the
places where are large Eruptions of them, any whit Sicklier, or affected,
otherwise than other places: And then, all Distempers are otherwise Solvable.

2. That the Qualities of the Air, that affect our Bodies, consist not in, nor
always with; those that may be supposed to belong to the grosser Air of our
Atmosphere. I have known Animals frequent some Years in a hard Frost, which
would be supposed to be pernicious to them; and not only my self, but that most
extraordinary Naturalist, and universally great Man, and my honored Friend,
Mr. Ray, has observed, that some Years the hardest Frost has not hindered the
Papilio's from coming out of their Chrysitis, which in some mild Springs, shall
not be found abroad so soon. This is the more fit Instance to prove what I say,
must be acknowledged by any that have observed the necessity of Heat, and how
much it contributes to the Production of this Change.

3. That there are some Qualities in the Air always, which are owing to the
parts more intimately mixed with it, than is the Nitre, that affects us with
Cold, and which passes where the grosser is not admitted. This is observable
in the Effects it has on Liquors, which the Managers of them are forced to have
recourse to, for the reason of the Disposition to ferment, or fret, or
Incapacity of either, Acidity and the like. All which some Years, Liquors,
especially Cider, is propense to, be the Weather what it will.

4. That Heat and Cold, Wetness or Dryness of Seasons, assist in inflicting a
Disease, as they may help admit these Particles.

5. That I have observed these Qualities of the Air to be Temporary, and the
Diseases effected by the Air to be so too, and that in their Continuation and
Variation they usually observe the Direction of both Causes, the Nature of the
Humor in succeeding Distempers being usually traceable, as the Variation of it
is likewise accountable.

Now although I can by no means maintain, that the Hypothesis of that Learned
and Ingenious Man, agrees with the Rise and Continuance of this Distemper, or
is sufficient to explicate it, nor can answer for the Nonappearance of the
Distemper before upon the same occasion. Yet that it was a fair offer at the
Truth, and affords a good hint, is remarkably to be taken notice of, in that
this Winter, in which more have died Apoplectick, and that in the Country, than
ever was taken notice in Man's Memory, or delivered to have been in any Age; I
say that this Winter should be, though not the hardest, yet remarkably long,
does seem to make the Nitrous Air a sharer in the Cause. But as I except
against the Explication of this Distemper, by bare Obstruction or Stagnation
from Cold, as not sufficient, so I come now to inquire, what farther knowledge
of this the Air will afford us, assisted by the preceding Considerations, and
to see how they answer here, and how far the Footsteps and Changes are
discoverable. And as Truth is not surely to be laid hold on, but when pursued
by a natural Method, so I wave all Hypothesis, and only propose this Maxim or
Rule to direct me, which I take to be too necessary a Deduction, to be deemed a
begging of the Principle. The Air that is productive of a Distemper, must
produce some other Effects in differing or less prepared Constitutions, and not
hit only where it can fully execute; and the Disposition, Particles, or
Qualities of the Air may reasonably be inquired of these Effects, as Prints of
its footing.

The Diseases then that have been inflicted by the Air this Winter, have been
Fevers [which I shall say nothing more of, than that the Heat was gentle, that
they were Putrid, and had putrid Pains in the Sides and Limbs, and that they
affected the Head] or ulcerating Colds, so I name them, being of two sorts, the
first violent Fluxes of the Alvus, and Catamenia, the other Ophthalmys, which
wore off in three weeks time by Suppuration. And lastly, The Small Pox, which
appears here a mixture of the preceding Distempers, or Qualities in the Air;
for the Air here gives these remarkable Dispositions, 1. to Corrode, 2. to
attenuating, whereby the parts seem to pierce to the Eyes and Bowels. 3. To
Flatulency, all which include a tendency to flow. Which Qualities, as with many
reasons I concluded to be Nitrous, so Vitriols mortified or resisted; and even
those Fluxes of the Catamenia, which in another reason Steel is observed to
raise and increase, submitted only to the force of the same Mineral; which I
was directed to by some further Observation of the Air, which is too long for
this Discourse: Though the increase of some Fluxes of this kind, upon the
taking Sal Prunellae, which usually gives a present check, is enough to advance
such a Hint. The last Year, viz. 1697. entered attended with a particular sort
of Colds, that induced an irregular Feaverishness; with milinary Pimples
spreading upon some particular places of the Body, so close and so small, as to
resemble a stain of Claret or other Scarlet Liquor; which superceded by Tumor
of other parts, and Sickness, in some proved Mortal. At the same time another
Distemper was found invading, though Sparsim only, which began about the
Michaelmas preceding, and continued to the middle of the last Year, which first
invaded the Patient with want of Rest only, and unaptness of the Brain for it,
wherein the Patient that was entirely well up, and had no complaint, but upon
lying down and disposure to slumber, was sensible of such Distraction and
Uneasiness of the Head, as obliged him to fly up immediately. This Distemper
continuing, brought a Cough without raising, and a sort of an Icteritia, with
Shortness of Breath, and frequent and sudden Apprehensions of a Deliquium. The
Year 1696 entered with the same sort of Colds, and with the Spring brought
Epileptick Distempers, which wore off with Scabbiness; and many People, Young
and Old, were surpised with Vertigo's; and others with Tumors in the Throats,
and corroding Ulcers, curable by Astringents only that were Vitrioline. In 1695
Deliriums were frequent. In 1694 Fevers that seemed to have their Seat in the
Glands, and were attended with great Acidity of the Saliva or Liquor of the
Tonsillae. And from three Years before reigned Nervous Rheumatisms, a Distemper
very unusual, from the acuteness of the Pain; the mortal Consequence of them,
and the puffiness of the Tumors, very remarkable: This Disease has continued
hitherto, but abating.

I engage not my self to solve or account for all these Changes of Diseases, or
the reason of them; it is sufficient that none of these Cases were attended
with any apparent Fever, the Matter was in all seated in the Membranes, the
part affected in all was puffy, the Distempers frequently changed one into
another, affected the Head and Nerves, cured by the same means, which were
Vitriolick, and were admitted by a wet Constitution of the Air. So without
making inquiry into the Origin and Commencement of this Disposition, and
Reason of it, it is sufficient that I illustrate the Seat and Nature of this
Distemper, and I think I must be allowed that these Diseases proceeded from the
same common Cause and Humor, and were transferrible into each other, and have
liberty to conclude first, That this Peccant Humor was seated in the
Membranes. 2. That it was flatulent, and had a flatulent Acidity. 3. That the
Matter was Nitrous. Neither think I my self oblig^d, to account for the
Determination of the Seat of this Humor, or the reason of taking Cold, but
shall from the evident Causes, Matter and Seat of it, infer,

That an Apoplexy is a sudden Deprivation of Life, by admission of Airy
Elastick Parts into the Caudex Cerebri, together with Thick and Turgid Chyle,
and is owing to a Corrosive Nitrosity and Fluor of the Blood, and Weakness of
the Vessels, or containing Parts of the Caudex effected by Cold, the way being
firs forced in the anterior part of the Cortex.

I think this a sufficient Notion of it as a Disease, but contradict not the
difference that must be made of Apoplexies inflicted by Force, as Drinking,
etc. or gradual ones.

Having thus fixed the Nature of the Distemper, the Intentions of Cure are
drawn from the Morbid Dispositions, which are,

1. Nitrosity of the Blood, which indeed is the Reason it is so very Florid in
Apoplexies; and to this is owing its Fluidity.

2. The Weakness of the Vessels from Cold received by them, and by this I
understand a Clog of a disabled Serum, considering the Nature of Cold in gross,
as separating the Juyces, and so mortifying them, as to put them past Reduction.

3. The Exorbitancy of Chyle, that maintains and conveighs Elastick Flatulent
Parts.

All which indicate the Astriction, and other Qualities I observed before to be
in Vitrioline Waters, and the Requisites that capacitate them for all this, are
in full Virtue only found in this ^pecies; where the Astriction is strongest,
and the quantity of Steel not so considerable, as to increase the Heat or
Turgency of the Blood, in both which this kind exceed the other two; though I
cannot but judge, that a Premission of the thin light sort, may in some cases
assist in more effectual preparatory Cleansing the Brain, and be very properly
directed to precede. Indeed the Hypochondriaca Affectio does so often dispose
to this Distemper, that as it will confirm much this Account, so will much
recommend this Method. It does not belong to this History, to deliver an entire
Process or Method of Cure, nor am I so opinionated of my own Ability, as to
prescribe it to others of my Faculty; yet because this Discourse may come into
other Men's hands, that may judge this Digression Fruitless, without some
Improvement of it, I shall, for the sake of the Fury and Suddenness of this
Distemper, give some Observations of mine, that may help to occurr or prevent
it, or assist, at least, in shortning the Process, and fit it for an
Extemporany Occasion. And though as Cases may much differ, so a Plethora
Sanguinis, Colluvies Serosa, or Viscous Phlegm, Obstruction of the Catamenia,
and the like, is to be consulted when they are in the Cause; yet the checking
the Fury of the Blood, as well as clearing the passages to the Brain, is best
performsd by Chalybeats, and to more good Effect, than by Bleeding, etc. and
differ not so much in the Cure, as they seem to do in the Cause; and my
Observations I shall deliver briefly thus.

1. That for Prevention (besides the removing any known Cause or Occasion) the
best Deobstruents are such as join and mix with the Matter they are to
exterminate; of this sort is Sapo venet, and Vrines humane, or perhaps of other
Animals; and these to be promoted to the use of Chalybeat Astringents, where
these Waters claim their place. Only I must mind the Reader, that if such a
Relaxation of the Vessels of the Brain attend it, as appears by preceding
vertiginous Warnings, I must after the use of the Waters, dismiss the Patient
to Mr. Boyle's Ens, which in the preceding Distempers of the Membranes of the
Brain, I have experienced to be most Effectual.

2. As the other Method is to prevent and restore, so for the present Relief in
the Assault, Emeticks and Catharticks usually distinguish themselves: The other
general and particular Evacuations fall not under my Cognizance, writing a
System being not my design, yet Sternutatories must not escape my Reflection,
which I have ever observed to hasten the approaching Death, to which the
Nature, as well as the Violence of the Motion made by Sneezing, dispose them;
and are fit only to put the Patient past Remedy with speed. And as this
Monition is necessary here, so a due Caution about Diet, which forbids eating
Pork, or Eggs, (...) Meat of thick, high and flatulent Nourishment, is
necessary to be observed with respect to Prevention. Other Particulars that
regard the Constitution of the Patient, or Predisposition to this Distemper
that the Physician is to judge of, lie not here before me. Thus much as to the
Apoplexy.

There are many other Distempers, wherein a Water of this kind is peculiarly
proper to master and remove flatulent and viscous Matter, and to curb the
Turgescence of a florid Blood, as in the Cephalic Disorders of Elder Women,
etc. and that I may not proceed upon Suggestions of Reason only, I shall recite
the Virtues of Knaresborow Water from the Observation of Dr. French, in his
words.

This Water Cools and Moistens actually, Heats and Dries potentially, and
according to other Qualities, second and third, it cuts, dissolves, attenuates,
abstergeth, viscous tartarous Humors in the Stomach, Mesentery, Hypochondries,
Reins, Bladder, etc. Penetrates, Corroborates, Astringeth, etc. It allays all
acid, gnawing and hot Humors, and Cures all such Symptoms as proceed from
thence, as Agues, Consumptions, Quinsies, Tumors, Imposthumes, Ulcers, Wounds;
it stops Bleeding, the Overflowing of Choler, the Dissentery, and such like
Fluxes.

It Corroborates the Brain, Nerves, etc. and prevents or cures the Apoplexy,
Epilepsie, Palsy, Vertigo, Inveterate Headache, and Madness; and all such
Symptoms as proceed from the Weakness, Coldness, Heat, Dryness or Moisture of
the same.

It Corroborates the Stomach, and causes good Digestion, consumes Crudities,
which are the Causes of Obstructions, and breed ill Blood and infirm Flesh, or
an ill habit of Body; it makes the Fat Lean, and the Lean Fleshy; cures and
preventeth the Cholick and Worms.

It strengthens and opens the Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, and cures
difficulty of Breathing, the Asthma, the Dropsy, Melancholy and fearful
Passions, Hypochondriacal Wind and Vapors (offending the Head and Heart) which
most Women and many Men are afflicted withal. It does also upon this account
cheer the Heart, cure and prevent the Palpitations and Passions thereof, as
also all Faintings.

It purifieth the Blood, cures the Scurvy, even in those whose Teeth are ready
to drop out of their Heads, by reason of the Extremity thereof; also the Foul
Venereal Disease, Leprosy, Jaundies Yellow and Black, and for the more perfect
effecting of these Cures, it does in many open the Haemorrhoids.

It provokes Urine, and cures the Suppression, and allays the Sharpness
thereof; it diminishes the Stone in the Bladder, by dissolving the soft
Superficial parts thereof, and evacuating that mucous slimy Water in which it
is involved, and by this means also it prepares it for Cutting, for sometimes
this Stone cannot be felt, by reason of that slimy Mucous, which Mucous it self
does also sometimes, by its Torments, counterfeit the Stone, where it is
collected in a great quantity, being of an acid tartarous Nature. It forces
out from the Kidneys and Bladder abundance of Sand and small Stones to a great
number, and sometimes such as are as big and as long as long Pepper. And as it
cures all Ulcers and Wounds in the Body, so especially, and much sooner, in the
Reins and Bladder; suppressing also the Pissing of Blood, and the Gonorrhaea.

It cures the Gout, Aches, Cramp, Convulsion in what part of the Body soever,
and gives ease therein suddenly.

It opens all Obstructions, and suppresseth all manner of Over-flowings in
Women, strengthens, cures the Mother, makes the Barren Fruitful, and is a
great Preventative against Miscarryings, and rectifies most Infirmities of the
Vterus.

Note, That this Water does not help all parts, cure all these Infirmities,
after one and the same manner, some being relieved by consent, or by removing
Obstructions of other parts. It is also used by way of Insession in Griefs of
the Womb, and by way of Injection into that, as also into the Bowels and
Bladder, where all the Qualities act immediately upon those parts; allay the
sharp and hot Distempers, mitigate the Pains thereof, Healing and Corroborating
the same.

It may moreover be used by way of Fomentation and Losson in external Wounds,
Ulcers, Itch or Scabs, and being dropped into Sore Eyes wonderfully cools,
dries and clears the same.

In a word, If any Intentions in a Medicinal way, be to be performed by
allaying Distempers, opening Obstructions, evacuating superfluous Morbifick
Humors, and Corroborating all the parts of the Body, those are effected in a
very good measure, if not fully and perfectly, by this Water.

And I my self have seen many of the aforenam'd Diseases cured by the help
thereof; and for other Cures effected thereby, I have been assured by them
themselves who received the Benefit, or by others who have been Eyewitnesses of
the same. Thus far Dr. French.

To the right understanding and due use of all which, I shall observe, That the
Cure of the Foul Disease can be supposed to be put partial; unless that
Distemper be taken in a less strict Sense; and passing the Notion of
Diminishing the Stone, which I had rather express by the preventing the
increase of its growth, I shall for the fixing Experience right, make this
Remark, which may be usefully applied to all the Waters,
which is, That in some Distempers (as Dropsy, Convulsions, Jaundies and Gout)
constant Success and entire Cure is not to be expected, without regard to the
State of the Disease, the Age and Firmness of it, the Cause of it, and the
Distempers complicated with it. Thus a Dropsy may not submit to this Remedy,
not only from the Firmness of the Obstruction, but also from the Constitution
and Laxity of the Patient, from the nature of the Disease, (which I have
observed sometimes to be from a Weakness of the Membranes, by Flatulent Matter
contained in them) or from the Disease inducing it. Convulsions here have
remedy only adequated to the Cause, be it a flatulent putrid Matter (which
usually gives the Distemper the Denomination of Worms, from the effect of it,)
or be it from Melancholy Hypoch. and Vapors Hysterical: But if seated in the
Brain, or supervening an Ague, or in a cold Constitution, I think here can
scarce have a proper Remedy. So the Jaundies I acknowledge have been often
cured by these Waters, and some of the Purging ones, when it owed its Rise to
an Obstruction of the Catamenia, a Clog of Phlegm, or uncocted Chyle, or
Melancholy, but I must not allow these, or any Waters, to cure this Disease de
Essentia. I think this Caution necessary to the understanding the proper Use of
these and all Waters, which by the help of this may be distinctly known, and is
of the greater Importance, since upon many accounts Empirical Use of these, and
all other Remedies, is found to be of Fatal Consequence.

The Virtues of the Atramentous Waters.
THese Waters, though they have the same Virtues with other Chalybeat Waters in
some degree, and create an Appetite, and wash the Viscera, yet penetrate not so
far, open not Obstructions so well, but are apt to raise a Heat in the Blood,
disagreeing to the designed Effect, have not that Acidity, nor calm
Astringence. These enrich the Blood, and where that is necessary, and
Obstructions remote do not contraindicate, may happily be used; and in the
Stone are Competitors with others. Agricola concludes these Effects, as in
common with other Vitrioline Waters. To cure Corroding Ulcers, Ulcers of the
Bladder and Kidneys, in the Mouth, Weakness of the Nerves, a weak Stomach they
help: And they may be used Internally and Externally. But in Gout, Stone, or in
Obstruction of the Glands, and smaller Vessels, are not to be used without
Danger or Inconvenience, so not in Hypochondriacal Cases. These are valuable in
proportion, as they are rich of Steel, keep it long, and have little bulk of
Salt.

The Virtues of the Light Chalybeat Waters.
THE Extraordinary Virtue of this sort consists in, that as the Chalybeat
Principles are in these most clean, so the Spirit most thin, and the Water both
light and thin. And so we have their Virtues not only most full here, but
somewhat differing: They invigorate the Blood without Heating, penetrate
farther without Inconvenience, Volatilize, Attenuate more, and their Acidity
goes off without leaving impression behind it preternatural. Thus as the heavy
Waters that contain less of the Steel, and whose Acidity is of a more fixed
Nature, have a peculiarity of Astringing without Heating; so this sort are
extraordinarily qualified for opening Obstructions, but seem not to have the
same power of Astringing in an equal degree: And on this account they do not
mortify a Scorbutic, Leprous Humor or Itch so well, nor are so powerful to
stop Fluxes of Blood. I think fit to observe these different Effects, which
being remarked, I refer the Reader for the reputed Virtues of these Chalybeats,
to the Virtues of the Knaresborow Water. I shall therefore pass on to examine
what Obstructions they remove, which I shall do, by exhibiting only Histories
of my own Observation; and from thence further to enlighten the use of them.

Among the Cures of this kind, none is more familiar than that of the Stone, by
removing the Disposition to the Generation of it, and restoring a good habit,
as well to the whole Body, as to the parts immediately concerned. And although
this Cure is performed by a timely Precipitation of the earthy parts out of the
Latex and Juyces of the parts, and restoring their natures; and so is owing to
the Qualities that these Chalybeat Waters seem to enjoy in common; yet the
fineness and penetration of this sort of them, must be allowed an extraordinary
Qualification.

But the Obstructions that I principally intend here, are such as yield to no
other Remedy, so constantly at least; and whose fatal Consequence gives these
Waters an inestimable value. Of this sort, I reckon first an Obstruction of the
Glands of the Mesentery; wherein, beside the sign of Chylous Excrements, and
rejection of Food an hour or two after eating, the Patient complains not of
want of Appetite, discernable Fever, or pain, or other disorder, till Fever,
Cough, and want of Rest (which last often precedes) proceed with the Emaciation
upon the continuance of this Disease. Of this I have found Tunbridge Water an
effectual Remedy, and most canstant, never failing those that I have known to
have tried it, who have been not a few. And the small Spring at Felstead, I
find avail with equal success.

An Obstruction of the Thymus, which discovers it self by pain at the Breast,
chiefly upon the Foods arrival at the place of its seat; which upon the
increase of the Tumor of this Gland, resists the passing of the Food into the
Stomach, and makes the Patient reject it, at least as soon as the Oesophagus is
a little filled, is a Disease of equal consequence with the other, and which I
have known these Waters speedily cure.

Another Disease from Glandular Obstructions cured by these Waters, is the
Dropsy, a Cure of which is taken notice of by Mr. Boil; but the Design of
these Observations, being to form an Experience, that may be distinct, clear,
and not fallacious, I must add, That the Effects of the Waters in this
Distemper, fall not under so single a consideration as in the other, but that
there are so many requisites in the Cases where these are proper, as make a
good Judgment necessary in the use of them, and ^orbid the drinking of them
without good Advice. For although I have reason to believe them to be
constantly effectual, timely taken, by those whose Constitution was broken by
trouble, and perhaps to be the only Remedy; and likewise in a Phlegmatic
Constitution; yet not only the seasonable and timely taking of them is to be
consulted, but a Crasis of Blood, that needs not invigorating, does sometimes
receive damage by them. And this I speak not by rote, but have known some Quin
Faeminae quinquagenariae, florid and lively, that the drinking of these Waters
have affected with a beginning Dropsy, the nature of these Waters (being to
invigorate the Blood, and produce the Catamenia) was so differing in effect.
And in a Dropsy that proceeds upon an Asthma, in a person of a florid sanguine
Complexion, either a Chalybeat Water of greater astringency, as the
Knaresborow, and that has least Steel; or else a Chalybeat that Purges, as
Scarborow Water, is much more proper.

I proceed to remark next, the like extraordinary effect of these light Waters
in Distempers of the Stomach, the pain by which they discover themselves is
most exquisite. A painful Tumor of many Months at the pit of the Stomach, and
reputed Scirrhous, I knew relieved and quite removed by Tunbridge Waters. I
might instance in other Flatulent Distentions of the Stomach, and question not
but they might be used with success in Ulcers of the Stomach, though in them I
have not known these Waters made trial of. But the most common Distemper, or
rather Symptom of the Stomach diseased, is known only by the name of Pain. It
is necessary to distinguish the kinds of this more nicely than is usual, and I
shall not inquire here into the particular seats of it, but mind the Reader in
general, that by the name of this Distemper, I understand an affection of the
Stomach or Ventricle, from Matter lodged in or near it, excepting those
Affections of it, per consensum, from the Head, or in acute Diseases; and so it
includes the primary Distempers of that Region, that produce pain in the
Ventricle. I fancy a Syllabus of all the Affections and Symptoms of this kind,
would be useful, and might be instituted after this manner.

Though the pit of the Stomach has the greatest sense of the Pain, yet this
Pain may be all over the Stomach.

So an obtuse Pain with Faintness and Sickness, and an Hemicrania, signifies a
watery vapid state of the Blood, as in a Chlorosis.

The same with Sickness attends a full Dropsy.

A rending Pain with weakness, follows great Evacuations in weakly Bodies, as
Suckling.

Shooting to the Back, denote the matter to be windy, be it in the Cavity or
elsewhere, and Cholicks vary. To say nothing here of Ulcers.

Moving a Rheumatism there fixed, and increases immediately upon eating.

Pain moving and fixing in Spots, with most exquisite Pain, Coldness, and
Convulsive Nippings, and working off with a Looseness, and coming some six or
seven hours after, eating a nervous Rheumatism, or rather Membranous.

This last again increases or assaults upon Cold taking, and is sometimes
seated in the Coats of the Stomach, and sometimes in the Membranes adjoining,
or both; so in some I have observed it to strike from the Stomach in a Vein, as
they call it, upward, side-ways, or the like; and not to bear a Position of the
Body that pents it, for the part afflicted always seems pent.

An obtuse Pain contracting the Stomach, such as is usually expressed by
knitting, attends Hysteric Fits.

An obtuse Pain without this, an Obstruction of the Catamenia; or a Plethora
sanguinis in hot Weather chiefly.

The Ventricle may be affected near its upper Orifice at the Pit of the Stomach
only, with a nipping Pain, or a knitting Pain, attending the Hypochondriacal;
and an obtuse Pain, with a Sense of weight in Trouble and Melancholy.

The sense of Pentness accompanies Wind, the sense of Fullness, Water or
Humor. So I might proceed to Soreness, Coldness and Acuteness, Faintness, etc.

There are other Pains near the Stomach, as in the Jaundies, about the bottom
toward the right side, so in a distempered Spleen or Liver, or Pancreas, may be
known by their Situation.

Thus Judgment is to be made of the proper use of these Waters, from the Cause
or Nature of the Disease; and of what means may reasonably be used together
with them. For an Obstruction of the Catamenia may make that Remedy necessary
that a Plethora forbids. A Chlorosis in a Phlegmatic Constitution is better
cured with other Chaiybeats, and a Pain from Weakness requires another
Intention. So that the use of these Waters is to be confined chiefly to Pains
Convulsive in the Melancholy and Hypochondriacal, and to other Collections of
Wind or Phlegm from any Obstructions. And although these chiefly arise from the
Affectio Hypochondriaca; and so are curable in the general Intention, yet
greater Accuracy is necessary both to the Discovery of the Distemper, and
assigning a Remedy, and without which, sure Observation can never be made.

Another Disorder of the Stomach, is want or loss of Appetite, which though it
is restored by other Waters and means, yet not only is more fully recovered by
these, but its cause more perfectly removed.

But there are other Distempers cured by these Waters, which are less
understood, and over which these reign alone. I shall instance in two. The one
is a Fistula, which though of many Years standing, I have known effectually
cured in six Weeks, by the sole drinking of Tunbridge Water. The other which
appeared to me as extraordinary, was a Periodical Fever and Cough, which I
knew a Gentlewoman cured of by the same Waters, who for many Years had never
escaped an Assault about October, before she was freed by this Remedy.
Obstructions of the Pancreas I should have named before.

The Virtue these have of Chearing the Spirits, and relieving a Heart oppressed
with Trouble, or tumultuated with any Passions, is as extraordinary as any of
the former; as being indeed the Cause and Producer of the Glandular
Obstructions, which together with Cephalic Distempers, as Giddiness, Pain,
etc. come under the Affectio Hypochondriaca, which therefore I shall consider
now distinctly in all its Symptoms.

The Affectio Hypochondriaca,
HAS very numerous Symptoms, and counterfeits all Distempers, and upon
continuance brings almost as many. I shall consider the Symptoms, and then the
reason of them, or seat of it. The Signs enumerated by Authors are, a Flatulent
Stomach, ill Appetite and Concoction, Vomiting glewy petuitose Matter, the
Stomach Flatulent, not well after Food; upon which came a rejection of Food by
Vomiting; Lipothymia, Giddiness, turbulent Flatus's and Cramps, Convulsions,
Tremors, Ructus's: Aquositates and Flatus inter binas tunicas seu membranos
mesenterii; Ventriculi dolores vehementes adsunt, qui nonnullis ad dorsum usque
procedant, and ab aegris incautisque pro Nephriticis hab^antur; concoctis cibis
quiescunt, mox aliis ingestis cibis eodem modo revertuntur, qui interdum
jejunos, interdum etiam a caena molestant; and non cessant priusquam aegri
evomunt cibos crudos and Phlegmata subamara and caleda aut acida; Alvus
adstricta; Aestus in Hypochondriis; Vrinatenuis; Anxietas Ventriculi; Pulsus
varii; Cordis palpitatio; Animi deliquium; Pulsatio in sinistro Hypochondrio ab
intemperie calida; Palatum lingua and os exsiccantur; and sitis levis
excitatur; respiratio difficilis; dolor quidam and constrictio in pectore
persentitur. Transit quandoque in Melancholiam and Epilepsiam, aut Apoplexiam
abit; quandoque caeci evadunt; Symptomata Paralysi and Convulsioni similia;
Lassitudo; Cerebrum exsiccant vapores and vigiliae adsunt; Insomnia or vain
frightful and Distracting Dreams suddenly and often disturbing the Sleep.
Nightmare, or sense of oppressing weight; Tension of the Hypochondries, but
that is a sign, nor constant, nor peculiar to their Distemper; Obstruction of
the Oesophagu^ or Swallow; Periculum suffocationis conqueru^^tir; dolor in
anteriore part Pectoris; stupor and dolor Formicans nunc in dextro nunc in
sinistro; Caligo; Dolor in Brachio vel digito hoc vel illo; sudor Frigidus, and
de graviori morbo sibi metuunt. And at last the part where the Humor lodges
has its Symptoms, as Stomach, Spleen, Liver, etc. which are then affected most
six or seven hours after eating. Whence these Flatus's proceed, the Sense of
Sennertus is, Magis consentaneum est istos Flatus contineri in illa cavitate in
sinistro Hypochondrio sub Diaphragmate ex Ventriculi, Omenti, Coli and viscerum
connexu orta, and exitum non habente, sed ita conclusa ut aquam and Flatus
continere possit. And for the beating in the left Hypochondry, says he, Ad quam
rem faciunt Glandulae in Mesenterio plurimae and praecipue magna illa, quae in
centro ejus primae vasorum distributioni addita est. But the more difficult
part of this Distemper to understand, is, that it not only affects and
distempers the Brain, but likewise the Mind it self is a sufferer in it; which
it chiefly or first afflicts with Fear and Despair; and freeing the Passions
from the government of Reason, makes way to all the extravagant Actings, that
an abused Imagination can give color to; and every Object receives its weight
from the Standard of the ruling Passion. The extravagant Dotages of this kind
are numerous in History, and either are ruled by the Impressions of the last
Stage, or Age of Life, or drown us in the present; or which is most common,
distract between the Sense of both; and make us lose the use of our Judgment,
if not of our Reason. Now this Distemper is effectually cured in all its
Symptoms, by these Light Chalybeat Waters, and to inquire into the Nature of
this Distemper, and on what account they do it, may not only be agreeable to
enlighten the Disease, but teach us the full Scope of the Virtue of the Remedy.
If we seek into the Cause and Seat of this Distemper, we may observe it to be
induced by despiriting, and may have its Original either in the Mind, or the
Body; and as it naturally is produced in our Bodies, I observe,

1. That it is a Flatus, as gross, crude, unconcocted, and vapid.

2. That the Fit usually comes six hours after eating, or as soon as the Chyle
is digested, and the Spirit of it spent.

3. It is occasioned by Diet, yielding a thick and plentiful Nourishment, and
Flatulent, and by thick fermented Liquors as Ale.

4. A working active Life that preserves the Concoction, and duly forces on
the Nourishment, and cleanses the Body, joined with a spare and more simple
Diet, is little affected with this Distemper.

5. Sower Belchings, not Signs of Acid in the Body, as is commonly judged
erroniously, but only the effect of rich Liquors despirited, and effete or
changed.

6. The time of its Accession is remarkable, which is at the Turn of Life to
its declive, or at 27 Years, though may be put off longer in some, but begins
then, when the Body begins to be despirited, when whereas before we see every
thing through the eyes of hope, we now are apt to view with despair.

7. It joins hand with the Scurvy.

8. Is cured by Acids, as Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur in some measure, and
kept off by drinking common Water, which is void of Fermentation, or elastick
Turgescence.

All which marks inform us, That this Distemper is seated in the Chyle, which
when effete and tumultuating, produces these effects; and as it may be
discharged and slung, may induce more terrible ones in earnest, which as it is
moving, it only represents by lighter touches: And as the grand Cardo of our
Life at the Climocteric before named, gives opportunity for this Insult; so the
strength of these Turgid parts of our Nourishment, is discernable in other
States of Life, though the Violence is most apparent at the meeting of
differing habits. For that all these Irregularities are owing to our
Nourishment, and that we admit our Dispositions to Passion and Vice by our
Throat, and only then when we take more than is necessary or required by
Nature, we are taught not only in Men where we see the effects of Ease and
Luxury, only when it is in an high degree; but the power of differing
Nourishment and manner of living, is most conspicuous in other Animals,
especially the more tender. These Animals that live hard (that is) use great
labor to get their Food; and that mild and unfermented, are free from three
Dispositions that Domestic Animals, as those that dwell near Towns, or have
opportunity of living easy, are liable to. The first is, change of color in
Coat or Feathers. 2. Inconstancy to their Mate, and Intemperance in Passions.
The last is, Distemperature of Body, and lyableness to Diseases. No wild Animal
was ever observed by Naturalists, to have been seized by those Diseases which
afflict them when kept ^tame. Hens I have seen Epileptic, Magpyes are often
afflicted by the same Distemper when housed, but who ever found them fallen in
the Fields? The same may be observed of other Animals, as Bull-finches, and
many Quadrupids, which can scarce bear housing, without peril of some Disease
or other. Which seems to imply, that a distempered Air can make no impression,
but upon a vitiated Nourishment. And this gives me a rise to add, That as the
Efforts of our Passions, that are owing to our Intemperance, are more silent in
other seasons of our Life, so it is observable, they have not been
distinguished by any Inquirers into Humane Nature, through want of well
understanding Humane Nature distinctly, or in its simplicity. And here I find a
late excellent Author much wanting to himself, in not examining the Fountains
of Idea's, which would have helped him to have uncompounded them, who, might by
this means have discerned Practical Idea's; a Principle of Justice being as
difficultly erased, as that of Self-preservation. For (to wave questioning the
Hypothesis of Idea's) since Judgment is made of Objects, as they lie in the
Imagination, it must needs be, that, as on the one hand the undue Examination
of things may make a Notion imperfect, so the strain of Imagination by our
Passions, must render our Judgment unjust. And this we see in our grosser
Passions, as Fear, Anger, Love or Aversion, but cannot discern it so well in
the lesser Emotions of our Temper, which seem more quiet, wherein yet it is
equally discoverable, that the Inequality of our Temper sways our Judgment, and
is often beforehand in the Cause, where it appears only in the sequel, and
seems to proceed from the Determination. Indeed we may usually see in any error
the stamp of that Temper that formed the Argument, or of a rapid and unheedy
Apprehension, that informed the Understanding; so necessary to right thinking
and due Notions of things is a due Temper, by how much our Passions have a
share in adjusting, if not forming, our Idea's. I might here observe the
Mistake of those that refer the illness of their Nature, to the necessity of
their make, and how natural the Account is, of Man's first Defection: But to
keep close to my Subject, I shall only mind, that the Debility of our Mind, as
well as the Infirmities of our Bodies, is owing to the Irregularity of our
Living, and Vice of our Nourishment. An Instance of this, is the Distemper in
hand, not only in the distracting Fears, and tumultuating Passions, that attend
it; and the innumerable delirous Fancies that are consequent to it, but in the
Diseases of the Body, as Obstructions of the parts before mentioned, with
Cephalic Diseases, as Convulsions, Epilepises, Apoplexies, etc. the last named
of which, is so often owing to the Pre-disposition of this Distemper, as much
confirms the account I have before given of it. Now although the reason of the
Hypochondriac Affection, as it gives a reason of the effect of these Waters,
may make this account satisfactory enough; yet it is farther serviceable, in
discovering the Cure more clearly and perfectly, and by giving a right Notion
of it, may assist in setting the Understanding to rights, and help those that
are afflicted, to make a true Judgment of their Disturbances, as well as
encourage them to a Cure. With respect to a Cure, we may observe the Benefit of
Exercise, and a moderate Diet, without fermented Liquors; and that Action and
Attention are required, to Health of Body and Mind. That Action is necessary to
due Thinking, all studious Men may and do observe, and the reason is, That the
Tumults of the Chyle, or Stoppages of the Vessels by it, are removed by the
hurry of the Blood; which, together with steadiness of Mind, which I call
Attention, gives our Engine its free Exercise and Working. And as the same
thing, that Exercise does with moderate Living, is effected artificially by
these Waters, so the pleasure of an even Life, void of these Hurries and
Inconveniences, recommend a preventional Method of this way of Living, for its
Rectitude and Generosity, before the Flights and Extremes of the other, that
must seek for Remedies to Art. And it is to be noted, That as this Distemper,
in all its Symptoms and Consequences, is effectually cured by these Waters; and
as it is moderated by the forementioned means, so all that are affected with
it, find their Error in drinking Wine and strong fermented Liquors, as an
artificial Support, by the great sinking of their Spirits, if not other
Symptoms; likewise about six hours after, and by the increase of the Distemper
by that means. To which I may add, what may be no small Information, and has
not been taken notice of by Physicians usually, That the Distempers that seize
the Body at the Climactericks, if they be moderated, so as to be kept from
making any mortal breach, will usually in two or three Years time, depart of
themselves upon moderate living. I could give many Instances of Epilepsies
themselves, as well as Giddinesses, Convulsions, a beginning Phthisis, etc.
that abated without any means two or three Years after. But as this Remedy,
viz. these Waters, relieve variety of Diseases, that are induced by the power
of distempered Chyle or Nourishment, and Weakness of Constitution at the
Cardines of our Life or Climactericks; so the Observation of this may turn to
account, if we consider, That many Distempers that are not usually
distinguished, are of this Original: For the enlarging therefore of this
Benefit, we may observe, That the Affectio Hypochondriaca, is, in this respect,
but a Species of Distempers, which we may call Climacteric or Cardinal. For the
better understanding of my Sense in this matter, I must take notice, That
though I cannot admit the received Notion of them fully, either as to their
Fatality, or superstitious Original from Numbers, yet that at the Septenaries,
or near the Body, receives its Changes, is not to be denied; and that then many
Diseases have their Original, which may execute not fully till some Years
after. But although every Septenary may be in some sort considerable, yet I
judge from Experience, that some may be reputed Cardinal, and that not from the
Efficacy of Number, which runs the grand Climacteric upon 63. Those that I find
reason to name Cardinal, are those on which our Life receives a considerable
Change of State; and though the fourteenth Year, on this account, cannot be
excluded, yet Observation of Distempers, or Mortality, makes me, with respect
to Diseases, to make or name three grand Climactericks, and to fix them on
those Years, when the Body receives its grand Alterations in its Cuspis and
declension, and these are 21, 27 and 49. The Diseases of the first are
Hemorrhages and Consumptions, which are frequent at that Age to enter the
Constitution, and not to yield to Remedies till two or three Years after,
though the Prevention of Exulceration render it curable. The Distempers of the
second are Cephalic, Nervous and Flatulent. Those of the third again are
Phthises, Gouts, Stone, Hemorhagies, Rheumatisms, and other Inflammations, that
proceed from an over Alkalisat Crasis of the Blood, as hot, burning or smarting
running Pains, and the like. In all which cases these Waters may be expected to
be highly serviceable, by the same Qualifications that capacitate them to
relieve the Hypochondriacal, viz. by Astringing, Deobstructing, Invigorating,
and taking off either the Orgasm or Degeneracy of the Chyle. And I speak not
this without some Instances that favor it: But from Hypochondriacal
Distempers, I pass on next to Ulceration of the Kidneys, which I have known
cured in more than one by Tunbridge Waters, which I must make this Remark on,
That they were Women of the last cardinal or grand Climacterick. But yet must
not this confine the use of these Waters to that case only, or forbid their
proper use in like Ulcers in other Ages.

Thus according to my design, I have recited what I have experienced of their
Virtues, but I must not pass the Cure of Periodical annual Colds and Fevers
(which I mention above) without this useful Observation, that as it is the
Peccancy of the Chyle, or Faeces of it, that makes the Body obnoxious to the
Effects of the Air, so it may be reasonable to expect the use of the same
Remedy to be successful in some other Distempers that come under this
Consideration.

Of some general Directions to be observed in the Use of the Chalybeat Waters.
THE Directions that emerge from the Nature of the Waters, and of the
Distempers they are used in, vary in some measure with the Constitution of the
Drinker, the State and Nature of the Distemper, and Season they are drank in.
And although the Choice of the Species of Water is directed by the Distemper,
yet nice or infirm and cold Constitutions, make exactness necessary in choosing
those that have least Coldness; on which account some have found, in the light
sort, Wellenborow and Islington less safe to be drank, or to require more
caution, from their ill Effects on those that have drank them when out of
Temper. The Season that one would wish to drink these Waters in, is a dry Time,
and Summer, the Waters being then strongest, and the Season favoring their
exerting their Astringency, and inspiriting Qualities; yet as Distempers do not
wait always for the convenience of the Remedy, so the Waters have been found
effectual at all Seasons likewise. And the incommode of the Season may be
helped, by a Glass of somewhat more Generous, after the Waters are run off, as
Gentian Wine, or the like; or Chalybeat Wine in the Afternoon, which I have
^ound to be very Helpful, where the Moisture of the Season, or Weakness of the
Constitution made it necessary; but not to be continued longer than it was so.
The difference of the Water makes some difference in the rule of Drinking, the
Heavy ones not allowing so long a Continuation of Drinking, and often
admitting, if not requiring, Purging, during the Course, which six Weeks may
well determine; whereas the light sort may safely, and ought to be continued
longer, to prevent return of the Disease, and establish the Constitution: Else
the Chalybeat Waters require the same common Rule, which is to be observed
before, in the time of, and after the drinking. Before the drinking, that the
foulness of the first ways may not be carried farther, and at least clog the
Remedy, and that Nature may be more light and easy, that must be removed,
before the drinking of the Waters is entered upon. And although it cannot be
supposed, that the proper Purges for particular cases, can here be consulted,
yet that Emeticks, in Cephalic Diseases, are best and fittest to answer all
the ends necessary, is an Intimation I cannot allow my self to pass.
Catharticks ought to be doubled at about two days distance, the first to regard
the cleansing the first ways, may be by a Bole of Lenitive Electuary, and as
much Resina Jallopii as may quicken it to desire, or Pills, or Draughts of
Infusion of Sena and Rhubarb; in both which forms, I admire the additions of
Salts either of Wormwood or Tartar, that may make them more detersive, and
occur any unnatural or exorbitant Acid. The latter Purgation ought to regard
the Disease, as Lenitive Electuary with P. Diasenae, and Dialtheae, or Manna
for Gravel. In Colicks, and where the Wind afflicts the Bowels, Hiera Picra. In
Cephalic Distempers, or where there is a Disposition to be Aguish, gentle
Emeticks. Where Wind afflicts the more remote Passages, or in the Blood,
afflicting the Muscular parts, Infusions of Purging Ingredients, as Sena and
Rhubarb, with a handful of Chamomel Flowers, or the Weakness of the Stomach may
require the Decotum amarum made Purging, or Pills of Rudii and Ruffii mixed,
and two or three drops of Oil of Cinnamon. The Dropsical Succus Ebuli in the
quantity of Cochl. 2 vel 3 is most proper for, in my Judgment: In the
Melancholic Constitutions, an Infusion of Sena and Salt of Tartar, among
others, is one of the first rate: The Scurvy, bitter Decoctions. The three last
Diseases, these Waters, as other Chalybeats, serve, by strengthening,
invigorating, and carrying off the offending Matter; and therefore those need a
due preparatory Course, as is sufficient to bring the Blood and Vessels into
such a state as may be fit for these Waters. But yet beginning Dropsies, and
other Obstructions from Trouble of Mind, admit these Waters as the only Remedy,
and require no course but this general Preparation. Excepting Dropsies, and
Distempers that are attended with old Obstructions, and Apoplectick
Dispositions in Phlegmatic Brains, I say, setting aside these, the Purging
Waters are the best Preparative, washing more universally, and leaving the Body
in the Temper that is most fit; and sometimes prevents the necessity of these
Chalybeat Waters; the Proprieties of which, will appear in a Table at the end
of their History. But because Pains of the Stomach often happen to be so
violent, as not to allow the use of these Waters* before they are abated, and
sometimes require a particular Evacuation, it seems incumbent on me, to give
some information, how that Symptom may be relieved: They are usually one of
these three sorts, First, a Convulsive Nipping Pain at the pit of the Stomach,
that holds for some Weeks, and soon upon eating is exacerbated: This usually
readily gives way, either to an Infusion of Baccae Juniperi in Whitewine, or
Ol. Terebinth taken inwardly, the last 16 drops at a time in Beer. Another is a
Pain all over the Stomach, though sometimes gathering more to one part of it,
and is more violent and racking, and goes off with a Looseness, being from a
Congestion of Watery Matter; This yields to the common Domestic Glysters often
repeated, and is checked by Ens Veneris, and sometimes by Chalybeat Wine. The
Pain that attends a Chlorosis by Ol. Caryophyllorum taken in Sugar; if from a
depauperate Blood, by Vinum Chalybeatum.

Phlebotomy here comes under consideration, which, although some Asthma's, and
other cases, may render it necessary, yet, where not necessary, is to be
avoided, as an ill Prepara^ivee for drinking of Water; and must be referred,
together with other Preparations in partic^^^ Distempers, to the Judgment of
the Physician that knows the Distemper, and consults the Constitution.

Of drinking I purpose not to prescribe either time or quantity, which vary
with the Disease and Constitution of the Drinker; but only shall note, that as
rising gradually* to a full quantity, is required not only by the body, that it
may the better bear it, but by the distempered part too: So the Vessels, that
they may be cleansed and strengthened in their own Tone and Tension, require a
gradual decrease. But though the continuation of this Remedy must be prescribed
by the Nature of the Disease, yet that a Caution is necessary, that the
drinking them be not left off too soon, appears in that in my own Observation,
many having suffered a Relapse, for want of continuing the Remedy some time
after the Cure. And this is so general, that I may peremptorily assert, that
less than three Months is not generally sufficient to the drinking of them,
though they take effect in half the time. It is not convenient to drink these
Waters too early, nor without some preceding walking to empty the Body; neither
is it safe to lie down upon them, especially in Cephalic Distempers; nor to
allow any business to take place in the Thoughts; on which score the distance
of the Wells, and the Resort, recommends the drinking these Waters at their
Springs. But the most material Rule, which the very design of them require, is,
That during the Course, the Drinker use Exercise, avoid all Flatulent Diet, and
that of Gross and much Nourishment, and drink as little fermented Liquor as he
may. And here especially drinking much Wine is to be condemned on a double
account, for beside that the inconvenient Temper that the Wine gives, renders
them unfit for drinking the Waters the Morning following, it opposes the
Remedy, and renders it ineffectual, by supporting the Morbid State; and for
this Reason, as generous Liquors are not to be omitted at the beginning of the
drinking, so they ought wholly to be set aside when the Course is well entered;
without which, Hypochondriacism, which is the most general Case, will not admit
of any entire Conquest. Neither is the Course of Living to be ended with the
Course of drinking the Waters, but that the use of them may be effectual; a
spare Diet, and the same abstemious living, with Exercise, ought to be
continued for two Months, in which time the Body may be supposed to be a little
confirmed. And for the same Reason, though some Distempers, as Stone, Jaundies,
and Melancholy, particularly, may require some other Intentions to be
satisfied, and so make a Course of Physic necessary at the same time, yet the
use (...) the Waters is so much the less beneficial, by how much it is
disturbed by Purging, or any other Medicines, and therefore Reason and
Experience place this means last. But in Apoplexies, and some watery Distempers,
as Dropsy and Chlorosis, an Astringent more potent is very necessary to close
and strengthen the Parts. The most proper and powerful of this kind. I
intimated above, to be the Ens Veneris of Mr. Boil, which, if it succeed, the
Waters, as the other Detersives and Purgers, are to precede, make an entire
Course in the surprising Distemper that I there apply it to; and in the room of
it, I have sometimes used Chalybs Preparat. with equal Success, if the
Apoplectick Symptoms were mild.

These Waters, as they suffer by warming, so are apt to bring some Disorders,
especially in an ill Season or Constitution, as Cold, Nauseousness, difficulty
of Urine and Giddiness, which are usually provided against by drinking a Glass
of Wine after every three or four Glasses of Water, for the first few Mornings.
But because the two last Symptoms do sometimes prove more considerably
obstinate, I shall take notice, that it is good for those that are obnoxious to
Cephalic Diseases, to provide against the Giddiness procured by these Waters,
by chewing of Nutmeg, and indeed Biscuit, or a Crust of Bread chewed do the
same, the motion of the Jaws seeming as necessary as the warming the Stomach.
And for the Stoppage of Urine, shall acquaint the Drinker, that where it is not
occasioned by the Stone, though Glysters and Purgers may be required sometimes,
yet it may soon be removed without usually, only Ol. Terebinth. guttis iij. in
umbilicum instillatis: And the same I have known done by a plentiful Glass of
Rhenish. But in all these Rules, I must make this reserve for the Heavy
Chalybeat Waters, That Purging is absolutely necessary during the taking of
those, which are not so clean, nor pass so well, and may bind the Body too much.

I have nothing more to add, but for a Conservative of Health, to recommend the
drinking of Tunbridge Waters with Wine in Winter, to the Hypochondriacal, which
are easier to be had than the German Spaw, and are as much better than those,
by how much they are lighter, and which, in Flasks headed with Oil, will keep
well.

THE Natural History OF THE Purging Waters OF ENGLAND, With their Uses.
PART II.
THE Purging Waters of England, for their Pleasantness, easiness of Working;
and extraordinary Effects in many Distempers have been justly celebrated; but
as their Original has not been yet proved, but remains a Question among
Learned Men; so the Varieties of their Natures, not having been examined, have
rendered the differences of them unuseful. The due Examination of both, I shall
therefore propose, with their Uses, which we shall find great, and very
distinct. The Method I shall use, shall be to set apart their Principles, and
then inquire into them, and then make Essays of the Waters. In order to this, I
shall distinguish their Characteristicks and proper Signs, and trace their
Original. And that we may proceed surely, I have examined the Waters at the
Wells, and the Earths of the several Wells, my self, except those that I had as
sure a Convenience of inquiring into, by some accurate and unquestioned
Friends. The Purging Quality of these Waters then, resides in the Salt, which
is peculiar to Wells that have these Qualifications.

These Purging Waters are all found above the dead Loam, in a Loamy Clay, that
is the same continued to the Foundation, or dead Loam. This I have found common
to the Selenitical Waters, as well as others; and in this Loamy Clay, the Water
has only a level Spring: And though the Waters, by the Surface, may seem to be
in a Gravel, as those of Richmond, yet the Earth, as I was there informed by
those that sunk the Well, proves to be a continued Clay, and without mixture of
Gravel down to the dead Loam. The Scarborow Waters, by an Exception against
this, being a running Spring, and in a Gravel, but the Earth of all others,
that have had a gravelly Surface, proving upon Inquiry a Loamy Clay, as that of
Richmond, and that near Colchester, it is reasonable to allow me it here, where
the Spring is not liable to enquiry; and since in my examination of that
Spring, I shall prove it a complicated one, of a Saline Water, as the rest,
joined with a Chalybeat Water, which sort are ever running Springs.

2. A Nitre ever appears on the Earth, about the Springs where it is exposed to
the Air, so at Scarborow, Woodham-Ferrys, Acton, etc. at Epsam it shows it self
like a white Incrustation; yet these Nitres all differ from the Salts contained
in the Waters.

3. The Matter impowering these Waters, is a Salt, of which they contain a
great quantity, some in a dry Season, affording near a Dram in a Pint: The
Quantities may be collected from the weights of the Waters; and this Salt not
Volatile.

4. They have universally one common Index, that is, a Stone, formed out of,
and bearing the face of Loam within when broken. At Epsam it is more mellow,
from the quantity of Chalk that that Soil affords; else it is naturally hard,
as I observed it in all the other Wells, almost to striking of Fire with Steel.
At Alford (my Friend informed me) the Stone would strike Fire, but not strong
enough to kindle Tinder: This Stone is is a sort of Pyrites, as the great
Naturalist, and Learned Physician, Dr. Martin Lister, rightly names it; but
that being a name of a Genus of Marcasites, and so too large an Appellative, I
shall particulary describe this, which is peculiar to this sort of Mineral
Waters. This Stone then (which is found in these Wells, at the bottom near the
dead Loam where the Water ooseth) in outward crust resembles a Pibble, and as
unformed, and as differing in bulk, most amounting to the size of a Man's Head;
and more of them are found bigger than less. It is heavy and very hard; when
broke, it appears coated, with flakes of Gypsum, some white, some yellowish,
some Alabastrine, not exceeding in thickness the eighth of an Inch; and from
its breaking, and thready Composition, is distinguished by Naturalists by the
name of Trichitis. This Coat invests some wholly, some are cased here and there
only, some this passing into, divides into parcels: The Matter or Body of these
parcels too, differ in hardness, and some in color, containing Iron, either of
the natural color as in most, or rushy, as in Richmond; but most of these
Stones are pure Loam hardened. Richmond Stone had this peculiar to it, that the
Stone was invested with Gypsum, b^t not divided by it as the rest, and was of a
lighter color, near that of ashes not high burnt.

The Stone of Dulwich again resembled the rest, but had many shining Particles
appearing, as in Marcasites: Their differences and different Reasons follow by
and by in their Essays, and will be found agreeable to the account of the
Waters; where they will be found to have no Essential difference, from any
Metalline parts or other, besides what the differing nature of their Salts
import, which from their differing depth, and remoteness from Nitre, makes the
Stone proportionably Marcasitical, or vary with the Soil: The shining of some
of these Stones, I referred to the Marcasitical Nature of the Juice, and found
the same Particles natural to the dead Loam, whence this Juice seems to be
derived, which seemed to imply, that the difference of this Juice, consisted
not in any accession of Mineral parts, but difference of Digestion, and the
Qualities the different Region may give it. I observed, among my other Essays
of these Stones, that when by Fusion with fine Glass, I endeavored to discover
any Mineral Tincture, though I discovered not any, yet the Dullwich Stone in
the same Fire, and at the same time, pierced the Vessel it was melted in, which
was of Tobacco-pipe Clay, and made it break smooth and shining like China
Earth, which the other Stones did not effect.

The Gellying of these Stones in (...), to me imported the same, it being the
^^ture of differing Marcasites, to form a Butter with the same Salts; from
which yet these differed, in that these afforded it not by Sublimation, which I
tried. And from the Nature of this Juice, the Dullwich Water seems to derive
the unkindliness of its Effects, which bears not drinking with the same freedom
as others, being more cold and heavy on the Stomach. The further inquiry into
the Nature of these Stones and Juice informing them, and how they have
reference to these Waters, comes in its place. The harmlesness of this Juice,
appears in the Epsam Stone, which is more lax and open, being not harder than a
Chalk, which showed its Original, but not the Essence of its Purging, to
require the unaltered Juice: That the Epsam Stone is the same with the other
appeared, in that some parts of it, as well as some parts of the Gypseous
Earth, would gelly in Aqua fortis as well as the other; especially those parts
where the Selenites shot. Else the Infusion of this Stone gave a Green, with
Syrup of Violets, which the others gave not.

Having thus found the constant Mineral Qualifications of these Wells, and
Indicia of the Waters, it will be satisfactory now, to observe more closely the
Waters, and in what or how they agree. And these power to be the same in
Original and Nature further,

1. That the Taste is common to the Waters, as well the Selenitical, or wherein
the Selenites are formed, as the other sort which are found in a constant loamy
Clay and even, and this in all its differences. For the smooth Taste of
Richmond Waters, is matched by the Colchester; the Bitterness of Epsam, in
Dullwich, and a little in Brentwood-weal. Besides there is somewhat of a common
Taste to all; so that may assist us in discovering their Principles.

2. The Salt, though it differs, some being figured, and some not, (of the
latter sort being Epsam and Acton) some melting difficultly, some easily, with
the heat of a temperate Hand, as the Salt of the same Waters do; yet it agrees
in its Nature, between a Nitre and a Vitriol, joining with Vitriols, and not
precipitating them, freedom from any Corrosive Qualities and Temper, in which
is a Union of Acidity and Nitre, and working a little both with Acids and
Alkalys, and having these Qualities, the same with the Salts, they are affine
to.

3. In their Virtues, not only in the Faculty of Purging, but in helping the
Appetite, allaying Hypochondriack Flatus, and the like Effects which are
Vitrioline.

Now the Purging Wells are of two sorts, The first affording a Stone, called by
Naturalists the Selenites, which is shot in the Clay where the Water issues;
and these Wells always afford veins of putrid Iron, together with the
Selenites, and some quantities of pleasant Acid Juice, like Spirit of Sulphur
or Vitriol, in a condensed coagulated form, or mixed with the Earth, and lying
in yellow or Ferrugineous Veins. Thus both at Epsam and Woodham-Ferrys I found
it, by examining the Wells when new dug. The other sort have no differing face
consisting of an uniform Loam to the bottom.

I shall first give a short view of the proofs, by which we may be sure we are
rightly fixed upon the true Ingredients or Principles, and then examine their
Nature, and Reason of their Production.

That the Matter which these Wells exhibit to our view, are the very Principles
of the Purging Salt of these Waters, and parcels of the Matter, is proved by
these following Particulars.

1. The Nature of the Purging Salts varies as these vary, as may be observed by
the comparing the Essays of the Waters, with the Trials of the Stones, and by
softness of the Salt of the Selenitical.

2. The same Ingredients and Matter found in all, and account for what they
differ in, and from the preceding Uniformity.

3. It is not of a deeper Original, because wherever these Ingredients are
found, there is likewise the Purging Water; but beyond these marks, is never
any thing found but a dead Loam, unpassable to Water, and unopen to yield Salt:
And this is clear in the Selenitical Water at Epsam, where neither Water nor
Selenites are found lower, though attempted some feet lower to enlarge the
Spring, which proved only common dead Loam.

4. Not of a wider Derivation, none of the same Waters lying in the
neighboring Earth, whence these Springs may be suspected to descend; nor any
of the Indexes of them, nor any Metals or Mineral bodies. Nor indeed are these
Earths found lying over any Mines, constant at least, as these Signs are.

5. Another most evident sign, that the Principles are here rightly fixed, is,
That the Species of these Waters which afford the Selenites, we have a clear
and good account of from all Naturalists, to proceed only from a mixture of
Loam and Chalk-stone, and perhaps a little Iron; and never to be found over any
Mine, but over Quarries of Chalk or Stone. Which is a sufficient Argument, and
the more considerable, in that they never took notice of the Purging Qualities
of the Waters.

6. The Signs and Qualifications of these Wells before recited, are proper to
them only.

7. Another Argument is to be drawn, from the Disposition of this Earth to
produce a Salt, as is seen in its Efflorescence.

8. From the softness of the Salt of the Selenitical Waters, which will be
understood and compared in the following account.

9. Their Innocence, regular Variation, and that these Principles account for
all their Phenomenon, prove the Salt of these Waters to be the genuine and
natural Product of these Principles.

To all which add, That the Purging and Medicinal Qualities resides in the
Salt; and that the open nature of Clays, would discover any Mineral or Metal
concerned, and not conceal more than we may observe.

That we may understand whence, or to what is this Salt owing, the Original of
the Salt, and nature both of the Earth and Juyces concerned in the Production
of it, I proceed now to examine the Principles.

The Principles or Ingredients that impregnate the Purging Waters, examined.
HAving thus traced the Production of this Salt, and determined it to the
Earth, through which the Wells are sunk, and Mineral Stone or Juice contained
in these Stones; we come now to examine these, their Nature, and what parts of
these enter the Composition, or how they are concerned in the Production of
this Salt. And upon due Essays of these Earths and Stones, we shall find in
general an Earth rich of Salt, Chalybeat or Ferreous parts, a Mineral Juice out
of which this Salt seems formed; and we may observe the Salt of the upper Soil
somewhat concerned in, and that on the Varieties of the two last, the Varieties
of the Waters do depend. And these I shall enquire into, as to their Original
and Nature.

The Earth in which these Wells are, and which yields this Salt, is a Loamy
Clay, more mellow, and more of a Clay toward the Surface, but more loamy toward
the bottom. The inner Earth is such as our Tiles are made of; at Richmond at
Epsam, they dig both Brick and Tyle, Earth too, as I remember, out of the Hill
yielding these Springs. So I need not describe the Earth, it being known that
the ponderous close and fat is used for Tiles, and the looser for Bricks. The
color of these Earths vary a little, and though usually Brown, yet in some
that color is brightned near a Gray. The Earth of these Springs is sound of
these two kinds constantly, either a mere Clay of the same face to the bottom,
as are the Wells where the Salt is Christalliz'd, or firm and figured, or the
same Clay mixed with Veins of Iron, and pleasantly Acid Juice, like Spirit of
Vitriol, and interspersed with Selenites, which are formed in it. The Wells
where they dig, only a pure loamy Clay, ever toward the bottom (which is seldom
more than twelve Feet, and I think never more than twenty in depth) receives
the Water from the sides issuing from between the Stones before described; and
nothing besides is observable in these Wells.

Now not only the face and figure of the Salt, but its Nature likewise,
acknowledge this Earth as its natural Patent, and all is confirmed in the
manner of its Production. The form of the Salt of the Wells, usually resembles
the Salt shot about them upon the Surface of the Earth, which at some is in
Stiriae, at some appears only like a soft mould. The Nature of it is middle
between a Nitre and a Vitriol, which agrees well with the Earth it is formed
of, Nitrous Earths requiring slackning in the open Air. And the manner of the
Production of this Salt, is fully as agreeable to this account, for it is not
only at these Wells, that this sort of Earth shoots this Nitrous Efflorescence,
but at all other places it is observable, as frequently in Ditches, and
wherever it is cast up by the Tile makers; and which is worth a Remark, as
discovering the Reason or Manner of its Production, it is to be noted* That
this Efflorescence, appears only where the Air is moist or damp, and confined.
This I observe, not only to account for the Production of this Salt in
Subterraneous Channels, but also for the difference of the Salt of the Water,
from that shooting on the Surface, that the Salt of the Water is more Fusil,
and retains more of the Acid part of the Salt, which is collected in proportion
to the Closeness, and the Moistness or Coldness of the place. And as a further
Illustration and proof of what I assert, I shall give the Reader one or two
Essays of Loam taken from common Pits for the making of Tiles, which prove that
this Earth contains a Salt that may be extracted, and hint the manner of its
Extraction. For although no Loam yields any Salt to an Infusion of boiling
Water, yet I found that Water sharpened with Oil of Vitriol, or common Salt, or
Spirit of Salt, would extract a Salt; and which is yet more, that Lime water
would slacken it, and make it yield one. I shall give the Examen of Loam,
opened by Spirit of Nitre, and Spirit of Vitriol.

Loam Water made by Infusion of common Water,
sharpened with Spirit of Nitre, gave with
Tincture of Logwood, a pale dusky Tawny.
Gall, a faint bluish Black, not thick
Syrup of Cloves, a dusky Red and palish.
Sal Absynthii, a white curdle, which easily dissolved
in washing, and left little Earth.
Syrup of Violets, a bright Red.
It differed little in taste, from what the Spirit of Nitre gave.

Loam Water two Pounds, with Spirit of Vitriol two Drams, infused a Week, had
the ma^kish taste of the Purging Waters.
With Tincture of Logwood, a sooty dusky color, a little reddish.
Syrup of Cloves, a red not bright.
Sal Absynthii, a white Curdle, not easily soluble.
Sir. of Violets, a purplish Red.
Sublimate Water, no alteration.
Loam Water made with common Salt.
With Tincture of Logwood, a bright Red. The Salts of these Infusions were
collected by evaporating.

I shall note, that these Infusions will detect some Ferrugineous parts in
Loam, and which seem separated in the Selenitical Earth, rather than added. The
Salt that these Loamy Clays yield, as it is of a common Origin with that of
common Earth, or upper Soil, so it seems to vary much on that account with the
neighboring Earth; but that this should be so very rich in generating, it must
be from the more Saline Nature of this Earth, or from plenty of some Menstruum
to extract it; the first may be from the continuation of this Earth with the
grand Matrix, which in others in intercepted by Lays of Gravel, or the like:
The latter may be from Juice, which is in a sort Vitrioline: And the closeness
of this Clay, does much contribute to this Collection, as well as the coldness
of it. But the Nature of this Juice comes next to be examined, under the Essay
of the Stones, which are Parcels of this Loamy Earth.

The Stones then, which are the proper Index of these Wells, and which, from
their Nature, are apt to receive Mineral or Metalline parts, must be supposed
to contain part of the Ingredients at least of this Salt. The Stones I proved
severally from the several Wells, whence I took them my self, the Hydrostatical
weight of which, with some other Essays, I shall more conveniently place at the
end of this Account. I proved them by Ustion or Roasting, by Calcination, by
Sublimation, by Precipitations: By Ustion, to separate the Salt: By the second,
to open the Body, and discover Mineral or Marcasite: The third, (...) discover
any sulphurous Body or Steam. Lastly, By Precipitations, both out of a
Lixivium, and of the washed Stone out of Aqua fortis: By all which, as well as
by Fusion with fine Glass, the Stones proved void of any Metalline or Mineral
Mixture. But instead of these, their particular Nature appeared, to consist in
the Juice or Salt of them, saving only a little Iron which Woodham-Ferrys
afforded, and which will be found to agree well with the Constitution of those
Waters which are Chalybeat. This particular sort of Juice, or Salt, appeared in
their forming a Jelly with Aqua fortis, which would not become liquid under
some days standing; and the parts I proved to be in some of the Earth at Epsam,
that lay among the Selenites, though the Stones by the mixture of Chalk did
not. This Quality not attending Loam, suggested somewhat different from that to
be concerned in it; and knowing that Antimony, Auripigmentum, and perhaps some
other Marcasites, with the mixture of some Salts whence Aqua fortis is made,
would yield a Butter by Distillation; I essayed this Jelly by Sublimation in
like Vessels, but failed of my Expectation, and then considered that this
Jelly, not only differed in being produced without Heat or Sublimation, but had
not the least Caustic Qualities of the other Marcasitick Butters, but rather
mortified the Acid Spirit. But all these Suggestions and Doubts (...) cleared
to me, by examining the Origin^^ of this Stone, when I understood it to be
formed of a Loamy Clay; in conjunction of a Vitriolick Juice. For this I was
first taught at Harwich, where I found the same Stones exactly, nothing
differing, either in face when broke, or whole and invested with the same
Gypsum or Trichitis, and with the same mixture of Iron. These Stones there lie
plentifully on the shore, and stuck in the Bank at the bottom of the Cliff, and
only at the Foot of that Spot of the Cliff that is a continued Loam. This
Production I referred to a Vitrioline Juice in Conjunction with the Loam,
because the common Coporas Stones are plentifully found on that shore, and I
observed Children employed there to collect them; but whereas they lie thick
where the Cliff is gravelly, where the Cliff was Loamy, and the shore floor'd
with these Stones, I found no Coporas Stones, nor did the Children seek there
for them, though they picked close by it, where the Bank begins gravelly. So
that these Stones seem produced in the Loam, as the other in the Gravel by the
same Juice. And since I have understood of several of our Diggers for
Tile-Earth, that the Coporas Stone is only found in those Clays that have a
Gravel mixed with them. So that at Harwich this Bed of Stones was the
Foundation of the Loamy Cliff, where the Cliff has been washed away or cut: For
the Harbor or Channel there, is Artificial, and of no old Date, the Current
having been formerly on the other side of Languard Fort, which then stood in
Essex. The not understanding this, made the Gentleman in Cambden to mention
them as Petrifactions made by the Sea. And from this undoubtedly proceeds that
Bed of Shells that covers the Cliff at perhaps fifty feet hight, which must be
carried thither at the making of the Harbor, or clearing of it, how else could
the petrified Clay bed, which contains the Shells, lie a top, and no
Petrifaction lower, till you come again to the bottom? I think that they must
originally have been the same lay, and that it is inconsistent to suppose
otherwise.

Having thus arrived at the Origin of the Stones, I shall make one farther
Observation, which is, That these Stones yield the same Salt in a Lixivium,
which the Waters contain: From all which I conclude, them Parcels of the
Materials, whence these Purging Waters have their Salt, and wherein the
particular Nature and Genius of the concrete Juice is to be had.

All this is confirmed by the Nature of the Salt of these Waters, which being a
mean Salt, between Vitriol and Nitre, requires such an Earth, and such a Place
for its Production, for lower it had proved Vitrioline, and superficial
Nitrous, which, with the difference of the Salt keeping pace with the varying
of the Stone, and with the corresponding Nature of the Salt, produced in moist
Cavities, as in Cellars, to that sort of it which is soft, as presently
appears, confirms fully this Account, as agreeable both to Reason and
Experience.

Of the Purging Waters wherein the Selenites is found.
THis sort of Waters have the same Taste with the other, and the like Variety
in the Tastes of the several Waters, and Purge alike. What they agree in is
delivered above, I shall therefore now consider their differences, and the
difference of the Principles, and compare the Reason of these, with the Nature
of the others. These Wells, upon inquiry, afford no fresh Principles, or
Mineral Ingredients, but what the addition of a Calcarious Salt produces, which
rather affects these Waters as a Menstruum. I proceed to observe the difference
and account for it.

These are ever in a Loam, but this Loam partakes of a Limestone, this is
evedent from all accounts of the Selenites; and at Epsam the blew Loam lies in
streaks in the Hill, and a Quarry of Chalk limits the Town at both ends. To
this is owing the laxness of the Loam here above the rest, and some differences
it shows upon trials, as its clearness of Iron, which Salt of Chalk and Lime
precipitat* and where the Chalk is not found, as at Woodham-Ferrys, the Water
there is Chalybeat.

The Pyrites, or hard Stone, is to be found here, but why it is perfect at
Woodham-Ferrys, and more lax at Epsam, is owing to the same reason. For those
two Wells were, what I could examine, being new dug, when I visited them, to
view and examine the Earth cast out.

The Differences of the Earth of these Waters, from the other kind, were common
to both these Wells. At Epsam, the Earth cast out of the Well (I mean
Simps^n's) near the Parcels of Selenites, had some tenderer or more brittle
Earth of several colors, but all near a Lemmon color, or of Iron rust. All
these upon examination, both with burning, and without, by bare washing,
afforded Iron which obeyed the Loadstone, and a Salt, or rather Juice, that was
pleasingly Acid, and not Caustic, but the Taste differed a little, as the
Color differed: The Lemmon-colour'd was exactly of the taste of Spirit of
Vitriol, without any odd taste; only note, that this I first burnt; and the
same Acidity I discovered in some white Flakes of the Stone, without any
Metalline taste. I shall not be particular in the Sublimation of these Mineral
Earths; inasmuch as all the ways I attempted to try them, discovered nothing
but pure Earth besides.

At Woodham-Ferrys, I observed the same colored Earths exactly, and discovered
only Iron, and the Juice or Salt mixed with it; and as at Epsam, so here, the
Earth cleared of these, was loose and open, and was but common Earth, as
appeared by weighing it Hydrostatically. The Particulars, see in the Account of
the Wells.

Hence I was apt to think, from the Nature of the Juice approaching to that of
Spirit of Vitriol, and upon the slackness of the Earth of these Wells, that the
Disposition toward an Alkaly of the admix'd Earth, had detected and separated
these Juyces, which seem locked up in the Loam of the other: But the Pureness
of the Vitrioline Juice in these, make me suspend that opinion; and, as I
intimated before, hence Epsam Water remains clear with a mixture of Galls,
whereas the other gives a dark Purple. I shall, for clearness sake, inquire now
into the Origin of the Selenites, and determine the Species of them these
Waters belong to, which are a Species of the Purging Kind. For the Salt of
these Waters differ from that of the other, as well as the Ingredients, in that
the Salt here is unfigur'd, soft, and melts in the warmth of a hand: In their
Operation they are accordingly more penetrating, and gall the parts of their
Excretion, or near it; which, that it is owing to the softness of the Salt, and
Calcarious Nature of it, appears, in that Woodham-Ferrys does it not so as
Epsam and Acton. The different Virtues shall be taken notice of in their place,
as the differences of the Salt shall be in the Examen of the Waters.

Now I observe, all Waters that afford the Selenites (at least of this Kind and
Figure) to be Purging; and because the Wells that afford them, are capable to
be proved beyond dispute, as at Kettering, and in Oxfordshire, it will much
conduce to the clear proof of the Ingredients and Principles of these Waters,
to give a good account of these which are a member of them.

At the places now named, the Selenites are found in a blew Loam over a Stone
Quarry, as I am informed by those that have brought me the Account from
Kettering; and of Oxfordshire by Dr. Plot: The Circumstances of which
(considering the Salt is not volatile) do evince, That the Ingredients of these
Waters do not lie lower, since these Stones are so usually found to have the
same Foundation, and constantly the same Matrix; for these Selenites never
being found the Index of any Metal or Mineral, nor hard enough to be a Spar;
but being observed to agree universally in constant Materials, which are the
same with the other sort of my Waters that is a Loam: And the Mixture of a
Limestone accounting for the Production of the Selenites, I conclude my
account genuine, and clear of them all.

The Selenites of these Wells is formed near the bottom in the Loam, at the
Water, as they ever are, and the Spring small; some are found of all sizes,
from the largest to so small, as scarce allow their Figure to be observed; and
the Loam I found figured like the Stones, and lying in clusters in like manner.
The Figures of them I found much differing, Those at Acton Rhomboid: At Epsam
many Rhomboid, many imperfect ones, or like Frustula of them, but most of them
Columns of six sides only, each side was a Parallelogram inequilateral with a
Pointing (which is comprehended under as many Triangles) and their Commissure
or Origin unequal; some of them were more Conical; but mostly their Position
was, as that of those found by Dr. Plot at Cornwell and Hanwell, many being
fixed like Radii to one center.

Thus I found them at Simpson's Well at Epsam, with this Note, That wherever
they stood thus, the Earth adjoining to it had much Iron in it, Fusil, and
pleasantly Acid mostly.

At Woodham-Ferrys some ^ew were Rhomboid, but most of them at one of the
Lozenge Figure, and resembling the Rhomboid, at the other round and flat, and
sharp; the two larger opposite Surface declining, till they meet at an edge,
which was Semicircular.

The Selenites found at Colchester were thin and flat, and bent a little,
consisted of Schiz^ or Flakes, and are of no distinguishable shape. I observe,
that where I could get a view of any quantity of the Earth, cast out of any of
these Wells, there were some of them always Rhomboid, as the more genuine
Figure; but others to differ, with the Salt, as I judged, and sometimes to be
ruled by the quantity of Iron, and receive the Figure that Metal usually
christallizes into.

What the Selenites owes its origin to, I refer my self to the Sense and
Observations of Naturalists, who were not unacquainted with this Qualification
of the Water in which they are generated. That most accurate Learned and
curious Naturalist Dr. Plot, in his Natural History of Oxfordshire, Cap. 5.
Par. 9. Speaking of the Selenites. Georgius Agricola differs from them all, and
makes it a product of Limestone and Water. Gignitur (says he) Ex saxo calcis
cum pauca aqua permisto. And thus I find it to grow here with us at Heddington,
in a blew Clay that lies over the Quarry, whose outermost Crust is a hard
Limestone. For clearness sake, this Stone may be distinguished into these four
sorts.

1. Those Selenites that are really Fissil, into tough flexil Plates, which is
more properly the Glacies Mari^, or Lapis Specularis. Muscovy Glass.

2. Those that consist of brittle Plates, or Flakes, which are not easily
separable, at least entire; an unformed sort of these are found in flat Plates
not very thick near Colchester at the North end, at a Publick-house half a Mile
from the Town, and in some Wells in the Town. The formed ones usually consist
of six sides, the breadth being more than the thickness, make the two level
Surfaces broader than the rest. In this they generally agree, but the Rhomboid
have their ends formed in like manner to make that Figure, so as to have ends
and sides alike; whereas those that are longer and narrower, vary in the
Figures that the Depressions at the ends make. Some are imperfect Rhomboid in
one half, and of an irregular Figure, the other half as at Epsam, etc. or
thinning to an edge, as at Woodham-Ferrys. All these agree in an uniform glassy
Surface.

3. Rhomboid and in the Flakes, of which it is composed, resembling the other;
but the Superficies is divisible into strings, the marks or lines of which,
appear in the Surface. Perhaps these may be formed only where they are produced
at a Stone-Quarry; for of this kind is that at Heddington in Oxfordshire, and
that of Kettering in Northamptonshire, and so may be distinguished in its name
as a Species of Talc, Selenites Talceus.

A 4th sort have a Cubico-Rhomboideal form; these are constantly Hexaedra, of
equal obliqueangular sides, or oblique-angled Parallelepipeds; are Fessil into
thick Plates, or indeed consist of Cubick pieces of the same Figure; such as at
Slindon in Staffordshire, mentioned by the same great Author, Nature. Hist. of
Staff. Cap. 5. Part 2. dug in Marle pits. These are less transparent, and as a
Species of Gypsum; may be called Selenites Gypseus.

To the second sort (which I take only to be the proper Selenites) belong those
of these Purging Wells. This distinction I think necessary to be observed; for
though I am inclinable to believe, that the Waters wherein the others are found
may Purge, yet the Selenites, as they are related to another sort of Stone, and
have some variety in the Matrix, may vary (reasonably enough) in their
Qualities, as the Talceus being produced at a Stone-Quarry, the Waters can
scarce be supposed to want the Coldness or Hardness such Quarries are wont to
communicate. And so of the rest.

The Origin of the Salt of these Waters, appears most evidently in the Salt of
this Species, or sort of them, which I shall therefore inquire into, by
examining the Reason of their Production, and compare with the Salt that is
nearest in resemblance. The Salt contained in the Waters which I call
Selenitical, has these Qualities or Properties peculiar to them, To be soft,
and melt in the warmth of a Hand; to be unfigur'd, and ^ret the parts of
Excretion; besides the middle Nature of it, and its being void of
Corrosiveness, which are common to the other sort. In its Softness and
Fluxilness, Nature and Manner of Production, it exactly resembles the Salt,
that damp Cellars produce, and is fixed in the middle to Cobwebs, being the
steam of the Earth, and more liquid part of what is extracted from it, and
flows in the moist Air there condensed: And no known Salt in Nature has the
Quality of running in so easy a Heat, beside the Selenitical, but that. And as
this confirms its Original, so the Reason it further complies with this
Account: For this soft Salt in these Wells, is the flowing part of the Matter
produced in them, the more solid Particles, and figurable, being detained at
the Loam, and employed in forming the Selenites*

Now that the Limestone which is concerned in this Production, naturally
effects this separation by shooting the more dense parts, is evident in the use
of it to precipitate Metalline parts, but more plainly in boiling Sugars. The
slackning quality of this chalky or limy Salt, I hinted before to agree with
the Earth of these Wells; and it is to be noted, That the Salt of the
Selenitical, is accordingly more uniform, not so thickning with Gall, nor
varying so much toward Nitres and Vitriols as the others do, but nearer the
Spirit. So I conclude the Salt of these Purging Waters, of a middle Nature
between Nitres and Vitriols, and formed out of the Loam, by the help of a
Vitrioline Juice or liquid Salt, and collected in moist Cavities.

The Trial of the Stones.
THE Stone which I have before described, and is common to all the Wells, has,
when broke, the Loam hardened, and is invested with a Gypsum, or Trichitis.

Richmond stone is of a light color and pale, near an Ash Color, not divided
by the Gypsum, but coated with it, some Ferrugineous stains were in one piece:
In the Air weighed two Ounces and 50 Grains; on the Water, one Ounce, two Drams
and 26 Grains.

Epsam a more lax stone, like a hardened clod, incrusted with a gray chalky
coat, which Acids wrought on with Ebullition, but did not slack in the Water,
weighed in the Air two Ounces and 47 Grains; in the Water one Ounce, one Dram
and 26 Grains.

Dulwich a darker stone and very hard as Flint, and inclined to a greenish in
the body of it, in several places, and the Cellulae, smaller than
Woodham-Ferrys or Harwich, or any yet observed by me; where not greenish, it
had many sparkles of shining small Particles, and when beaten fine, was whiter
than any. In the Air two Ounces and 47 Grains; in the Water one Ounce, two
Drams and 39 Grains and a half.

Woodham-Ferrys Cells as the former but larger, the body often greenish where
exposed to the Air, else Loam-like, but the Gypsum seemed to have penetrated
the body of the stone. In the Air two Ounces and 46 Grains and a half; in the
Water one Ounce, two Drams and 17 Grains.

Common Loam in the Air weighed two Ounces and 49 Grains; in the Water one
Ounce and 67 Grains.

Chalk in the Air two Ounces and 47 Grains, and in the Water one Ounce, one
Dram and one Scruple, besides four or five Grains lost by its s^ackning.

The Salts extracted from the Stones, they all smelt Lixiviat in boiling.

Richmond stones Lixivium with Lignum Nephriticum, took the color of Rhenish
or Whitewine, or near a Buff-colour.

With Tincture of Logwood, a Red tawnyish.

Gall, a faint Tincture of Red but clear.

Turnsole Liquor, sharpened with Spirit of Vitriol, it brightned the Red a
little.

Oil of Tartar per deliquium, no alteration, but did not readily mix.

The Lie of the Roasted Richmond Stone, With Tincture of Logwood, brightened
the Red higher than Pump-water.

With Turnsole preserved the Red.

With Gall a high Lemmon color and clear.

Lignum Nephriticum clear and not colored, as Spirit of Vitriol does.

Oil of Tartar p. d. thick large curdle.

The Lie exceeded not Pump or common Water in weight.

Aqua fortis wrought violently on this Stone, but extracted no Tincture, but
jelly'd, but not so firmly as the other; no Precipitation could be obtained
from the Jelly.

No Efflorescence when mixed with common Salt, and exposed to the Air some
time, as mineral bodies do.

Dulwich raw stones Lixivium remained thickish, white, and of taste brackish;

With Lignum Nephriticum a deep Malaga Sack color, and not very clear, as
Alkalys.

Redded the tawny of Tincture of Logwood deep, as Alkalys, though not so
purplish, but near that of Acids.

Gall yellow like small Beer, and very thick, did not precipitate, though it
stood a night, the cloud gathered upward, and at bottom more clear, like common
Salt. Tunsole it dulled as Alkalys toward a Blew.

Liquid Salt of Tartar it curdled large and precipitated, as Sal Marine: Upon
the whole it resembled common Salt, especially with a little of the Nature of
Sal Gem, or withal somewhat Allkalisat.

The Lie of Dullwich Stone Roasted.

With Tincture of Logwood a dull Ale-colour, as Cellar-Salt and ^laubers Salt.

Gall, a pale Red, not more cloudy than the Lie.

Liquid Salt of Tartar a thick curdle.

Syrup of Clove Gilliflowers took away the Red, and rendered it durty and dark,
as Alkalys effect.

With Lignum Nephriticum a pale yellow and clear, which grew thicker upon
standing six or eight hours, like Spirit of Salt.

Solution of Sublimate, no alteration as Vitriols.

About six Drams with an Ounce and half of Aqua fortis, made considerable
Effervescence, and thickened in two or three hours to a Jelly, of a gray dirty
color, the powder of the Stone not settling to the bottom. Aqua fortis on
Chalk wrought thickened a little, but not Jelly'd; on common Loam did not work.
Brick Earth only a small Effervescence; Cimolia purpurascens altered not. I
essayed Tinore, Cellar-Salt, and Lapis Calaminaris, which last communicated
only a dry ^aste more Corrosive.

Half the Jelly dissolved in a great quantity of fair Water, precipitated not
any heavy Powder, the dirt flying about in it light. The other half distilled,
sent over a Liquor near the scent of Spirit of Salt, but no Butter.

The Earth exposed to the Air, had no Efflorescence.

Dullwich stone melted with Glass, did not tinge the Glass, but penetrated the
Vessel it was melted in, which was of Tobacco-pipe Clay, which broke smooth
like China; an effect which the other stones, melted at the same time, had not.

Woodh^m-Ferrys stones Lixivium tasted sweetish; Redded Tincture of Logwood
near a Claret, but deeper and darker: With Gall whitish and turbid as Nit^es
(Note* that this was made of the burnt stone) but with some Gall flying in it
and curdled, which is the effect of Sal^petre.

Lignum Nephriticum it took a clear Tincture from, and of a Canary color.

The stone washed, Jelly'd in Aqua fortis, from which nothing could be
separated by Sublimation or Precipitation; no Efflorescence upon the exposing
it to the Air, nor was any Metalline Tincture discovered by Fusion with Glass.

Epsam stones Lixivium with Oil of Tartar per deliquium grew white and thick,
with Gall a fine and clear Yellow.

With Tincture of Logwood a dull pale Tawny.

It slack'd not in Water, it jelly'd not in Aqua fortis, the Powder remaining
heavy and close at the bottom.

I boiled some of the Stain in Lie, and in Water sharpened with Spirit of
Nitre, I infused some, but from neither could make any discovery by Color or
Precipitation. So now I come to the Essays of the Waters, and Nature of the
Salts therein contained.

Selenitical Waters.
Ebbisham commonly Epsam Water in SURRY.
EPsam Water was the first of the Purging kind discovered in England, viz.
1630, or soon after. The Hill is a Clay of a brown color and reddish; and
where the Wells are more gray.

The Well is about twelve foot deep; the Earth where the Spring is, afforded
the Selenites plentifully, at a private Well they were Columns, the sides and
superficies of which were inequilateral Parallelograms posited with their edges
downward, and their ends meeting in the center: In a Well a few feet distant,
and at the public Well, they were Rhomboid. At both ends of the Town is Ch^lk
dug, and the Hill here and there has veins of blew Loam. Of the private Well
which was newly sunk, I informed my self by examining the Earth cast out of it,
which I received of the Owner Mr. Symonds, together with this Account.

The upper Earth, for two Spit deep, was the same; then they came to a harder
and Loamy, which lasted about seven feet; then to a looser, which sparkled with
small Selenites, as at the public Well; this held for two feet, where they
came at the Stones and Water together: The Water in Summertime flowed in at the
rate of an Ale-barrel in 24 hours. Below the Selenites they came at a dead
heavy Earth and black, partaking of Iron, under which was the common dead Loam,
or Cortex of the Mineral Region: And though they dug three or four feet deeper,
yet neither was Water or the former signs found. As the Selenites had somewhat
of the shape of Vitriol of Iron, so where they lay, were veins of Iron and
colored Earth; the Iron was pure, and obeyed the Lodestone; the Earth, which
was either of a Brimstone color, or that of Iron rust; I proved by washing to
be the same, only joined by an Acid Juice like Spirit of Vitriol, which in the
yellow had no taste of the Iron, but a distinct pleasant Acid; which with the
Jellying of some parts of the Earth in Aqua fortis, especially of the whiter
part of it where the Selenites lay, is what I observed there. I shall not
therefore repeat my Trials of the Earths, which were fruitless.

The Water is moderately clear, of Taste bitter, together with a muakish
Saltishness, not manifestly Lixiviat, but a little of the taste of the second
Salt of Salt Marine, and of that Cellar Salt that is gathered by things hanging
in the middle of Cellars, and not what fixes to the Walls.

Epsam Water precipitated not Vitriol dissolved in it, but promoted its
atramentous Quality, as does the Salt, not precipitating the Color, as Salt of
Lime or Chalk, nor turning it red, as some others, particularly Salt of
Cellars. Notwithstanding this, it agreed with that sort of Alkaly particularly
which is calcarious, in that it restored the blew of Tincture of Turnsole
sharpened; it took a Purple with a Tincture of Logwood in common Water lively
and full, not dull red a little purplish and dusky as Salt of Tartar made with
Saltpetre, and Alkalys produce; nor tawny as Salt of Cellars. Further, as Salt
of Chalk, it troubled a Solution of Sublimat in fair Water, and sent down a
white precipitate, which Alum does not. With Syrup of Violets a Grass-green, as
the same Salt. Yet it peculiarly differed from the Salt of Chalk, and all
grosser Salts, in taking a high Yellow, and clear Tincture from Gall, which is
peculiar to Spirit of Nitre, it being not of the Nature of Saltpetre, which is
the only Salt that takes a pale but clear Tincture. With Syrup of Cloves it
became dark ^ooty and greenish, as do Alkalys and Fuligo of Vitriol, that
adheres to places where the Fume of boiled Coporas comes.

The peculiar Nature of the Salt of this Water is, to be Calcarious, yet
agreeing with Vitriols, and particularly to resemble Spirit of Nitre, rather
than Nitre it self; yet to resemble the Salt of Chalk, in precipitating a
Solution of Sublimate, which Spirit of Nitre will not.

The Acidity that came over in Distilling, was little and pleasant.

The Salt Gray near a White, and unfigur'd, or incapable of Christallization,
but soft like Barbados or Lisbon Sugar. It did not cast up a Scum till it was
near boiled up, and the Salt precipitated in boiling. This Salt was wrought on
by Acids, yet it coagulated Salt of Tartar rendered Liquid, called Ol. Tartari
per diliq. it did not inflame with Sulphur, but blister'd on a hot Iron, and
was not Caustic either burnt or unburnt. The Earth of this Salt was white, and
dissolved in part in distilled Vinegar, and was about an eighth of the Salt.
The Salt of the Water which is said to amount in some dry Seasons to the
proportion of seven Drams in a Gallon, scarce then exceeded the half of that
quantity after a wet one, when I had it, indeed not so much. The Salt purged
pleasantly in the quantity of half an Ounce as I tried it, but it seems to
require a very gentle Evaporation to the due Preparation of it, that Acidity of
Alkalisatness may be preserved entire. This Salt dissolved in some of its own
Water, deepned the yellow color of Galls to a Pink, and at last to a Red or
very near, as Spirit of Nitre does upon long Infusion, but thickish as embodied
Salts. I saw some Salt boiled up in Copper, without any Verdigrease Tincture,
so mild is the Acid.

Acton Water in Middlesex.
THE Earth of this Well afforded Rhomboid Tale, as a Gentleman that lived at
the place, and informed me, expressed it: Much Nitrous Efflorescence appears in
the Clay about the Well.

The Spring opens Northerly; is reputed one of the strongest Purgers about
London: It is noted to occasion a great Soreness of the Intestine and
Fundament, which is reasonably referred to the quantity of Salt they wash from
the Body, but the Penetration of the Salt of the Water, may make it more
pungent and keen. The Water was whitish, not so clear as Epsam, not saltish,
but rather to me seemed sweet, with a little of the Bitterness of Epsam: It
curdled with Soap, as do all.

The Salt of this Water is soft, and not christalliz'd, wherein it agrees with
Epsam Salt, though I thought scarce so soft. The distinct Nature of this Water,
or Salt of this Water, consists in, that this Salt is more Calcarious, or of
the Nature of Salt of Lime, for the Water, boiled high, disturbed a Solution of
Sublimate in fair Water, whence it precipitated a yellowish Sediment, a little
more yellow than the Water, which it left white. And this Salt is likewise more
Nitrous, or has more of the Nature of the Salt of the upper Soil, as appears,
in that it takes a pale Yellow from Gall, but dusky and disturbed, as common
Salt does effect; not so dirty, nor so apt to precipitate, as Sal Calcarium.
With Syrup of Violets it took a Green, with Tincture of Logwood made with
Brandy a deep Red and purplish, as Nitrous Salts do with cold Tincture of
Logwood, which hot would give a full Purple. The Salt did not precipitate fine
Silver out of Spirit of Nitre, which common Salt would. A Pint and half of the
Water yielded forty eight Grains of Salt, in which was six Grains and a half of
reddish Earth, on which Acid Spirits wrought. The Earth precipitated in Boiling.

Colchester Water from the North end in ESSEX.
THE Water boiled Meat without discoloring the Flesh, which it rather
whitened. The Water was much the same with Acton, giving with Tincture of
Logwood a purplish Red a little Tawny; and with Gall a clear Yellow and pale,
but in half an hour grew turbid, with a whitish Cloud: But with Lignum
Nephriticum it became a little darkish but clear, a little toward what Spirit
of Vitriol does.

Woodham Ferrys in Essex, being a Chalybeat, is reserved to that Class.

The Water at (...).
THis Water clai^s the princip^l Place, being made Illustrious (...), in which
His Majesty has (...) his Mansion Palace. The (...) at this Well, has much
the (...) clustered Columns formed at (...) this difference, that this at
Kensington is depressed and flat on one side, as they are prominent on the
other; and at the base or flat side are more truly separable than the S^^^nites
of these Waters usually are, and so nearer resemble the ^uscovy Glass. The
Pyrites which I received from this Well was very hard, of a greenish Gray or
Hazel color; and (...) it differed from all in wanting the crust of Gypsum or
Trichitis, so upon infusion of Aqua^ortis it did not coagulate into a Jelly,
but yet after the working of the Aqua fortis, which was very violent, the
Powder settled not, but remained of a yellow or Iron rust color, Fl^ing or
turbid, though it stood some days: The Mineral Matter therefore being re^^iv'd,
or taken up by the (...) with fair Water, and (...), and not much (...)
^^rrosive Acidity.

This Liq^or which remained (...) the Settlement of the Powder or Dust, upon
further Diluting sent down no Mineral parts, but upon mixing a little powdered
Gall, turned immediately of a blew Black, as is the Property of Iron to
produce. Distilled Vinegar on this Stone made no Effervescence, yet extracted
the Chalybeat parts, as appeared in the Taste. The weight of this Stone was one
Ounce and one Grain in the Air, and just six Drams in the Water, which was the
weight of the piece which I had.

The Water was clearer than these usually are, and less bitter than Epsam, but
of a more manifestly Saline Taste. In the Quantity of nine Ounces and five
Drams, and 48 Grains, it outweigh'd common Water 37 Grains. Its Alkalisate
Nature appeared, in giving a Red in^lin'd to a Purple with Tincture of Logw^^^
in that Spirit of Nitre did not disturb it, in that it troubled and rendered
Milky a Solution of Sublimate in fair Water, and sent down a white Precipitate
as Salt of Chalk does, and in giving the same Green with Syrup of Violets. It
became dark and sooty with Syrup of Cloves as Alkalys, yet not so much
Alkalisate as to turn greenish, nor indeed to lose all the Red. It had an
Acidity, in that it curdled Spirit of Hartshorn, and the same it produced with
the Lixivium of Salt of Plants. With Gall it became thick and white, as the
Salts of Earths that are not perfectly Nitrous, but of a mixed Nature, or where
the Acid and Salt disturb each other or oppose, Earths, as they approach to
Nitres, or are more Alkalisate, darken this white. With Lignum Nephriticum it
took a deep Yellow, or Orange, and clear as Alkalys produce. With Iron and Gall
it took a reddish Black and rusty, as Alkalys, and not apt to hold it without
Precipitation.

I found in two Quarts about 40 Grains of Earth, light, leafy and gray, which
Distilled Vinegar wrought on. The Salt was soft and unfigur'd mostly, but had
some Stiriae formed in it, flat and not pointed, at least most of them.

This Salt melted not easily as Epsam Salt, but bore a good Heat, and had a
much greater quantity of Earth in it, the hardness of which was felt on the
Tongue in tasting the Salt. Much Earth precipitated in boiling as others, but
it bore not readily a Scum, till near boiled up, at least as in making other
Salt, till the falling of the Salt.

I judged this Salt of the Nature of an Alkaly, and of kin to Epsam, but yet to
differ, being not so resembling the Spirit of Nitre, in the Trial with Gall;
and accordingly that Water increased Ink-making without turning it Red; so that
this seems more related to the gross or embodied Salt, which accordingly makes
it disturb a Solution of Gall.

This Water differs from the rest, in that it troubles but very little a
Solution of Sal Saturni in common Water, in which it resembles more Saltpetres,
which does not disturb it at all. The Salt of the Water did trouble a Solution
of fine Silver in Spirit of Nitre, which in a long time precipitated, the
Precipitation was neither so quick, nor so full, nor in so large Curdles as
common Sea Salt or Rock-salt does it.

Puring Waters in an even Loamy Clay, more Simple and not variegated.
Richmond Water in SURRY.
THis Water is a level Spring; the Wells are on the side of the Hill a few Rod
from the River Thames, in a brown leamy Clay, which are about nine feet deep to
the bottom of the Water, as the Digger informed me there. There is a Tile-Kill
adjoining to the Ground where the Wells are. This Water was first discovered
about 1686, the account that the Possessor of one of the Wells, Mr. Brown, gave
me, was, that the Earth was an even Loamy Clay, that the Water issued into the
Well from the side, among the Stones, whereof I brought away as many pieces as
I could dispose of. No Selenites found here. The Loam and Clay about the Well^
had a Nitrous Efflorescence; the Earth above, and about Richmond, a Gravel.

This Water purges well, but I think scarce so much as Epsam and Acton, but
more smoothly. The Water is smooth on the Tongue, scarce any appearance of
bitterness, salutes the Palate with the taste of common Water, but leaves a
farewell a little nauseous and sharp.

The Water curdled Milk, but not so hard or strong as others; with Syrup of
Violets a mild Green, not so deep as Vitriols make; it resembled common Salt or
a Vitrioline, in that Spirit of Nitre dropped into it, made no Alteration,
though the Water was boiled half away: Spirit of Sal Armoniack rendered it
thick, white and curdled, and sent down a large Precipitate. Spirit of
Hartshorn made a small Curdle and Precipitate. Spirit of Salt no Alteration.
With Galls it grew immediately turbid, white and thick, not Milk-white, like
what Salt of Hungarian Vitriol produces, not dark as Alkalys, not colored as
common Salt, not clear as Saltpetre, nor reddish as Chalk, nor dark, and ready
to precipitate the Color as Spirit of Vitriol. The Water standing a while on
pieces of Iron, with Gall, changed dark with a reddish cast, as Alkalys render
Ink In both these it resembled Salt of Cellars^ yet differed in giving a wan
dusky Red with (...) of Clove Gilly flowers as common Salt, and ^^^ding
Tincture of Logwood ^s Acids.

The Salt of this, Water hence appears to be Acid, of a Vitrioline Nature, yet
to be a little Alkalisate or Nitrous, ^ot so deeply as Alkalys, but resembling
the Salt embodying Vitriols, or the uniting of Vitrioline Salt with the Salt of
common Earth, and which our common Water contains.

Richmond Water distilled in a Glass retort, yielded a Water which was Acid
enough to redden a little the color of Syrup of Violets, and to give a faint
Red with Tincture of Logwood, but took no Quality from Iron; and it was very
light in weight, equal to Tunbridge and the light Chalybeats.

The Salt was gray and figured like the Bacilli of Nitre, flat and long, and
many of the S^iriae were pointed like Needles, some Prisms, some Camellae; it
melted not easily, yet I thought sooner than Vitriols. It changed not the
color of Salt of Tartar, but curdled its Deliquium; inflamed not with Sulphur.
The Earth was smaller than in most Waters, was gray, and Acid Spirits as of
Salt; Aqua fortis and Spirit of Nitre would not touch it: It altered not in the
Fire, but made a small Decrepitation or Spitting, I judged a little more than
Alum. The Salt of this Water did not disturb nor change the color of
Sublimate Water, which Alkalys and Salt of Cellars does. It was a little
sweetish, and not cold as Saltpetre is.

The Stone found in this Well resembled Loam: The Loam cast up for Tiles in the
Ground joining to this Well, had a Nitrous Efflorescence.

The Stone had a Tincture of Iron. The Tile-earth in the Ground adjoining, I
infused in warm Water sharpened with Oil of Vitriol. This Water gave a Green
with Syrup of Violets, and with Tincture of Logwood a sooty dusky color a
little reddish.

Dullwich Water
HAS its name from the Town near it, but the Wells are in Lewisham Parish in
Kent: The Wells are in the foot of a Hill, about twelve in number: The Hill and
Ground adjoining, is a stiff Clay with some Wood upon it: These are next in
Antiquity to Epsam, being discovered about the Year 1640; The Hole dug is about
nine feet deep as I judged, and the Water about half a Yard deep, being usually
emptied every day: The bottom is a Loam as is the Hill; and where the Water
issues in, is found the Lapis Lutoso-Vitriolicus, which glitters with
Vitriolick sparkles, and is divided into Parcels by the Trichitis. This Water
purges very quick, and are not to be drank by a Body out of Temper, or Heat by
walking without inconvenience. I was there July 1696 after some wet days. This
Water is bitter like Epsam; it curdled with Soap or Milk much more than
Richmond, and equal to Epsam. Taken the same day with Richmond in the quantity
of nine Ounces and near a quarter, was 28 Grains heavier than common Water, and
12 Grains than Richmond.

With Gall it turned ^st yellow and clear, then thick and muddy, white and a
little yellowish, in which it resembled common Salt; and with that it agreed in
making no alteration in a Sol^tion of Sublimate, and in making an (...) with
Spirit of Nitre, and in not disturbing Spirit of Salt. It agreed with Acids, in
not relieving the Red of Tincture of Turnsole sharpened, in curdling Spirit of
(...) very much, but Spirit of Sal Armoni^^^ (...) little, or rather in a more
fine Cu^^le: In which Trial this resembles common Salt more than Richmond,
which curdles the last most, and in giving a Red with Tinct^re of Logwood. The
particular Nature is somewhat pointed at, in that this Water after an Infusion
some hours on points of Nails, with Gall became dusky and thick of a foot
color, which precipitated and left the Liquor yellow; in this it differed from
(...) Salts.

The Stone proved it self to have much of the Nature of Rock-salt, such as is
brought from the West of England near Chester.

The Salt shot into Stiriae, which being heat, blister'd and lost much by a hot
Fire, so as to have only 12 Grains remaining of 40, but this was done in Earth;
the more fixed parts remained angular and flat like Sea Salt. The stone melted,
pierced the Clay readily, and made it break like China.

The Calx of the Salt remained Gray.

Though I must not adventure to determine the particular Nature of the Salt of
this Water, which made the stone sparkle, yet I may say it is Marcasitical, and
that it contains no fresh or new Metal or Mineral, but that it varies in the
Salt (as the Gravels and Loams meeting and joining, produce the common Vitriol
stone) which here seems of kin to that of common Gravels, and that it has some
cold Nature proportionable to such an Original, but fluxile withal, being apt
to set the Blood flowing.

The Salt I conclude by the Essays, to resemble common Salt, and to be of kin
to Mineral Salt, as is our Rock salt, but yet to differ in its being more
Penetrative and Fluxile, and not of the Nature of common Salt, which
precipitates not Vitriols.

North-Hall Water in Hartfordshire,
Weighed heavier than Epsam, and pleasant, not so nauseous to taste. It
preserved the blew of Syrup of Violets, which Nitres and Alkalys changed to a
green. It disturbed not a Solution of Sublimate in common Water: It was not
acid enough, nor Alkalisat enough, to give either a red or dirty brown with
Tincture of Logwood, but gave it a yellow which grew paler upon standing, as I
judged somewhat like Glaubers Salt, which is made of common Salt and Spirit of
Vitriol, and which likewise purges: It took very little yellowness from Galls,
and what it took it would not hold, but suffered to precipitate presently: The
first being the effect of Spirit of Salt* the last of Spirit of Vitriol. It
curdled soapy Water in large Curdles, and Ol. Tartari per deliquium the same;
and upon shaking, this Water raised a great Froth, which it kept a great while.
I judged therefore this Water to contain a Salt resembling common Salt, and
that part of it which is condensed and christalliz'd through Cold in a Humid as
in Cellars, the Coagulation with Liquid Salt of Tartar being not so universal,
as with the other part of common Salt.

Lambeth nearer Well in Surry.
THIS Water, beside the Virtues which it has in common with other Purging
Waters, has the Property of caring Leprosies, and cleansing and clearing
Scorbutic Scurss and Spots; which how the Nature of the Salt accounts for, is
worth Observation. This Water tried at the Well after a dry Season was clear,
but not so Limpid as common Spring Water, having somewhat of the color of
Rainwater; it was of the taste of Saltpetre, or nearer Saltpetres second Salt,
but left a Vitriolick brackish or nauseous taste on the Palate. Half a Pint and
half an Ounce of this Water, exceeded common Water in weight 24 Grains; it made
no alteration in a Solution of Sublimate in fair Water, which Nitres and
Alkalys disturb; it agreed with common Salt, in changing the Red of Syrup of
Clove Gilliflowers into a cloudy pale color, in which the Red upon 24 hours
standing was wholly lost, but was restored by a drop of Spirit of Nitre; it had
the Effects of the same Salt in curdling strongly with Ol. Tartar* per
deliquium, in giving a pale yellow not very fine with Gall; and with Tincture
of Logwood a brown, exactly resembling Ale that is not fine, a little browner
(if any thing) than what common Salt produces. But in this it agreed with
Saltpetres second Salt, and it disturbed a Solution of Sal Saturni in fair
Water, just to that degree that Saltpetres second Salt does; and with Lignum
Nephr^ticum gave a Whitewine yellow and clear quickly as Saltpetre does; common
gravelly Spring Water gives near the color but upon longer standing. It agreed
besides only with Glaubers Salt in the Essay with Gall and Logwood. The Water
standing on Iron 24 hours, gave with Gall a reddish Purple, which turned Inky,
and although the grosser parts precipitated, as where there is a mixture of
Nitre, and in the Vitrioline Waters impregnate with the Salt of the upper Soil,
yet the color remained in the clear Liquor much deep^^ than a Violet, though
it stood open some days. This one drop of Spirit of Nitre turned ^^een as it
does Ink made with English (...). A drop or two of this in common (...) a
Gravel resumed the Red. This Water precipitated fine Silver out of Spirit of
Nitre, but not so quick and strongly, I thought, as Rock-salt and Sea Salt.
This Water accordingly changed not the color of Syrup of Violets, neither does
common Salt.

Thus the Salt of this Water agrees with common Salt, but comes not up to its
power of Precipitating or Coagulating, which Properties would rather set and
fix the Humor, and so promote the Distemper, as appears in the Effects of
Bay Salt to produce the Scurvy, which Property is observed to lie in the
hardness of the second or less coagulable part, and not to be found in the Salt
when purified.

It agrees in some Trials with Saltpetres second Salt, which is not wholly
differing from common Salt. But because Salts differ, I examined the Water more
nicely. It disturbed a Solution of Hungarian Vitriol which common Salt did not,
Rock Salt very little, but the second Salt of Saltpetre readily effected
likewise, but scarce in so high a Degree, for this sent down a yellowish
Precipitate forthwith; yet it did not trouble a Solution of Mercury Sublimate
as Sal Gem. nor precipitate it as do the Nitres and Lime-salt of a yellow, or
as Salt of Chalk and Marle white.

The Salt was gray near white, mostly near Cubes, or in thick plates as common
Salt, some scurfie light parts with it, which was the Scum which precipitated
in Boiling, no Stiriae or pointed parts could I observe. The Water did early
raise or bear a Scum. The Salt readily ran per deliquium, and le^t a leafie
Earth and gray about 24 Grains out of a Quart of Water: This leafy Earth was
very light, and made a very small Effervescence with distilled Vinegar, nor
would it wholly take away its Acidity.

This Salt precipitated fine Silver out of Spirit of Nitre in hard large
Curdles; Saltpetres second Salt only whitens and disturbs the Solution which at
last precipitates it. Ol. Partari per deliquium works on it, but does not
precipitate the Silver: But this Salt, I thought, did scarce so fully
precipitate the Silver as Rock Salt.

I therefore refer the Nature of the Salt of this Water to that of common Salt,
whose power it has even to the depurating a Solution of Vitriol, but without
either so gross and strong an Earth, or so severe and coagulative an Acidity.

The Diseases that have been cured by these Waters, as I found them registered
in a Table at the Well, were as I remember, Leprosy, Scurvy, Vertigo's,
Jaundies, Worms, Stone and Colic.

To understand on what account this Water exerts its power, beside Worms, which
every one knows to be destroyed, and the flatulent putrid matter suppressed by
Sea Salt, I think the Leprosy may well illustrate. To have a Notion of the
Nature of this Disease, It is not necessary here to inquire into the particular
Juice it is seated, in, and Vessels serving it; it is sufficient that the
Nature and Genius of the Humor or Salt is toward an Alkali, exulcerating and
dry, seated or produced by too thick and luxuriant Chyle, in too nitrous or
scorching a Climate: That the Cure of this Disease consists not only in some
Qualities that mortify it, but in some pungent parts that can retain their
Nature, and are apt to separate the grosser parts, we are taught by the success
of Vipers in this Disease, which have a Faculty of separating Tartar from
Canary in which they are infused, which else yields none. On which, by the way,
I must observe the Error in choosing that Wine for the Infusion, on which the
Virtue of the Vipers is in so much measure lost, proportionably to the demand
of the thickness of the Liquor. If this be conceded, I think it must be
allowed, that as the Nature of this Salt is disposed to mortify Alkalys, and
to penetrate without Corruption, so its being void of that severe Coagulum may
qualify it to separate and discharge. And that I beg not much in this Notion,
will appear in the opposite Salt of Brentwood-Weale, which I have experienced
to encourage and increase this Disease.

The Water of the farther Well at Lambeth.
THIS Water in Taste came nearer common Pump Water, agreed with the other Water
in every Trial, as well by weight as otherwise; only Syrup of Cloves did not
wholly lose its Red, neither did a drop of Spirit of Nitre restore it, as it
did in the other: Whence it appears to be of a less Vitrioline Nature, or not
so affine to Seasalt; and so may be more fit for general drinking, though not
so satisfactory to the particular Intention.

The Purging Water of Alford in Somersetshire.
THIS Water is of kin to the other: The Acidity not Volatile or alterable. Gall
and Lignum Neph^^ticum gave it a very pale yellow, but the Lignum Nephriticum
somewhat deeper than the Gall or Saltpetre does. With Tincture of Logwood an
Amber color like Glaubers Salt and Salt of Cellars, and not far from that of
Saltpetre. With Gall and Iron it gave a right Purple color, as Mineral Acids,
and which Saltpetre does: It differed from Saltpetre, and seemed between that
and common Salt.

The Water of Brentwood-Weal in Essex.
AS Lambeth Water and Woodham^Ferrys, I have experienced specifically proper
and effectual in Leprous Diseases, so this is considerable in its opposite
Nature, which I have likewise experienced.

This Water is of Taste Lixiviate, with a little Bitterness, and not free of
the maukish taste of the rest, but not so nauseous as Epsam. With Syrup of
Violets it gave a full green as Alkalys, with which it agreed in giving a dusky
Gold color near that or Malaga Sack with Lignum Nephriticum, in tur^ing thick
and dark with Iron and Gall, not black or bluish as Vitriols, common Salt and
Saltpetre; and which precipitated as the bla^ks made with Alkalies. And lastly,
in not precipitating fine Silver out of Spirit of Nitre, more than fair Water
will.

It distinguished it self from Vitriol and Alum, in growing thick and whitish
with Gall, as Nitres of a mixed nature do, or Vitriols and common Water; the
same standing became a pale yellow, which precipitated as it would in a
Solution of Saltpetres second Salt, or near the effect of common Salt: It gave
a Red with Tincture of Logwood (as Cellar-salt but more red) which Vitriol
blackens and Alum purples. With Syrup of Cloves it gave a dull pale with a
bluish cast, as Alkalies do, but more like to Saltpetres second Salt.

With a Solution of Sublimate no alteration; nor any change or Precipitation or
disturbance in a Solution of Hungarian Vitriol, in both which it agreed with a
Vitriolick Salt, as almost if not altogether all these do.

With a Deliquium of Salt of Tartar it coagulated extremely hard like stone, as
the second Salt of Salt-Marine.

A Solution of Salt Saturni this Salt rendered white and thick like Milk, in
which it differed from Saltpetre, which does not disturb it, and from
Saltpetres second Salt, which disturbs it but a little. This Water in boiling
threw up much of the Salt in the Scum, as Sal Gem. does, and had some gross
earthy white Flakes precipitated.

The Salt was white, and shot in very small Stiriae or flat Bacilli, most of
them pointed, some not; these did not readily melt. The Earth too was white and
in great quantity, being near a fourth part. Some part of the Salt was stained
yellow, having some of the Soil in it. Some part of the Salt which was the
last, was not shot so discernably, but was in hard lumps, and seemed to consist
of a second Salt, that is of a somewhat differing Nature. This did differ from
the other in making a greater Precipitation of fine Silver out of Spirit of
Nitre, and a greater Coagulation of the Liquor of Salt of Tartar.

The Salt wherewith this Water is impregnate, appears to be a full Alkali (and
the deep red with Tincture of Logwood made with Spirit of Wine does not
contradict it, Alkalies giving not much deeper with that Tincture) joined with
a hard coagulating Acid not of the Nature of common Salt, but rather of
Saltpetres second Salt.

And according to this Nature of it, this Water will not keep sweet four days,
whereas the others will near three times that time.

That this should be injurious in Leprous cases, is very (...) telligible, from
its Alkalifateness to raise the Blood and ulcerate, and its coagulative
Acidity. And it is observable, that the Lambeth Water is exactly of the
contrary Nature, containing a Salt affine to Sea Salt, but without the Severity
of the Acid or coagulative Quality. This Water of Brentwood I have experienced
beneficial in Hypochondriacal cases, particularly at the beginning. But the
difference of the Constitution of the Patient is necessa^^, to be consulted, in
order to the due Prescription of these, as well as other Waters, since either
the different Nature of the Salt of the Blood, or a peculiar Mechanism of the
Body, may make it liable to receive great Alterations according to the Nature
of the Salt.

This is clear in the present instance, for whereas the Melancholy and dull
Crasis of this Patients Blood, made this a suitable Remedy, yet I observed in
another Gentlewoman of the same Years, but of a Florid Sanguine Complexion,
this Water to be of so differing an Effect, as to cause Violent Flushings of
the Body and Face, and an Obstruction of the Catamenia, all which the Nature of
the Salt accounts for.

Upminster Water in Essex,
WAS very clear, of taste bitter, with a sweetish nauseous taste. In the
quantity of nine Ounces six Drams and six Grains, out-weigh'd common Water 55
Grains: The Water curdled Oleum Tartari per deliquium, but not very large nor
very quickly; curdled Spirit of Hartshorn strongly; its Alkalisate nature
appeared in thickning a Depurated Solution of English Vitriol, and much sooner
a Solution of Hungarian, and making a large Precipitation: In taking a high
yellow Tincture with Lignum Nephriticum near an Orange; with Gall a Turbid dark
and greenish, which precipitated, leaving the Liquor yellow; in making an
Effervescence with Oil of Vitriol; in giving a Claret-red with a Tincture of
Logwood in fair water mixed without heat; in taking a dark sooty thick color
with Syrup of Cloves. In the Verdigreese green with Syrup of Violets, and in
troubling a Solution of Silver in Spirit of Nitre, not so effectually as common
Salt: It differed from Saltpetre in rendering a Solution of Sal Saturni milky:
It differs from Alkalies, in that it makes no alteration in a Solution of
Sublimate made in fair water.

Barnet Water in Hartfordshire,
WAS very clear, had much the taste of common Pump water, but with an addition
of bitterness, though less than in the other; in the quantity of ten Ounces,
this Water, taken in Summertime, as were the others, surmounted common water
in weight near a Dram, or within a Grain of a Dram. The Salt of this Water
exactly answered a Salt Alkalisate, particularly that of Chalk in all Trials;
with Gall it became thick, disturbed, and whitish, not free of the yellow
Tincture; with Syrup of Violets a deep Verdigreese green; with Syrup of Cloves
a sooty dusky color; with Tincture of Logwood cold an Orange tawny; with
Lignum Nephriticum yellow and clear: It rendered a Solution of Sal Saturni in
common water milky: It rendered a Solution of Mercury Sublimate milky: It
disturbed and made thick a clear Solution of Hungarian Vitriol; and did not
precipitate fine Silver out of Spirit of Nitre: The same in all these does Salt
of Chalk only. Moreover this curdled the Deliquium of Salt of Tartar, and also
Spirit of Hartshorn, but both fine.

Stretham Water in Surry,
OF Odor sweetish; of Taste it was nauseous and Saline, not so bitter as
Barnet, taken at the same time; and was lighter by ten Grains in seven Ounces
and a half: It answered the same Ess^ys with Barnet water, only with Syrup of
Cloves a little more blew, like common Salt, or Saltpetres second Salt; when
near boiled up, the Salt on the sides in the cold, shot in long and flat
Bacilli, not ready to melt in heat, and had the cold taste of Saltpetre, but
with a sweetness. The bottom had three sorts, some being flat, broad, and
grained like common Salt, and some soft, like Epsam, which had flakes in it;
four Scruples of Salt had about eighteen Grains of Earth; the Earth and flakes
were white and clearish, they burnt white, and Distilled Vinegar wrought on it,
but did not take up any considerable quantity of it.

The Purging Chalybeat Water of Scarbourgh in Yorkshire.
SCarbourgh Water is Chalybeat and Purges, it has Qualifications of a Purging
Water, the Salt of it is figured, approaching to a Nitre, and which is really
Nitrous, and the Earth over the Spring shows the Nitrous Efflorescence, that at
other Purging Waters is an Index of the Earth whence the Salt is derived.

As Chalybeats, it is a running Spring, and proceeds from a Gravel, and exposed
to the Air, some days loses its power of making a black with Gall, the Salt
remaining being purely Nitrous. It has the Virtue of both Waters, and is
sufficiently celebrated by the Frequenters of it. And I hence conclude it to be
either two Waters joined, or a Chalybeat Water washing a Nitrous Vault. The
Spring is upon the Seashore, and flows from or near an Alum Mine: It is
observable, that other Springs that flow over Alum Mines here in England, yet
differ not the least from common Water; the black slaty stone not yielding the
least Aluminous Taste before Ustion. I shall clear it from partaking of Alum or
Sea Salt by Trials, which will confirm my Account of the other Waters, since it
is clear of participating any thing with the Mine over which it runs, and the
Mine would probably discover any other Minerals joined, if such there were; and
the same Nitrous Earth here sound, that is common to the others, makes this
more plain. The proportion the nature of this Salt bears to the Nitre of common
Water, and true Nitres, is discoverable by the quantity of time the Water
retains its Ink-making quality, Alkalies, and so the true Nitre of the Ancients
precipitate their dirty black presently.

The (...) was examined at the Spring, at my direction, by the accurate hand of
my worthy Friend and Ingenious Gentleman Mr. Edward Carter of Scarbourgh, in
whose own words I shall deliver their Trials of them, only adding to each a
Corollary of the use I make of them.

Quest. 1. What Color Nutgall gives it, and whether Turbid or Clear?

Answ. A Grain of Gall strewn upon the Surface of eight or ten Ounces of the
Water, does without any farther mixing, immediately strike a deep reddish
purple color, which presently becomes turbid; if you let the same stand all
night, the Water will in a manner recover its pristine clearness, and a Powder
of the color of colcothar will precipitate to the bottom in a large quantity.
Or if a few drops of Spirit or Oil of Vitriol be instilled into the foresaid
Tincture, it will presently be clear as at first, without the Precipitation of
any Powder.

The reddish Purple is effected by Alkalisate parts united to the Acid,
distilled Acids to the like; but that the Salt of this Water is Nitrous, is
observable in its turbidness, but chiefly in the Precipitation of the color
upon standing, which Precipitation Spirit of Vitriol prevents, though it
destroys the color.

Quest. 2. Has the Water any Scum or bituminous Film.

Answ. When it stagnateth in any place, or stands a few hours in an open Glass,
there is an Azure colored bituminous Film or Scum upon it, and if the same be
exposed to the Air for about a Week, there is one rises up much like that
which swims upon Limewater.

The first is common to Chalybeat waters, which appears upon the separation of
the Nitrous and Vitrioline parts by the Air, but the latter a peculiar of the
Salt, which being not calcarious, I judge to be of such a Quality as complies
with the Corruption of the Water, so far as to suffer its grosser parts to be
thrown up, which Limewater does by the motion of its own active Salt; so far
it differs from those of the Nature of common Salt which preserve Liquors. Weal
water has the same Disposition.

Quest. 3. What Color the Water kept three days in an open Glass will take
with Nutgall turbid or clear?

Answ. Galls give it a color then much as before, yet something more remiss,
but if it stand longer, as about a week, they cause no such alteration,
changing it only into a milky color, like Barley water, as Salt of common Earth
does, which is not Alkalisate.

Quest. 4. What Color with Syrup of Violets?

Answ. A light Green, which may be turned into a reddish Purple, by adding some
Spirit or Oil of Vitriol.

To these Remarks I have added some (which perhaps may not be unacceptable)
touching the quantity of Salt and stone Powder contained in those Waters, its
Taste, Odor and Figure when Christallized.

According to my nearest Computation, it has about an Ounce in four Gallons,
and almost as much of the stone Powder, which is of the color of Sand made use
of in Hour-glasses. I never could discover any of the blew Clay, which some
pretend to have found.

The Salt has a very remarkable Bitterness, and when newly made, a strong
sulphurous Smell.

The Christals are very clear and transparent, comprehended under eight plains,
two of which are Sexangular, and the other six are Rectangular Parallelograms,
which are disposed after this manner, The sides are constituted of the two
Sexangular Planes, alternately interposed to two of the largest Parallelograms,
each side standing at right Angles with the other: The ends are terminated by
the four lesser Parallelograms inclining to each other, from the Extremities or
lesser sides of the lateral Parallelograms, as the two Lines marked with the
points and dash. Thus I have described the Form of it as intelligibly as I can
in words, but because a Figure will help to explain what has been said, and be
a means to represent the Idea better to the Understanding, I shall endeavor to
give you the best Delineation I can.

Half of the Planes or Surfaces may be represented thus, but the other which
are opposite, must be supplied by the Imagination.

a exactly represents one of the Sexangular Planes, which has another like it
directly opposite. c, b, d, do show the Proportions of the greater and lesser
Parallelograms, but they cannot be represented Rectangular in the Scheme, as
indeed they are as was mentioned above, the sides a and b do stand at right
Angles, and so do the sides opposite to them. Thus ^ b.

Thus far is the Account received in the Gentleman's Letter dated Scarbourgh,
June 22. 1697.

Some Christals of the Salt of this Water, with the Earth or stony Powder of
it, I received since from the same hand. The Salt was clear and uniform or
single, and not an aggregate, consisting of Bacilli or Columns, nor plected as
the Alum there produced appears, the Figure was the same now described, only
one of the ends was not so exact, being a little broken; and the Crystal in
bulk hardly amounted to half the measure of the Figure.

This Salt precipitated not fine Silver out of Spirit of Nitre, as Sea Salt,
and our Rocksalt does do, yet disturbed not a Solution of Sublimate, which
Alkalies and Nitres do, and which Alum thickens and whitens: A few drops of
this Salt dissolved in fair Water, rendered a Solution of Sal Saturni white as
milk, which Saltpetre does not disturb: It curdled Ol. Tartari per deliquium,
but not so strongly as Epsam Salt. The Salt inflamed not upon a hot Iron,
though with Brimstone added, nor was very fluxile.

In Sum: The Salt partakes not of either Alum or Sea Salt, but is Nitrous, not
of the Nature of Saltpetre or its second Salt, nor so Alkalisate, as to
discover it self in Sublimate Water, or to give a deep Green with Syrup of
Violets, but which allows a mixture with Vitriols, and is not so Alkalisate or
full of Nitre as to precipitate; but near that imperfect one of our common
Earth, and which is not so fixed, as to keep in one state or Solution of it in
Water; but hinders not, if not promotes, the Fermentation or intestine Motion
of the Liquor, which it clears by throwing up a Scum. For as far as appears to
me, Salts that have a Solidity, and yet a disposition to Fermentation, that in
burning throw up a Scum rather than precipitate, as the Salt of Weal* Water,
and that that stagnates on rich common Earth, does among the Nitrous sort. It
would be advantageous to the discovery or distinguishing of the Nature and
Virtue of this Salt, to put some up in a Bottle with Sack (which is a Wine that
makes no Tartar) to observe whether a Precipitation would result, only to Fine
it, or a Fermentation or disturbance would be renewed.

The Propriety of this Water consists in the middle nature of the Salt, which
keeps thick with Galls, as the Salts that Vitriols embody with effect, which
are not purely of the nature of common Salt; yet is so familiar to Vitriol, as
not to disimbrace soon; beside the Chalybeat parts, and its less volatile
Acidity.

The Chalybeat Purging Water of Woodham-Ferrys in Essex.
THE Earth cast out of this Well contained many discolored Parcels of mellower
Earth, the colors of which were two, that of Brimstone and a Ferrugineous; and
which yielded Iron upon Essay when only well washed. And as at Epsam these
Veins attend the Selenites, so the same stone is plentifully found here; most
of them were in one half resembling the Rhomboid, the other had a differing
Figure, by the declining of the two opposite grand Planes, till they determined
at an edge, which was Semicircular, as in the Figure. In parcels of this Loam
enclosed, I found great plenty of Vermicular bodies which were mere Iron; of
which Metal one Tubulus Marinus and several pieces I brought away with me and
reserve. The stone or imperfect Marcasite, which I call Lapis Lutosovitriolicus
here, had many shining Particles in it, and consisted of Parcels divided by a
thin Wall of Gypsum or Trichitis, and precipitated some Iron when dissolved in
Aqua fortis, and diluted with fair Water.

The Water was clear, of Taste Chalybeat, but had more of the nauseous sweetish
taste of the Purging Waters not void of Bitterness; with Gall a thick Purple,
as Saline Chalybeats. In the quantity of nine Ounces five Drams and 24 Grains,
exceeded common Water in weight thirteen Grains. It changed not the color of
Syrup of Violets, it took not away the color of Syrup of Cloves, which
Alkalies do, by inducing a sooty or green, and common Salt, by rendering it pale
and cloudy. It agreed with Vitriols and common Salt in making no alteration in
a Solution of English and German Vitriol, nor in a Solution of Mercury
Sublimate; yet curdled not much or large with Spirit of Sal Armoniack, and less
with Spirit of Hartshorn; and with Spirit of Nitre suffered no alteration;
with Logwood infused a Purple, but more toward a Red or Murry. Note, I used in
this Experiment, the Water when boiled high toward a Salt.

The Salt differed from Saltpetre, in rendering a Solution of Sal Saturni milky;
it precipitated a Solution of fine Silver in Spirit of Nitre immediately as
common Salt, yet made with Liquid Salt of Tartar but a fine curdle; with Lignum
Nephriticum a pale yellow, and thick as common Salt; with Iron and Gall
infused, a right blew Ink, and which did not precipitate.

The Kensington Water gave a more red black, and which soon fell; and with
Lignum Nephriticum a clear high yellow near an Orange.

This Water of Woodham-Ferrys did not precipitate any Ferrugineous parts or
Okar, upon its losing its power of Tinging with Galls.

Then the Water with Gall took a yellow tolerably clear, but not purely clear
of disturbance, near the effect of common Salt.

The Salt of this Water comes near common Salt (Bay Salt with Gall giving a
reddish cloudiness) as the other a Vitrioline or mixed one. The simplicity of
the Salt appears in the color and clearness with Gall.

It precipitated a ruddy Earth in boiling, which distilled Vinegar wrought on
with great Effervescence. The Salt seemed of two sorts, the first being hard,
not readily flowing in heat, and grained, and crackling a little in the Fire
and leaping. Some flat shoots like Saltpetres Bacillis. The Earth contained in
two Quarts, was about forty Grains.

The Water retained its power of Tinging with Galls many days in Glass-bottles
only cork'd. It did not readily raise and bear a Scum in boiling.

The Virtues and Use of the Purging Waters.
THE Original and Genius of the Salt of these Waters being thus arrived at,
their successful Effects in Distempers, and how these are agreeable to the
Nature of the Salt, comes now under consideration, that hence we may be
directed to the right and proper use of them. Diseases or more truly Symptoms
are so various in their Causes, that, without the Knowledge of these,
Observation and Experience it self will be uncertain and unserviceable. Now the
Diseases which are observed to be helped by Purging Waters, as ill Concoction,
Pain at the Stomach, Heart-burning, lost Appetite, Vomitings, Cholical Pain of
the Stomach, Cholick, Iliaca Passio, Worms, Nephritick Pain, Gout, Rhumatism,
Heat of Urine, or Suppression of it, Scurvy and its Symptoms, as Itching,
Pustles, and the like. Jaundies, Vertigo, Headachs, Hysteri^k and
Hypochondriacal Passions, are all cured by the Waters, only as they fall under
this Notion and consideration, That they proceed from a vitiated or delinquent
Chyle, and want of due Ferment of the parts, and that the Matter is seated in
the first ways, or larger Secretory Vessels. It is so very material to observe
this, as not only to improve the use of them in other Cases, but may likewise
help us to avoid the Misfortune of the Empirical use of them in cases where
they are ineffectual. Errors of which kind I have observed in the use of the
Waters, and indeed of all other Medicines, as the Jesuits Bark and the like.
That the Matter ought to be fit for exterminating, I might prove in almost all
the Distempers these are proper in, The Jaundies are often cured by the Waters,
when they have proceeded from Melancholy, or have been otherwise produced by
the foulness of the Viscera, or are a Symptom of obstructed Menses, or a
Plethora, but when Essential, can be as little expected to have a Cure from
these Waters, as when it is Symptomatical of a Fever, or a Venenate Disease.
Vertigo again may proceed from Melancholy, a flatulent foul Stomach, or tough
Phlegm in the Blood, as in the Rhumatism, or from the nature of the Salt of the
Blood, as in Scurvies, and in that Crasis which attends Women chiefly at the
grand Climacterick of 50, or from a Plethora, and so may be subject to the
reach of these Waters; else in Cephalic Distempers, such as Apoplexies,
Dispositions to Lethargies, Palsies, and even in Dropsies, Purging Waters in a
general consideration, can never be supposed to be applicable. From the same
Chylous Recrements, Convulsions often take origin, and may have place among
Cures of this kind, and Pains in the Head, but ought to be marked with the same
Proviso. Accordingly Cautions against the use of them in a Chlorosis, Fevers,
Cholera morbus, and Suppression of Urine from Stone or confirmed Obstruction,
our Reason readily suggests; which too forbids the use of them in Women with
Child.

The Qualifications that give these Waters an extraordinary capacity for these
Cures, are their Acidity agreeable to that of the Stomach, and which indeed is
Vitrioline, their abstersive Salt, of a middle nature between Vitriol and
Nitre, quantity of Liquor, and not only their Purgin, but as it is easy
without Sickness or Griping, or other flatulent Disturbances raised usually by
other Purgers, and which hinder those calm Effects that are necessary to the
relief of some Distempers; to which some would add Coldness, and agreeable
bitterness, but this holds not in all. From all which we may reasonably expect
success, when a preternatural Salt is to be washed away, the Ferment of the
Stomach to be restored, Viscera to be cleansed, or cooling is necessary. Indeed
the Purging Waters, or their Salts, are much the finest Purgers in Nature, and
in many of the preceding Cases often perform Cures alone. They are the best
Preparatives to the Chalybeat Waters, and the only Purge proper to intervene in
the use of them, where Purging is expedient, because these do it without
disorder, and are of like nature. Of what general use these Qualities make this
Purge, I need not discourse, especially for prevention, since so near all
Diseases are owing to the Vice of the Stomach, or Recrements of the Chyle. But
besides this general nature of the Salt of these Waters, it is found of some
Specific Qualities in many of them, which frequently differ from each other,
and to have distinct Virtues accordingly. That besides the Purging Quality, and
what that can contribute, there is so much in the Nature of the Salt, as may
give the Waters the force of a Medicine, may be very easily believed by any who
will consider of what Energy the Qualities are, that these Salts differ in. The
second part of Sal Marine is known by Seamen to produce the Scurvy, and a Salt
nearly affine to Nitre the Itch. It is known that Nitre and Vitrioline or
common Salt precipitate each other, and must be allowed to do as much in the
Body, and may be observed in the reason of the different Cures wrought by these
Waters. Alkalisate Salts and Nitrous, produce a fluor of the Blood, and in the
present State of the Air, which I intimated to be Nitrous or Alkalisate, I have
found Fluxes frequent I mean Sanguinary, and have as certainly found Chalybeats
and Vitrioline Salts effectual, and observed Sal Prunellae to increase them,
when used by the less thinking Administrer.

You may observe in Lambeth Water a common Salt, without the severe Coagulum
which accounts for the Virtues. In Weal a particularly opposite Nitrous one. In
Kensington near a Saltpetre. In Dullwich a Salt related to common Salt, but
very penetrative and fluxile, fit to command a Stubborn Antagonist, but
mischievous to a tender and over-heat Body, and accordingly I have observed it.
I might go through all the Waters. The good Effects of the Chalybeat Purgers in
Asthma's, a Dropsy make them a Peculiar over and above what their Salt would.

And in Salts of the same nature as Nitres, some we shall here find of a more
open nature, approaching a calcarious one, and so more apt to correct Acidities
in the first ways, some more locked, and so fit to reach them when digested and
remote. In Weal Water I find an Alkaly joined with a severe coagulating Acid,
the first raising the Floridness of the Blood, the last apt to fix the Humor
and obstruct; and may have a good use to those Complexions that need both these
Qualities, as those do that are pale and inclinable to be loose body'd. And
although in passing of right Judgment, the Consideration of the Constitution
and Complexion of the Patient is necessary, and as Tunbridge Water does in some
provoke the Menses, in some stop them, so this Water might produce the
Obstruction before named in a Person of a Sanguine Complexion on that account,
which is a natural Effect of a Plethora; yet it must be allowed to be but
answerable to the Quality of the Salt. Epsam Salt has a Qualification of
softness to penetrate farther than others without Obstruction, of the nature of
Spirit of Nitre, and so can both incide and mellow what it meets with. The
searching Quality of this Salt, I have known universally complained of, as
raking and so heating by lean Persons, both Men and Women, but upon the same
reason it is the most extraordinary Purge for grosser Bodies. To know rightly
the Intentions these Salts satisfy, requires a good Understanding of the
Nature of the Disease, which here cannot be insisted upon, only I shall give
you one Instance in the Use of Epsam Water in Melancholy, whether natural
Melancholy be not produced by the Formation of the Vessels and Complication,
rather than by the nature of the Juyces, I dispute not, nor how the Brain is
concerned: The Disease effectively demonstrates it self to consist in the due
Separation or discharge of the Excrements of the Body hindered, and through
want of that Salt that should be separated with them to promote their
Expulsion, whence their Spittle is fresh and stinking, their Body bound, and
which is perhaps the Original of all this, the Blood allows not of a due
Separation of Choler, and other parts that Nature alots to be amended. In all
these Intentions Epsam Water or Salt recommends it self by its calcarious Salt,
to advance the Heat and florid State of the Blood, and mix with it; by its
Acidity to penetrate and incide, yet not of power to precipitate and harden;
but above all by its Softness and Liquibility in Heat or Moisture, it is
disposed not only to cleanse, but to render the Blood fluid and mellow, and
leave the Vessels lax. And that I am right here, and not wide from Experience,
it may be proper to inform the Reader, that I have known this Disease cured by
this Water only, in those Persons who have taken the other Waters, as well as
other Medicines, ineffectually.

And as Nitrous or Alkalisate Salts raise the Fermentation of the Blood, which
is the same Effect which they have on Liquors, so Acids correct and suppress
it: The Effect of one is ever discernable by flushing Heats, and the happy
Effects they have in Malignant Fevers, and the power of the last in correcting
the Heat of the Blood, and putting the Salt in condition for a Discharge, is
evident in the use of Acids, in those Fevers that are attended with
Exanthemata. And this I mention, because in the Choice of a Purging Water for
Prevention of Sickness as they are often drank, the Nature of the Fever on
foot ought to be considered. I wave that, and proceed to the Classes of the
Waters, and their several Virtues.

The Waters agree in general to create or restore an Appetite, suppress Wind,
and relieve Hypo^hondriacism. But the Virtues that result from their Specific
Nature, both from my Judgment and Experience in many of them, stand thus.

1. A Water containing a Salt, somewhat of the Nature of Salt of Chalk, but
more resembling the Spirit than body of Nitre, and not corrosive. Of this kind
is Epsam, whose Salt is unfigur'd or ungrain'd, and melts in the warmth of a
hand. The Cases a Salt of this Nature is adequate to, are Melancholy, Cholicks
and Cholical Pains in the Stomach, Obstructions of the Glands, and accordingly
Heart-burning, Pains in the Sides, and any parts of the Body, if not too
confirmed, Scurvy, Vertigo; it cleanses gross Bodies, and safely lessens
Fatness; relieves Redness of the Face; relaxes a costive Disposition; and
cleanses the Kidneys, and perhaps in Ulcers of the Kidneys, or other parts, may
fitly precede Chalybeats.

2. A Water more calcarious, and whose Salt is more of the Nature of the Nitre
of the Earth than of the Spirit; such are Acton, Barnet and Stretham Waters,
these I judge proper in the Stone, Gout, Diseases of the Lungs without
Inflammation, and for Heart-burning; and wherever the Intention of Sweetning
the Blood is required, or raising the warmth and heat of it, this may be a
suitable Purge; and are good in Melancholy, wherein Acton claims the next place
to Epsam: They restore a good Color to the Face, and remove or cure the
falling away of the Flesh, and promote Fatning.

3. A Water whose Salt is Alkalisate, and resembles Salt of Tartar, and the
Sulphurous Salts of Vegetables, though not perfectly; and as is Vpminster, may
be supposed to have the power of sweetning Acidities in remoter parts of the
Body, strengthens the Stomach, checks Vomiting, and where Alkalies suit, is a
good Diuretic, and is a proper Purge where the Body has a Disposition to Agues
or Dropsies, only here the Salt is preferable to the Water, as it may be taken
in a more proper Vehicle.

4. A Salt Alkalisate, with a very hard coagulating Acidity, namely,
Brentwood-weal, has the advantage of an Alkaly to sweeten the Blood, but with
Astriction, it increases flushing Heats, Scurfyness, and Leprous Humors, but
is beneficial in any Fluxes through Coldness and Weakness, and to the
Hypochondriacal, whose natural Temper is such; checks the Catamenia, and may be
good to prevent Abortion, backed with Chalybeats.

5. A Salt Alkalisate approaching a Saltpetre, is that of the Water of
Kensington, the Virtues of an Alkaly appear before; as relating to Saltpetre,
it may be more Diuretic, it tempers Choler, allays Thirst, suppresseth
inflammatory and putrid Heat, and eases Pain. The Earth contained in this
Water, is so much in quantity, and the leafy hard parts so many, that I should
think the Salt of this Water to be preferable to the Water it self. Or else the
Water ought to be boiled till half be evaporated, and then depurated by
suffering the grosser parts to subside.

All the Waters following partake of the Nature of a Vitrioline or common Salt,
or Sea Salt, and so resist Putrefaction, make a strong Concoction, are proper
in Worms, may cure a Jaundies when it comes upon a Colic, mortify Scabs, and
remove Scurfyness, and kill several Humors, as Tetters and the like Eruptions;
their particular Natures are as follow.

6. Waters which bear a Salt related to common Salt, but clear of the Muriatick
part, are Alford in Somersetshire, and Colchester. To restore an Appetite, for
Worms and mortifying Eruptions, and Hypochondriack Flatus.

7. A Salt more fully of the Nature of common or Sea salt, in its power of
mortifying preternatural Salts in the Body, without the severity of
coagulating, is found in Lambeth Waters, whereof the nearest Well is the most
perfect. The Virtues see in the Examination of that Water. Only observe that
these are used outwardly as well as inwardly.

8. A Salt of the Nature of that part of common Salt which Christallizes in the
cold, is found in North-Hall Water, and may be beneficial in the Scurvy, beyond
any others, as likewise in Rhumatisms, and in what cases soever that are
attended with Putrefaction.

9. A Salt of the Nature of common or Sea Salt, yet not having an Acidity
agreeing with Iron, but Fluxile, Penetrative and Marcasitical, is that of
Dullwich; it mortifieth Scabby Humors, and such as are the Effects of Luxury,
but promotes the Flux of the Menses and Haemo^rhoids. These require regular
Drinking, work very much, and that churlishly on those that either Drinking or
Walking has put out of Temper.

10. Salt of the Nature of Salt of English Vitriol, that is of Iron, and seem a
result of the uniting of Vitriol and Nitre, or Salt of common Earth, whose
Characteristick is to give a white clouded Liquor with Gall, and not so high a
color with Lignum Nephriticum as Alkalies give: This is the Salt of Richmond
Water, and the two Chalybeats, and recommends the Use of these Waters, in the
Cure of Scurfs, is most safe in Dropsies, in Ulcers in any part; in
Hypochondriacal Cases exceed the rest: And the benefit of a Purging Water that
is Chalybeat is extraordinary great, it not only answering the design of both
Waters, but under the consideration of a Purging Water, is made thereby
specifically proper in Asthma's and beginning Dropsies, and without which
Qualification, it could be administered neither so safely, nor with so good
Effect.

According to my Method before, I shall deliver the Virtues of the Chalybeat
Purging Waters, from Observation of the Learned Dr. Witty at the Spring at
Scarbourgh, the happy Successes of which make him lift it above all the Waters
in Europe; he recommends in it these Qualities, Crassos lentosque humores
attenuat incidit, and dissolvit in Ventriculo, Mesenterio, Intestinis, Renibus
and Vesica; diluendi item and detergendi virtutem nacta, eos per Vesicam and
intestina promptissime expellit, prout ab eorum positione videantur magis
inclinari. And presently names the Venae lacteae, the Portae and Liver; and he
makes a Remark at the Diuretic Quality, that notwithstanding two thirds
presently run off by Urine, it purges so much, and at both in their lessening
the bulk and weight of the Body. He enters his Observations with a Cure of a
Scurvy, attended among other Symptoms with Pains in the Joints, and difficulty
of Breathing; and of a Gout in the same Gentleman, so considerable abated by
it, that in a Letter he there acknowledges, he never after that suffered any
Symptom of moment.

The Diseases further recorded by Dr. Witty to have been cured by the same
Water, and of which he produces instances, are, diverse Distempers of the
Head, chiefly arising from the consent of the Stomach and Hypochondries,
Affections of the Nerves, and Spasm, vellicating the Coats and Nerves of the
Stomach; or caused by Worms or sharp and bilious Humors. Palsies that from
their accompanying Scurvy are called Scorbutic.

A Vertigo assaulting upon the least motion or heating of the Body.

A Vertigo with a Cold Sweat, intermitting Pulse, and Stiffness of the Neck
remaining after the Cure of a Spasmus Cynicus, and which he judged to be
Scorbutical.

A Spontaneous Weariness and Weakness of the Nerves, especially upon going
forth in Cold Weather, remaining after the Cure of a Scorbutic Palsy, that at
first had seized the Patient upon a Journey, and taken away Reason, Sight,
Strength and Motion.

An Epilepsie from a hot Vapor which the Patient felt to rise from the
Hypochondries, and suddenly to strike his Head and Joints, and which had
frustrated many Remedies.

In Stoppages of the Breast he observed it to promote Expectorating,
Spontaneous Weariness, and Difficulty or Shortness of Breath.

A Phthisical Asthma, that suffered not the Patient to lie down, or sleep, or
keep his Food, and scarce allowed him to drink, mended in ten days time, and at
last cured, so as to recover his Flesh, and vanquish the Symptoms.

An Obstinate Catarrh.

Gout, a Fit of which he freed himself from by drinking the Waters two days, as
soon as he felt it certainly coming; in which too he practiced Bathing in Salt
Water, and Sweating upon it.

In morbis Ventriculi, Anorexia, Cardialgia, Eructatione perpetua, Nausea, and
Singultu.

Hypochondria^ism, with Pains of the Stomach after eating Flesh, Distention and
Hardness of the Stomach and Torsions of his right side in one Patient; and with
a joined Pain of Back and Stomach, with a Schirrous Tension of the Ventricle
and Liver, continual Disposition to Vomit, and a Jaundies supervening every
Fit, in another Patient, who could not lie on the right side, nor bear the
Region of the Liver to be touched.

Oppilations of the Mesentery, Liver and Spleen, preventing a Dropsy.

Another instance of its power in reducing the Belly after Childbirth, which
remained Tumid.

Scurvy, Hypochondriack Melancholy, and Worms; Fluxes Dysenterick and
Lienterick. Hot Intemper of the Kidneys, in wearing a new Stone, and expelling
it with the Tartareous Matter. Also in a fresh Lues Venerea safely and quickly
stopping a Gonorrhaea, and carrying off the Relics, after the Cure of an old
one.

In Morbis uterinis and Suffocatione Matricis, Chlorosi, Fluore albo Mensium
fluxu inordinato. Abortionem praevertit and conceptionem promovet. And
strengthens the Natural Parts.

I affix this Register exactly, because when so nicely done, is the only true
way of adjusting their Virtues; and is so much the more useful, as it is
equally applicable to Scarbourgh and Woodham-Ferrys, which are both the same.

Rule of Drinking these Waters in general, is the same which the Chalybeats
require, viz. Cheerfulness and Exercise, and a mild Diet, they are not to be
slept upon without danger, nor does the benefit of them consist with a Temper
disordered by Drinking, either in the use of them, or immediately before.

The Repetition of drinking Purging Waters three or four times, sufficiently
answers the general Design of washing the Body, though the more stubborn
disorders of some Bodies, make a longer use of them necessary. But when the
Nature of the Distemper, or its Obstinacy, require the use of them
specifically, they ought to be continued as other Remedies for many Weeks,
though with Intermissions at Discretion.

The Use of the Salts of the Purging Waters is very advantageous for Persons
that are distanced from them, and in the Winter, especially in cases wherein
the Milk, which is usually added to make them agreeable by turning them into
Posset clarified, is not allowable, as in Itches and Salt Eruptions. The Use of
which both in Glysters and Purges, when dissolved in Water, or convenient
Apozems, is most kindly, and may be properly applied, as the Learned Dr. Grew
has introduced it.

Some Observations on the Bath Water in Somersetshire.
THE smallness of the Quantity of the Bath Water, which I could procure at so
great a distance, did not allow me Scope to try the earthy and Saline parts
collectible by Evaporation. The Water was clear, and coldish to taste, not wide
of the taste of common Water. It did not gild Silver, or make it yellow, as it
does at the Spring. I could discover little Alkalisate in it: It thickened and
became milky with Oil of Tartar and curdled: It did not precipitate Sublimate
dissolved in common Water considerably, which upon standing some time became
only a very little whitish. The Salt contained in this Water, appeared fully to
be Saltpetre, in that it did not the least disturb a Solution of Sal Saturni in
fair Water; but showed a little of the Nature of common Sait more than
Saltpetre has, in giving a pale yellow with Lignum Nephriticum with a dark
cloud which settled; and in taking a dull Ale color, not fine with Tincture of
Logwood, the red it took languish'd more and more: And in precipitating a
Solution of fine Silver out of Spirit of Nitre in a hardish Curd, more than
Saltpetre does.

Those that know the Nature of both Saltpetre and Sulphur, which are the
Principles that impregnate this Water, must allow them to be produced by the
heat of the Earth, and not to be the cause of it. If we enquire into the Cause
and Original of this Heat, the Nature of the Salt evidenceth it not to be
produced by any calcarious Quarry, nor the Effervescence of contrary Salts and
Acids: Subterranean Fire is groundless, and has invincible Absurdities; it may
reasonably be supposed to be maintained by the Heat of the Earth; for as a
considerable Heat is required to the Concoction and Preparation of Metals, and
is sensibly proved in the Mine-chambers; so that Crust of dead loamy Earth that
assists to maintain it, separates it from us; and though we find no such
extraordinary Heat, yet the Heat of the Mines do not only prove a Heat, but
imply a much greater to be where the Metal is prepared, than where it is
separated. The Eruption of it at places, I pretend not to account for, but that
it is different often in places not many Rods distant, is beyond doubt.

The Virtues of these Minerals well account for the Cures wrought by the Bath,
the most which I have observed or known, having been in Tumors or Palsies from
tough Phlegm; not to take notice of their external Use in Scabby Diseases: And
those that have been within my knowledge, have been all performed by Pumping
the diseasy part, and not by Bathing. Now the Qualities that Authors take
notice of in Sulphur to heat and dry, incide, open and provoke. Sweat, and
resist Putrefaction, considered with the power of the other to ease Pain,
penetrate, discuss, and temper Inflammation, suffices to the performing all
this. But to bring it nearer to sense, I shall take notice what any Person may
prove, that a Bath made of Saltpetre, Sea Salt and Brimstone, is the most happy
Dissolvent of Oedematous Tumors even in the Legs, that hitherto I have
observed. It is much to be suspected, that this Water must lose much of its
power, if not the best part, by carriage, together with its power of Tinging
Silver yellow, especially for inward use.

I shall conclude all with this useful Remark, That as the Waters are a
powerful and extraordinary Remedy, so to have success in the use of them, it is
necessary to form just and due Observations of them, by distinguishing,

1. What Cures are wrought by the Waters on a general Account, and what by the
Nature of the distinct Salt.

2. What are proper and may effect in light Cases, but seldom avail alone.

3. Some that avail, but fail in confirmed Cases, as the Purging Chalybeats in
Hypochondriacism.

4. What Distempers they Cure, with regard to a particular cause, and not
universally.

And lastly, What they may be trusted to for, as in inveterate and confirmed
Obstructions. The light Chalybeat Waters may, and perhaps in Asthma and Scurvy
the Purging Chalybeats, etc.

Some Observations on the Water of Queen Camel in Somersetshire.
THE Trial of this Water I annex to the Bath Water, because this is likewise a
Sulphurous one and might illustrate that; at least having it by me I thought
worth preserving. It is a cold Spring of a faetid smell, in which, as well as
in Taste, it resembled that of a foul Gun, as my honored Friend the Reverend
Mr. Samuel Adamson, who made the Experiments for me at the Spring, informed me.
It tingeth the stones black on which it falls. The use of this Water is
inwardly and outwardly in the King's Evil, and other Ulcers and Scabbiness, in
which the success is frequent, and purges little of any thing, but has
produced Eruptions if drank without occasion, by a Body whose Constitution they
disagreed with. It has the Reputation of proceeding from a Copper Mine, for
which my Friend could discover no ground, as neither do the Trials, unless some
Pyrites there found may give the occasion.

This Water proved upon Trial to contain a Calcarious Salt, yet not so open as
to answer with Gall and Lignum Nephriticum, and a Sulphur differing from common
Brimstone, and more amicable to Alkalys, and not to be precipitated by Acids;
and to contain no Metalline parts, at least openly so.

With Gall it took a very pale Yellow, and upon standing a Week a little deeper
color, and a little thicker.

With Lignum Nephriticum, upon 12 hours standing, a little deeper than with
Gall; in both which it resembled neither Vitriols, which take less color, nor
as Alkalys, which give a deeper, but nearer Saltpetre, or rather common
Pump-water.

Like Alkalys it curdled not Milk.

With a Solution of Sublimate, 15 drops in 4 ounces, a bright brass color, and
upon addition of 5 drops more, curdled and precipitated of a Feuille mort
color, as Alkalys and Salt of Lime.

Oil of Tartar p. del. 75 drops in 4 ounces, made it more limpid and inclinable
to a bright Copper, which Vinegar would not precipitate.

The Water, when it had stood a Week, with a Solution of Sal Saturni, turned
White like Milk as Alkalys, but when fresh, with 10 drops of the Solution, took
a dark brown color, and looked thick.

The Sediment, which is small and dark colored, would not burn, nor would it
communicate a Color to Aqua fortis, nor to common Salt upon standing, as
Metals and Copper especially will.

For various Reasons I must excuse any inimical Mineral from a share in this,
especially Arsenick or Copper, but judge it rather near to common Sulphur, but
less remote from an Alkaly: But to know this more nicely, the Pyrites ought to
be proved.

As this may show the reason of its good Effects in the King's Evil, and why it
agrees not in a Scorbutic Disposition, so it may help to drect its proper
place in Acid Tumors, as Milk Sores, or where the Chyle is curdled, which if
observed, might make the Waters more useful.

This Water gilds Silver as does the Bath Water, and as does common Sulphur.

The Figure of the Scarborow Water Salt referred to at Page 155.
The Figure sent me and there referred to.



The Figure of the Salt sent me.



FINIS.
A Second Essay of the Bath Water.
HAving some reason to be dissatisfied with the former Essay of it, I procured
some more new: I found the Taste a very little Nauseous and Saline. The Salt of
it resembled Common Salt, the Water not disturbing a Solution of German
Vitriol: nor a Solution of Sublimat, and taking but a pale dull red with Syrup
of Cloves, and very little Color from Lignum Nephriticum, and with Gall pale
and curdled. With a Solution of Salt of Lead it curdled strongly, but Whitened
not the Liquor so much as Pump Water. Besides this strong Precipitation it had
this peculiar, not to praecipitate Silver, so readily or so much as common
Salt: And it made a White curdle with Spirit of Hartshorn, but did not disturb
Spirit of Sal Ammoniac: This differing Effect, of these two Spirits, is only
found in a Decoction of common Salt and common Sulphur, and Sulphurous Bodies;
for I observed near the same, to succeed with an Infusion of Orpiment and
Spirit of Vitriol diluted. This odd Phenomenon is in Dulwich Water, which
hereby is illustrated to be owing to the Sulphurousness of the Pyrites, and
perhaps depth of the Water.

A TABLE OF THE WATERS Here Examined.
ACTON Water in Middlesex page 126 Alford in Somersetshire 144 Aylesham in
Norfolk 23 Barnet in Hartfordshire 149 Bath Water in Somersetshire 178 and 185
Brentwood-Weal in Essex 144 Colchester in Essex 128 Dulwich Water in Lewisham
in Kent 135 Epsam in Surry 122 Felstead in Essex 28 Ilumington in Warwichshire
21 Islington near London 27 Kensington near London 129 Knaresborough in
Yorkshire 19 Lambeth farther Well in Surry 143 Lambeth nearer Well in Surry 138
Marks-Hall in Essex 21 North-Hall in Hartfordshire 137 Oulton in Norfolk 23
Queen-Camel in Somersetshire 182 Richmond in Surry 132 Scarborow in Yorkshire
151 Stretham in Surry 150 Tunbridge in Kent 26 Upminster near Brentwood in
Essex 148 Wellenborow in Northamptonshire 27 Wittham in Essex 19 Woodham-Ferrys
near Danbury in Essex 158
AN INDEX OF THE Virtues and Properties OF THE WATERS.
A.
ACidity of the Stomach, as Heartburning and all Acid Humors to sweeten and
carry off. The Purging Waters that are Alkalisate or Calcarious. Apoplexies to
prevent and Cure. Knarsborow and Marks-hall. Asthma. Scarborow and Woodh.
B.
Against Barrenness. Scarborow and Knarsb. perhaps both successively used.
Bleeding at any part. Knarsborow and Marks-^^
C.
Catarrh. Scarborow and Woodham-F. Cholicks. All the Purging Waters, those of
common Salt best, but if Inflamatory Epsam. Cholour of the Face to mend. If
from a Chlorosis the Purging Chalybeats, else the Alkalisate, and principally
Epsam. Consumption. If Climacterick, the Light Chalybeats, but if introduced by
a Haemoptoe, the Acid. Cramps and Convulsions. Knaresborow.
D.
Dropsy. If Hypochondriacal, The Light Chalybeats. Diabetes. All the Waters
are received to Cure, but the most certain the Light Chalybeat, as Tunbridge,
etc.
E.
Epilepsie Hypochondriacal. Scarborow.
F.
Fatress and grossness to lessen. Epsam. Fistula. The Light Chalybeats. Fluxes
Dysenteric. Scarborow: Fluxes of all sorts in Women. Knaresborow. Fluor A^bus.
Scarborow. All Fluxes of Blood. Knaresborow.
G.
Giddiness. The Purging Waters, if Old Chalybeat, that is, the Light ones, and
to confirm the Cure by the Acid Chalybeats. Gout. All the Chalybiates but the
Nitrous. Gonorrhea. Scarborow and Knaresborow.
H.
Heat of the Face or at the Stomach. Epsam. Hypochondriacism. Purging Waters
and Chalybeat successively: The First according to the Constitution, as in the
Gross Epsam; The Chalybeat, i^ the Diseases affect the Head or Glands, the
Light Sort; and the Cure to be confirmed by the Acid, as is Knarsb. and Marks-
I.
Jaundies. If Originally from the vice of the Ventricle and Intestines, the
Purging Waters that partake of common Salt; if upon Melancholy, or
Obstructions, the Chalybeat.
K.
King's Evil. Queen-Camel.
L.
Leprosy. Knaresborow and Lambeth. See Scurfs.
M.
Melancholy. All the Alkalisate Waters, but most effectual Epsam. Against
Miscarrying. Scarborow and Knaresborow.
O.
Obstructions. The Light Chalybeat.
P.
Running Burning Pains. The Purging Waters, especially the Chalybeat. For
Pilegmatick Constitutions. Brentwood-W. Pissing of Blood. Knarsborow.
S.
Schirrous Tumors of the Stomach. The Light Chalybeats and Scarborow. Scabs.
Knaresborow. Scurf and Scurvy. Scarb. and Woodh. Stone. Agreeable Purgers,
North-hall and Lambeth, or the Purging Chalybeats, cured by the light sorts.
Swelling of the Belly continuing after Childbirth. Scarborow. To Sweeten the
Blood and Juyces. The Alkalisate.
T.
Tumors of the Spleen, Mesentery and Liver. Scarborow. Teeth to Fasten.
Knaresb. and Marks-Hall.
V.
Vertigo. Scarb. Ulcers. The Chalybeats. Heat of Urine. Knaresb.
W.
Worms. The Purging Waters bearing common Salt. White Fluor. See Fluor.
Weakness of the Nerves, Scarb. Spontaneous Weariness; Scarb.
The end of the Index.

