A full and true Account, of the Behaviors, Confessions, and last Dying
Speeches of the Condemned Criminals, that were Executed at Tyburn, on Friday
the 24th of May, 1700.
JOHN Shirly, alias Davis, 22 Years old, Condemned for Firing the House of Dr.
Sloan; being examined said, that he was Descended of a good Family, that his
Parents, who tenderly loved him, Educated him at School a considerable time,
but growing Headstrong, he ran away from them, and Listed himself a Soldier,
for several Years he served abroad in that Station, and at last, having got
Acquaintance with the Surgeon of a Regiment, he pretended to practice that Art,
which brought him in no small Profit; but being Viciously inclined, lived at
such a rate, that his Incomes could not answer his unnecessary and exorbitant
Expenses, which caused him to rack his Invention, how to support his profuse
way of Living; this made him listen to bad Advice, and to turn a deaf Ear to
that wholesome Counsel, which they who knew his Parents frequently gave him. The
great Enemy of Mankind provided some Accomplices for him, who having consumed
their Substance with riotous Living, were willing to undertake any wicked
Action that might support their craving Circumstances: To this Gang he
willingly associated himself, and committed several Robberies and Burglaries,
more than he could remember: At length they resolved to break open this House
in Bloomsbury-Square, which they attempted in several Places, but could not
effect; then they resolved to burn it; and accordingly one of them struck a
Light, and cut a little Door into Splinters, then breaking the Glass and part
of the Wood in the Window, set a Candle to it, which caused the Window to
blaze: Their Design as he said, was to throw Stones at the upper Windows, to
awaken the Family when the Fire had got a Head, and so under Pretense of
helping them to carry away their best Goods, and Rob them of all that was
valuable. I pressed him very often to discover whether he was concerned in that
great Fire in Red-lion Fields, putting him in mind, that there is no denying or
lessening his Sins before God, who was privy to all his Thoughts and Designs,
and knows all his Actions, though never so secretly committed, and no human Eye
saw him. But he still denied that he was any ways concerned in it, only that he
was present when it was burning, and got a silver Candlestick, a Case of
Pistols, and some other things. He did not seem at first so well affected with
his Condition as could be wished; but afterward he returned to a better Mind,
and wished that he had a longer space to live, that so he might testify his
Sincerity, by leading a better Life for the future.

Philip Wake, Convicted for the same, confessed his Crime, and gave an account of
it much after the same manner, only with this Adition, that Davis was the
Projector of it, and encouraged them to do it, when they resolved to desist. He
added, that he was an old Offender, had made several Resolutions, to forsake
his evil Courses, but as often broke them: His Indisposition did not permit him
to speak much, but he seemed very attentive to good Advice.

James Walters, Condemned for several Felonies: Was an Apprentice to a
Merchant, but leading a dissolute debaucht Life, his Master turned him away;
then he went to his old Companions, who prevailed with him to go abroad with
them, where he committed a great many base, notorious Actions. He complained of
the tedious Confinement he underwent, and how troublesome it was to him, who
was always a busy stirring Person: But he was put in mind that he should by no
means once fancy, that he must lie in that doleful Place, shut out from all
Business, and condemned as it were to a state of Idleness; but that he should
set himself with all his might, to mind the one thing necessary, the great Work
of Repentance, and making his Peace with Almighty God; for this would cut out
work enough for him, and of more Comfort and Profit to his Soul, than any other
Employment which he had formerly been used to. He was also told, that he stood
now upon the very brink of Eternity, and must shortly appear before the
Tribunal of God, which is infinitely more terrible than that of any earthly
Judge can be; therefore it became him, with all the seriousness that is
possible, to prepare himself for so dreadful an Appearance; to which he
replied, that he had a good Education, and understood these matters very well.

John Titt, 24 Years old, Convicted for Burglary. He served his Master (who was
a Waterman) very Faithfully, but being made free, he unfortunately met with
some Acquaintance which enticed him to Drink to excess, and so neglecting his
lawful Calling, being reduced to want, was the more easily prevailed with to
commit this Fact, the only one of that Nature, (as he said) he ever was Guilty
of. His Life of late was very irregular, addicted to Swearing, Lewdness, and
Debauchery, for which he said he was exceeding sorrowful, and that his Vices
were now as detestable in his sight, as before they seemed pleasant.

John Hatchman, aged 15 Years, Convicted for the same, confessed his Crime, and
said that Titt meeting him in Southwark, made him Drunk, and then brought him
along with them to break open the House. He denied he ever was concerned with
such Persons any more, and Promises if he be Transported, to lead a better Life
for the future.

John Cooper, Condemned for the same. He was seized with the Jayl-Distemper,
which is a violent Fever, attended with a delirious Light-headedness, and so
was not in a capacity to give any Account of himself.

Joseph Fisher, 48 Years old, Born in Cornwall, Condemned for Burglary, was a
Seaman, and served aboard in the Royal-Navy, and as he said, did once


