Great News from Dublin,
^iving a True Account of the Seizing of a Ship coming from IRELAND, with Fifty
Commissions from the late King James, to several Gentlemen in Lancashire, in
order (as supposed) to a Rebellion in ENGLAND. Together, with the Relation of
the Papists Seizing the Protestants Estates in Ireland, and imprisoning the
Vice-Provost of the College of Dublin, and other Worthy Divines, on pretense
of a PLOT, etc.

With Allowance.

Chester the 12 th of June, 1689. SIR,
ON the Eleventh of this Instant, Arrived here a Vessel, with some Fugitive
Protestants Abode, which give an Account, that the pretended Parliament of
Dublin, after the general Concurrence of both Houses, for rescinding and
abolishing the late Act of Settlement, proceeded to pass a Bill for the
Forfeiture of all Estates of Protestants absent; which, with all Severity, even
^^e Soldiers and Rabble-Papists put in Execution: That upon the Report of
Supplies ^eing Landed at Londonderry, they immediately Issued out an Order for
securing all Protestants of any Note; and particularly, they have clapped up the
Reverend Doctor Action, Vice^rovost of the Col^edg, and Doctor King the
Minister of St. Warbourgh's Parish, and seve^l others, upon a Blind pretense,
that they were Plotting against the Government, (as ^^ey style it) though all
that could be said for harmless and Innocent Persons, was urged (...) their
behalf to the late King; but such is the Insolence and Jealousy of the French
Minister, and his Party, That it is now thought no longer in his Power to deny
or main^in any thing against them. Yesterday came in a Vessel from Dublin to
this Port, in com^^ny of another small Vessel, and King William's Officers of
his Customs going on Board her, ^emember'd the Master had about five Weeks
before stole out of the Harbor, without ^^king her Entry at the Custom-House,
and the Master besides being suspected for an ill Man they gave notice to the
Mayor, and other the Kings Officers, who immediately Re^^^t and Seize on the
Kings Vessels; and, after strict Search, find packt up Fifty Commis^^^^,
directed to several persons in Lancashire; which Commissions were forthwith
sent to (...) Majesty, and it is hoped, will give an ample Discovery of all or
most of the disaffected ^^^sons in that County: Colonel Kirk, with the Ships
and Soldiers under his Command, ^^^^'d from the Isle of Man the fifth Instant,
the Wind at East South-East, a pretty strong ^^le, so that we doubt not, by
this time, of his safe Arrival: From Dublin we hear, that the ^^^ist Army is
extremely discouraged with the vigorous Resistance of the Protestants in
Londonderry, that they begin to look nearer into Matters, and do already shake
their ^^ads, and wish they could handsomely unravel their past Actions. Doctor
Walker, and ^^eutenant Baker, do labor indefatigably for the support of the
Town, which stands ^^^m yet, and in good condition; though by continual
Watchings, and hard Service, they ^o hourly wish and Sigh for their long
expected Succors. The Lord Tyrconnel continues ^et indisposed with the Black
Jaundice, which had like to have proved dangerous to him; ^e seems to be
sensibly afflicted for the loss of his reputed Son the Lord Galmoy, (who was
^ill'd before Londonderry in the last great Sally) and is not well satisfied
with the French ^anagement of Affairs: Many of the Irish Army desert daily, and
take the Boggs for ^^eir Refuge, being either terrified with the haughty
Insolence of their French Comman^rs, or tired with the continual drudgery of
Marching, Counter-Marching, and other ^teigues of Martial Exercise and Dangers:
We have it confirmed, that great Numbers of Boats and other small Vessels,
designed (as is thought) for Transportation of Sol^^ers from any part of the
North of Ireland to Scotland, have been seized and burnt by ^he Ships from
Scotland. The Protestants of Dublin begin now to be very apprehensive (...)
their Safety, especially since the Confinement of those Clergy men and
Encroachments (...) the College: The late King has put a stop to all Passes;
and such is the strictness and severity of the Searchers, that we are likely to
have little or no Intelligence from Dublin. This is all that occurs at present

From your Humble Servant, J. M.

LONDON. Printed for W. Downing 168(...)


