The Mystery OF THE TEMPLE and CITY, DESCRIBED In the NINE last Chapters of
EZEKIEL UNFOLDED. Also these following Particulars are briefly handled: I. The
Calling of the Jews. II. The Restitution of all Things. III. The Description of
the Two Beasts, Rev. 13. IV. The Day of Judgment, and the World perishing by
Fire. V. Some Signs of the Times when the Fall of BABYLON is near. VI. Some
Advantages which the Knowledge of these Truths will afford. VII. The Conclusion
of all in some Counsels and Directions.


By WILLIAM ALLEINE, Minister of the Gospel.

Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God:

PSALM. lxxxvii.3. Blessed are they that keep his Commandments, that they may
have right to eat of the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into
the City.

REV. xxii.14. LONDON, Printed for B. Harris, and are to be sold at the
Stationers Arms in Sweetings-Alley, near the Royal Exchange; and by T. Wall
near the To sey in Bristol. 1679.

Some Discovery OF THE NEW HEAVENS, AND THE NEW EARTH. ALSO OF The Earnest
Expectation of the Creature, to be delivered from its Bondage, into the
Glorious Liberty of the Children of God. TOGETHER With some Hints wherein it
will consist: Gathered out of Holy Scriptures. AS ALSO A Guess at the Time
wherein it may probably be expected. Together with the Profitable Uses to be
made of it; As in 2 Pet. 3.14.

By WILLIAM ALLEINE, Now with the Lord.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Harris. 1679.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
IT will be a good recompense of much Labor in bringing forth that which here
follows, for the opening of a dark Prophecy, if it shall make thee resolve, as
Moses did concerning the burning Bush, I Will turn aside to see this great Sight;
even that City, the Frame whereof was shown to the Prophet, and whose Name
shall be JEHOVAH SHAMMAH, The Lord is there. In this Prophecy there are, as in
Paul' s Epistles, (...), Things hard to be understood; yet to be in some
measure understood, if He shall lead into these Mysteries, whose work it is to
lead into all Truth. When I first applied my self to a more serious and fixed
search into the Matters contained in this Prophecy, I was little better than
blind unto them: but now I seem to be able to say, as the Man that was brought
blind to Christ, after the Lord had put his Hands upon his Eyes, I see Men like
Trees walking. And if others shall be like the Angels in desiring to look into
these things, it is to be hoped they may see and discover them more clearly and
distinctly. The Glorious Truths which here lie hid under a Vail of Legal
Shadows and Figures, do in other parts of Scripture appear with open Face; and
the Holy Spirit, speaking by Ezekiel in Parables, does by other holy Men of God
speak more plainly. And the way of teaching by Parables is very grateful, and
convincing, when the Parable is understood. The words of the Wise thus given
forth do better sink down into the Heart, and will not be so easily let slip.
August. lib. 2. de Civ. Dei. Cap. 56. says well, Nemo ambigit and per
similitudines liberius quaeque cognosci, and cum aliqua difficultate quaesita,
multo gratius inveniri. Qui enim prorsus non inveniunt quod quaerunt, fame
laborant. Qui autem non quaerunt quia in promptu habent, fastidio saepe
marcescunt. In utroque autem languor cavendus est. Magnifice igitur and
salubriter Spiritus Sanctus ita Scripturam modificavit, ut locis apertioribus
fami occurreret, obscurioribus fastidia detergerit. Nihil enim fere de illis
difficultatibus eruitur, quod non planissime alibi reperiatur. He that by the
guidance of the Holy Spirit brings the light Scripture to that which is more
dark, and the plain Scripture to the Parable, is an Interpreter one of a
thousand. And if it shall be the Endeavor of any to do thus, in relation to
this and other Prophecies, then let them take these two Instances for their
Encouragement: The first is that of the Eunuch, who came to Jerusalem to
worship, and in his return, as he sat in his Chariot, read Esaias the Prophet,
and when he read God hearkened, and heard, for the Spirit said to Philip, Go
near and join thy self to this Chariot: As if he had said, Here Is one reading a
Prophecy, which he does not, but would understand; go thou therefore, and make
him to understand it: and Philip began at that Scripture, and preached unto him
Jesus. So read, and set your Hearts upon all that is here shown, and see
whether the Spirit will not join himself to your Hearts, and Preach much of
Jesus to you in and from this Prophecy.

The other Instance is that of Daniel, Chap. 9.2. Who understood by Books the
Number of the Years of Jerusalem's desolations; and then Verse 3. sets himself
to seek the Lord; and whilst he was speaking, the Man Gabriel being caused to
fly swiftly, said to him, O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee Skill and
Understanding. If Daniel had not read the Prophecy of Jeremiah, he had not
understood the time of the Jew's Deliverance from their Captivity, neither had
that Great Discovery been made to him upon his Prayer, of the coming of the
Messiah. Now go and do thou likewise, and then may the Lord give thee Skill and
Understanding also in this dark Prophecy, whereby abundant Matter for Prayer,
and Ground of Hope will appear, which may be an Anchor of the Soul in Troublous
and tempestuous Times. When you shall be in the Contemplation of this, and
other Prophecies, you will be as Moses on the top of Pisgah, taking a View of
the Promised Land: And thus may you come to be like the Men of Issachar, who
had Understanding of the Times, to know what Israel ought to do.

As for the ensuing Discourse, the Thoughts of Men may be various about it:
Some may judge that too little is said, and that Things should be more
particularly spoken to. Others may think that too much is said, and may scoff
as the Athenians, Thou bring certain strange things to our Ears. If any
shall complain that too little is said; I will confess it; For every thing in
the Description of this TEMPLE and CITY, has its proper Signification: But I
must say, not for want of Time, but for want of better Skill and Understanding,
of all these Things I cannot now speak particularly; yet I find that of Hosea
verified, Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord. If any say,
it is too much; let them enter into the Sanctuary of God, and weigh the
Scriptures well, on which the Things which may seem strange are grounded,
before they reject them, for the Aim has been not to utter any thing from
Fancy and Conceit, but all from Scripture; and not from a private
Interpretation of Scripture, but an Interpretation justified by other
Scriptures: And I would not be thought to be positive in all things; but as
propounding some things to the Prophets that they may judge. If any thing of
Error shall appear, yet I presume not that which will be destructive to the
Faith once delivered to the Saints, in any part of it: For, Matter of Faith and
Worship, and what concerns Gopel-Ordinances, and Magistracy and Ministry, are
throughout asserted and justified. That good thing which God has said he will
perform, held forth in this Prophecy, and the Revelation of Christ's Personal
Presence and Reign upon Earth, was not a little disparaged by the Carnal
Imaginations and Conceits of some about it, which were no other than the Smoke
of the bottomless Pit, which arising thence, did darken the Glory of a very
precious Primitive Truth, and exposed it to that Contempt under which it has
long lien buried. But what was by the subtilty of the Old Serpent sown in
dishonor, begins now to be raised in glory. I shall add no more by way of
Preface, but those Two Petitions of the Lord's Prayer; Thy Kingdom come, and
thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven. Thy Kingdom is come, and is
within, and among thy Disciples; let it come, and be over all. Now one of a
City, two of a Family are brought to Sion, and make a little Flock. Let the
time come when all the ends of the Earth shall turn to the Lord, and all the
Kindreds of the Nations shall worship before him. Now thou do Govern among
the Saints, be thou Governor also among the Nations. And thy Will is done by
some few Calebs and Josuahs that follow thee fully, yet the Best are far short
of doing thy Will as it is done in Heaven; It Is done by some few on Earth in the
sincerity and uprightness of Heaven: let it be done in the exactness of Heaven.
Thus shall it be done when the King of Glory shall come from Heaven, and all
the Saints with him.

EVEN SO COME LORD JESUS, AMEN.
The Mystery of the Nine last Chapters of Ezekiel in part made manifest.
IN these last Chapters of this Prophecy of Ezekiel we have a description of a
Temple, and City, which in the Visions of God were represented to the Prophet;
by which we are not to understand a material Temple, or City, built after the
return of the Jews from Babylonish Captivity. For,

1. The Temple and City here described, are far different from the City
Jerusalem, and the Temple there, both for situation and largeness. The Temple
in the description of it is as large as a City, and the City as large as a
Country: For the Temple with the Courts thereof, being a perfect Square, each
side contained five hundred Reeds, Chap. 42.16. and the circumference of the
City, is said to be eighteen thousand Measures, which is judged by Interpreters
to be a vast circuit.

2. A River is said to issue from under the Threshould of the House, Chap.
47.1. which is not any where affirmed of the Temple at Jerusalem.

3. This evidently appears from Chap. 41.12. where there is mention made of a
separate place, and a Building before it, which is distinct from the Temple
before described; for the Building in the separate place is not so large as the
Temple, the breadth thereof being seventy Cubits, and the length ninety Cubits:
so that this Building with the separate place is but equal with the Temple,
that is, an hundred Cubits each way. And farther, this Building cannot be the
Holy of Holies, for the Dimensions are different: the Holy of Holies is but
twenty Cubits long, and twenty Cubits broad, verse 4. Now we do not read of
such a Building and separate place near the Temple of Jerusalem: it is true, 1
Kings 6.27. mention is made of an inner house, which was the Holy of Holies
joining to the Temple, and was not in a separate place from it.

4. This Temple and City shall not have being on Earth, till the twelve Tribes
shall be brought back from their Captivity; for they that serve the City, serve
it out of all the Tribes of Israel, chap. 48.19. and the Land is to be divided
by lot unto the Tribes of Israel, verse 29. which are all named, and the Gates
of the City have also the Names of all the Tribes upon them.

These reasons make it evident, that somewhat else must be meant. Now as the
Apostle says 1 Pet. 1.4, 5. Ye are built up a spiritual house: and Gal. 4.^.
Paul speaks of a Jerusalem which is above, and John of that Jerusalem which
comes down from God out of Heaven. So this is here understood: and the Temple
is the Church of the living God, made of lively stones: and the Church in that
pure and glorious state which it shall be brought into when Antichrist shall be
destroyed: and those things which may be shaken, being the things made by men,
shall be removed. The Temple and City of Jerusalem were Types hereof. And this
glorious Church will be the substance of those shadows, and is set forth by
their names. And what is here foretold, had the beginning of its accomplishment
in the Gospel Church, gathered by the Apostles, and since continued in the
world; and shall have its perfect accomplishment when the new Jerusalem shall
come down out of Heaven, and the Jews shall be called, and the Fullness of the
Gentiles shall come in. So that we may conclude with Rabbi Solomon, quoted by
Cornelius a Lapide, Omnia quae in Ezekiele de Jerusalem scribuntur, de sancta
civitate, superna Jerusalem, absque dubio intelligenda sunt. All is to be
understood of the Heavenly Jerusalem, but chiefly of this Heavenly Jerusalem as
it shall come down out of Heaven, and of that estate which it shall be then in.
Now that somewhat of the Mystery of this Prophecy may be made known, I shall
propose several things to consideration; not proceeding therein according to
the order of the Prophecy, but shall endeavor to bring the main things of it
to several heads. And truly I may say to the praise of him that teaches Man
knowledge, that by running thus to and fro in this Prophecy Knowledge has
increased, and happily some hints may be given, which may provoke others to
search further into it.

The first thing to be laid down shall be for an Introduction to the rest which
are to follow, which is this:

Prop. 1. What is here represented should with all seriousness and diligence be
looked into and considered, chap. 40.4. Son of man, behold with thine eyes, and
hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall show thee:
declare all that thou see to the house of Israel. This Command so vehemently
urged in so many expressions belongs to all Christians, but especially to the
Ministers of the Gospel. The external and internal Senses are called upon, and
stirred up to attend to what is made known to the Prophet in this Vision, and
to take an exact view of it: and surely it may be expected, that upon diligent
search, accompanied with prayer, much may be understood of this so dark a
Prophecy. It Is again pressed, chap. 44.5. Mark well, and behold with thine eyes,
and hear all that I say unto thee. See, and set thine heart, as in the former
place it is commanded; behold with thine eyes the Frame, and set thine heart to
know the signification of it: behold with thine eyes the shadow, and set thine
heart upon the substance; and if the heart be set upon these things, it shall
be given to know the Mystery of them. This Prophecy then should not be looked on
as unprofitable, or that which cannot be understood. Surely if all Scripture be
profitable, then this also; and if all things were written for our learning,
then these things likewise, how dark soever they may seem to be. Luke 2.20.
Christ read out of Isaiah the Prophet, and then closed the Book and expounded
the place to the Hearers, saying, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your
ears. And in this the Ministers of the Gospel should be like Christ, they
should read and give the meaning of Scripture. But as to this Prophecy, what do
the most when they have read it, but close the Book and lay it aside, and are
like those reproved by Christ, Isa. 29.11. The vision of all is become unto you
as the words of a book that is sealed, which men delivered unto one that is
learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he says, I cannot, for it is
sealed: and the book is delivered to one that is not learned, saying, Read
this; and he says, I cannot, for I am not learned. The Preachers excuse is,
the book is sealed; the Peoples, we are not learned: but God has not sealed
it, therefore let not men seal it either to themselves or others. God says,
Behold with thine eyes, and set thine heart to all that I show thee. Let not
any then shut their eyes, nor turn away their hearts, from these so admirable
and glorious Discoveries. For as God has not said to the Seed of Jacob, Seek
ye me in vain; so he does not here say, See in vain.

Prop. 2. What is in this Prophecy given forth as a Precept, and as showing
what ought to be, is to be taken under the notion of a Promise, and as
declaring what shall be in the glorious state of the Church here set forth; as
chap. 45.9. O Princes of Israel, remove violence. Now as Princes at all times
ought, so then the Princes of Israel shall remove violence according to that
promise, Isa. 60.18. Violence shall be no more heard in the land. Chap. 44.24.
The Priests shall judge according to my judgments. Though it is their duty, yet
it has not been always their practice: but in the estate of the Church here
foretold it shall be, as their duty, so their constant practice. Plato gave an
Idea of a Commonwealth, not such as ever was in the world, but such as ought to
be: now here we have an Idea of a Church and Commonwealth, not only which
ought to be, but also which shall be.

Prop. 3. In this Prophecy one and the same Church is set forth by these two
representations of a Temple and City: by the Temple is set forth a pure and
glorious Church, constituted according to the mind of God, wherein he shall be
purely worshipped. In it shall be the true Worshippers, who shall worship the
Father in spirit and in truth. The Father seeks such to worship him, and here
they shall be found. By City is meant the same Church, as a spiritual and
heavenly Commonwealth. As the same people of Israel were a Church and
Commonwealth, so as that all that were of the Church, were also of the
Commonwealth of Israel, and all of the Commonwealth were of the Church: so will
it be in this time and State here foretold. In this Temple Christ is the High
Priest, and Priest upon a Throne, ministering for men in things pertaining to
God. In this City he is a King; in the Temple he is Head of Saints as a Church,
leading them in and out, and being in the midst of them, chap. 46.10. gives
counsel, life, grace, strength, and acceptance to all. As the Heart is in the
midst of the body, the Fountain of Life; as the Sun is in the midst of the
Planets, giving light to all, so is Christ in the Church. And in the City he is
Head of the same Saints as a Commonwealth.

Prop. 4. The Church which is here set forth as a Temple and City, is that
glorious Church which shall be after the calling of the Jews, even that Church
whose Windows shall be of Agates, and Gates of Carbuncles, and all her borders
of pleasant stones. And as this is meant of the Church of the Jews when they
shall be called, so therefore it is described by a Temple like the Temple at
Jerusalem, and by Jewish Rites and Figures. The Substance is given forth under
the names of the Shadows, and the Holy Spirit speaking of things which shall
concern the Jews, speaks to them in the Jews Language. That the Church of the
Jews when they shall be called is here meant, appears, because the Names of the
Tribes of Israel are mentioned, as having Portions in the Land, and Gates in
the City; and the Strangers, that is, the Fullness of the Gentiles, who shall be
brought in, shall have an Inheritance with them.

Prop. 5. There is an Outer and an Inner Temple mentioned in this Description:
the outer Temple with its Courts and Gates, and the Chambers of the Courts and
Gates are described, chap. 40. and 41. and the building of the separate place,
chap. 41.13. which is there called the Inner House and Inner Temple, verse 15.
and 17. In this Inner Temple are North and South Chambers, even many Mansions.
Here are Priests which approach to the Lord, and eat the most holy things.
Without in the Outer Temple are Ordinances, which are holy things; but in the
Inner Temple the most holy things are eaten, that is, Christ himself in a
Beatifical Vision of him. Here is also a City described with its Gates; and
without that, Portions for the Tribes of Israel, each Tribe having a Portion in
the Land, and a Gate in the City. Now what does this signify, but that there
will be a Church?

1. In the City New Jerusalem, and in the Inner Temple, that is, the Church
Triumphant, consisting of Saints come up to the measure of the stature of the
Fullness of Christ; of Saints, I say, both raised and coming with Christ, and
also of those which shall be then changed.

2. It shows that there will be Churches also without the City, consisting of
Saints, which shall have Portions in the Land; and Churches of the Outer
Temple, and Saints in the Chambers of the Courts, and Gates, as well as in the
Inner Temple. Those in the chambers of the Courts, and Gates, and Outer Temple,
shall have the Perfection there required, and that measure of Light and
Holiness which shall be due to that state; and shall perform the Service which
shall be required of them in that station. And these Churches without shall
have gate holiness, court-holiness, court-attainments, and Outer Temple
perfection, communion, and comforts; and the others shall have Inner Temple
holiness, perfection, and consolations. The like may be said of the City: there
is the beloved City, New Jerusalem, Rev. 26.9. and there is the camp of the
Saints like the camp of Israel, when the Tribes marched and pitched in order
about the Tabernacle, and is set forth by the same word (...), which is in the
Septuagint to set forth the camp of Israel. This camp will consist of called
Jews and converted Gentiles, even the Nations of them which shall be saved, and
shall walk in the light of the New Jerusalem; for New Jerusalem light shall
fill the breadth of the Land of Immanuel; and every little chamber of the gates
has a window to let in New Jerusalem light into it. This camp of the Saints
will be urbs mobilis and castrensis, a moveable and Tent City; and the New
Jerusalem, urbs fixa. The former will answer the Church of Israel dwelling in
Tents, and the later the state of that Church when Jerusalem was the City
chosen of God to place his Name in. So then there will be at that time, when
the Jews shall be called Saints in two different states, that is, glorified and
not glorified. That there will be glorified ones shall be after proved; and
that there shall be some not glorified, I shall prove by this Argument: There
will be marrying and begetting of children in that time, which cannot be among
the raised Saints, for they marry not, neither are given in marriage; therefore
there must be Saints in an inferior state, among whom this will be. And that
some Saints shall beget children then, is evident from chap. 47.22. Ye shall
divide the land by lot for an inheritance unto you, and to the strangers that
sojourn among you, which shall beget children among you, and they shall be to
you as born in the land among the children of Israel. This likewise is manifest
from Isa. 59.20, 21. The redeemer shall come to Sion, and unto them that turn
from transgression in Jacob. As for me, this is my covenant with them, says
the Lord, my spirit which is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor
out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from henceforth and for ever. This Promise
concerns the Jews when they shall be called; for by this the Apostle proves
their calling, Romans 11.26. Now after their calling they shall have Seed and
Seeds Seed. Isa. 60.15. I will make thee the joy of many generations. Isa.
61.9. Their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring among
the people. Isa. 65.23. They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for
trouble; for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring
with them. The Promise is to them and their offspring, who shall all be
sanctified ones, and the blessed of the Lord. The curse of Adam shall not then
rest upon any of the Saints children, but they shall have the blessing of
Abraham.

Prop. 6. This Temple and City, this Church and Commonwealth which was
constituted and framed according to an Heavenly pattern; Moses did all
according to the pattern in the Mount; and Solomon built the Temple after the
form which was shown to David by the Spirit, 1 Chronicles. 28.12. So Christ shall
build this Temple according to the heavenly pattern. All shall be done by line
and measure, and every part shall have its due proportion; so that it will be a
Spiritual House fitly framed, growing into an holy Temple; chap. 40.3. Ezekiel
saw a man, whose appearance was as Brass, with a line of Flax, and a measuring
Reed. This is Christ, who shall do his Work exactly, and according to rule.

Prop. 7. There were some things commanded to the Jews of old, which are not
mentioned in the description of this Temple and City, and the not mentioning of
them with other Jewish Rites and Ordinances here spoken of, does argue the
Perfection which the Church here described shall have, above what it had under
Moses, or any time since. Now to show this, consider:

1. There was a Candlestick for Light, both in the Tabernacle and Temple: much
is spoken of it, as Exodus 25.31. and in other places; this was a Type of
Gospel-Churches, which are called Golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.20. and the two
Witnesses are called two Candlesticks, Rev. 11.4. A Candlestick is to hold
forth light in a dark place: And when Gospel-Churches are called Candlesticks,
it notes Churches which shall be in a time of darkness, when a Candle is
useful. Thus in John's time there was much darkness upon the face of the earth,
John 1.5. The light shines in darkness. And the two prophesying Witnesses, are
Lights, shining in Darkness. Heathenish, Mohammedan, and Antichristian darkness
has covered the greatest part of the World; and the few Witnesses of Christ
have been Candlesticks holding forth the true light in a dark time and place.
But in the description of this Temple and City, we read nothing of a
Candlestick, or light of a Candle. Whence may be concluded, that the state of
the Church here foretold, will be much more glorious in respect of Light and
Knowledge, than as yet it has been; Rev. 22.5. it is said the New Jerusalem
has no need of a Candle. And then even in the portions of the Tribes that will
be made good: Isa. 30.26. The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the
Sun, and the light of the Sun sevenfold. That degree of Scripture Light which
now shines in the World, being compared with that which shall shine hereafter,
is but as the light of the Moon to the light of the Sun; it is but as the lesser
Light ruling the Night: but then it shall be as the greater Light ruling the
Day. And as now is a time of much darkness in the World, so a great matter of
comfort it is, that we may say as the Apostle, Romans 13.12. The Night is far
spent, and the Day is at hand. The Night in which Antichrist reigns, and wild
Beasts are abroad seeking their Prey, is very far spent; and the Day of the Son
of Man is at hand. And when this Day comes, the Church shall be no longer a
Candlestick, but a glorious Light upon the top of a Mountain: and all
Heathenish, Mohammedan, and Antichristian darkness shall pass away, and the
Earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the
Waters cover the Sea. There shall be abundance of light, and knowledge: Idols
shall be abolished, and there shall not be Athism in the World. As there is not
Atheism in Hell, but Devils and damned Spirits know that there is a God: so in
this time of such glorious light, there shall not be Atheism amongst the
unconverted ones in the world. And this is a reason why the Devil endeavors so
much to fill the world with Atheism now, because he knows his time is short, of
being Ruler of the darkness of this world, and the day is at hand, in which the
Earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord: And when the
Morning of this Day shall come, then the wild Beasts shall lay them down in
their Dens, and not hurt, nor destroy in all the holy Mountain of God. And men
shall be ashamed to commit those abominations which now the world is so full
of. They that be drunken, are drunk in the Night: But in that Day they shall be
sober, and civilly and morally good, who shall be without saving grace.

2. There were Laws given to the Jews concerning the Lepers, both for the trial
of them, and removing them from the Camp, when pronounced unclean: and it was
supposed there might be a Leper of the house of Aaron, Lev. 22.4. Thus hitherto
it has been in the Church: much of spiritual Leprosy has been found there,
and even amongst those of the seed of Aaron; but we find not any thing here of
such Laws. What may be concluded hence, but that at this time there will be no
Lepers in Israel. Spiritual Leprosy shall not appear amongst any in Churches,
to occasion their removal from them, Rev. 21.27. In the New Jerusalem there
shall be nothing that defiles.

3. There was a Law about blessing and cursing in Israel, Deu. 27.12. The
blessings were to be pronounced from Gerizim, and the curses from Ebal: but we
find not any command here for cursing any in Israel. There will be that day
blessing, but not cursing in Israel. Jer. 31.23. It shall be said, The Lord
bless thee O Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Holiness. But, as it is
Rev. 22.3. there shall be no more curse. All shall have the blessing of
Abraham, and none the curse of Ishmael, to be cast out. There shall not be an
Anathema Maranatha for any of the Church then.

4. There were Laws about the redemption of Inheritances, Lev. 25.25. If thy
Brother be waxen poor, and sell his possession, and any of his Kin come to
redeem it, then he shall redeem that which his Brother sold. But we read not
any thing here of selling, or redeeming Inheritances; because no Brother shall
at this time wax poor, a^^ sell his Inheritance. Now it is, as Christ said, The
Poor ye have always with you; but then there shall be no Poor in the Land. They
that obtain that Kingdom which is to come, shall have all other things added to
them. Christ will not be then Hungry, Naked, Sick, or in prison in any of his
Members.

5. There were Laws concerning such as had familiar Spirits, and were Wizards,
Lev. 20.27. A man or a woman that has a familiar Spirit, or is a Wizard, shall
surely be put to death. But at this time there shall not be such in the Land of
Immanuel: nay not amongst the unconverted ones. Evil Spirits shall not be
Familiar Spirits to any then, for they shall be all bound, and shut up in the
bottomless Pit.

6. There were Laws for trial of Jealousy, which was the bitter water that
caused the curse, which the suspected woman was to drink. Now as among the
Tribes in the Land, and among the sacred Nations, there will be Marrying; so
none that shall defile themselves, either by Fornication, or Adultery. No
Adulterers, or Effeminate shall be in that Kingdom of God, but all shall
possess their Vessels in Sanctification and Honor.

Prop. 8. This will be a time in which God will honor those that honor him,
which is promised, 1 Samuel 2.30. And in this time, and state of the Church, it
shall be eminently made good. This may be concluded from Chap. 44.16. The
Priests, the Levites, the Sons of Zadok, which keep the charge of my Sanctuary,
when the Children of Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to
minister unto me. As for the Levites that went astray after Idols, and made the
Children of Israel go astray ^hey shall bear their iniquities, and not come
near (...) the Office of a Priest; v. 10.13. but I will make them keepers of
the charge of the house.

Here two things are to be opened:

1. What this has reference to under the Old Testament; that is, when did the
Sons of Zadok show themselves faithful in keeping the charge of the Sanctuary;
and when did the Levites go astray themselves, and cause Israel to go astray?

2. What this foretells, in reference to the times here meant.

For the first, Let it be considered who were the Levites going astray; and
when, and how they went astray: and next, wherein the Faithfulness of Zadock
and his Sons appeared.

As for the Levites that went astray, they were those of the stock of Eli. It Is
said of his two Sons, Hophni and Phineas, they were Sons of Belial, and knew
not the Lord, and therefore God denounced a Judgment, 1 Samuel 2.20. I said that
thy house should walk before me, but now be it far from me. And upon this God
said, v. 16. I will raise me up a faithful Priest; which was fulfilled when
Abiathar followed Adonijah, and Zadock was made Priest in his room.

And those Levites went astray in two things:

1. Eli's Sons made a God of their Belly, and offered to that Idol what was
brought to be offered to the Lord. Their custom was, 1 Samuel 2.13, 14. When any
man offered Sacrifice, the Priests Servant came while the Flesh was in
seething, with a Fleshhook of three Teeth, and struck it into the Pan, and all
that the Fleshhook brought up, the Priest took to himself; v. 15. Thus the Sin
of the young men was very great, for men abhorred the Offering of the Lord.

2. Abiather, who was of the Stock of Eli, went after Adonijah, and no doubt
drew some other of the Levites with him, and by this the iniquity of Eli's
House came to be full, which brought the Judgment threatened; as we see, 1 Kings
2.27. Solomon thrust out Abiathar, from being Priest, that he might fulfill the
Word of the Lord which he spoke concerning the House of Eli.

Next, as touching Zadock's Faithfulness, that was seen in his keeping with
David, and anointing Solomon; 1 Kings 1.39. and many faithful Priests descended
from him, as Jehoiada, whose faithfulness was eminent in hiding Joash, and
after bringing him forth, and giving order for the slaying of Athalia. Matthew.
23.35. mention is made of Zacharias, who was slain betwixt the Temple and the
Altar. Ezra also was of the Posterity of Zadock, Ezra 7.2.

2. As for what this foretells, observe these particulars:

1. When Idols shall be abolished, many that have gone after them may find
mercy and favor. As for Idols, they shall be abolished, Isa. 2.18. But many
that go after them may be spared: I will make them Keepers of the charge of the
House. Psalm. 99.8. Thou sparedst them, but tookest vengeance of their
Inventions. 1 Cor. 3.15. If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss,
but he himself shall be saved.

2. Those to whom God will vouchsafe any favor, after their goings astray,
must be convinced of their sin therein, and lay it to heart. Ezekiel. 43.11. If
they be ashamed of all that they have done, show them the pattern of the House:
So, if ashamed, they shall keep the charge of the House.

3. God will in the times of restitution have a faithful Ministry, according to
his own heart, which shall keep the charge of his Sanctuary; and neither
Levites, nor any of the House of Israel, shall go astray after Idols any more.
There shall not be an Adonijah, or an Abiathar to go after him; but there shall
be Sons of Zadock, that is, faithful Priests, following the true Solomon. Jer.
3.15. Ple give Pastors after mine own heart.

4. It seems that in the New Jerusalem there may be different degrees of glory:
Zadock and Abiathar, some Levites that went astray, and the Sons of Zadock may
meet there, but not in the same degree of glory; as appears Chap. 44.14, 16.
David had his Worthies who followed him in the Wilderness, and some did more
valiantly than others: And when David came up out of the Wilderness unto the
Throne, he conferred honor upon all, though not in the same degree, 2 Chronicles.
11.20, 21. Abishai had a Name among the three, and was more honorable than the
two, and he became their Captain; however he attained not to the first three.
So verse 25. Benaiah was honorable among the thirty, but attained not to the
first three; and David set him over his Guard. Now this may be looked upon as
typical: Christ will honor all his Servants, but most his most eminent and
faithful Servants. We read in relation to this time, of Rulers over ten Cities,
and Rulers over five Cities, Luke 19.17. according to the greater or lesser
number of Talents given and gained. When the mother of Zebedees children asked
of Christ, that one might sit at his right hand, and the other at his left in
his Kingdom; he replied, Can ye be baptized with my baptism, and drink of my
cup? And further says, That to sit at his right hand and left, shall be given
to those for whom it is prepared. Whence it follows, that there are different
degrees of glory in Christ's Kingdom; and those that do and suffer most for
Christ, shall have greater degrees of glory; not that doing or suffering does
merit, but thus shall they be rewarded by Grace.

Thus in these eight Propositions some things have been insisted on, which
relate both to the City and Temple; in the next place they shall be handled
apart. And first what concerns the Temple with the Courts and Gates, and those
that worship and minister in it; and then what concerns the City, and the
Portions of the Tribes in the Land. Concerning the Temple let some things be
considered in the general, and some things more particularly.

The more general considerations are these:

Consid. 1. The Church is here set forth in its exalted state, and as very
eminently and visibly glorious; for it is a House upon the top of a Mountain,
chap. 43.12. and is here set forth in its Mountain estate, according to that
Prophecy Isa. 2* 2. The mountain of the Lords house shall be exalted above the
top ^f the mountains. It shall be a Mountain above all Mountains, a Mountain
exalted and established in its exalted state. The Church shall not be then in a
Wilderness, nor low in a low place, not in dens and caves of the earth, but on
the top of a Mountain. There is a time when the Saints are to glorify the Lord
in the Fires or in the Valleys, Isa. 24.15. The man of sin has been upon a
Mountain, and the true Church of Christ in the Valleys and in the Fire; but
glorifying the Lord in the Valleys, and enduring the fiery trials, it shall be
glorified on the top of a Mountain, and be for ever above, and no more beneath.
And as the Saints always are, so then they shall appear to be, the excellent
ones of the earth, and they that despised them shall bow themselves down at the
Soles of their feet, and shall call them the City of the Lord, the Sion of the
Holy One of Israel; And God will make them the joy of many generations, Isa.
60.15. As the Church shall be in a glorious and quiet estate, so shall it
continue in it many generations.

Consid. 2. Here is a place prepared to receive, and a Table to entertain all
that come to this House. No sooner within the gate, but there is a chamber to
receive them. Once the Son of Man had not where to lay his head, but he will
provide better for his Servants. The Shunamite said to her Husband, Let us make
a chamber on the wall, and set a bed, and a table, and a stool in it; which was
to entertain Elisha the Prophet, 2 Kings 4.10. this is Christ's care for all
that come to this House. And they that shall be planted in these courts of the
House of the Lord, shall grow and flourish in them; and as it is said Psalm
84.7. They go from strength to strength, or from company to company. So they
that come to this House, shall go from the company in the chambers of the Gates
and Outer Temple, to the company in the Inner Temple: so coming to this House
upon the top of the Mountain, shall at last get to the top of glory in it.

Consid. 3. Many things in the frame of this Building are four square: the
whole Building is so described, each side being five hundred Reeds. Thus it was
in Solomon's Temple, 1 Kings 7.5. all the Doors, Posts, and Windows were four
square; so here the chambers are so, one Reed long, and one Reed broad. So the
Posts, chap. 41.21. the Altar, chap. 43.10. the holy Oblation of Land, chap.
48.20. Thus Rev. 21.16. the City lies four square, which may signify thus
much:

1. Churches and particular Saints shall agree with their Rule, and be fitly
and exactly framed as they ought to be; they shall be like Christ, and
conformed to his will. Things of a four square figure are made so by a square
Rule: Churches shall at last be framed according to their Rule, which is the
Word of God. Churches shall be four square Churches, Saints shall be four
square Saints, made after God, and shall bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam,
even as they have of the Earthly. They shall be at last as throughout like the
Heavenly Adam, as ever they were like the Earthly Adam.

2. Churches and Saints shall be like one another, all four square, all figured
alike; there shall be at last an Uniformity of Churches, and of all Saints;
they shall all serve the Lord with one consent; and when all shall agree with
their rule, then shall they agree one with another.

3. Churches, and Saints in them, shall be like themselves. As like Christ,
like one another, so like themselves: not subject to declinings, and decays, as
now they are. All shall be growing onwards toward perfection, and none shall
backslide. Round things are easily turned this way or that way, but what is of
a four square Figure lies firm. All will be firm and stable in the Church here
set forth. Saints will not be like Reuben, unstable as Water; or double-minded
Men, unstable in their ways; but like David, who said, My heart is fixed, O
God, my Heart is fixed. It is a good thing that the heart be established with
Grace, Heb. 13.9. And at this time the Lord will perform this good thing, in
establishing the Hearts of all his People with Grace, so that they shall not
fall from their own stedfastness; but he that is righteous, shall be righteous
still, Rev. 22.11.

Consid. 4. A Sabbath will be observed in this time when the Jews shall be
called, both by them, and the saved Nations. Chap. 46.1. mention is made of Six
Working-days, and of the Sabbath Day; not a Jewish, but a Gospel Sabbath, the
First day of the Week: which is conceived to be hinted, Chap. 43.26, 27. Seven
days shall they purge the Altar, and when these days are expired, it sha^^ be
that upon the eighth day, and so forward, the Priests shall make your
Burnt-Offerings, etc. when the seven days are expired; and so the Seventh,
which was the Jewish Sabbath ended, then upon the Eighth day, the First day of
the Week, which is the Christian Sabbath, shall the Priests make your
Burnt-Offerings. And so forward; that is, upon every First day after the ending
of the Jewish Sabbath. Now the Sabbath mentioned Chap. 46.1. is this Eighth
day, so called in relation to the Seventh expired; but the First day of the
Week, to be observed by the Jews when they shall be called. This of the Sabbath
may well be taken in a literal sense; for we ought not to leave the literal,
and go to a mystical sense, when there is no necessity for it. What is spoken
of the New Moon, must be taken in a mystical sense, because that was an
observation purely shadowy, and ceremonial; but not so the Sabbath. Let it be
owned then as truth, that a Sabbath shall in this glorious state of the Church
be purely kept. True, in the New Jerusalem there will be a perpetual Sabbath;
but not so amongst the Tribes in the Land. As Adam in Paradise had work to do;
and if he had continued in his innocence, should have wrought the six days, and
have kept the Sabbath: So shall the Saints do in the times of restitution, for
they will be restored to the doing of that which Adam should have done. As they
shall be restored to Privileges, so to the performance of Duties; of which the
exact keeping of a Sabbath is one. And for the farther clearing of this so
considerable a truth, let Isa. 58.13, etc. be compared with this place of
Ezekiel. If thou shall call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, etc.
Where observe, that several great and precious Promises are made to the Jews;
and the keeping of the Sabbath is the condition, upon which the accomplishment
of them does depend. And these Promises were not fulfilled at the Return of the
Jews from Babylonish Captivity, or at any time since, but shall be fulfilled
when the Jews shall be called. Let the particulars be well weighed, v. 8. Then
shall thy Light break forth as the Morning, and thine Health shall spring forth
speedily. What Light is this, but that mentioned, Isa. 60.1. Arise, and shine,
for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. The Jews
have been long in Darkness, but the Glory of the Lord shall at last be
revealed, and the Veil shall be taken from their hearts that they may see it.
And thy oighteousness shall go before thee: that is, The Lord thy
righteousness. This then respects the time when the Jews shall be called by
this Name, which has not been yet; for they at Christ's first coming, went
about to establish their own righteousness, and did not submit to the
righteousness of God; they would not then be called by this Name. And farther,
it is said, The Glory of the Lord shall be their reward. It shall be with them,
as with the Jews in the Wilderness, when they had the Cloud and smoke by Day,
and the shining of a flaming Fire by Night. Which when Pharaoh pursued them,
was their reward, v. 10. Then shall thy Light rise in obscurity, and thy
Darkness as the Noonday. The Jews are under Darkness within, and without;
Darkness covers their Hearts, and their State; for they lie hid in obscurity
and darkness, and none knows where the Ten Tribes are; but at last they shall
be brought forth to the wonder of the World: for it shall be said, These, where
had they been? Isa. 49.21. v. 12. They that shall be of thee, shall build the
old waste places, and raise up the foundations of many Generations. When they
returned from Babylon, they were the Foundations only of one Generation of
Seventy years, that were raised up. This promise then must look further, v. 14.
I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the Earth: Not only of
Canaan, but of the Earth. And lastly, I will feed thee with the Heritage of
Jacob thy Father. Which intimates the calling, and gathering of the Ten Tribes
also. When the Jews returned from Babylon, they were fed only with Judah's
Inheritance. For the Ten Tribes did not then return, which may be proved from
Hos. 1.6, 7. I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel, but will
utterly took them away. But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will
save them by the Lord their God. Therefore when Judah was saved from Babylonish
Captivity, Israel was not saved: But at last Judah and Israel shall be saved
together, v. 11. Then shall the children of Judah, and the children of Israel
be gathered together, and appoint them one Head; and then they shall be fed
with the Heritage of Jacob. 'Twas the whole Land of Canaan which was Jacob's
Heritage, which he divided amongst his twelve Sons. And how exactly does this
agree with Ezekiel's Prophecy about the division of the Land amongst the twelve
Tribes, which shall be fed with the Heritage of Jacob their Father. Its most
evident then that these Promises are to have their accomplishment when the Jews
shall be called. But observe what must be done by them. If thou shall call the
Sabbath a delight. Therefore, first a Sabbath will then be kept, even a
Christian Sabbath by the Jews. And if a Sabbath was to be kept by Adam in
Paradise: if it was to be observed from the beginning, and shall be by the
Jews, when called: If the Church, in the times of restitution of all things
shall keep a Sabbath, how much more is it now to be done, when Saints have so
much need of it? The Sabbath is made for man; that is, for man's benefit, and
advantage secondarily, as principally for God's glory, that he might be praised
for the Works of Six Days: And the Christian Sabbath is to be kept, that God
may be glorified for the work of Redemption, and of a new Creation. And when
the New Heavens and the New Earth shall be created, there will be a New Command
for it, like that New Command of Love, John. 13.34. And then the Saints shall
say, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power; for thou
have Created all things. In the beginning, the Heavens and Earth, and all the
Host of them: And now the New Heavens and Earth are finished, and all the Hosts
of them. And for thy pleasure, they are, and were created, Rev. 4.11. All
things in the beginning were created, and now he that sits upon the Throne has
made all things new. And as a Sabbath will be kept by the Jews; so, in a most
strict manner: If thou shall call the Sabbath a delight. Many keep a Sabbath
now, but do not call it a delight: But then it shall be the Saints delight.
Next, The Holy of the Lord. The Jews shall acknowledge it to be Jure Divino.
They shall not look upon it as a Humane Institution, and call it the Holy of
Men, but the Holy of the Lord; because made Holy by him. And also holy to the
Lord, honorable: and shall honor him, not doing thine own works, nor finding
thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words; which now even the best are
too apt to do.

Consid. 5. A Passover will be kept in the Kingdom of God. Ezekiel. 45.21. In the
first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall have the Passover,
a feast of seven days; and in that day shall the Prince prepare for himself,
and the people of the land, a sin-offering, and a burnt-offering, and a
meat offering, verse 22, 23, 24. Christ and the Saints shall keep this
Passover and Feast together. Compare herewith Luke 22.16. where after Christ
had declared his earnest desire to eat of that Passover, he adds, I will not
any more eat thereof, till it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. It Is observed
by Ainsworth on Exodus 12.11. that seven famous Passeovers are recorded in
Scripture: The first that which Israel kept in Egypt, Exodus 12. The second in
the Wilderness, Number. 9. The third when the Israelites first entered into Canaan
in the Valley of Achor, Josh. 5.10. The fourth in the Reformation of Israel by
King Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 30. The fifth under Josias, 2 Chro. 35. The sixth by
Israel returning out of Babylon The seventh by Christ and his Disciples. And we
may observe how the true Gospel-Passeover came in the room of the Legal
Passover, and what times and occasions answerable to the former there have
been, and will be, for keeping a spiritual Passover.

1. The true Passover has been slain in Egypt, 1 Cor. 5.7. Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us. And as the Israelites having the Blood of the
Lamb upon their Door-posts, the destroying Angel passed over them: so Believers
having the Blood of sprinkling upon them, may be sure that wrath and vengeance
shall pass over them; and they may and ought to keep the Feast by rejoicing in
the Grace of God toward them, and in their Peace with him, and also in hope of
the Glory of God; and should abundantly bless God for giving Christ for them:
so should they keep the Feast.

Q. But how was Christ our Passover slain in Egypt?

A. There is that which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where also our
Lord was crucified, Rev. 11.8. The great City there spoken of is Rome, and by a
Synecdoche is put for the Roman Jurisdiction, which then did extend it self
over Iudaea; and by the Roman Power was Christ crucified, for the Romans way of
putting to death was crucifying. So Christ was slain in Egypt spiritually so
called, that is, in the Roman Dominion.

2. A spiritual Passover has been kept in the Wilderness; for the Church has
been driven into the Wilderness by Antichrist, and there has been preserved
and nourished, being fed with Angels food: and much experience of Gods goodness
has been given for meat to the people inhabiting the Wilderness. So that even
here the Saints have had the great privilege of keeping the Feast, and eating
their spiritual Passover, whereby the Woman has been nourished in the
Wilderness.

3. There have been some times of Reformation, and of the Gospels prevailing,
and some enlargement of the Church from Antichristian Tyranny and Bondage, and
thereby a ground of keeping the Feast; as in the times of Hezekiah and Josiah,
all being the fruit of Christ their Passover, sacrificed for them.

4. The calling of the Jews, and the glorious estate of the Church in that
time, is believed and waited for, and not in vain; for the Valley of Achor
shall be given them for a Door of Hope, and Vineyards from thence; and then
there will be a time for the Jews keeping this Passover and Feast, with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

5. Babylon must fall, and be destroyed for ever; and the Churches Redemption,
which draws nigh, will come. The man of sin has been consuming by the Spirit
of Christ's mouth, and will shortly be destroyed by the brightness of his
coming; and Christ shall take to himself his great power and reign. And then
shall the Passover be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, and the Prince and
People of the Land shall eat it together. And as Christ and his Disciples had a
personal communion in eating the Typical Passover, so shall they in eating the
true Passover.

Q. But how shall Christ, being the Passover, eat it?

A. The Saints shall eat this Passover, and keep the Feast, and Christ with
them. Saints shall eat it by looking on Christ, as once slain for them. They
will rejoice in what Christ has done for and is to them, even Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. And then Christ also will keep
the Feast; that is, he will rejoice with the Saints, as having been their
Passover, slain for them, and as having by his Spirit made them new creatures.
The benefits of his Death and Mediation, and blessings of his Kingdom, which
then the Saints shall be partakers of, will be his great delight; and as a
Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so will Christ over the Saints. They shall
eat and rejoice in what they receive from Christ, and he in what he gives to
them. And as he said, it is more blessed to give than to receive; so shall he
rejoice more in what he gives to the Saints, than they can in what they receive
from him. And as Saints shall offer praise, so Christ with them. Once he said,
Father, I thank thee, that thou have revealed these things to babes: so at this
Feast will he say, Father, I thank thee for my Kingdom, and that these are with
me in it, having been brought out of great tribulation. I thank thee that all
mine Enemies being made my Footstool, these are with me on my Throne. And for a
close of this particular, consider how Christ shall prepare for himself, as
well as for the people of the Land, a Sin-offering and Burnt-offering, etc.
This does not intimate that Christ has sin of his own to expiate, but because
he shall (as has been shown) eat this Passover with the Saints in the Kingdom
of God; therefore he is said to prepare for himself, as well as for the people
of the Land. Christ prepares joy and gladness for himself, when he prepares
good for the Saints.

Thus much of the Passover. We read also of the Feast of seven days, chap.
45.25. but nothing of Fasts. This will be a time of joy and gladness; and
sorrow and sighing will fly away. The Bridegroom will be with the Saints, and
therefore they shall not fast.

But as we read, Zech. 8.19. The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the
fifth month, etc. shall be joyful feasts. And this shall be when many and
strong nations shall seek the Lord in Jerusalem, verse 22. Now it being shown
how a spiritual Passover will be kept in the Kingdom of God, it may not be
judged impertinent to add something for the opening of another Scripture,
which has near affinity with this; and that is, Matthew. 26.29. I will not drink
henceforth of this fruit of the vine, till I drink it new with you in my
Fathers Kingdom. Of this Fruit, which does not intimate that the Fruit of the
Vine, taken in a proper sense, shall be drunk in that Kingdom of God which
shall be in the New Jerusalem, but that which shall have some analogy or
likeness with it. For clearing this consider, that,

1. Christ is called a Vine, and he is the true vine, as he says, John 15.1.

2. The Church is called a Vine, Psalm 80.8. Thou have brought a vine out of
Egypt, thou preparedst room for it, and did cause it to take deep root. And
when the Jews shall be called, they shall be planted a noble Vine. God shall
prepare room for it, and its Boughs shall spread, and be as the Cedars of God.
The Foxes shall be taken that would spoil it, and no wild Bore out of the Wood
shall waste it; and the Lord will not only look upon, but come down and visit
this Vine. Thus we see that Christ is a Vine, and the Church is a Vine; and
this is a Vine in a Vine, a Vine planted in Christ the true Vine, having its
life, strength, and sap from him: and when he shall look for Grapes from it,
'twill not be in vain, it shall not bring forth wild Grapes. And next consider
how Christ and the Saints shall drink of the Fruit of the Vine, new in the
Kingdom of God.

1. The Saints shall drink, and drink abundantly, of the Fruit of the true
Vine, which is Christ: for he appearing in glory, and the Saints seeing him as
he is, they shall be abundantly refreshed and satisfied, in those times of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord. The Saints drinking now of this Fruit
of the Vine by Faith, have joy unspeakable and full of glory. When they shall
drink in the New Jerusalem by vision, full fruition, and participation of the
benefits of Christ, how full of glory will that joy be! Psalm 36.8. Thou shall
make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. A River of Wine shall flow from
Christ then, the streams whereof shall make glad the City of God.

2. As the Church is a Vine, so Christ shall drink of the Fruit of it. For, 1.
The Memory of what Saints now do and suffer for Christ, will be very grateful
and pleasing to him: for what shall Christ say then? Come ye blessed, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you: for I was hungry and ye fed me, I was thirsty and
ye gave me drink; and what ye gave me then to drink, is sweet Wine to me now.
And this is the Fruit of the true Vine Christ.

2. The then holiness and happiness of the Saints, and their peace and
prosperity, will be Christ's great delight: all is the Fruit of the true Vine,
being purchased by his Blood: and of his Fullness Saints receive as Branches
from the Vine. And then Christ shall rejoice in the glorious effects of his
Sufferings for the Saints, and take pleasure in their prosperity, procured by
his being a man of sorrows. And once more let Psalm 36.8. be considered, Thou will make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. There will be in the New
Jerusalem a River of pleasures, and these shall be not only the Saints
pleasures, but Christ's pleasures also: for that River, the streams whereof make
glad the City of God, shall make Christ also glad. And lo, here is the Wine
which cheareth God and Man: such an expression there is in Jothams Parable,
Jud. 9.13. It cheareth the heart of Christ, who is God and Man; and it cheareth
Saints too. Christ beholding the Saints, shall see of the travel of his Soul,
and be satisfied: this is the Wine which he shall drink. And Saints shall
delight themselves in the Lord, and be satisfied in seeing him, and have the
desire of their hearts; and this is the Wine which they shall drink. And thus
as a Passover will be kept in the Kingdom of God, so shall also the Lords
Supper; but among the glorified Saints in the New Jerusalem, not in signs, but
in sight of Christ. And as at the first Institution of the Lords Supper Christ
was personally present with his Disciples; so when it shall be eaten and drunk
in this more excellent way in the Kingdom of God, Christ shall be personally
present with the Saints; for he says, I will drink it new with you. And this
shall be done,

3. In the Fathers Kingdom: which is taken two ways.

1. As distinct from the Kingdom of Christ as Mediator, which shall then have
being, when Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father.

2. As the same with Christ's Kingdom; for Christ's Kingdom is the Fathers,
though at last the Fathers Kingdom shall not be Christ's as Mediator, but as God
equal with the Father. I say, Christ's is the Fathers: for,

1. The Father gives it to him; Christ is the Fathers King; I have set my King
upon my holy hill of Sion, Psalm 2.6. And he has given him power over all
flesh, John 17.2. And has committed all judgment to him.

2. The Father governs the World in and by Christ as Mediator.

3. The Son rules to the glory of the Father, for he is said to be Lord, Phil.
2.11. And every tongue ought to confess it to the glory of the Father. So
Christ's Kingdom is the Fathers, which is here meant, as thus appears:

1. What in Matthew is called the Fathers Kingdom, Mark 14.25. and Luke 22.18.
is the Kingdom of God; and the Kingdom of God in the Gospel most usually is
taken for Christ's Kingdom, Luke 11.21. The Kingdom of God is within you, or
among you, which must be understood of Christ's Kingdom.

It is to be observed also, that what is called the Fathers Kingdom in Matthew,
is called Christ's Kingdom Luke 22.30. That ye may eat and drink at my table in
my Kingdom.

2. Christ's Kingdom is included in the Fathers, in that Petition, Thy Kingdom
come. The Prayer is made to the Father, Thy Kingdom, etc. Now in this Petition
the coming of Christ's Kingdom is first desired, and after the Fathers, when
Christ shall have finished the work given him to do as Mediator.

Consid. 6. This House with the whole Limit thereof, and every thing belonging
to it shall be most holy. Chap. 43.12. This is the Law of the House upon the
top of the Mountain, the whole Limit thereof round about shall be most holy:
And it is added to show the certainty of it, This is the Law of the House.

Q. But how a Law?

A. The Law of this House shall not only be a Law showing what ought to be:
For thus it is a Law now, and at all times, that all things in the Church should
be holy. 1 Cor. 3.17. The Temple of the Lord is holy. That is, ought to be so:
But also a Law showing what shall be. There is a Law commanding, and a Law
causing that to be which is commanded, like the Law of the Creation, Let there
be Light, and there was Light. So God will say, Let this House be holy, and it
shall be so. There is the Law in the Word, and the Law in the Heart; and in
relation to this time especially God promises, I will put my Laws in their
inward parts, and write them in their hearts, etc. The Law in the Scriptures
requires obedience; the Law in the Heart inclines to it, and makes it natural
and pleasant. Paul said of Timothy, I have no man like minded, who will
naturally care for your state. So when the Law is in the Heart, it will make
Men to care naturally for the things of God: I mean with respect to the Divine
Nature, which Saints partake of. Romans 8.2. Mention is made of the Law of the
Spirit. Now such will be the Law of this House. The Law of the Spirit, which is
mighty in Christ Jesus, shall make the whole Limit of this House holy. Ezekiel.
36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes,
and ye shall keep my Judgments, and do them. And here let this farther be taken
notice of, and it will be a very comfortable consideration. Not only the
Temple, and Altar, and those that worship therein are to be measured, but also
the Courts, both inner and outer; and the Gates and Chambers thereof, all are
to be measured, and made according to their Pattern, and so most holy. Now
compare with this, Rev. 11.1, 2. Where the Temple and Altar, and those that
worship therein are to be measured. But the Court without was not to be
measured, because it was to be given to the Gentiles, etc. This sets forth the
time of Antichrist's Reign, who was to possess the outer Court. But when the
Gentiles thus tread down the Court which is without, there is still a Temple,
and Altar, and there are those that worship therein, even a true Church holding
Christ the Head, and holding forth the truth as it is in Jesus; and such who
worship the Father in Spirit, and in Truth. And in this time the holy City must
be trodden down forty and two Months. Jerusalem in the Letter was trodden down
of the Romans: and Mystical Jerusalem has been trodden down also. As that by
the Power of Rome when Heathenish; so this, by the Power of Rome Antichristian,
but Heathenish still; Papists being but Heathens to the true Israel of God.
This Court trodden down of the Gentiles is cast out, and not measured, being
cut off, and separated from the Temple; that is, the true Church of God, by the
Reed of the Word, as not belonging to the same. Thus in John's Vision, the
outward Court is not measured, but Heathens possess it. But Ezekiel in his
Vision sees the outward Court also measured, with the Gates, Thresholds, Posts,
and Chambers thereof; and all most holy. What may be concluded hence; but that,

1. The State of the Church as it shall be after the Destruction of Antichrist,
is here set forth. when the forty and two Months shall be ended; the
Witnesses raised, and the Jews called: for so long as Antichrist remains, he
possesses the outward Court, and it is not measured. But being measured, as we
see in Ezekiel's Vision, the Gentiles will be then cast out, and Christ will
tread in his anger, and trample in his fury, those who did tread down the Holy
City. And this measuring of the outward Court, shows, that the times of the
Gentiles will be then fulfilled; and the Jews inwardly, and in the Spirit, even
a true Church, shall be in the outward Court.

2. Churches at this time will be pure, yea most holy, even the Churches of the
outward Court; for all will be measured. The Wall on the outside of the House,
chap. 40.5. the Stairs, the Gates, the Thresholds, and every little Chamber, v.
6, 7. all agree with their Pattern: and so there will not be any Antichristian
Church, left, but all will be holy, yea most holy. How will this be? Churches
will be, as true, so pure, and in a degree of purity above what they have been
at any time yet in the World. The Church of the Jews in the Wilderness was
holy: the measured Churches which have been in the time of Antichrist's Reign,
have been holy: And the Primitive Church gathered by the Apostles, was more
holy than any before, or since. But that Glorious Church which shall be after
the Calling of the Jews, being compared with the former, shall be the most holy
of all. As Christ said of John Baptist, A greater than he has not risen,
notwithstanding he that is least in the Kingdom of God, is greater than he. So
there has not been a more Glorious Church in the World, than the Primitive
was: but the least in the time here meant, will be greater than that. The least
of Churches in the time of the New Heavens, and New Earth, will be greater and
more glorious than the best in the times of the Old Heavens, and the Old Earth.
And why may we not conceive that God is pleased to make use of the Names of the
Types and Figures, in setting forth this Glorious Church; to declare that this
Spiritual House will be framed as exactly according to an Heavenly Pattern, as
the typical House was: and that true holiness will be as perfect, and exact in
this, as typical was in that? We know that Moses his Work was according to the
Pattern in the Mount: For he made the Tabernacle, Aaron's Garments, and all
other things, as he was commanded. There was a perfect Ceremonial Holiness in
all. And the Sacrifices were without blemish. Now all things here being given
forth under the Names of Mosaical Rites, and Shadows; this seems to intimate,
That true Holiness will be as perfect in this time, as Ceremonial was in Moses
his time.

Thus much concerning the General Considerations: the more particular are these
following.

Consid. 1. All Ordinances will be Gods Ordinances, and administered according
to his Institution, and Command; and none of Men's Ordinances will be added to,
or joined with them. Chap. 43.7. The place of my Throne, and of the Soles of my
Feet, shall the Children of Israel no more defile, in setting their Threshold
by my Threshold, and their Posts by my Posts. There is God's Door, and
Threshold, by which Men are to enter into the Church; and there are Doors and
Thresholds made by Antichrist, and he would not have any to enter, but through
his Doors, and over his Thresholds. But in this time of Reformation, all these
will be taken away, and none shall remain but the Lords. And then not only
Ordinances, but the Forms and Fashions of them, and all their Circumstances,
and manner of Administration, will be of Divine appointment. The Man of Sin
has taken upon him to form, and fashion things which concern the Worship of
God; and to mend Divine Institutions, and to make up what he judges to be
wanting in them. He will put a better form upon them, than that in which the
Word has left them to us: and adds many new things of his own inventing. But
observe what is said, Chap. 43.11. Show them the form of the House, and the
fashion thereof, and all the forms thereof: Show them the Ordinances thereof,
and all the forms thereof. The mentioning of Forms so often, is not a vain
repetition. It Is to show, that all will be as it ought, both for Substance and
Circumstances. And when it is said, All the Ordinances, and Forms thereof, it
may be meant of the forms of those Ordinances. All in this Church will appear
in a Scripture shape, and form; and the Lord will magnify his Law, and make it
honorable; and all Antichristian Laws and Ordinances shall be brought into
contempt, and shall have the Judgment of the Great Whore, which is to be hated,
and utterly burnt with Fire.

Q. But will there be such Ordinances as now, in that time, viz. Preaching and
Administration of Sacraments? John says, Rev. 21.22. That there will not be
need of the Sun, or Moon, no need of a Ministry; for the Lord God, and the
Lamb, will be the Temple thereof.

A. This is true, as to the New Jerusalem, but amongst the People of the Land,
and the saved Nations, there will be Ordinances: They shall have the Light of
Scripture, and a Ministry holding it forth. Fishers stand upon the Bank of the
River. What are these, but Fishers of Men? and do hint a Ministry. A Ministry
must be till all the Saints be come up to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ; which cannot be said of the People of the Land. And we may
not think that the great abounding of Light and Grace, in that Glorious Day,
will render a Ministry useless, and unprofitable. For as 'twill be a growing
time with the People of the Land, and the saved Nations; so a Ministry will be
a means of their growth. It Is observed that Christ, who received the Spirit,
and not by measure, did yet attend on John's Ministry; which is gathered from
John 1.26, 27. John Baptist says, There is one standing among you, etc. This
was Christ, who then stood among John's Disciples, He it is, who coming after
me, is preferred before me. After me, in the Greek is, (...), not post, but
pone me, behind me, as a Follower of mine. Matthew. 16.24. If any will come
after, (...), so as to be a Disciple, and Follower of mine. So this coming
after, is of a Disciple following his Master. Thus did Christ; he followed
John, and attended on his Ministry. And how was the Ministry magnified by this,
when the Lord of Glory attended on it! Christ was, as John's Master, so John's
Disciple; even as he was David's Lord, yet David's Son. John might have said,
as when Christ came to be baptized of him, I have need to be baptized of thee;
so I have need to be taught of thee, and come thou to me? But this Christ did
also, because it became him to fulfill all righteousness. And if it became him
to do this, how much more does it become us to do it now? and how much more
will it become the people of the Land to do it, when the Jews shall be called,
who shall then be in a growing state?

And if there shall be a Ministry in that time, then also Baptism; for Christ's
Commission was, Go teach all nations, baptizing them; make Disciples, and then
baptize them. If therefore the saved Nations shall be converted by teaching,
then they must be baptized. This seems hinted chap. 40.38. At the entries by
the posts of the gates they washed the burnt-offering. And if there shall be
Baptism, then also the Lords Supper; which the Tables, on which the
Sin-offering is to be slain, may also hint; of which more afterward.

Q. Will not the personal coming of Christ put an end to Ordinances? for the
Apostle says, As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show
forth the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26.

A. The Saints with Christ in the New Jerusalem will be above Ordinances, but
not the people of the Land. Two things are necessary to carry a people above
Ordinances:

1. Christ's receiving them to himself, to be where he is; John 14.3. I will
come again to receive you to my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.
This is the coming which carries a people above Ordinances:

2. Their being with Christ in glory, and made like unto him. Thus will it be
with the Saints in the New Jerusalem, but not with the people of the Land, till
changed and translated thither: therefore they may sometimes have a sight of
Christ yet will not hereby be carried above Ordinances; which may be cleared by
two Instances.

First, Christ was transfigured on the Mount, and was seen in that glory, in
which he shall appear at his second coming; for Peter says, That he, and
James, and John, were then Eyewitnesses of his power and coming. There were
with Christ then Moses, and Elias, and Peter, and James, and John; Moses and
Elias saw his glory, and appeared with him in glory: and so they were above
Ordinances. Peter, and James, and John, saw his glory, but did not appear with
him in glory, neither was that sight to continue: and therefore notwithstanding
this they were to be under Ordinances. And that they might not think themselves
hereby carried above them, there came a Voice out of the cloud, Hear him. After
they had thus seen, they were commanded to hear: and we may well conceive, that
thus it will be in the New Jerusalem state; some will be as Moses and Elias, in
the presence of Christ, and like him in glory; so the Saints in the New
Jerusalem: others will be as Peter, James, and John, who may sometimes see
Christ, and yet be under a command of hearing; so the People of the Land.

Secondly, Paul had a sight of Christ after he was received up into glory, 1
Cor. 15.8. Last of all he was seen of me also. And this sight of Christ was
with his bodily eyes, even as the other Apostles; and five hundred Brethren had
seen him. But notwithstanding this sight Paul remained under Ordinances.

Consid. 2. The Members of Churches shall have true holiness and righteousness,
Isa. 60.21. Thy people shall be all righteous. Chap. 43.7. The place of my
throne shall the children of Israel no more defile. No carcass shall be here,
none dead in sins shall be admitted into this spiritual house. Eliashib was
guilty of this evil thing in relation to the material Temple, He prepared a
chamber in the courts of the house of God for Tobiah, which grieved Nehemiah,
and therefore he cast the housholdstuff of Tobiah out of the chamber, Nehem.
13.7, 8. But no Tobiah shall have a chamber prepared in the Courts of this
House of God; neither shall any of Antichrists Housholdstuff be found in this
House to defile it. Chap. 44.9. No stranger, uncircumcised in heart or flesh
shall enter into my Sanctuary. All shall put off the body of the sins of the
flesh, and be circumcised to the Lord, both in heart and flesh, inwardly and
outwardly: they shall be holy in heart and life, and in all manner of
conversation. There shall not be any, who under a form shall deny the power of
Godliness. In the later perilous times it is so, but in the last pure and
peaceable times it shall not be so. Rev. 22.3. His servants shall serve him;
him, and not their Enemies; him, only, and him thoroughly. All shall be an
oblation to God, and shall present their bodies a living sacrifice. Chap.
45.15, 16. One lamb out of the flock, out of the fat pastures of Israel, for a
meat offering. Ordinances and means of Grace shall then be fat Pastures for the
Saints to feed in. The Church has been in the Wilderness, and nourished there,
Rev. 12.14. but at last it shall be brought out of the Wilderness into the fat
Pastures of Israel; and the Saints feeding in them shall be fat and
flourishing, whereby he that is feeble shall be as David, and he that is as
David shall be as the Angel of the Lord. And mark what follows; All the people
of the Land shall give this Oblation for the Prince, or be this Oblation to the
Prince in Israel. And how shall this be? Ve^se 1^. It shall be the Princes part
to give Burnt-offerings, and Meat Offerings, making good that Promise, I will
cause you to walk in my Statutes. Now to set forth this more fully, consider,

1. All the Sacrifices shall be holy and without blemish; Chap. 46.4. Lambs
without blemish. The Saints of that time shall be Lambs in innocence, and Lambs
without blemish. Now there being much spoken in this Prophecy about Sacrifices
and Offerings, I shall take this occasion to unfold somewhat of the Mystery of
them, And in the first place shall take notice, that mention is made of the
Princes Offerings, and of the Peoples Offerings. The Prince is Christ, and of
his Offerings we read chap. 45.22. On the day of the Passover shall the Prince
prepare for himself, and the People of the Land, a Bullock for a Sin-offering,
and seven Bullocks and seven Rams for a Meat Offering: the Sin-offering for the
People of the Land, the Meat Offering for himself and the People of the Land.
The Peoples Offerings are mentioned chap. 46.24. These are the places of them
that boil, where the Ministers of the House shall boil the Sacrifices of the
People. ^n the next place we may observe the several kinds of Sacrifices
mentioned in this Prophecy, being four, the Sin-offering, the Burnt-offering,
the Meat Offering, and Peace Offering.

1. The Sin-offering, and this is Christ, who ma^^ his Soul an Offering for Sin.

Q. How shall Christ be offered when this Temple shall be built?

A. 1. There shall be a full discovery of the Mystery of Christ crucified, of
his being made Sin, and fulfilling righteousness. We may observe, that where
Christ crucified was preached, and his death was shown forth in the Lords
Supper, there he is said to be crucified. Gal. 3.1. Before whose eyes Christ
has been evidently set forth, crucified among you. So that he was crucified at
Galatia, that is, evidently set forth as crucified. In like manner when this
Temple shall be built, Christ shall be slain; that is, evidently set forth as
slain. The price of his Blood, and his great love in laying down his Life, will
be fully manifested, and the Doctrine of Justification by Free Grace, through
the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ will be fully cleared up, and all Errors
about it will vanish. Christ was crucified at Jerusalem without the Gate, and
at Galatia: now at the time here meant Christ will be crucified, not as at
Jerusalem, but as at Galatia, in being evidently set forth as crucified.

2. Christ crucified shall be applied by Faith. The Jews shall not establish
their own righteousness then, but shall submit to the righteousness of God: and
the Benefits of Christ crucified shall flow in abundantly upon them, as in
reconciling them to God; so in purging them from dead works to serve the living
God. Chap. 45.20. The blood must be upon the posts of the house, the settle of
the altar, and on the posts of the gates; so shall ye reconcile the house. And
this is to be done for every one that erreth and is simple. The least sin cannot
be done away but by the Blood of Christ, and then all from the least to the
greatest shall be done away. Concerning this Sin-offering one thing more is to
be observed against Popish Altars and the Mass. Chap. 40.39. There are Tables
to slay the Sin-offering upon: we do not read of Tables for this use under the
Law, but only of an Altar. Christ will not be sacrificed and offered on an
Altar, as the Papists dream they do, supposing the consecrated Bread and Wine
to be the very Body and Blood of Christ, which their Priests pretend to offer
up upon an Altar as an Expiatory Sacrifice. But Christ shall be only slain
upon Tables, that is, evidently set forth as slain, both in the Word preached,
and in the Lords Supper, which (as has been before shown) will be then
administered among the People of the Land: and the whole Mystery of Christ
crucified will be made so plain upon these Tables, that he may run that shall
read it.

2. Burnt-offerings; of which see Lev. 1. and 8. and 9. chap. These went up in
Fire to the Lord upon an Altar, which figured,

1. Christ, who went up in the Fire of Love and Zeal for the Glory of God, and
the Good of Souls.

2. The Saints, who are to present their Bodies a living sacrifice, and to
ascend up also in the Fire of Love and Zeal, and so shall be accepted.

3. Meat Offerings; which signified,

1. Christ. Heb. 10.5. Sacrifice and offering thou would not have; but a body
have thou prepared me, which is the true Mincah, purging away sin. 1 Samuel 3.14.
The sin of the house of Eli shall not be purged with Mincah.

2. The Persons of Christians sanctified for a pure gift. Isa. 66.20. They
shall bring your brethren for a Mincah. Romans 15.16. That the offering of the
Gentiles may be acceptable to God. The converted Gentiles are now, and at last
the Jews shall be a Mincah acceptable and well pleasing to God.

3. The Fruits of Grace, both toward God and toward Men. Heb. 13.16. To do
good forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Phil. 4.18. The
things sent by you were the odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and
well pleasing to God.

Concerning the Burnt-offering and Meat Offering it is to be observed, that the
Prince is to offer them. Chap. 46.4, 5. The Burnt-offering which the Prince
shall offer on the Sabbath Day shall be six lambs, etc. And the Meat Offering
for the lambs as he is able to give. Which may signify thus much: First, when
any shall be converted, Christ shall offer them to the Father, and he will
accept them; these are the Lambs which Christ shall offer. And he shall offer
as he is able to give, or according to the gift of his hand, that is, according
to what he has in his hands. When Christ apprehends any, and takes them into
his hands, he presently offers them up to the Father, and puts them into his
hands. Secondly, when any are to be changed and translated into the New
Jerusalem from amongst the People of the Land, then Christ shall offer them to
be admitted into that glorious Society there, and the Father will accept them.
These are the Lambs which Christ shall take out of the fat Pastures of Israel,
and offer to the Father, and shall be with Christ beholding his Glory. These he
shall offer in the New Moons, and Sabbath Days; that is, in the times appointed
by the Father.

4. Peace Offerings, or Sacrifices of Payments and Pacifications, in which Men
paid to God their acknowledgments of Mercies received, and gave thanks for
their Peace and Prosperity. Psalm 56.12. I will render Praise; or pay
confessions to thee. These signified;

1. Christ's Oblation of himself, who became our Peace.

2. Our Oblation of Praise. The Peace Offerings might be of Males and Females.
Gal. 3.28. Male and Female, all are one in Christ, and should be a Sacrifice of
Praise. But here is a Question arises.

Q. If by Peace Offerings, Meat Offerings, and Burnt-Offerings, Saints are
meant, and their Services; how are these said to reconcile? For so we read,
Chap. 45.15. One Lamb of the Flock out of the fat Pastures of Israel for a
Burnt-Offering, Peace Offering, and Meat Offering, to make reconciliation for
them.

A. 1. It must be granted that the Lambs taken out of the Flock, signify
Saints; for they are Christ's Flock: Fear not little Flock, etc. Now indeed
little, but then it shall be a great Flock.

2. One of two hundred includes all, and is instead of the whole Flock, which
shall be this Burnt-Offering: as appears, verse 16. All the People of the Land
shall give this Oblation; or rather, shall be this Oblation to the Prince in
Israel. All shall willingly give themselves up to the Lord Jesus, and own him
for their Prince.

3. Observe what is said, ver. 17. It shall be the Princes part to give
Burnt-Offerings, and Meat Offerings, and he shall prepare the Sin-Offering, and
the Meat Offering. Here two things are to be taken notice of:

1. When Saints become a Meat Offering, and Peace Offering, it is by Christ's
preparing them, and making them such.

2. Christ prepares the Sin-Offering to go with the Meat Offering; that is, he
appears in the presence of God as their Sin-Offering, whereby their
Reconciliation was first made, and is continued. And Saints being presented as
a Meat Offering duly prepared, together with the Sin-Offering: thus they become
a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling favor, acceptable and well-pleasing unto God.

4. To declare this farther, take notice of a twofold Distinction.

The first Distinction is this, There is Reconciliation to God:

1. By taking away enmity, and appeasing wrath, and making peace. This is done
by Christ alone, as the Sin-Offering. Thus verse 19. The Blood of the
Sin-Offering put upon the Posts of the House, does reconcile the House.

2. By having the evidence of Reconciliation, and Peace. This comes, and is
continued through Prayer, Praise, Repentance, holy and humble walking with God.
And in this sense the Meat Offering, and Peace Offering make Reconciliation;
because through these it is made evident.

The second Distinction is this.

1. There is Reconciliation to God as a Lord, and Lawgiver; who is just, and
will not clear the Guilty without satisfaction to his Justice.

2. To God, as an offended Father; who is the Lord, Gracious and Merciful. For
God does show Fatherly displeasure to his Sons when they forsake his Law; and
sometimes visits their Iniquities with stripes, and their Sins with a Rod. Now
Reconciliation in the former sense, is by the Blood of Christ alone, which
Faith eyes, and makes application of. But Reconciliation in the latter sense
may be by the Peace Offering, and Meat Offering; when Faith in Christ, as the
Sin-Offering, goes with them. Reconciliation to God as an offended Father, is
through Humiliation, Repentance, and Reformation, and presenting the Body a
living Sacrifice: And thus Lambs without blemish, taken out of the fat Pastures
of Israel, do reconcile. Which in relation to the times here meant, signifies
thus much. As Enmity will be taken away, and Peace made with God for the House
of Israel: So the Jews being all effectually called, and made a Righteous
People, they shall walk so closely with God, and offer such well-pleasing
Sacrifices, as they shall not give occasion for Fatherly Displeasure; neither
will the Lord hide his Face any more from the Horse of Israel; neither will
there be Iniquities to visit with stripes. For, Chap. 43.7. the Lord says, My
Throne, and the place of the Soles of my Feet, shall the Children of Israel no
more defile. And therefore as the Peace Offerings, and Meat Offerings shall be
duly offered; even every Morning, Chap. 46.15. So a perfect Reconciliation with
God as a Father shall be continued; and the Saints shall have a Blessed State
of uninterrupted Communion with God, and everlasting Joy, as in their Hearts,
so upon their Heads. And as now there is no Curse to true Believers; so then
there shall be no Cross. There is now no condemnation to those that are in
Christ Jesus; and then there shall be no Correction to them. And as all the
Offerings of Judah and Jerusalem, shall be pleasant to the Lord; so all the
Dispensations of God shall be pleasant to Judah and Jerusalem. Thus much
concerning the Sacrifices mentioned in this Prophecy, both for the kinds of
them, and what they signify. Now for the farther clearing of the holiness of
these Sacrifices, consider two things:

1. There will be an Altar, sanctifying them. For we read of an Altar, Chap.
43.13. And a measured Altar, being of God's appointment; These are the Measures
of the Altar. Which was not meant of any material Altar, set up after the
Return from Babylon: But as the Apostle speaks of the true Tabernacle; so this
here is the true Altar, which God has erected, and not Man: even that
mentioned, Heb. 13.10. We have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat
which serve the Tabernacle. Christ in respect of his Godhead is this Altar,
sanctifying the Gifts which are offered upon it.

1. Christ gave himself, and the Altar sanctified this Gift: the Divine Nature
being the Altar that sanctified the Humane Nature, and made the Sacrifice to be
of infinite value and worth; and altogether sufficient to take away Sin. As
Man's sin had infinite evil in it, so Christ's Obedience to Death, and the
Righteousness which he fulfilled, brought infinite Glory to God; he being an
infinite Person who fulfilled the Righteousness, and so the Offense is made
void thereby.

2. This Altar sanctifies Believers, and their Gifts offered upon it. Isa.
56.7. Their Sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar, Rev. 8.3. Christ,
adding Incense, offers up the Prayers of Saints upon the Golden Altar.

Now this occasion being given for unfolding somewhat of the Mystery of the
Altar; three things more may be added for a farther discovery thereof:

1. The Names given to the Altar are worthy of observation; and here are two
Names by which it is called in one Verse, Chap. 43.15. The first is, (...) the
Mountain of God; and (...) the Lion of God. Certainly there is much of Mystery
in these Names. We do not find the Altar called by these Mames elsewhere in
Scripture, only Isa. 29.1. The City Jerusalem is called by this Name, probably
because of the Altar there. I shall take notice of the latter Name in the first
place. The Lion of God; so called because the Altar did devour the Beasts
offered upon it, as the Lion does his Prey, which may have some signification
here. For,

1. The Sacrifices brought to this Altar will be slain, and the Fire of it will
devour Flesh in them, and consume it. But yet when Nature as corrupt shall be
slain, a Divine Nature shall live, and so the Sacrifices will be living
Sacrifices, Romans 12.1. And the reasonable Creature being renewed, shall perform
reasonable service. Those that come to this Altar are crucified with Christ,
yet live, as Paul said of himself, Gal. 2.20. A Saint laid on this Altar is
dead, as carnal, but lives by Christ living in him. When Christ was offered, as
Man he died; but the Altar, the Divine Nature did live; which, as it did
sanctify, so afterward it did enliven the Sacrifice again. Thus it is with the
Saints, they are put to death in the flesh, but live in the Spirit, by this
living Altar. And thus the power of this Altar will more eminently appear, in
destroying Flesh and corrupt Nature, in the Saints of that Glorious Church
which is to be in the World.

2. This Altar will be a Lion of God to its Enemies, who shall be a Prey to it.
Enemies it has; Some deny its Being, as the Divine Nature of Christ: this the
Arrians did of old; the Socinians do it now. And as these would make void this
Altar in its Being; so there are others who go about to make it void in its
use, that is as an Altar: Thus the Papists, who would find out other ways for
acceptance with God, as their own Merits, and Saints Mediation. Now this Lion
of God will at last rise up to the Prey, and devour all its Enemies. True, he
couches now, but these Enemies will not leave stirring and provoking, till they
rouse him up, and then he shall destroy them at once, Rev. 6.9, 10. The Souls
under the Altar cry, how long, O Lord, do thou not avenge our Blood on them
that dwell on the Earth? And it was answered, That they must rest till their
Brethren, which are to be killed as they, should be fulfilled. And then as Rev.
14.18. An Angel shall come out from the Altar, having Power over Fire, crying
with a loud voice unto him that has the sharp Sickle, saying, thrust in thy
Sickle, and gather the Clusters of the Vine of the Earth, for her Grapes are
fully ripe. Now when the Altar has done its Work as the Lion of God, what
shall it be then, and how shall it appear? Then it shall be called by this name
Harel, the Mountain of God. The Enemies of this Altar have endeavored to
obscure it, and to hinder any from coming to it, or looking toward it. The
Gentiles possessing the outward Court, do hide this Altar, so that it is seen
but by a few, viz. The measured Worshippers in the Temple. And these Gentiles
set up other Altars; as Jeroboam did, to hinder Men from coming to this. Yet
this Altar remains, and there are true Worshippers that come to it by Faith,
and offer their Gifts upon it, Rev. 11.1. But when this Glorious Temple shall
be built, then this Altar shall appear. For the Gentiles that hide it, shall be
driven out of the outward Court, and Christ shall be then more clearly seen as
Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar. For when the Temple of God shall be opened, as
the Ark of his Testament, so the Altar shall be seen, and that as the Mountain
of God, before which all other Altars will be ^hrown down for ever; Christ will
be gloriously visible as God-Man, as King, Priest, Prophet, and Altar. And when
the Name of this Altar shall be the Mountain of God, then the Souls under the
Altar, and hid with Christ in God, shall stand before it; and Christ appearing,
they shall appear with him in Glory.

2. We read of the Settle of this Altar, Chap. 45.19. The Blood was to be put
upon the Settle of the Altar. And Chap. 43.14. mention is made of the greater,
and the lesser Settle. What may we conceive to be meant hereby? Surely, as the
Divine Nature is the Altar, so the Humane Nature is the Settle thereof. For in
the Humane Nature of Christ, did the fullness of the Godhead settle, and there
it dwells Bodily. And this is the greater Settle of the Altar. And as the
Apostle says, Hebrews 13.10. We have an Altar; so those that have this Altar,
are the lesser Settle of it: and in special, as chiefly here meant, that
Glorious Church which shall be after the coming down of the New Jerusalem, will
be this lesser Settle. Now we finding this Altar with its greater Settle, upon
its lesser Settle, the Church, which shall be at last in the World, what does
this hint, but a personal presence of Christ, as God-Man, in it?

3. This will be a cleansed Altar, Chapter 43.20. Thou shall take of the Blood
thereof, and put it upon the Four Horns thereof, and on the Four Corners of the
Settle, and upon the Border round about, thus shall thou cleanse and purge it.
This Altar is always pure in it self: but as the Holy Name of God is said to be
defiled; so also has the Altar of God been defiled by Whoredoms, Idolatry and
false Worship, and by the approaches of such who have not washed their hands in
Innocence. Now the cleansing of this Altar notes the doing away of all such
defiling Abominations. No abominable person, no abominable thing, shall come
nigh this Altar: Both Worship, and Worshippers shall be Holiness unto the Lord,
verse. 26. Seven days shall they purge the Altar, and purify it, and they
shall consecrate themselves. Let the particulars be observed:

First the Blood is to be put upon the Four Horns of the Altar: What do these
signify, but the Power of the Godhead? And reconciling Blood upon the Horns of
the Altar, shows that the Power of the Godhead shall save, and not destroy
those that come to it. Divine Power will be reconciled to them. And here it is a
happy and blessed thing, when Blood touches Blood: That is, when the
Worshippers come with the Blood of Sprinkling upon them, to the Blood of
Sprinkling upon the Horns of the Altar, and so take hold of them. Joab took
hold of the Horns of the Altar, but coming with the guilt of Innocent Blood
upon him, and not with that which purges away Sin, he was taken thence, and
slain. But at the time which this Prophecy relates to, it shall not be so. None
but purged ones shall come, and none of these shall be taken thence; Because
the Blood of Christ's Manhood will engage the Power of the Godhead, to save all
the Sanctified Ones that shall come to this Altar, and shall protect, support,
and perfect that which does concern them.

2. The Blood is to be put upon the Settle of the Altar; which we are to
understand of the lesser Settle, even that Glorious Church of the Jews when
they shall be called, which shall be a cleansed and purged Settle, having that
Blood upon it which speaks better things than that of Abel. And it shall be a
Settle purged throughout, for the Blood is to be put upon the four corners of
it.

3. The Blood is to be put upon the Border round about. What is meant by the
Border of the Altar? The pure Worshippers that shall come to this Altar, may be
conceived to be its Border round about, Psalm 26.6. I will wash my hands in
Innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord. Those that come to, and
compass this Altar, are its Border round about. And Blood shall be upon this
Border: so that all shall be cleansed and purged ones that come to this Altar:
And therefore as the House of Israel shall no more defile the Holy Name of God,
so not the Holy Altar of God, by any Abominations. Thus much concerning the
Altar.

2. As there will be an Altar to Sanctify, so all the Sacrifices shall have
the Salt of the Covenant cast upon them, Chap. 4.24. Thou shall offer them
before the Lord, and the Priest shall cast Salt upon them. This is borrowed
from Lev. 2.13. Every Oblation of a Meat Offering shall be seasoned with Salt;
neither shall thou suffer the Salt of the Covenant of thy God to be lacking
from thy Meat Offering. Saints, and their Services, are a Meat Offering; but
the Salt of the Covenant must not be lacking. Salt makes savoury, and preserves
from putrefaction. An Unregenerate state is set forth by not being salted,
Ezekiel. 16.4. So to be salted is to be Regenerated, and made New Creatures. Col.
4.6. Let your speech be with Grace, seasoned with Salt. Not corrupt
Communication, but salted and seasoned with Grace. And as there is the
Unleavened Bread of Sincerity, so there is the Salt of Sincerity. It Is not any
Salt that will do: Not the Salt of Morality, and common Gifts; But it must be
the Salt of the Covenant: that is, a true Faith and apprehending Christ for
Righteousness, and Sanctification, so as to receive of his Fullness Grace for
Grace. And those that have this Salt of the Covenant, are under a Covenant of
Salt. For we read of both. The Salt of the Covenant is mentioned, Lev. 2.13.
and a Covenant of Salt, Numb. 18.19. 2 Chronicles. 13.5. Now a Covenant of Salt is
an inviolable and perpetual Covenant. Those that have the Salt of the Covenant,
are under an everlasting Covenant, that shall never be broken. And in relation
to the state of the Church here meant, it hints thus much; that the Church
shall remain in that pure, holy, peaceable, and prosperous estate which then it
shall be brought into, of which the Prophets have spoken so much. Babylons
glory, because raised by and accompanied with so great Abominations, shall be
as when God overthrew Sodom. God will stain the pride of all glory. Men do
first stain their glory with Pride, Injustice, Profaneness, etc. and because
Men stain it with sin, God will stain it with judgments. The Honorable ones of
the great City Babylon shall be brought into contempt, and the Despised ones of
Sion shall be made a praise in the Earth. Thus much of the first particular,
that all the Sacrifices shall be holy.

2. All Duties shall be performed by Saints, and all Graces shall meet in them,
and their good Works shall have all their requisites to make them perfect.
Saints then shall be upon better ground than the young man had, able to say
what he did, All these have I kept from my youth up; and they shall have
respect to all Gods commands: and yet having done all, will say as Christ
enjoins, We are unprofitable servants; and as Paul, I am not hereby justified.
They shall have the Lord for their God, and none other besides him, Zech. 13.9.
and no Graven Image shall be among them. There shall be no profaning of the
Name of God, chap. 43.7. no drawing nigh to God with the mouth, when the heart
is removed far from him. The Sabbath will be purely observed; and for second
Table Duties see chap. 45.10. Ye shall have just Balances, a just Ephah and a
just Bath. There shall be justice in dealings, and none shall go beyond or
defraud his Brother in any matter, but that Rule of Christ will take place,
Whatever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them. I shall
instance in two Duties, and a little insist on them.

1. Prayer. Mal. 1.11. In every place incense shall be offered with a pure
offering. Prayer shall be as Incense, and this enkindled with the Fire of the
Altar. Zech. 8.21. Let Us go speedily to pray before the Lord: Thus shall they
be calling on one another, and that in a time when many People and strong
Nations shall seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem. This has respect to the
time of the Jews being called: for ten men out of every Nation shall take hold
of the Skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we have
heard that God is with you. And at this time he will pour upon the House of
David, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and Supplication.
And as persons gathered together in their Assemblies shall pray, so in their
Families, and all in their Families apart. Zech. 12.14. Every family apart, and
their wives apart. Hence we find the Name Israel used so much in this Prophecy,
because now the Jews shall be such Wrestlers with God, as Jacob their Father
was, and shall not let him go without a blessing. And as Christ lifted up his
eyes and said, Father, I thank thee that thou have heard me; so shall Saints
then, even in prayer, be able to offer up praises for being heard, because they
know Christ will be making Intercession for them. Chap. 45.23. Seven days of
the Feast the Prince shall prepare his burnt-offering. When Saints keep the
Feast, and are praying and praising, Christ offers his Burnt-offering, that is,
he offers up his Supplications with and for them.

2. At this time God shall have his due praises signified, as has been shown
in the Peace or Pay-offerings, for the great mercies of that time. A Figure of
this we have Matthew. 21.9. Christ rode in triumph into Jerusalem, the people
cried Hosannah in the highest, and so did the Children, which offended the
Scribes; to whom Christ said, Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou
have perfected praise. Which may be looked on as prefiguring two things, in
relation to the time of Christ's coming in his Kingdom.

1. That even the young Children of Saints shall then have a great measure of
Grace, and much knowledge of the Glory of God; and beholding the King in his
beauty, shall cry Hosannah to the Son of David. Little Children will come to
Christ, and of these shall be the Kingdom of God. There will be many Timothy's,
who from their Childhood will know the holy Scriptures; and as acts of Reason
shall put themselves forth, so acts of Grace therewith.

2. The Babes and Sucklings in Christ, the new Converts shall show forth the
praises of him that has called them. The offering up of praise is the great
evidence of the truth of Grace in the heart: and at this time will the Lord
perfect praise. The praise which the Saints shall offer will be perfect praise,
not shadowy and in appearance only, but it shall have the perfection of
sincerity and truth: and it shall be in such a degree as God shall expect from
their state. None shall receive the grace of God in vain, but according to what
they receive they shall render: As where much is given, much is required; so
then where much shall be given, much will be rendered. And as all Duties shall
be performed by Saints, so all Graces shall meet in them, and their good works
shall have all their requisites to make them perfect. Chap. 46.11. In the
feasts the meat offering shall be an Ephah to a Bullock, an Ephah to a Ram, and
an Hin of Oil to an Ephah. When any thing is spoken of Oblations and
Meat Offerings, Oil is also mentioned; by which the Spirit is meant making the
Saints a willing people. They shall have the Oil of grace and the Oil of
gladness: all their works shall be done with zeal and alacrity. A due
proportion of love and willingness is the Hin of Oil which is to go with the
Offerings. This is further set forth chap. 46.23. There was a new building, and
it was made with boiling places: then he said unto me, These are the places of
them that boil, where the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifices of
the people. The Ministry then will be a heating and a boiling Ministry; the
Word will be a Fire in the Heart; and Love and Zeal enkindled thereby, will be
as the Fire which came down from Heaven, and was kept burning in the Temple; by
this the Sacrifices shall be well boiled, so that there will not be crude or
raw Services then among the Saints; there will not be cause to take up Luthers
complaint, Deest ignis. The Fire from Heaven, which was long kept burning in
the Temple, did at last go out, and was not in the second Temple; but lo, here
it is found in these boiling places of a more glorious Temple, being the
substance of that shadow, where it shall not go out.

3. Saints shall make progress in the ways of God, and persevere in well doing.
There will not be Apostates at this time, none doing wickedly against the
Covenant, neither shall any of those of understanding fall; Israel shall not be
any more backsliding Israel. Chap. 46.9, 10. When the people of the land shall
come before the Lord, he that enters in by the way of the North Gate to
worship, shall go out by the way of the South Gate, he shall not return. Here
must be no shadow of turning; the Worshippers shall not go back. The Prince in
the midst of them when they go in shall go in, when they go forth shall go
forth, so that they shall be still following Christ. Verse 14. A Meat Offering
must be prepared every morning. There shall not be a ceasing of the daily
Sacrifice, either by Saints neglect or wicked men's interruption. Thus much of
the Church Members.

3. The Pastors of Churches shall be all holy, and duly qualified; even Pastors
after Gods heart. Now concerning the Ministers which are mentioned in this
Prophecy, we may take notice how they are set forth in respect of their kind,
and in respect of their qualifications. As for the first, here are three sorts
mentioned:

1. Priests and Ministers of the Sanctuary, which shall come near and minister
to the Lord, chap. 45.4.

2. Levites, called Ministers of the House, chap. 45.5.

3. Such as serve the City, chap. 48.18. which are to be ranked amongst the
Ministers, as afterward will more fully appear.

The Names of Priests and Levites are borrowed from the Law, to set forth a
Gospel Ministry. The Priests under the Law were to sanctify the most holy
things, and to burn Incense before the Lord, and to minister to him, and to
bless in his Name, 1 Chronicles. 23.13. The Levites were to set forward the work of
the House of the Lord; and some were Singers, instructed in the Songs of the
Lord. Of Singers we read in this Prophecy, chap. 40.44. In the Inner Court were
the Chambers of the Singers, such who will be instructed themselves, and shall
instruct others in the Songs of the Lord. They were also Porters, 1 Chronicles. 26.
and some were for the outward business over Israel.

Now to know who are meant by these Priests and Levites, and such as serve the
City, we must consult the New Testament, and such places wherein mention is
made of the several Officers and Ministers which God has set in the Church:
and surely it is a Gospel Ministry which is here meant, for sometimes we find
it under a Gospel name. Ministers, chap. 44.11. They shall be Ministers in my
Sanctuary. Chap. 46.24. The Ministers of the house boil the sacrifice of the
people. Now for the places of the New Testament which speak of a Gospel
Ministry, see 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set in the Church first Apostles,
secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, then Helps, Governments, etc. Ephesians. 4.11.
He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some
Teachers. 1 Timothy 5.17. The Elders that rule well count worthy of double honor,
especially those that labor in the Word and Doctrine. In these places we find
Pastors which are Overseers of a Flock, and for the perfecting of the Saints,
Evangelists to preach among the Nations, through whose Ministry Nations will
be saved, and walk in the Light of the New Jerusalem. These are foretold Isa.
66.19. I will send those that escape of them to Pull and Lud, etc. and they
shall declare my glory among the Gentiles, and such as have not heard of my
fame, neither have seen my glory. Lastly, those that serve the City will be
Ministers building up Saints, and making them meet to be received into the holy
City. Now these several sorts are to show, that the Church of the Jews shall
have all sorts of Ministers and Officers, which it ought to have by Divine
Appointment; all for teaching, edifying, bringing in, building up* and for rule
and government for the inner and outward business of the House of God. Thus we
see what sorts of Ministers are mentioned in this Prophecy. We may further take
notice of Gods care to provide for them, as also the way in which they shall be
provided for: God will make sufficient provision for all; 'twill not be as now,
some have Riches given them, and others Poverty, and some Food convenient. But
then as all shall be of Agars temper, in desiring but Food convenient, so that
shall be given them, chap. 45.3, 4. and 48.9. The Oblation that ye shall offer
to the Lord shall be of five and twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in
breadth, in the midst whereof shall be the Sanctuary; it shall be for the
Priests the Sons of Zadock. And over against the Border of the Priests the
Levites shall have five and twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in
breadth. The residue being ten thousand Eastward, and ten thousand Westward,
shall be for Food for those that serve the City. And here we see the way in
which they shall be provided for: The twelve Tribes have their several
Inheritances allotted them by themselves, and then the Ministers have a Portion
set apart for them, so as that they are not to have a Maintenance out of the
Inheritances of the People, either by their free gift or otherwise: and thus
there will not be any dependence upon the people to be a snare to them, or any
matter of offense to the people, or occasion of difference betwixt them. Hence
it is said chap. 44.28. Ye shall give them no possession in Israel, I am their
possession: that is, it shall not lie upon you to make provision for them out
of your Inheritances, but they shall have Possessions by themselves. When
Canaan was divided, each Tribe allotted to the Levites out of their
Inheritances Cities to dwell in, Josh. 21. Eight and forty Cities were given
them by lot, some out of each Tribe; so that then the Levites had Inheritances
from the Tribes. But when the Jews shall be called 'twill not be thus. Paul
said he would keep himself from being burthensom to the Corinthians; the like
says the Lord here concerning the Ministers of the new Heavens and new Earth,
they shall not be burthensom to the Church in which I shall set them. Next
concerning their Qualifications consider,

1. They shall be clothed with righteousness; this is meant by the Linen
Garments, chap. 44.17. with which the Priests shall be clothed; they shall have
the fine Linen white and clean, which is the righteousness of Saints.

2. Their frame and fitness for Ministerial work shall be such, that it shall
not be any way burthensom to them; but they shall be like Christ, who said, My
meat is to do the will of him that sent me: and like Paul, abundant in Labors
without pain and weariness. Chap. 44.18. No wool shall come upon them, they
shall not gird themselves with any thing that causes sweat. They shall do
their Ministerial work without sweat; it was a part of Adams Curse, In the
sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread, Genesis 3.19. If he had not sinned, he
should have done his work without sweat. Sin caused sweat; Labor is now
toilsom and painful, causing sweat and weariness: but here will be work and no
sweat and weariness, because the Ministers at that time shall have sufficient
strength for and delight in their work.

3. They shall be consecrated to God, and not defile themselves after their
Consecration. Chap. 44.20. The Priests shall not shave their heads. That we may
the better understand what is signified hereby, we must look back to the Law of
the Nazarites, which forbids them to shave their heads; and concerning their
not shaving their heads two things are to be taken notice of.

1. It was forbidden them to shave their heads in the days of their Separation,
Number. 6.5. All the days of the vow of his separation no razor shall come upon
his head. But yet,

2. In two cases it was commanded them to shave their heads; as,

1. In case of being defiled by the dead, Number. 6.9. If a man die suddenly by
him, and he has defiled the head of his consecration, then he shall shave his
head in the day of his cleansing.

2. When the days of this separation were fulfilled, Number. 6.13, 18. the
Nazarite was to shave the Head of his Consecration.

Now for the Application of these things: consider,

1. The Priests here spoken of shall be spiritual Nazarites; that is, Persons
consecrated to God. The word Nazarite signifies, One separated to some special
Dignity and Sanctity, Genesis 49.26. Joseph was called a Nazarite, being separated
from his Brethren. Christ was not a Nazarite after the Law of this carnal
Commandment, but a Nazarene, being bred up in Nazareth; and his Name was
Netser, the Branch. Yet the truth of this Type was fulfilled in him, he being
separated to a holy Work. And thus the Priests shall be Nazarites; that is,
separated to a Work and Ministry which they shall fulfill.

2. The Priests being under a Prohibition of shaving their Heads at all; hence
it may be concluded, that what was the ground of the Nazarites shaving their
Heads, shall never happen to them. And therefore,

1. They shall not defile themselves after their Consecration: They shall do
their work, and walk worthy of their Calling. There shall not be a Mark among
them, declining the work of God; nor a Demas carried away with the Love of the
World: And none shall defile themselves with any Antichristian Abominations. We
know there is a Popish Custom of shaving the Head, and much of Religion is
placed in it; but none of that sort of men shall have a Being in this time of
the Churches Purity and Glory: But as Isa. 7.20. The Lord shall shave with a
Rasor the Head and Hair of the Feet, even all that have the Mark of the Beast.
Rev. 19.20. The Beast and the false Prophet shall be taken, and cast into the
Lake of Fire, and the Remnant shall be slain. In the worst of times a remnant
of Saints is left, which keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony
of Jesus Christ: But in that day no remnant of Babylon will be left, but the
remnant will be slain by the Sword of him that shall sit upon the white Horse.

2. Their separation shall not be for Days, but Eternity. The Nazarites
outward, and in the flesh, were separated but for a time: But the Nazarites
inwardly and in Spirit, shall be for ever. For though their Work as Gospel
Ministers shall cease at last, yet they shall be Priests to offer the Sacrifice
of Praise continually. The Royal Priesthood spoken of, 1 Pet. 2.9. is a
Priesthood for ever. So then the Priests shall not shave their Heads; that is,
the days of their separation shall not end.

3. They shall not be proud or vain. Chap. 44.20. They shall not suffer their
Locks to grow long. This sometimes discovers the pride and vanity of the Heart;
whence that may be truly said to some, which Eliab spoke uncharitably to David,
I know the pride and naughtiness of thy Heart. Priestly Ornaments then will not
be carnal, but the Ornament of a meek, humble, and gracious Spirit.

4. They shall not be profane, verse 21. Neither shall any Priest drink Wine.
They shall be far from Rioting, Drunkenness, and Chambering, and Wantonness:
They shall not be filled with Wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the
Spirit. Now it may be said to many of those which stand in that Rank, How long
will ye be drunken? Put away your Wine from you: But at this time such shall
not be found among the Priests of the Lord.

5. They shall be Pastors of pure Churches, over whom the Line and Reed shall
pass. Chap. 44.22. The Priests shall not take for their Wives a Widow, or her
that is put away. For the better understanding of this, we may observe, that
Pastors of Churches are called Husbands, there being a kind of Spiritual
Marriage betwixt them and Churches. Lev. 21.4. The Priest shall not defile
himself, being a chief Man among his People, or being a Husband among them. So
that a Pastor is an Husband to his People. Now at this time the Priest shall
not take a Widow, etc. What is signified hereby? All Antichristian, Popish, and
pretended Churches will at this time be put away, and thrust forth. For though
there will be a time of Babylon's boasting, that she shall sit a Queen, and not
be a Widow, nor see sorrow, yet her Plagues shall come in one day, and Babylon
must know Widowhood, and the loss of Children. And when Antichristian Churches
shall be Widows, and thrust forth, none of the Priests of the Lord shall marry
them. Now when any Popish Churches are Widows, there are Priests ready to marry
them; but then they shall be left desolate: And in this sense will that be
fulfilled, Rev. 18.23. The voice of the Bridegroom, and the voice of the Bride
shall be heard no more at all in thee. No Priests of Babylon shall be left to
marry them; and none of the Priests of Sion shall then marry any Widow, or
Daughter of Babylon. And observe what follows; They shall take Maidens of the
House of Israel. Churches shall consist of chaste Virgins espoused to Christ,
and of such who are Israel after the Spirit. Such shall the Priest take, or a
Widow that had a Priest before. That is, If any Churches shall be Widows, by
the translation of the Pastors into the New Jerusalem, such a Widow a Priest
may marry.

6. They shall not err in Doctrine or Judgment. No Tares of false Doctrine will
then be sown. Chap. 44.23. They shall teach my People the difference betwixt
the holy and profane, and cause men to discern betwixt the unclean, and the
clean. They shall not justify the Wicked, nor condemn the Righteous; neither
call Evil good, nor Good evil; but shall faithfully show unto Men what is good,
and what the Lord requires of them. Now many, like Ahab's false Prophets,
utter smooth and pleasing things; but then all shall be Micaiahs, in speaking
what the Lord shall declare to them, verse 24. In Controversy they shall stand
in Judgment, and shall judge it according to my Judgments. All Controversies
about matters of Faith, Worship, and Government shall then be at end, for the
Priests shall judge them according to Gods Judgments.

7. They shall not in a way of Church Communion converse with such as are but
dead of themselves, to the committing of Sin, or are under a force in the
profession of Godliness: This may be gathered from Chap. 44.31. The Priest
shall not eat of any thing that is dead of it self, or torn, whether it be Fowl
or Beast. This was forbidden under the Law, Exodus 22 31. That which died of it
self, and was not orderly slain, was unclean, and forbidden to Aaron, and his
Sons. The Sacrifices must be orderly slain, and so they might be eaten. Now
this in the spiritual signification of it, forbids Communion with carnal
persons, who may seem mortified ones: But their body of Sin not being truly
slain by the Word and Spirit, they shall not be judged fit for religious
Communion. For the better clearing of this, let Acts 10.12, 13. be considered:
Peter saw in a Vision a Sheet, wherein were all manner of four-footed Beasts,
etc. And there came a voice, Rise Peter, kill and eat. And what was meant
hereby, may be gathered from v. 28. Ye know that it is unlawful for a Jew to
keep company with one of another Nation, but God has showed me that I should
not call any man common, or unclean. That is, I must preach the Gospel to
Gentiles, as well as Jews, and I must endeavor to kill the Old Man in them;
and this being done, I may eat; that is, keep company with them, and no longer
judge them unclean. This place of Ezekiel. then hints thus much, That in the New
Jerusalem-state, all admitted to Church Communion, shall be sound and sincere
in the matter of Godliness; and true Nathaniels, Israelites indeed, in whom
will be no guile.

There are now three Ranks of Men professing Godliness:

1. Such as are dead in some sort to Sin, and take up a profession of Godliness
of themselves, doing it from Self-love, or slavish fear; or aiming at profit or
praise; or because they are willing to escape Hell, and to get to Heaven at
last. These may be reckoned among the Righteous, but not being truly of them,
may go out from them. For they that forsake Sin out of slavish fear, may turn
to it out of fear. Those that follow Christ for Loaves, may forsake him for
Loaves.

2. Such as are under a force in the profession of Religion, and have their
Sins as it were torn from them. Some by religious Magistrates or Masters, may
be withheld from Sin, and be brought to some outward conformity in the matter
of Godliness; these are the torn, which if admitted to Church Communion, may
break off from it. For those that are torn from Antichrist, and but seemingly
joined to Christ, may be torn from Christ, and so go back to Antichrist again.

3. There are such who through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body,
not being under a force, but are made a willing People to follow Christ, and
are no otherwise constrained, but by the Love of Christ; judging that they
ought to live to him who died and rose again: and of such will all the Churches
of the Saints at last consist. These three sorts seem hinted, John 1.13. Christ
gives to them power to become the Sons of God, who believe in his Name; being
born not of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Some are
born of the will of the flesh, taking up a Form of Godliness from a carnal
principle, and fleshly will. Others are born of the will of Man, being
religious, because Men that have Power over them will have it so. The former
are the Dead of themselves, these the torn. There are others born of God, who
can say as Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us by the word of truth, that we
should be a kind of First Fruits of his Creatures. Now at the time of
Jerusalems being made a praise in the Earth, such as are born of the flesh,
which are the Dead of themselves; and such as are born of the Will of Man,
which are the torn, shall not be in that Kingdom; but such as are born of God
shall enter into, and be of that Kingdom of God. The Priests shall then kill,
and eat; kill, and keep company with them, and so not eat of any thing which is
dead of it self, or torn; and that in the next place, whether it be Fowl or
Beasts. Beasts are called Beasts of the Earth, and Fowls the Fowls of Heaven.
By Beasts of the Earth, are meant Men of a worldly temper, who mind earthly
things, and under a Form of Godliness, are Lovers of Riches more than Lovers of
God. But the Priests shall not eat of such then: No covetous man, who is an
Idolater, shall have any Inheritance in that Kingdom of God. By the Fowls of
Heaven, are meant such who seem to fly high in the profession of Religion, but
do it for praise and applause, and trust in what they do, that they are
righteous thereby. The Pharisee that boasted, God I thank thee that I am not as
other men are, or as this Publican; I fast, etc. He seemed to fly so high, as
to be dead to Sin, and to the World; but he was but a Fowl, dead of himself,
and therefore unclean. Now the Priests in that glorious state shall not eat of
such Beasts, or Fowls: But what temper those of that Church shall be of, these
following Scriptures declare, Isa. 60.4. All they gather themselves together,
they come to thee: v. 5. Then shall thou see, and flow together, thine heart
shall fear, and be enlarged. Filial fear enlarges the heart to run the way of
God's Commandments. The Forces of the Gentiles shall come to thee: These Forces
shall not be forced, but shall come, v. 8. Who are these that fly as a Cloud,
very swiftly, and in great abundance, and as Doves to their windows very freely
and willingly, Psa. 102.18. When the time to favor Sion shall come, the people
which shall be created, shall praise the Lord; or the new created people: All
of the Church then will be a new created people, Isa, 54.11, 12. O thou
afflicted, tossed with tempests, and not comforted, I will lay thy Stones with
fair colors, and thy Foundations with Saphires; I will make thy Windows of
Agates, and thy Gates of Carbuncles, and all thy Borders of pleasant Stones.
Isa. 60.21. Thy people shall be all righteous, the Branch of my planting, the
works of my hands, that I may be glorified. By this we see how much better it
will be with the Church every way than now it is; better in state, and better
in frame; better within, and better without: Purity, Peace, and abundance of
Light within, and none to make it afraid without: Such as it should be within,
and such as it should be without.

9. They shall not do their work for hire, or reward; but a work done as it
ought to be, shall be its own reward, Chap. 44.28. In the day that he goes
into the Inner Court, he shall offer, etc. And it shall be to them for an
Inheritance. Their Sanctuary-work and Ministry shall be their reward. Verse 29.
Every dedicate thing in Israel shall be theirs, and the first of all the
Fruits. When any by their Ministry shall be dedicated to the Lord, these shall
be their Glory and Joy, and Crown of rejoicing; and shall be better to them
than the First Fruits were to the Priests under the Law.

Thus much concerning the Ministers of the House.

4. This Temple shall never be destroyed, as the Temple of Jerusalem was. Chap.
49.19. The Priests shall take of the Blood and put it on the Posts of the
House, and on the four Corners of the Settle of the Altar. The meaning is, As
the Blood of the Lamb being on the Israelites Door-posts, the destroying Angel
did not enter; so this House being sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, no
Destroyer shall come near to hurt it: No Nebuchadnezzar shall burnt it with
Fire. v. 20. So shall ye reconcile this House. This House will be a reconciled
House; here is every where reconciling Blood, and there the Lord will not be
angry with it to destroy it. There has been a time in which Judgment began at
the House of God; but from thence it shall go to Babylon, and there rest, and
never come near this House again. Chap. 41.18. The Building was made with
Cherubims, and Palm Trees; showing the Church to be Triumphant, and Victorious.
First Cherubims, whereby Angels are meant, of whom an innumerable Company will
be with the Saints in the New Jerusalem. And sometimes Men are called
Cherubims, as appears by comparing Rev. 4.6. with Ezekiel. 1.5. The four living
Creatures are Cherubims, but such as were redeemed to God by Christ's Blood,
Rev. 5.8. and therefore Men. And these Cherubims are said to have two Faces:
Chap. 41.18. The Face of a Man, and the Face of a Lion. Though Saints then
shall not have a Heart, and a Heart; yet they shall have a Face, and a Face;
and these not contrary, but well agreeing: They shall have Prudence, Humanity
and Love, signified by the Face of a Man; and Fortitude signified by the Face
of a Lion. Saints shall be Lions without fear, and Men without ferity: Lions in
courage and Men without brutish cruelty. The Beast mentioned, Rev. 13. which is
the Antichrist, is described as being wholly a Beast, a Lion, Leopard, and
Bear; but has neither the Heart nor the Face of a Man; there is nothing of
Humanity in him toward the faithful Witnesses, but like the Devil seeks to
devour. Secondly, there are Palm Trees, showing that Saints shall be upright,
and grown to an high stature, and always flourishing, their Leaves shall not
fade. And Palm Trees signify Victory, and Saints praising God for it; Rev.
7.9. I saw a great multitude with palms in their hands, saying, Salvation to
our God. Salvation will come from God, and that shall the Saints return to him
in their praises.

5. When this Temple shall be built, there will be a pouring out of the Spirit
in a plentiful and abundant measure: I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh,
Joel 2.28. Some taste thereof was in the Apostles days, but at this time will
be the full accomplishment. This is set forth in the Vision of the Waters,
issuing from under the Threshold of the House, chap. 47.1. Now as John 7.27.
mention being made of living waters, the interpretation is given, this spoke he
of the Spirit. So the Spirit is here meant, the Spirit and Word of truth, and
the Spirit of Grace. These waters have two excellent properties:

1. They are healing, chap. 47.8. These being brought forth into the Sea, the
waters are healed. The Doctrine of the Gospel shall not only drop as the Rain,
and distill as the Dew, but shall be as a flowing River, which shall heal even
the Waters of the Sea. By Waters sometimes Multitudes of people are meant, Rev.
17.1. The whore sits upon many waters; that is, Multitudes of people, Nations,
and Tongues, verse 15. So then the Spirit by the preaching of the Gospel shall
heal, that is, convert Multitudes of people, even Nations and many Nations; for
by Conversion men are healed: Matthew. 13.15. Lest they should be converted, and
I should heal them. Hereby the hurt done in the Natures of men by Adams sin is
healed. This shows that there will be great Conversion-work at this time: And
the healing will be of all diseased parts; they are first to the Ancles, so
that their Feet and Ancle-bones shall receive strength, and they shall walk,
and leap, and praise God; the lame man shall leap as an Heart; their feet shall
be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, and they shall run in the
ways of the Lord. Then they are to the Knees; so that those that come to these
Waters shall bow the Knee to Christ, and yield obedience to him. Next They are
up to the Loins; the Lusts of Concupiscence shall be washed away. And lastly,
Waters to swim in; Sanctification by them will be throughout. These will be as
the Pool of Bethesda, those that shall step into them will be healed of their
Infirmities; and as the Waters of Jordan to Naaman, which cured him of his
Leprosy.

2. They are Waters giving Life, verse 4. Every thing that lives,
whithersoever these waters come, shall live. Those that do live, shall live;
those that did live but a Natural Life, by these Waters coming to them shall
live a Spiritual Life; those that lived the Life of the first Adam, shall live
the Life of the second Adam; those that did live but by a Soul living in them,
shall live by Christ living in them. These will not be as the Waters of Noah,
none shall perish in them. They are the proper Element of the new Creature,
which cannot live out of them. There are now Waters of Adversity going over the
Saints, which issue out of Babylon, and from Antichrists Throne there; but
these shall be all dried up, and there shall be no more Sea: Rev. 21.1. That
Sea which is the gathering of the Waters of Babylon shall be no more. So that
the Saints shall not sit down and hang up their Harps, and weep by those Waters
of Babylon; but shall stand by these Waters of the Sanctuary, having the Harps
of God; and shall sing the Songs of Sion in their own Land.

6. In this Temple Christ is Prince. Chap. 44.2, 3. No man was to enter by the
East Gate, because the Lord God of Israel entered by it; it is for the Prince.
This Prince is the Lord God of Israel; Christ shall sit in it to eat Bread. The
Saints are to worship at the Door of this Gate before the Lord, chap. 46.3.
Ezekiel. 8.16. There were about five and twenty men with their Faces toward the
East, and Backs toward the Temple: There are some like these that turn their
backs upon Christ, and faces to Antichrist; their backs upon the true Temple,
and faces to the Synagogue of Satan: but the true Worshippers turn their faces
to Christ, and worship him, and these and their Services are as pleasant Bread
to Christ. He is the Bread of Life to them, and they Bread of Delight to him.
It Is Christ then who is the Prince, he shall command in matters of Worship and
be obeyed, and shall govern the Saints in their whole Conversation. Christ will
be all in all in this house, Prince, Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar. It Is
observed that the Altar was in the midst of the Building, which if measured
from the East, North, and South Gate, there is the same distance; and when
(...) came in at either Gate, the Altar is directly before them and in their
view: All shall look to Christ and be saved.

Q. How can it be said that this Prince is Christ, seeing the Prince is to
prepare for himself and the People of the Land, a Bullock for a Sin-offering?

A. This is the Legal Phrase which is here made use of concerning Christ. The
Priests under the Law were to offer for their own sins as well as the Peoples;
but being spoken of Christ, it must be taken not in a Legal but Evangelical
sense; as thus,

1. The People of the Land will be looked on as Christ's Body, and so himself.
Ephesians. 1.22. He is head over all things to the Church, which is his body. And
Ephesians. 5.30. We are members of his body. And it being so, when he offers for the
People of the Land, he offers for himself: so then, for himself and the People
of the Land, is in effect thus much; for the People of the Land, which he
reckons to be part of himself, even his Body.

2. The sins of the People of the Land were Christ's by imputation; he was a
common person, and the Iniquities of all did meet in him. So then his
Sin-offering might be for himself as made Sin, but in the benefit of it for the
People of the Land. Christ gave himself for himself in this respect, even to
discharge himself from that guilt which he had taken upon him, that so he might
save the People of the Lord from their sins.

Thus much concerning the Temple.

Concerning the Frame of the City represented in this Vision.
Consid. 1. THis City is the same with that which was shown to John, Rev. 21.
even the Holy City New Jerusalem, of which such glorious things are spoken by
the Prophets. This will appear by comparing Ezekiel and John, Ezekiel. 36.27. Then
will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean. Chap. 37. There is
a promise, that Judah and Israel shall be one Nation, and one King shall be to
them all; even David, who is Christ. And observe how Ezekiel. 37. agrees with
John; My Tabernacle also shall be with them. Rev. 21.3. The tabernacle of God
is with men. The Gates of Ezekiels City, chap. 45.31. have the Names of the
Twelve Tribes of Israel upon them; so also John's, Rev. 21.12. And the Vision
of the Waters is alike in both, as is to be seen by comparing chap. 47.12. with
Rev. 22. In Ezekiel it is said, Upon the bank of the river grow all trees, the
fruit being for meat, the leaves for medicine. Rev. 22.2. On either side of the
river was the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and that every
month; and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.
Observe, Ezekiel says, all trees; John, the tree of life: the Tree of Life is
indeed all Trees.

Consid. 2. There is a City of God partly on Earth, and partly in Heaven:
Partly on Earth, Heb. 12.22. Ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of
the living God. Mount Sion is the Church on Earth, said to be the Joy of the
whole Earth; the best part of it, the Saints therein, being the excellent ones
of the Earth: and partly in Heaven, Ye are come to the Heavenly Jerusalem. It Is
said, that Jerusalem in the letter was distinguished into the higher and lower
City; this is Mystical Jerusalem: and as Ephesians. 3.15. we read of the whole Family
in Heaven and Earth, a part of it being on Earth, and a part in Heaven, which
make one whole Family; so the Church in Heaven, and the Church on Earth, make
one whole City. And upon this account the Saints on Earth are said to be come
to the Heavenly City, because the Church on Earth and in Heaven make one City.
Gal. 4.26. Jerusalem which is above, and the mother of us all. Heb. 11.16. He
has prepared for them a city; that is, for those that died in Faith, verse 13.
Those that die in Faith, who had here peace by Believing, enter into the City
prepared for them, which is the Jerusalem above; and there they have the Vision
of Peace. In the Jerusalem above is Jesus the Mediator, and an innumerable
company of Angels, and the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect, with those that
have been raised and changed; all these being associated make one body
mystically, and an heavenly City, and this is the Mother of us all.

1. Of particular Saints, in that they are born from above: for as this City is
(...), above; so are Saints (...), from above; born of the Spirit, which is
given forth from this City.

2. This is the Mother of Churches on Earth, the Metropolis or Mother City, and
Churches on Earth are her Daughters. Rome would be the Mother Church, which is
a Mother indeed, but of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth. Jerusalem above
is truly the Mother Church; out of it came Laws and Ordinances to be observed
on Earth. The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men? Ordinances from
Heaven coming out of this City from Jesus the Mediator, who has all power in
Heaven and in Earth, are to be received and observed. Whatsoever ye bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven. Hence is the Power of the Keys; and what is
done in Churches on Earth, is examined in Heaven, and there ratified, when
there is a due execution of that Power which is from above.

Consid. 3. That Jerusalem which is now above, shall come down out of Heaven,
and so the whole City and Family of God shall be on Earth. Rev. 21.9, 10. it is
twice affirmed to show the certainty of it, I saw the holy city new Jerusalem
coming down from God out of heaven. Which we may understand thus:

1. Those that are mentioned Heb. 12. as making up this City, shall come down,
for Christ shall come down, Zech. 14.5. The Lord thy God shall come down; then
the innumerable company of Angels shall come down with him. Matthew. 24.31. He
shall send his Angels, and they shall gather the elect. Dan. 7.10. Thousand
thousands ministered to him, etc. And lastly, all the Saints shall come with
Christ. The Spirits of just men shall be united to their raised Bodies, for
them that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

2. These shall descend as a City: I saw the City descending. They shall come
as a Body Politic. The whole Heavenly City shall come together; Christ, the
holy Angels, and all the Saints with him; and so shall be on Earth: For the
Kings of the Earth do bring their Glory and Honor into it; and the Nations of
them which shall be saved, shall walk in the Light of it: and Gog and Magog
shall gather against it, to their own utter ruin, and not to the least hurt of
the Saints. Like the Men of Sodom, who compassed the House round where the Lord
was, who first smote them with blindness, and after rained Fire and Brimstone
upon them from the Lord out of Heaven: Even so will these compass the Camp of
the Saints, and the beloved City, and then shall be destroyed by Fire from
Heaven; which evidently shows, that the New Jerusalem shall be then on Earth.
And Saints coming down from Heaven lose no Glory thereby, because Christ will
be with them; and they with him to behold his Glory. Yea, there will be rather
an addition to, than a diminution of their Glory. For,

1. They shall have opportunity of doing some Works on Earth, which they have
not in Heaven: They shall be as the Angels, ministering Spirits, for the good of
Saints: And as Christ after his Resurrection spoke of the things pertaining to
the Kingdom of God, so may the raised Saints.

2. They shall reign upon the Earth, and exercise such a kind of Dominion,
which they do not in Heaven.

3. The Saints of the New Jerusalem shall know, and acknowledge the Saints in
their Portions in the Land, and those of the saved Nations: which cannot be
said of the Saints in Heaven. Isa. 63.16. Thou art our Father, though Abraham
be ignorant of us, etc. But when Abraham shall be in the New Jerusalem, then he
shall not be ignorant of the People of the Land; but as the holy Angels know
the Saints on Earth, so shall the New Jerusalem glorified Saints know those not
glorified. Rev. 4.1, etc. We have a Representation of this City as now in
Heaven, but chiefly as it shall be on Earth: for it is said, I will show thee
things which shall be hereafter. And what was shown him? A Throne set in
Heaven, and one that sat upon it like Jasper, with a Rainbow about his head.
To assure the Saints that there shall be no more any Deluge of trouble and
adversity. There are Four and twenty Seats, and Four and twenty Elders, which
are glorified Saints in the Mansions prepared for them: they have Crowns of
Gold; they Reign with Christ in the New Jerusalem: And as Christ will have Work
for them, so they shall be fitted for it. The four Beasts have the Face of a
Man; that is, Wisdom and Understanding: Of an Ox, Strength for Work: Of a Lion;
that is, Courage: And of a flying Eagle; they shall make haste and not delay to
do the Will and Work of God. Then the Kingdom so long prayed for will come, and
the Will of God shall be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven.

Consid. 4. This City is to be taken two ways, more strictly, and more largely:

1. More strictly, as distinct from Suburbs, and the portions of land without
it; having twelve Gates, etc.

2. More largely, as comprehending all that belong to it, and shall be under
the Government of it, and shall walk in the Light of it, and partake in its
Liberties and Privileges. Thus the Tribes, and Strangers with them, in their
Lots and Portions, shall belong to the New Jerusalem, and be reckoned to be of
it. As the Great City Babylon more strictly taken, is Rome, which is said to
Reign over the Kings of the Earth: But as more largely taken, it comprehends
all the Nations that walk in the Darkness of it, which wonder after, and
worship the Beast, and are under his Power. So the New Jerusalem, more properly
is that which comes down from Heaven, but comprehends also all that walk in
the Light of it. And as Babylon has ten parts, so New Jerusalem twelve parts,
even a Portion for each Tribe.

Consid. 5. the Dominion of Christ the King in this Great City, shall be
extended over the whole World. For as he shall Reign in the New Jerusalem, and
there have his Throne; so he shall in that Day be King over all the Earth,
Zachar. 14.9. And all, even Saints, and not Saints, shall be subject to him,
although in a different manner. Chap. 46.16. The Prince is said to have
Servants, and Sons, which two Names will take in all. The Sons are such as
shall be born of God, and made after God; and all besides will be comprehended
under the Name of Servants, who shall be under the Dominion of Christ, and be
made to submit to such Laws which Christ shall give, for the Government of the
unconverted Nations; who from slavish fear at least, and happily from some taste
they will have of the benefit of his Government, shall become Servants to him
as King of Nations. Jer. 7.10. he is so called. There shall be a time in which
all shall fear him, either filially or slavishly: The Sons out of an awful
respect, shall with Love and Delight serve Christ as King of Saints; the
Servants, because they must, shall submit to his Government. See Psa. 18.44.
Psa. 66.3. See the Hebrew. For the farther Illustration of this, let Zach.
14.16. be considered. Every one left of the Nations, who shall escape the
destruction of that Day (for all found in actual opposition against Christ in
that Day, will be cut off) shall come up from year to year to worship the King,
the Lord of Hosts, and shall keep the Feast of Tabernacles. Here are large
Expressions, taking in all: For all shall worship Christ, either as Sons, or as
Servants; and keep the Feast of Tabernacles. And to know what is meant hereby,
we must consider on what ground the Jews kept this Feast. Now we find, first,

1. That in this Feast the Israelites were to dwell in Booths, and to rejoice
before the Lord, who had brought them out of Egypt, Lev. 23.43. Now in answer
to this, the Nations shall acknowledge a great benefit, in Christ's taking off
the Antichristian, and all other Tyrannical Yokes from them; and by his
reigning in Righteousness, whereby every Man shall sit under his Vine, and
Fig Tree: The Servants under their Vines, and Fig Trees of outward Peace,
Plenty, and Prosperity; and the Sons under their better Vines, which shall
yield them abundance of Spiritual Blessings; they shall abide in Christ the
true Vine, under whose shadow they shall sit with great delight.

2. The Feast of Tabernacles was kept to acknowledge the Goodness of God, in
blessing them in all the Works of their Hands, and in all their Increase, Deuteronomy.
16.15. Thus the Lord shall wonderfully bless the Nations in the works of their
Hands, and give them great Increase, which they shall acknowledge to be a
benefit of his Government; and thus they shall keep this Feast.

3. In the Feast of Tabernacles, the Law was to be read, that they might
observe to do all the works of it, Deuteronomy. 31.11. Thus the Nations shall own all
the Laws of Christ, for their Government in Righteousness, and shall submit to
them. All therefore shall keep this Feast, but in different manner. The
Servants shall worship the King, the Lord of Hosts; but the Sons shall worship
the Lord their God, and David their King, Hos. 3.5. The Servants shall fear the
Lord, and his wrath, and justice: The Sons shall fear the Lord, and his
Goodness: The Servants shall serve the Lord, and the King. The Sons their Lord,
and their King.

And here it may be farther observed. That as all shall be subject to Christ,
so he will give Rewards to all, though not in like manner, but suitably to
their Service: The Servants shall have an outward, and temporal Reward, for
external Subjection; the Sons a Spiritual, and Eternal Reward. The Servants
like Abraham's Children by the Concubines, shall have Gifts for a time: The
Sons an Inheritance for ever. The Servants shall have an Esau's Portion, the
Dew of Heaven, and the Fatness of the Earth: The Sons a Jacob's Portion, the
Lord or their God, an exceeding great Reward. The Servant shall have such a
Reward of outward Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity, as to be able to say as Esau,
I have enough: The Son such a Reward, as to be able to say as Jacob, I have
all. This may be gathered from Chap. 46.16, 17. If the Prince give a Gift to
any of his Sons, the Inheritance thereof shall be his Sons, they shall have it
as joint Heirs with Christ, and it shall not be taken from them. But if he give
a Gift to one of his Servants of his Inheritance, then it shall be his to the
year of Liberty, after it shall return to the Prince. But his Inheritance shall
be his Sons for ever. Observe,

1. The Servant has but a Gift of Christ's Inheritance, the Sons have his
Inheritance.

2. The Sons shall have an eternal, the Servants a temporal Reward; even but
till the year of Liberty. Two things are to be taken notice of, for the better
understanding of this:

1. During the One thousand Years Reign of Christ, and of the Saints with him,
the Servants shall peaceably and quietly enjoy their Gifts. As they shall at
this time submit to Christ's Government, so shall they enjoy their Reward
without disturbance. Which we may conceive to be hinted, Chap. 46.18. The
Prince shall not take of the Peoples Inheritance, by oppression, to thrust them
out of their possession. By People the Servants are meant, because they are set
up in opposition to the Sons. Now neither the Prince, nor the Sons of the
Prince, shall take away the Peoples Inheritance, that is, those Gifts of
Christ's Inheritance, which he shall give them. As the Servants in this time
shall not rise up against the Sons, or disquiet them; so the Sons shall not
disquiet the Servants, nor thrust them out of their possessions.

2. When the one thousand years shall be expired, Satan shall be loosed out of
his Prison, and shall go out to deceive the Nations in the Four Quarters of the
Earth, and gather them together in Battle, etc. So then the Servants will rebel
against the Prince, and rise up against the Sons; and hereby shall forfeit and
lose all before given them: And those of them thus gathered, shall be destroyed
by Fire from Heaven. And now will the Year of Liberty come, and the Nations out
of which Gog and Magog shall arise, ceasing at this time to keep the Feast of
Tabernacles, shall be smitten with the Plagues which are mentioned, Zach.
14.17, 18.

Consid. 6. The Saints shall reign with Christ; the Saints glorified, and not
glorified.

1. The glorified Saints of the New Jerusalem, Matthew. 19.28. Ye shall sit upon
twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, says Christ to his
Apostles: This shall be in the Generation, when he that sits upon the Throne
shall make all things new.

Q. Shall some Saints rule over other Saints in the New Jerusalem?

A. We do not find any ground to judge thus: But the glorified Saints shall
have rule over not glorified Ones, and also over the unconverted Nations.

1. They shall judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. If any will say, that this is
meant of Saints, sitting with Christ in Judgment over the Dead raised to Life.
Let it be considered: First, it is said, They shall judge the twelve Tribes of
Israel: And if this be meant of their sitting with Christ to judge them, then
some Saints must be Judges of other Saints; against which may be urged that of
Paul, Romans 14.10. Why do thou judge thy Brother? we shall all stand before
the Judgment Seat of Christ. All the raised Saints and Brethren shall stand
together to be judged. There seems little force in the Apostle's Argument, if
some Saints shall then be Judges of other Saints; nay some ground would be from
hence, for judging now, if they shall judge them then. So that somewhat else
must be meant hereby. And for this; Secondly, consider some other places of
Scripture; as Luke 19.17. Have thou Authority over ten Cities. So the Apostles
shall judge; that is, Have Authority over the Tribes of Israel in the Land.
Luke 22.29, 30. I appoint to you a Kingdom. So by Judging, is meant, Reigning.

2. They shall Reign upon the Earth amongst the Unconverted. 1 Cor. 6.1, 2.
Know ye not, that the Saints shall judge the World? That is, such as are not
Saints: and this, not only by approving, and justifying the Sentence of Christ
against them, Go ye cursed, etc. But the Saints shall order and regulate the
great Affairs of the World, and therefore might well be judged fit to determine
small matters of difference then among Brethren. Rev. 2.26. To him that
overcomes will I give power over the Nations, and he shall rule them. So by
Saints judging, is meant, Ruling the Nations. The Saints in John's time had
this Promise, which must be made good to them.

Q. But in what manner shall the raised Saints reign?

A. This is not so easy to determine; I shall only mention one place, and
leave it to consideration, whether it may not afford some hints as to this
thing. Heb. 2.5. Unto the Angels has he not put into subjection the World to
come: But what is man? etc. By the World to come, we are to understand, The New
Earth, or the State of the Earth which is to come, wherein Righteousness shall
dwell: For (...) being a Participle of the Feminine Gender, understands (...),
quasi (...) (...), the inhabited Earth, Matthew. 24.14. The Gospel shall be
preached (...), in the whole World. And the Septuagint has the same word, for
the habitable parts of the Earth, Prove. 8.31. This then is not meant of a state
of Glory in Heaven, but of a new state of the Earth to come.

Q. And to whom is it to be put in subjection?

A. 1. Negatively; It Is not put in subjection to Angels. There is now an
Invisible Government which Angels have over this World: There are
Principalities and Powers, to whom are made known by the Church, the manifold
wisdom of God. Ephesians. 3.10. And they are Ministering Spirits for the good of the
Heirs of salvation. But it seems by this place, that when the New Heavens and
New Earth shall be created, this their Ministration shall cease: and being then
Friends of the Bridegroom, and Attendants on him, they shall join in singing
that Song, Rev. 5.12. Worthy is the Lamb, etc. And as when God was perfecting
the Work of the First Creation; so when he shall make all things new, these
Morning Stars shall sing together, and these Sons of God shall shout for joy,
Job. 38.7. And we may not think the Angels will lose glory by this; for their
Ministry (to the Saints) being fulfilled, they shall have a full Reward: yea,
their glory will be the greater; for their Ministry before was immediately to
the Saints, but then it will be immediately to the Person of Christ himself.
Even as some persons who are Servants to a great King, are called home, from
negotiating abroad, to wait on their Kings person in his Royal Court. So that
what the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon's Servants, may much more be said of
the Angels then, 2 Chronicles. 9.7. Happy are thy Men, and happy are these thy
Servants, which stand continually before thee, etc. And Christ himself shall
deliver the Kingdom to the Father, but shall lose no glory thereby.

And we may conceive some reason of the ceasing of this Dispensation of Angels
Government; the evil Angels will be all bound, and cast into Prison, and not be
suffered to walk to and fro in the New Earth. As in this World there are evil
Angels, tempting to Sin, and hindering the doing of much good, causing trouble
to the Saints: So there are holy Angels withstanding them, which are fit and
proper Instruments to be employed against them. And as Saints have invisible
Enemies, so invisible Friends. Dan 10.13. The Prince of the Kingdom of Persia
withstood me 21 days. Which (says one) must be understood, De daemone quodam
Aulico, etc. Acting in Cambyses, and his evil Counselors, and inkindling
hatred against the Jews. Now says the holy Angel, This Prince withstood me:
Here Is Angel against Angel. But in the World to come, 'twill not be so; because
evil Angels will be all shut up in the Bottomless Pit, and so no need of the
Ministration of holy Angels to withstand them. Thus then the World to come, is
not put in subjection to Angels.

2. Affirmatively, It Is to man, What is man?

1. To the man Christ Jesus, who took the Seed of Abraham, and was by the
suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor. He will be supreme Lord of
this World to come.

2. To the Saints, who as they now suffer, so then shall they reign with
Christ. Rev. 5.10. We shall reign upon the earth. First, The glorified Saints,
we shall reign of; whom it is said, Rev. 24.4. They lived and reigned with
Christ: This shall be so, that God may have a time for honoring the Saints.
Why shall the Saints execute the Judgment written? That it may be said, This
honor have all his Saints, Psa. 149.9. So, why shall the Saints succeed the
holy Angels in their Government? that it may be said, This honor have all his
Saints. And seeing God has such regard to their honor, how dear should His
honor be to them?

Q. But how shall the glorified Saints rule in the World to come?

A. For the How] take this hint: As the glorified Saints shall succeed the holy
Angels in their government; so shall they reign after such a manner, as the
Angels did before: and so, as in the Resurrection, they shall be like the
Angels, in not eating and drinking, and not marrying: so also in matter of rule
and government. And therefore as Angels have been sent to make known the mind
of God to his Servants, 2 Kin. 1.3. and 15. Dan. 10.14. Rev. 22.16. So may the
glorified Saints be the Messengers of the Mind of God, to Saints not glorified.
The Law was given by Angels; and it is said, The Law shall go forth from Sion,
and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem; In which may be the Ministry of
glorified Saints: Angels ascend and descend upon the Son of Man: They are at
Christ's command, and come and go when he bids them. They ascend to know, and
descend to do. In like manner shall the glorified Saints go and come at
Christ's command. And lastly, when Saints die, Angels carry their Souls into
Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22. So when the time shall be for the Translation of
any Saint into the New Jerusalem; some glorified ones may be sent to bring them
in. For a conclusion of this particular, consider 2 things:

1. As Angels lose no glory by coming out of Heaven to do their work on Earth:
so shall not glorified Saints, by going out of the New Jerusalem to Saints not
glorified.

2. If the Angels of Heaven and Saints on Earth might have any converse
together, so as that the Saints could bear the Access of Angels as Abraham did,
then much more may the not-glorified Saints of the World to come, be able to
bear the Access of the glorified ones to them; and that because Saints
glorified and not-glorified will be of the same nature; and also the Saints
not-glorified will then be better capacitated, in respect of Purity and
Spirituality, to bear the Access of the glorified Saints, than any were
heretofore, to bear the Access of Angels to them. And lastly, glorified Saints
may appear in such a form, which the not-glorified ones may be able to bear.
This seems hinted Ezekiel. 44.19. When they go to the people, they shall lay aside
their garments in which they ministered, and put on other garments. Thus much of
the Reign of the raised Saints.

Secondly, the Saints not-glorified; that is, those of the twelve Tribes in
their portions in the Land, and also those of the saved Nations, shall reign.
Dan. 7.27. The greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given
to the people of the Saints of the most high, and all Dominions shall serve
him. Not that all Saints shall be Rulers, but all Rulers shall be Saints:
Magistracy and Government will be then in the hands of Saints. Rulers shall as
Men live soberly, as Magistrates righteously, as Members of Churches godlily.
They will be as David, men after Gods own heart, doing all his wills; as
Solomon, having wisdom to go in and out before the people; and Nehemiah,
seeking the welfare of the people of Israel, Ier. 30.21. Their Nobles shall be
of themselves, and their Governors shall proceed from the midst of them. Ezekiel.
45.8. My Princes shall no more oppress my People. Thus shall it be in that
glorious Commonwealth of the Jews, which is to come: Princes in it shall be the
Lords Princes, and the People the Lords People; and none but the Lords Princes
shall rule over the Lords People, and none of them shall be oppressing Princes
to them. Verse 9. Let it suffice you, O Princes of Israel; remove violence,
execute judgment, etc. Isa. 60.18. Violence shall be no more heard in thy land,
and wasting and destruction within thy borders. And as verse 17. I will make
thine officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness. Ezekiel. 43.9. Let them
put away the carcases of their Kings, etc. What were Ahaz, and Ahab, and
Jeroboam, (and Manasseh also before he repented) but as abominable to God, as
Carcases are to Men? But when the Jews shall be called, their Rulers shall not
be such, but David's, Hezekiahs, etc. doing that which is good in the sight of
the Lord.

Q. What need will there be of Rulers then, seeing God has promised he will
put his Law into the mind, and write it in the heart of all his People, and
cause them to walk in his statutes, and they shall keep his judgments; which
promises shall be eminently fulfilled then?

A. Rule and Government may well consist with that pure and glorious state; for,

1. If Adam had continued in innocence, there would have been Rule and
Government, as we may well suppose; for he should have begotten Children, and
so have had rule over them as a Father. The Law of Nature would have taught
Children to honor a Father.

2. Christ in his childhood and growing estate was under the rule of Joseph and
his Mother, Luke 2.51. He went down with them, and was subject to them.

Consid. 7. There will be during the one thousand years a Translation of many
out of the Nations into the Church, who shall have Inheritances among the
Tribes of Israel, and also of many from among the Tribes in the Land, into the
New Jerusalem; as also from among the saved Nations.

1. Out of the Nations into the Church; for this see Ezekiel. 47.22. The strangers
that sojourn among you, which shall beget children, shall be as born in the
country, and they shall have inheritance among the Tribes of Israel. So that
in the Land there will be Propagation; and the mention of Children may be to
hint, that the strangers, and their children with them, shall have Inheritance
in Israel, and be of the Church. Which shows, that there will be
Conversion-work at that time; which also (as before was hinted) appears from
the Fishers standing by the River, and by the healing of the Waters, the mirey
places not being healed, by which may be meant the Nations not converted, out
of which Gog and Magog shall at last arise.

2. From amongst the Tribes of Israel in the Land into the New Jerusalem; for
this see chap. 48.19. The increase of that over against the holy portion is to
be for food for those that serve the city; and they that serve the city, shall
serve it out of all the Tribes of Israel. For the understanding of this place
let it be considered, what this City wants, and has need to be served with.

1. It does not want Food and Raiment; for all in it will be as the Angels,
they need no Candle, neither light of the Sun, much less then Corn, Wine, and
Oil.

2. This City wants nothing but more Citizens, nothing but more Saints; and
these it will want, till all the Elect shall be called, and come up to the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Thus does Heaven now want the
Saints upon Earth, and so will the New Jerusalem, till all the Mansions there
shall have those in them for whom they are prepared. Compare this of serving
the City with Luke 14.17. there is an Invitation to a Supper, Come, for all
things are ready; the Servants are sent to invite more, verse 22. Yet there is
room; and the Lord said, Compel them to come in, that my house may be full.
Whence may be gathered, that there is no want in this City, but of more Guests
and Citizens. This City then is served more remotely, by those that shall be
Instruments in bringing in strangers among the Tribes of Israel; and more
nearly, by fitting Saints for the New Jerusalem. And here by the way let it be
observed, what a glorious Work that of the Ministry is, it being now to serve
Heaven with the Saints it needs, and at last the New Jerusalem with the
Citizens it will want. The Ministers of Christ are like those Officers which
provided Victual for King Solomon, and for all that came to his Table, 1 Kings
4.27. The Saints brought in shall be as Victual for Christ, and all that come
to his Table; and with these the City is served. Hence may be gathered thus
much:

1. When the New Jerusalem shall come down, there will be Saints in two
different states; some in the City, where Christ's Throne shall be, some without
in the Land; for they serve the City out of all the Tribes of Israel, that is,
with Saints taken thence.

2. Amongst the Tribes in the Land there will be a Ministry serving the City.

Q. Whether any Saints of the Tribes in the Land or saved Nations shall die in
that time, or whether they shall be changed and translated into the City?

A. Against the death of any Saint in that state, and for their change, it may
be thus argued:

1. It Is said Rev. 21.4. God shall wipe away all tears, and there shall be no
more death. This is spoken of the People of God, verse 3. No death to such as
shall have the Lord for their God.

2. Paul says 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. Behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed. There will be at last a change instead of
death, and when the time of changing comes, no Saints shall after that, die;
and this change will begin at the Resurrection of the dead Saints; The dead
shall be raised, and we shall be changed; that is, at and after this each Saint
shall, in the time appointed for it, be changed: Of this change Enoch and Elias
were Types. And it is said further verse 54. Then shall be brought to pass the
saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O Death, I will be
thy plagues; O Grave, I will be thy destruction. If after this destruction of
the Grave Death shall happen to any Saints, how shall it be swallowed up in
victory? God will then be the death of Death, and the destruction of the Grave;
and therefore Death and the Grave shall not be the destruction of any of the
Saints Bodies. 1 These. 4.16, 17. The dead in Christ shall rise first, then we
which are alive shall be caught up. (...), afterward; that is, all in their
order, some at, some after the coming of Christ, in the time of the one
thousand years; some at his coming, even all then alive, which before were
called. And at this time a new Generation of Saints will be brought forth, and
converted by means of the appearing of Christ: For now will be a through
conversion of all the Jews, many of them not being effectually called till this
time, as after will appear. And now also will the fullness of the Gentiles come
in, which will be the Nations of them which shall be saved.

Q How does this agree with Isa. 65.20. The child shall die an hundred years
old, but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed; the child
being set in opposition to the sinner, is one born of God, and that is in the
time of the new Heavens and the new Earth, verse 17?

A. Death is sometimes put for a Change in Scripture, and why then may it not
be so taken here? Heb. 9.27. It Is appointed to men once to die. But 1 Cor.
15.51. We shall not all die. How shall these two places be reconciled? Beza
thus reconciles them, In iis qui immutabuntur, illa immutatio species mortis
erit: Change will be a kind of Death. Heb. 11.13. These all died in faith: but
Enoch being one of them, verse 5. did not die, but was translated, that he did
not see death: How shall this seeming contradiction be reconciled, but as
Ribera does? Nomine mortis translatio comprehenditur, etc. Under the name of
Death a Translation is comprehended, in that Enoch's Translation was a Death in
relation to those that remained alive in the world, because by it he ceased to
be amongst them. It Is said of him, He was not; which elsewhere signifies death;
as when Jacob said, One is not, that is, dead, in his thoughts.

Consid. 8. The Name of this City shall be Jehovah Shammah, The Lord is there;
and this shall be its Name from that day. Which does intimate such a Presence
of Christ with the Saints, which was not before. He has been present in Spirit
from the beginning of the Gospel Church; but at this time the Church shall have
another kind of Presence, even his Personal Presence. Here Is a new Name for a
new Presence, the Name of it from that day shall be, The Lord is there. Chap.
43.2. The glory of the God of Israel came from the East, his voice was as the
noise of many waters, and the earth was lightened with his glory. Haec Dei
gloria est Christus, says one; Surely this Glory of the Lord is no other than
the Lord of Glory, who is the brightness of the Fathers Glory. Solomon's house
was filled with the glory of the Lord; that was a typical House, and had a
typical Glory, that is, some glorious sign of Gods Presence, and his owning
that House. Here will be the true Temple, into which the King of Glory shall
come. The Ark was a sign of Gods presence with the Jews, which is therefore
called the Lord, Josh. 3.11. Behold the Ark of the Covenant, even the Lord of
all the earth, etc. As the Jews had the typical presence, so when they shall be
called, they shall have the true presence of the Lord in the New Jerusalem,
Rev. 11.19. In the Temple was seen the Ark, that is, the Lord of all the earth
typed by the Ark. This Temple shall be the place of Gods Throne, and of the
Soles of his Feet, chap. 43.7. Now he is upon a Throne in Heaven; but when
Jerusalem shall come down, in it shall be his Throne. Ier. 3.17. At that time
they shall call Jerusalem the throne of the Lord. At what time? When all the
Nations shall be gathered to the Name of the Lord to Jerusalem, and when the
House of Judah shall walk with the House of Israel, verse 18. Observe also what
is said verse 16. They shall no more say, The Ark of the Covenant of the Lord,
neither shall it come to mind. The presence of the Lord with the Israelites, is
no way to be compared with that his presence which is to be in the New
Jerusalem; for the Ark shall not then come into mind. It Is well observed by
Cornelius a Lapide, Hoc nomen valde congruit cum illo quod Christo imponitur,
Isa. 7.14. Immanuel. This Name has very near affinity with the Name Immanuel,
God with us: now as Christ was Immanuel, by a personal presence on earth, so
the City will be called Jehovah Shammah from his Personal presence. Now for the
better clearing of this great truth of Christ's personal Presence and Reign, and
of the Saints reigning with him, two things are to be done:

1. Scripture-Arguments for it shall be produced.

2. Objections against it shall be answered. For the first;

As Christ took our Nature, and therein did execute his Prophetical Office, by
teaching and speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God; and also
his Priestly Office, by offering himself without spot to God: so he has a
Kingly Office also, which as he has been executing providentially, and
spiritually, he shall so do it personally; and where he preached and suffered,
there will he reign, and execute justice and judgment even in the earth.

Arguments to prove the Personal Presence of Christ in the New Jerusalem, and
his Reign upon Earth.
Arg. 1. REv. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I give to sit with me on my
throne, as I overcame, and am set down with my Father upon his throne. Christ
was at this time in Heaven sitting upon the Fathers Throne, which is his also
as God. He reigns as Mediator, but sits on the Fathers Throne, where he must
sit till all his Enemies be made his Footstool, Psalm 10.1. Sit at my right
hand till I make thy foes thy footstool. We may observe that there is Christ's
sitting at the right hand of God upon the Fathers Throne, and his sitting at
the right hand of God upon his own Throne. In the former respect he sits upon a
Throne in Heaven, in the latter he shall upon Earth. The Scripture gives ground
for this distinction; for the former see Heb. 8.1. Who is set at the right hand
of the throne of the Majesty in the Heavens; that is, at the right hand of the
Father upon his Throne in Heaven. Heb. 12.2. And is set down at the right hand
of the throne of God. Then for the latter, his sitting at the right hand of God
upon his Throne, see Zech. 6.13. He shall sit and rule upon his throne: His, as
distinct from his Fathers. And he shall be a Priest upon his Throne; two things
are here manifest: First, as he sits and rules upon his Fathers Throne, so he
shall sit and rule upon his own Throne. Secondly, as he is now a Priest upon
the Fathers Throne, so he shall be a Priest upon his own Throne, and there make
Intercession; and whilst he is a Priest making Intercession, he is at the
right hand of God, Romans 8.34. Who is at the right hand of God making
intercession for us. Thus we see that there is the Fathers Throne, and Christ's
own Throne; but where is the place of his Throne? Not in Heaven, for there he
sits on the Fathers Throne: therefore it must be on Earth, of which we have a
clear proof Mat. 25.31. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, then shall
he sit upon the throne of his glory: then, and not till then, upon his own
Throne; and his own Throne is that which is called the Throne of his Father
David, Isa. 9.7. Luke 1.32, 33. The Lord God shall give unto him the throne of
his father David, and he shall rule over the house of Jacob. First, he shall
rule over the House of Jacob, which he did not at his first coming, for then
the House of Jacob rejected him. Secondly, when he shall reign over the House
of Jacob, his Kingdom will be of long continuance; of his Kingdom there shall
be no end; his Kingdom shall not be destroyed, as those that go before it. This
Kingdom over the House of Jacob is doubtless that which the Disciples thought
should immediately appear: and it is observable, that Christ does not deny the
appearance of it in its time, but the immediate appearance. He shall sit upon
the Throne of David: David was in the old Jerusalem, where he had his Throne;
and Christ, who is David, shall be in the new Jerusalem, and have his Throne in
it. Then shall that Prophecy of Daniel be fulfilled, Dan. 7.13. I saw one like
the son of man, which is expounded to be Christ, verse 27. All Dominions shall
serve him. He came in the clouds of Heaven, which in Scripture sets forth his
personal coming; and there was given him Glory and a Kingdom, which is meant of
a Kingdom on earth: for it is given him, that all People, Languages, and Nations
should serve him, so as that the Lord shall be King over all the earth; and his
Kingdom shall be the stone which shall break in pieces the great Image, and
become a great Mountain, and shall fill the whole Earth. Thus Christ shall
reign sitting on his own Throne.

Next let it be considered, how the Saints shall sit with him upon his Throne,
and reign with him. This is not meant of the state of Glory in Heaven, for
Christ does not there sit upon his own Throne, and therefore they do not sit
with him upon it, but behold his Glory. Consider the Saints own sense, Rev.
5.10. The four beasts, and four and twenty elders say, We shall reign upon the
earth. This is the sense of the Saints in Heaven, and shall any on the Earth
contradict the sense of Heaven? This is confirmed Dan. 7.26. The Judgment shall
sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and destroy it to the
end; and then the Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be
given to the Saints, Rev. 2.26. To him that overcomes will I give power over
the Nations, and he shall rule them with a Rod of Iron, even as I received of
my Father. The Saints shall judge the World, and govern the Nations; yea the
Saints shall judge Angels also, Mar. 16.17. In my Name shall they cast out
Devils. This Paul did, Acts 16.18. I command thee in the Name of Jesus, that
thou come out of her. Such a power some have had in the time of the Old Heavens
and Earth: much more may it be conceived of the Saints of the New Heavens and
Earth. And as the Saints have been cast into Prison by Satan, Rev. 2.10. So why
may not Saints have power to cast him into Prison, suitable to that promise;
They shall take them Captives, whose Captives they have been, and rule over
their Oppressors. And therefore as Saints shall have this honor to bind the
Nobles of Babylon with Links of Iron; so it is possible they may have a farther
honor, eved to bind evil Spirits with Chains, and to clear the Earth and Air
of them, and to command them in the Name of Jesus out of the World, into the
bottomless Pit, and there shut them up, and keep them close Prisoners, during
the One thousand years. Observe farther, this promise was made to the
overcoming Saints in John's time. They must rule the Nations, and be raised to
reign.

Arg. 2. It Is most evident from Scripture, that the Church shall have in the
last Days a very Peaceable and Glorious Estate upon Earth. The Prophesies
concerning it, are so many, and so manifest, that it cannot be denied, Isa.
54.11. and Isa. 60. It Is also evident, that this State will be of long
continuance: Peace so long as the Moon endures. Mine Elect shall long enjoy
the works of their hands. As the new Heavens and new Earth shall remain before
me, so shall your Seed and your Name remain, Isa. 66.22.

It Is also evident that Ancichrist must be destroyed, the Beast and the false
Prophet must be taken, and Satan bound up, before the Church shall have its
Liberty and Peace; for whilst they have power, they will be troubling the
Saints. Lastly, It Is evident, that there will be a personal coming of Christ,
when these things shall be accomplished. For,

1. There will be a personal coming of Christ, when Antichrist shall be
destroyed. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. The Lord shall consume him with the Spirit of his
Mouth, and destroy him with the Brightness of his coming. Which is not meant of
a Spiritual coming; for this is included in the former expression, of consuming
with the Spirit of his Mouth; therefore it must be meant of a Personal coming.

2. When this Glorious time shall begin, Christ will come the second time. This
is evident from two places: the first is Matthew. 24.30. Immediately after the
tribulation of those days, the Sun shall be darkened, etc. What tribulation is
this? v. 21. There shall be great tribulation, such as was not since there was
a Nation. This is the great Tribulation spoken of by Daniel and Zachary; now
when this Tribulation shall end, and the Glorious State shall begin, then shall
they see the Sign of the Son of Man, and immediately after, the Son of Man
himself. From hence it is most evident, that the second coming of Christ will be
at the beginning of this blessed time: For immediately after the tribulation of
those Days Christ comes. So that if there shall be a quiet and peaceable estate
of the Church, as it is most evident there shall be, then the personal Presence
and Reign of Christ must be acknowledged. The second place is Acts 3.19, 20.
Repent that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall
come from the presence of the Lord. This is his Personal presence: In the worst
of times the Saints have had refreshing from his Spiritual presence, but the
great refreshing times will be from his Personal presence: and the following
words do evidently set forth this sense; For as he is now in Heaven, so shall
he be on Earth: The Heavens receive him personally; and therefore when the
times of Restitution come, the Earth shall receive him personally.

3. When Christ shall come, his Kingdom shall come. 2 Timothy 4.1. Christ shall
judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and Kingdom. Then a King shall
reign in righteousness, Isa. 32.1.

Arg. 3. When the time of the Marriage of the Lamb shall come, then the Lamb
himself shall come: the Bridegroom must be present at the Marriage. Hence we
find mention made of the Bridegroom's coming, and their going in with him to
the Marriage, who shall be ready, Matthew. 25.6.18. which must be understood of
his Personal coming. Here four things are to be considered.

1. Who is to be the Bride, the Lamb's Wife: Now the New Jerusalem-Saints will
be the Bride, Rev. 21.2. I saw the holy City, New Jerusalem, prepared as a
Bride adorned for her Husband. So those that shall come with Christ, and be
gathered to him at, and after his coming, shall be the Bride, the Lamb's Wife,
2 Thessalonians. 2.1. I beseech you by the coming of Christ, and our gathering to him:
That is, To be with him in the holy City. Then that will be fulfilled, Two
shall be in the Field, one shall be taken, and the other left. And the raised
Saints, and those that shall be taken into the holy City, will be the Lamb's
Wife.

2. What is meant by the Lamb's Marriage. For this we may consider, that when
any are converted, they are espoused to Christ, and take him for their Husband;
and Christ loves and cherishes them. No man hates his own flesh, but loves
and cherish it, as the Lord the Church, Ephesians. 5.29. So all true Saints on
Earth are espoused to Christ in Heaven. 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one
Husband, that is Christ. But though espoused, it is to an Husband absent from
them. As for this Marriage of the Lamb then, what is it, but Christ's coming,
and receiving to himself his espoused ones to be with him in the holy City,
that they may have the refreshing of his presence? Let the Husband dwell with
the Wife; this Christ will do. And when the Bridegroom shall come, then what
was done before in a way of espousals, betwixt Christ and the Saints in a state
of absence, shall be completed in a Personal meeting, and cohabitation in the
New Jerusalem.

3. How the Bride is made ready for the Marriage. Rev. 19.7. The Marriage of
the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready. Which in the general
is to be adorned with Beauty and Glory like to Christ's. The Kings Daughter
must be all glorious within, and her clothing of wrought Gold, and she must be
brought to the King in Raiment of Needle Work. More particularly, this
readiness consists in two things:

First, Unspotted Hol^ness and Righteousness, Rev. 19.8. To her was granted,
that she should be arrayed in fine Linen, white and clean, which is the
Righteousness of Saints; this will be the Wedding Garment. At this Marriage,
Christ shall present to himself a Glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle. And
Christ will say, Thou art all fair my Love.

Secondly, Bodies raised or changed, and fashioned like to Christ's glorious
Body. The Lamb's Wife will consist at this time of Spirits of just Men made
perfect, dwelling in glorious Bodies like to Christ's. For the adorning must be
of Bodies as well as Spirits, to make them ready for this Marriage; and thus
the readiness will be complete and full. The Bodies of Saints are Christ's, as
well as their Spirits, 1 Cor. 6.20. And their Bodies are for the Lord, and the
Lord is for their Bodies, v. 13. And therefore Christ will have his Wife made
ready, for the Marriage with himself, in Body as well as Soul. Psa. 17.5. I
shall behold thy Face in Righteousness, and when I awake, I shall be satisfied
with thy likeness. Righteousness and Likeness, make this Readiness, and it must
be Likeness in a glorified Body; for it is, when I awake. And when this shall be
done, the Saints shall have Blessedness, and that even to satisfaction: Christ
shall see his Bride, and be satisfied; and Saints shall see Christ, and be
satisfied.

4. When this Marriage shall be: This we see, Rev. 19.15. When Christ shall
tread the Winepress of the Fierceness and Wrath of Almighty God; and when the
Beast shall be taken and destroyed, then will be the time of the Lamb's
Marriage. For then it is proclaimed, The Marriage of the Lamb is come. And at
this time will be the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, v. 9. Blessed are they which
are called to the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb. Which is called the Supper of
the Great God, v. 17. To which the Fowls are called to eat the flesh of Kings,
and Captains, and of Mighty Men. And why blessed? Because now the Righteous
shall rejoice, in seeing the Vengeance executed on their Enemies; and this Joy
will be their Supper. By this it is very evident, that when the Beast shall be
taken, and the false Prophet, and the Remnant slain at that great Battle of
Armageddon, then the Bridegroom will come, and then will be the Lamb's
Marriage, and the Churches Glorious Estate will then begin. The Marriage will
be at this time, because now will be the Marriage-Supper; and when the Marriage
shall be, Christ must be personally present; unless we will conceive a Marriage
without a Bridegroom. Compare Matthew. 25.6.10. The Bridegroom came, and they
that were ready went in with him. This all do understand of a Personal coming.

Arg. 4. There will be a Resurrection of all the dead Saints, at the time of
the Battle of Armageddon, when the Beast shall be taken; and if so, then a
personal coming of Christ. 1 Cor. 15.23. They that are Christ's at his coming.
Now that there shall be at that time a Resurrection of dead Saints, may be
proved from Dan. 12.13. Go thou thy way till the end be; for thou shall rest,
and stand in the Lot at the end of the days. Where observe these particulars:

1. Go, Let thy Soul go its way to Heaven, thy Body its way to the Grave.

2. Stand, Which intimates a Resurrection, stand up from the dead.

3. Stand in the Lot; Canaan was divided by Lot. To this there is allusion
here: More persons than one are concerned in that about which the Lot is cast.
So then at this time Daniel shall have a Lot in the New Jerusalem; and if he,
then others of the dead Saints shall have their Lots there also.

4. Stand in the Lot at the end of the days. Go till the end be. What end is
this? It has reference to v. 6. How long shall it be to the end of these
wonders? v. 7. It shall be for a time, times, and a half; and when he shall
have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy People, then all these
things shall be finished. Whereby he understands the end of the Jews trouble,
which will be at the Battle of Armageddon. Now at the end of these days of
trouble, and immediately after this tribulation, as Christ shall appear, so
Daniel shall stand up from the dead; even in the end of the days: What days?
Doubtless the One thousand three hundred and thirty-five days, which were last
mentioned. Blessed is he that comes to them, because then the Saints trouble
will end. And in the end of these days, Daniel, and the rest of the dead
Saints, shall stand in their Lot, and inherit the Kingdom prepared for them,
and promised to them. So here we find the First Resurrection, of which it is
said, Blessed and holy is he that has part in it.

Arg. 5. Luke 19.11, etc. He spoke a Parable, because they thought the Kingdom
of God should immediately appear. The scope of this Parable shows, that there
was to be a Kingdom of God; and such a Kingdom which was not in Being at that
time, neither was immediately to appear, but after a long time. Matthew. 25.19.
For Christ was first to go to Heaven to receive a Kingdom, and after that to
return to the Earth to administer the same, v. 12. Now this is not meant of his
Spiritual Kingdom alone; for that was then in being, and immediately to appear
more eminently. Of this Christ said, Luke 17.21. The Kingdom of God is among
you, which comes not with observation, (...), it does not now come with
Splendour and Majesty: for Christ came not then to be Ministered to, but to
Minister. Somewhat more then must be understood, even that Kingdom which shall
appear at Christ's return; which will be the Spiritual Kingdom, growing up to
its due height and perfection: And also that outward and visible Kingdom, which
Christ shall have over the whole Creation; so that all shall bow to him: and
neither evil Spirits, nor wicked Men, shall have any thing to do in matter of
Rule and and Government. This Kingdom will come with observation: For as the
Lightning shines from one part under Heaven to the other, so shall the Son of
Man be in his day. Then Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets
shall be seen in the Kingdom of God; and they shall come from the East, and the
West, and North, and South, and shall sit down with them in that Kingdom,
Matthew. 13.28, 29. which hints a Kingdom on Earth; for the East, West, North,
and South-parts of the Earth, are not so called in relation to Heaven, but with
reference to some place on Earth. For the farther clearing of this, we may
observe, That there are in the Government two eminent prefigurations of this
Kingdom.

The first is, Christ's riding in triumph into Jerusalem, Matthew. 21.8. The
Multitude spread their Garments, and cut down Branches from the Trees, and
cried Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed be he that comes in the Name of the
Lord. Mark 11.10. Blessed be the Kingdom of our Father David, that comes in the
Name of the Lord: It came then in a small degree of it. And when Christ shall
come in his Kingdom at last, then the Jews shall see him, and say as the
Multitudes did then, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord, Matthew.
23.39. And that which Christ did then, seems to foretell two things which he
shall do at his coming:

1. He shall purge his Temple: When he rode into Jerusalem, he went to the
Temple of God, and cast out those that bought and sold in it. Christ will
thoroughly purge his Temple when he comes, and make it the House of Prayer. The
Church shall be a Mountain of Holiness, and that new World the Habitation of
Justice.

2. Christ will heal Infirmities, v. 14. The Blind and the Lame came to him in
the Temple, and he healed them. At his first coming, he healed all manner of
bodily Infirmities. At his next, he will heal, not only bodily, but spiritual
Infirmities, more eminently than at his first coming.

The second prefiguration of Christ's coming was his transfiguration; of which
we read, Mat. 17.2. Christ said, Chap. 16.28. There be some standing here which
shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of Man coming in his Kingdom.
And we may observe to whom Christ spoke this. It was to his Disciples, v. 24.
Jesus said to his Disciples, and so continues his Speech to them, till he spoke
these words. Now although Mark says, that he called the People to him with his
Disciples, yet he directs his Speech to the Disciples especially; and therefore
we may conceive, that when he said, there be some standing here, etc. he means
some of his Disciples, and not all of them; and then it follows, After six days
Jesus takes with him Peter, and James, and John. So they were the same here
meant. And his transfiguration before them was a type of his coming in his
Kingdom. This sense has a great confirmation from 2 Pet. 1.16, 17. We have not
followed cunningly devised Fables, when we made known unto you the power, and
coming of Christ, but were Eyewitnesses of his Majesty. As if he had said, the
power, and coming of Christ was that which was shown us: for when we saw him on
the Holy mount, with his Face shining, and his Raiment glistering, we saw his
power, and coming; and the glory in which he shall appear. This is meant of his
second coming, of which we read, Chap. 3. where he speaks of the Scoffers that
should ask, where is the promise of his coming? Many look upon this glorious
truth, of Christ's coming to reign upon Earth, as a cunningly devised Fable;
but says Peter, it is not so; for that which we have seen with our Eyes,
declare we unto you. How, and when did they, see it? When they were with him in
the Holy Mount, and saw him transfigured before them. Then they saw it in a
Praeludium of it. So when Peter spoke of the power and coming of Christ, and of
the new Heavens, and new Earth, 'twas that which he was an Eyewitness of at
his transfiguration. Hence three things may be concluded.

1. When Christ shall come, he shall come in his Kingdom.

2. The raised, and changed Saints shall then appear with him in glory; of
which the appearing of Moses, and Elias was a type.

3. When Christ shall come in glory, and the raised, and changed Saints shall
appear with him in glory, then there shall be other Saints in an inferior
state, who may sometimes see Christ, and the glorified Saints, and have some
converse with them. Thus was it when Peter, and James, and John saw, as Christ,
so Moses, and Elias: and why may it not be thus after the coming of Christ? We
may the better conceive it, seeing those Saints, which shall be in an inferior
state to the glorified ones, will be much better capacitated for converse with
them, than Peter, and James, and John were at that time.

Arg. 6. The last argument shall be taken from Rev. 20. where Satan's binding,
Christ's reign, and the resurrection of the dead Saints to reign with Christ,
and all for one thousand years, are plainly declared. Take the particulars in
their order.

1. The binding of Satan for one thousand years: Concerning which observe,
First, the description of him that shall be bound, who is set forth under
several names. He is called the Dragon, to set forth his cruelty, being full of
rage and wrath: and the old Serpent, to note his subtilty, and cunning
craftiness to deceive: then the Devil, a caluminator, the accuser of the
Brethren: and lastly, Satan, the adversary, the great Enemy of God and
godliness, of Christ and Christianity; the hater of all men, but especially of
the household of faith. 1 Pet. 5.8. Your adversary the Devil. Now from this
variety of Names we may conclude, that this binding will not be partial, and in
some respects only, as they say, who hold that he was bound at Christ's
Passion, or at Constantines time; but total, and absolute, from deceiving or
doing mischief, in any kind whatsoever. He shall be bound as a Dragon, and not
be able to devour, persecute, cast into Prison, or to cast a flood out of his
mouth to swallow up the Saints. He shall be bound as a Serpent, and not tempt
or beguile. As a Devil, he shall not accuse the Brethren; and as Satan, for
though he shall continue an adversary, yet he shall not be an adversary, going
up and down as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. In a word, he shall
be bound up as God of this world, and Prince of the power of the Air, and as a
spirit working in the Children of disobedience. This total binding will appear,
by considering, Secondly, the manner of his binding, and the restraint which
will be put upon him. He shall be bound, and cast into the bottomless pit, and
a Seal set upon him: his Prison will be made sure, he shall not break Prison,
shall at last be a close Prisoner himself. And for what end must he be thus
shut up? That he should deceive the Nations no more, till the thousand years be
finished: In this time he shall not be suffered so much as to enter into an
Herd of Swine. Now these things being well considered, we may conclude that
these thousand years are not past already; they did not begin at Constantines
time. For when did Satan deceive the Nations more, than within that thousand
years, by bringing forth Mahomet, the false Prophet in the East, and by the
revelation of the Man of Sin in the West. Surely, these so many expressions
signify little, or nothing, if the thousand years be past already. Thirdly,

Take notice of the time how long he shall be bound, one thousand years. The
time of the Beast's reign, and of the Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth, is
given out by Days, and it is concluded that a Day, is put for a Year, according
to Ezekiel. 4.6. I have given thee a Day for a Year: but the time of Satan's being
bound, and of the Saints reign, is set forth by years. And we may conceive this
reason, why the time of Saints sufferings is given forth in a mystery. God had
in this, respect to his Servants weakness. If it had been given forth plainly,
it might have been some matter of discouragment to the Saints, to think that
the Beast should reign so long in the World. The time of Satan's being bound,
and the Saints reign, is plainly declared to be for a thousand years, that the
People of God might have the more joy in the expectation of it. God would not
that his People's Sorrow should be a full Sorrow, but would have their Joy to
be a full Joy.

Fourthly, observe what follows the thousand years of Satan's being bound v. 3.
He must be loosed a little season. v. 8. He shall deceive the Nations, Gog and
Magog, who being gathered shall be destroyed by Fire from Heaven: and all must
be done in a little season. Now if the thousand years be past, when was the
Prophecy of Gog, and Magog, fulfilled? Besides, when Gog, and Magog shall be
destroyed, then next the last Judgment of the wicked follows, Rev. 20.12. Thus
much of Satan's being bound.

2. Christ's Kingdom is here foretold; they reigned with Christ. So Christ
reigns: he will at this time take to himself his great power, and reign; and at
the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, the Kingdoms of the world shall become his
Kingdoms, and his reign will be personal; and thence the Name of the City shall
be, The Lord is there.

3. The dead Saints shall be raised to reign with Christ, v. 3. They lived and
reigned with Christ. That is, by a resurrection, as after follows; and this is
called the first Resurrection. Now the great question is, what Resurrection is
here meant? For the clearing of which, consider, that it is not a spiritual
Resurrection which is here meant; For,

First, this is a Resurrection of Saints, who before had past through a
Spiritual Resurrection. For who are they that shall live, and reign, or be
raised and reign? Those that were beheaded for the Testimony of Jesus, and word
of God, and would not worship the Beast, etc. These live and reign, and of
these is the first Resurrection. Now are not these to be judged Saints: have
not they part in a Spiritual Resurrection, before they thus stand it out
against the Beast, and before they have part in the first Resurrection? Shall
we so much offend against the generation of these just ones, as to account them
to be a company of persons dead in Sins, when they bear such a Testimony for
Christ, against Antichrist, and seal it with their Blood? it is therefore most
evident that this first Resurrection is of dead Saints, and not of Sinners dead
in Sins: And in this sense we may take those words, Blessed and holy is he that
has part in the first Resurrection. It Is a Resurrection of holy ones.

2. Those that were dead before they had part in the first Resurrection, and
the rest of the dead who have no part in it, after mentioned, are to be
conceived to be under the same kind of Death. So that if those that have part
in the first Resurrection were such who were spiritually dead, then the rest of
the dead must be such. And if those that live again, live by a bodily
resurrection, then those that do not live again are such who remain under the
power of a bodily death. And if such as live again, shall be such as shall be
raised from a civil death, as the witnesses will be, then those that do not
live again, will be such who shall remain under a civil death: so that the
first, and second resurrection, must be of the same kind. Hence then it will
follow

First, If those that live and reign, be such as live spiritual, then those
that do not live again, must be such who remain spiritually dead; and s^, then
it follows, that in the time of the thousand years there will be no Conversion.
For the rest of the dead lived not again till, etc.

Secondly, If the living again be meant only of a Civil Resurrection of Saints,
from a persecuted condition, into a quiet and ruling state: Then the rest of
the dead that live not again, must be other Saints in a low, and afflicted
state. So some Saints shall live, and reign for a thousand years, and others
shall be afflicted, and persecuted all that time, which is directly contrary to
Scripture; for the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be
given to the Saints. What remains then, but that we conclude, this first
Resurrection to be of dead Saints, from a bodily death, at the beginning of the
thousand years; and the living again of the rest of the dead, to be meant of
the resurrection of the Wicked, after the finishing of them.

4. All the dead Saints shall be partakers of this first resurrection, and not
only the Martyrs who suffered a bodily death: For Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
who died a natural death, and did not suffer Martyrdom, shall be raised, and be
in that Kingdom of God, Matthew. 8.11. Luke 13.28. Again, Rev. 11.18. The time of
the dead is come, that they should be judged, and that thou should give
reward to thy Servants, the Prophets, and to all that fear thy Name. So this
First Resurrection must be of all Saints, even as many as fear the Name of God.
And this shall be when the Seventh Angel sounds his Trumpet, and the Kingdoms
of the World shall become the Kingdoms of Christ. Therefore when it is said, the
beheaded Saints shall live and reign; all are hereby meant, that have been
liable to persecution and trouble: for all the Saints from the beginning have
suffered, one way or other. None have been free from Satan's temptations, and
few from Persecution, in one kind or other. Those that have not been persecuted
as Abel, to death, happily have been persecuted as Isaac was by Ishmael. Satan
has been bruising the Heel of the Church from the beginning, and will do it
till his Head be bruised, which will be at the beginning of the thousand years;
and so bruised, that he shall not recover any thing of Dominion, till the end
of them; and then he shall deceive the Nations, but not hurt the Saints. 'Twill
be but a vain Attempt against them. He shall not touch them, and there shall
not so much as an hair of their head perish. Thus far concerning the Arguments
for the Personal Reign.

In the next place, some Objections against it shall be answered.

Object. 1. John 18.36. My Kingdom is not of this World.

A. The meaning cannot be, that Christ shall not have the Government of the
World; for he is King over all the Earth de jure, and shall be de facto. He
has Right to rule, and shall at last rule according to his Right. That we may
the better understand this place, let some other Scriptures in the first place
be compared with it; and then let this Scripture it self be considered. For
other Scriptures, see Psa. 96.11, 12, 13. Let the Heavens rejoice, and the
Earth be glad; let the Field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall the
Trees of the Wood rejoice before the Lord, for he comes, he comes to judge
the World in righteousness, and the People with truth. Whence is it that the
Creatures shall thus rejoice with the Saints? Because they shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption, into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God;
and Satan and Antichrist shall not have dominion over them, but all will be in
subjection to Christ. See also Psalm. 97. The Contents of which in the Sir.
Version, are these; David foretells the coming of Christ, and his last
appearance: and the Sept. gives it this Title, (...). A Psalm of David; Quando
terra ejus restituta est, vel quando stabilita est; When his Earth was
restored, or established. It is a Psalm fitted for the time of Christ's coming
to reign, and of the restitution of all things, v. 2, 3. Righteousness and
Judgment are the habitation of his Throne; a fire goes before him, and burns
up his Enemies round about him: Which may well be judged to have reference to
the Battle of Armageddon, and the Conflagration which Peter foretells. This
Title is the more to be taken notice of, because it agrees with what is said of
Christ, Isa. 44.8. He is given for a Covenant to establish the Earth; or to
raise it up. Christ's Throne shall be established in the Earth, and then the
Earth shall be established in a peaceable and prosperous estate. Before it
reels like a Drunkard, Isa. 24.22. and Nimrods will fill it with violence: But
Christ reigning, he shall establish it upon a Foundation of Righteousness, the
effect of which shall be Peace. Rev. 11.15. The Kingdoms of this World are
become the Kingdoms of Christ: Though Christ says, My Kingdom is not of this
world; yet the Kingdoms of the World must at last be his. If it were of this
world, and now to be set up, then would my Servants fight, (...), but now my
kingdom is not from hence. At this time it is not to be set up over the World,
neither is it now to be from hence; I shall not, my Servants will not contend
for it; But the time will come, when I will in my Majesty ride prosperously,
because of truth, meekness, and righteousness.

Next, let this place it self be considered; and first, What was the occasion
of these words; Pilate asks Christ, Art thou the King of the Jews? this Christ
does not deny, but asks another Question, Speak thou this of thy self? And
then Christ replies, My Kingdom is not of this world: As if he had said, I am
indeed the King of the Jews, but they now reject me, and will not that I should
reign over them; they will have no King but Caesar, therefore let them suffer
from Caesar, and let their City be destroyed and left desolate, till the times
of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled, and then the Kingdom shall be restored to
Israel. Secondly, what follows? There was a Providence ordering that
Inscription, Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews. A time must be when
Christ shall be the King of the Jews. Hos. 2.5. The Children of Israel shall
seek the Lord, and David their King. Pilate asks him again, Art thou a King? He
answers, Thou say that I am a King. Thou savest that which indeed I am:
which he witnesses in the next words; For this cause was I born, and came into
the world, that I might bear witness to the truth. And if Christ was for this
end born, then the Saints are new born, and Ministers called to bear witness to
this truth. And it is observable, that after all this, Pilate justifies Christ
thus far, I find no fault in him. Surely as the High Priest spoke not of
himself, but being High Priest prophesied, That it was expedient that one
should die for that Nation; so Pilate prophesied, in the Inscription which was
set over him, that Christ should be the King of that Nation; and as once Balaam
and Saul were among the Prophets, so was Pilate also when he wrote that
Inscription, and would not yield to an alteration of it. Christ's great Enemies
bear witness to his Priestly and his Kingly Office. Thus much for answer to
this Objection, and for the clearing of this place, which now appears to be,
not against, but for this truth of Christ's Kingdom.

Object. 2. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution.

A. Other Scriptures, and those not a few, do plainly declare a state of
freedom from persecution at last: They shall sit under their Vines and
Fig Trees, and have none to make them afraid. Their Enemies shall come bending
to them, and bow themselves down at the soles of their feet. How shall these
Scriptures be reconciled with the former? Acts 14.22. We must through many
tribulations enter into the Kingdom of God. As Saints now must look to go to
Heaven through tribulations, so the Church must for a long time endure
tribulation: but at last it shall get through it into the Kingdom of God, which
shall be upon Earth, in which Christ shall reign, and the Saints with him: then
time shall be no more; that is, troublous times, persecuting, suffering-times
shall be no more, but then shall be the day of the Son of man. So distingue
tempora, and concordabunt Scripturae; state the times aright, and Scriptures
will agree. In the day of the Man of Sin, Saints suffer; in the days of the Son
of Man, they shall have rest.

Obj. 3. Satan being loosed out of his Prison shall deceive the Nations, and
gather them to Battle, and compass the Camp of the Saints, and the beloved
City: Now can it be thought that they shall dare to do this, if they shall know
Christ and the glorified Saints to be there; and shall they be exposed to
Battle and oppositions.

A. 1. Sin, especially malicious wickedness, is daring and desperate. What will
it not attempt, when there is the sweetness of Revenge tempting to it? And
malice loves to show it self, though it cannot do the utmost it would. Rev.
16.9. Those that are scorched with great heat, blaspheme the Name of God, who
had power over those Plagues. When they cannot free themselves of those Plagues,
and have no power over those Plagues, they blaspheme him that has: they do
what they can, when they cannot do the utmost they would, for Revenge. No doubt
but at this time the Devil will find much of malice and envy, at the power and
prosperity of the Saints, which will give him the more advantage to deceive the
Nations. The power of malice, and of a desire of Revenge is so great, that it
makes Men run the hazard of losing their own lives, to be avenged on those they
hate. And this no doubt will be raised to such an height in wicked men at that
time, that it will make them run headlong into a desperate design; and as
oppression makes wise Men mad, so malice and envy, will then make wicked Men
mad.

2. Somewhat like to this has been done: There were many glorious appearances
of God in Egypt, and at the Red Sea; great Wonders were wrought, yet after this
Pharaoh pursues the Israelites, and overtakes them. God makes a way in the Sea,
and a path in the mighty Waters, and Pharaoh was so hardened as to follow after
them in the Sea, where the whole Host of Egypt was drowned. And after all the
Amalekites must needs know what God had done for the Israelites, yet they would
fight against Israel. And Baalam knew the presence of the Lord with the
Israelites, and could say, The Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a
King is among them, even the same King who shall have his Throne in the New
Jerusalem: Yet notwithstanding this, he did what he could to curse Israel, and
gave pernicious Counsel against them to the Midianites. This he did, though he
knew that Isratl should drink of the Blood of the Slain, as they did his. These
things being considered, why should it be looked on as a thing incredible, that
the Nations should gather against the beloved City, though Christ shall be in
it, and it shall be known by this Name, The Lord is there?

3. The evil Angels rebelled in Heaven, and began a War there: This they did
when they were in the presence of God; and if they did this in Heaven, no
wonder that they should be so ready to do it on Earth: though they know the
effect will be their being cast into the Lake of Fire. And if evil Angels shall
act thus desperately against a known Christ, to their own known torment, then
we may conceive it also of Gog and Magog; seeing they will have the like
Devilish Malice, and the old Serpent deceiving them.

4. This will be but a gathering against the Camp of the Saints, and the
beloved City; like the Sodomites compassing Lot's House round, where the Lord
was, who smote them with blindness, and after destroyed them with Fire and
Brimstone: So here will be a gathering to Battle, but no Battle, for Fire from
Heaven will destroy them. So that all this will not be to the least hurt of
Saints: They gather against, but get no Victory over them: They compass the
Saints, but do not conquer them. Pharaoh pursued, but did not touch one
Israelite: Not one Israelite was hurt, and no one of Pharaoh's Host escaped.

Thus will it be with Gog and Magog; not one of them shall escape burning, and
not one Saint shall perish, or not so much as one hair of any of their Heads.
So this gathering will not be to the hurt, nay not affrightment of the Saints,
for terror shall not come nigh them. But as when the Heathen rage, and Rulers
take Counsel against the Lord, he that sits in Heaven laughs, and has them in
derision. So the Saints in the beloved City, and in the Camp of the Saints,
shall but laugh at Gog and Magog, and the vast Multitudes with them, and have
them in derision.

Object. 4. The last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death, 1 Cor. 15.26. This
is destroyed to Saints by their Resurrection; and therefore it may seem to
follow hence, that there will not be a First Resurrection of dead Saints, at
the beginning of the thousand years; because long after this the Saints will
have Enemies, as Gog and Magog, when the thousand years shall be finished. If
Death be the last Enemy which shall be destroyed, then the Resurrection of dead
Saints will not be till after the destruction of Gog and Magog.

A. The words may be thus rendered: Death which is the last Enemy shall be
destroyed. But it does not hence follow, that Death shall be destroyed last of
all: for some will be destroyed after Death.

For the Wicked, who have been Enemies to the Saints, shall be last of all sent
away into everlasting punishment.

Q. But how is Death the last Enemy, if after Saints shall be raised, Gog and
Magog shall gather against them?

A. Death is the last prevailing Enemy over a Saint. When this shall be
destroyed, no Enemy after this shall prevail against the Saints, or do them any
hurt.

Obj. 5. As the High Priest did enter once every year into the holy place, Heb.
9.7. so Christ being an High Priest of good things to come, did by his own
Blood enter into the holy place, which is Heaven, verse 24. Christ is entered
into Heaven it self, to appear in the presence of God for us. Hence it may be
argued, that if Christ shall be a Mediator, and make intercession during the
thousand years, then he must continue in Heaven, which is the holy place.

A. 1. It must be acknowledged, that Christ shall continue his Mediation in the
thousand years: For in that time many will be called, much Grace will be given
out; Saints will pray, and Christ will add Incense to their Prayers, and offer
them on the Golden Altar.

2. The Holy of Holies, into which Christ is entered, is in the Heavenly
Jerusalem. As the holy place, which was the Figure of the true, was in old
typical Jerusalem, so the true is in Jerusalem above, where Christ is.

3. When the New Jerusalem shall come down out of Heaven, then the Holy of
Holies will come down also, and Christ in it. Here observe, First, the New
Jerusalem is described, as having a Figure like the Holy of Holies: The length,
and breadth, and height of the holy place were equal, 1 Kings 6.20. And the
same is said of the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.16. Secondly, Ezekiel's Temple,
which is to set forth a Church on Earth, when the Jews shall be called, will
have an Holy of Holies, Chap. 41.14. He measured the length twenty Cubits, and
the breadth twenty Cubits before the Temple; and he said unto me, this is the
most holy place. Not that which was the Figure, but the true. And this affords
a strong Argument, to prove that this Name, The Lord is there, intimates a
personal presence. For Christ must be personally present in the most holy
place, to make intercession, which will be at last upon Earth. Thirdly, The
Throne of God and of the Lamb, will be in this City, Rev. 22.3. And Christ on
this his Throne, sitting at the right hand of God, and making intercession.
Under the Law there was a twofold Throne.

1. A Throne above upon the Ark, called the Mercy Seat, Exodus 25.17. There the
Lord promised to meet and commune with the High Priest. This was a Figure of
the true, which is called the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4.16. This Throne will be
in the New Jerusalem, and Christ a Priest upon it, Zachar. 6.13. praying for,
and dispensing Grace from it to the Saints.

2. A Throne of Judgment. Solomon made a great Throne of Ivory, there was not
the like in any Kingdom, 1 Kin. 10.18. And this was a part of Jerusalem's Glory
of old, Psa. 122.5. There are set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the House
of David; and upon David's Throne must Christ sit. Now when it is said, the
Throne of God, and and of the Lamb, shall be in it, this also is meant. And
here let this one thing be observed: As Christ shall give to the Saints to sit
with him upon his Throne, so this is not meant of the Throne of Grace, where
Christ is High Priest. True, they may go boldly to it, to obtain Mercy, because
Christ is there making intercession. But Saints shall not sit there as joint
Mediators with Christ; though they are said to be Priests, yet not Priests upon
a Throne. But the Saints shall sit with Christ upon his Throne of Judgment to
whom they shall be Servants, in executing Justice and Judgment in the Earth.
Psalm. 149.9. To execute upon them the Judgment written. Christ shall write the
Judgment, and they shall execute the Judgment written by him. This honor have
all his Saints.

Having thus laid down some Arguments to prove the personal presence of Christ
in the beloved City, and some Objections against it being answered, that this
great truth may be the better evidenced, let the last words of David be a
little considered. These we find in 2 Samuel 23. and Psalm. 72. In the former
place, v. 1. it is said, These be the last words of David; and the Preface to
what he had to utter, shows that they were things of very great weight, and
very glorious truths. David the Son of Jesse said, and the Man who was raised
up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, the sweet Psalmist of Israel
said, The spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his Word was in my Tongue, the
God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me. He that rules over Men
must be just, ruling in the fear of the Lord. As these words were a direction
to Solomon, so chiefly a Prophecy concerning Christ, which may be thus
rendered. Be thou ruler over Men, just, ruling in the fear of the Lord. David's
Sons succeding him in Government, were not all such. But Christ, who was made
of the Seed of David, and is to sit upon his Throne, shall be such a Ruler. He
shall be as the light of the Morning, when the Sun arises, even a Morning
without Clouds, as the tender Grass springing out of the Earth by clear shining
after Rain, v. 4. Christ the Sun of Righteousness, shall arise, he shall shine
forth as the light of the Morning, after the long Night of Antichristian
darkness; and then there shall be a Morning without Clouds. Christ shall come
in Clouds, but being come, the Clouds shall pass away, and the tender Grass
shall spring out of the Earth; they of the City shall multiply, and flourish
like the Grass of the Field. David did not expect it should be thus in the
Generations then immediately following. True, in the beginning of Solomon's
Reign there was a short Morning without Clouds; but in his latter days he
declined, and after him things grew much worse. Hence he says, Although my
House be not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant,
ordered in all things, and sure. As if he had said, I see, by a Spirit of
prophecy, that my successors will not be all just, yet the Covenant made with
me stands sure, and shall be made good in him who is my Lord, and shall be my
Son. And here is all my Salvation, and all my desire. I see his day, and long
for the great Salvation of it, and all my desire is, that he may have a name
above every name, and be exalted, and extolled, and be very high. I see the
defections and desolations of my House, but look beyond these, and do well
know, that a Rod shall come forth of the Stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow
out of his Roots, and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, and he with
Righteousness shall judge the poor, and reprove with equity, for the meek of
the Earth.

In the latter place, which is Psalm. 72. there is a Prayer added to this
Prophecy, and the conclusion of these last prophetic words of David. The
contents given of it are these: David, praying for Solomon, shows the
goodness and glory of his, in type, and in truth, of Christ's Kingdom. Several
passages in it show, that it must be meant of Christ chiefly; as v. 5. They
shall fear thee as long as Sun and Moon endure, throughout all Generations: v.
7. In his days shall the Righteous flourish, and abundance of peace, so long as
the Moon endures: v. 17. His Name shall be for ever, and men shall be blessed
in him. This was the promise made to Abraham, In thy Seed shall all Nations be
blessed; that Seed was Christ. Gal. 3.16. Glorious things are spoken of
Christ's Kingdom in this Psalm. He shall judge the people with Righteousness.
The Mountains, that is, Rulers, shall bring peace to the people. They shall not
be the Mountains of Prey, but the Mountains of Peace. His Kingdom shall be
universal, even to the ends of the Earth. An absolute Victory will be gotten
over his Enemies, they shall lick the Dust; and the greatest shall be made to
bow to him. The Kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles shall bring Presents, the
Kings of Sheba and Sebah shall offer Gifts; yea all Kings shall fall down
before him, all Nations shall serve him. And then will be the Churches full
Redemption: v. 14. He shall redeem their Soul from deceit and violence. Now the
foresight of this glorious Kingdom, and of the happy Estate of the Church in
it, makes David to break forth into Praises; v. 18. Blessed be the Lord God,
the God of Israel, who only does wondrous things; and blessed be his Glorious
Name for ever, and ever, and let the whole Earth be filled with his Glory,
Amen, and Amen. And then he concludes this, and all other his Psalms, with
these words; v. 20 The prayers of David, the Son of Jesse, are ended. Whence
may be gathered, that this Psalm contains the remainder of the last words of
David, and that this Psalm was the last of David's Psalms, though it be not set
last in the Book of Psalms. For the clearing whereof, two things may be
considered:

1. The Psalms are not all placed according to the time of their composure, or
the occasion of them: for Psalm the Third, is a Psalm of David when he fled
from Absalom. Now many made before this, are set after it; as Psa. 34. A Psalm
of David, when he changed his behavior before Abimelech. And Psa. 51. A Psalm
of David, when Nathan the Prophet came to him, after he had gone in to
Bathsheba. So also Psa. 57, and 63. So then, this may be the last, though not
set last.

2. The Psalm it self gives us ground to conclude that it was the last, and
made by David a little before his death: For thus he begins it, Give the King
thy Judgments, O God: Which shows, that Solomon was now made king, for so he is
here called. And this Psalm was made when both Father and Son were Kings. Give
the King thy Judgments: There David is called King; and thy Righteousness to
the King's Son: There Solomon is called King. And that Solomon was King,
David's own words do declare, 1 Kin. 1.48. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
which has given me one to sit upon my Throne, mine Eyes also seeing it. By
this it is evident, that the plain literal sense may stand; that this was the
last of the Psalms of the sweet Psalmist of Israel, who never sung more sweetly
than now. And to this, these three things may be added:

1. The matter of this Psalm contains that which was the sum and scope of
David's Prayers, even that Christ might reign gloriously, and that in his days
the Righteous might flourish. This is all my desire, and in this my Prayers
will reach their end.

2. David being carried in spirit to the Day of Christ's glorious reign, and
being set in the View of his blessed Kingdom, and seeing him breaking
Oppressors in pieces, and perfecting that which concerns the Saints; and at
last delivering up the Kingdom to God the Father, breaks out into this joyful
Acclamation, The Prayers of David the Son of Jesse are ended. They are
fulfilled, and fully accomplished, they are all consummated. So much is in the
Hebrew word (...) the Prayers of David, and of all the Saints, will at last
have a full accomplishment; and Faith may, even as God does, call the things
that are not, as though they were. So by a voice of Faith he might well say,
The Prayers of David the Son of Jesse are fulfilled.

3. When Christ shall take to himself his great Power, and Reign, and shall
have put down all that is to be put down, and shall present all the Saints
faultless before the presence of his Glory, with exceeding Joy, then Prayers
will be ended. As the Prayers of Saints, so Christ's also, who is David the Son
of Jesse. Hos. 3.5. They shall serve the Lord, and David their King: There
Christ is called David; And Isa 11. A Rod shall come forth of the Stem of
Jesse: there he is the Son of Jesse: So the Prayers of this David the Son of
Jesse will be ended. All that ever he prayed for will be accomplished; yea, all
that he has to pray for, will be granted: For then all the good things
contained in God's Decrees shall be brought forth: and whatever Christ has
purchased for, shall be enjoyed by the Saints: All Promises will be fulfilled
to them, and all the desires of their hearts given them. And then, as Faith
will be swallowed up in Vision, and Hope in Fruition, so Prayers will end in
everlasting Praises.

That the great things contained in this Prophecy, in which we have been thus
running to and fro, may be the better understood, and improved, somewhat shall
be added upon these following particulars: 1. The Calling of the Jews. 2. The
Restitution of all things. 3. The Description of the two Beasts, Revelat. 13.
4. The Day of Judgment, and the World's perishing by Fire. 5. Some Signs of the
times when the Fall of Babylon is at hand. 6. Some Advantages which the
knowledge of these Truths will afford. 7. The Conclusion of all, in some
Counsels and Directions.


1. The Calling of the Jews.

We may conceive that there will be a twofold Calling of the Jews: A First
Calling will be at the ending of the One thousand two hundred and ninety days,
Dan. 12.11. At that time the Jews Deliverance will begin, and there will be
then a calling and a gathering of them: But at this time many will be called,
but not so many chosen. This calling will be inward, and effectual to some; but
to many but outward, and in profession only; For after this their calling, they
will have many Enemies, causing great trouble to them: Dan. 11.31. there is
mention of an Enemy; and it is said, Arms shall stand on his part, and they
shall pollute the Sanctuary of strength: And, v. 45. He shall plant the
Tabernacle of his Palace in the glorious holy Mountain. Zach. 14.2. I will
gather all Nations against Jerusalem, and the City shall be taken. Now as this
will be a time of great trial, so many of the Jews shall fall away. Dan. 11.30.
This Enemy shall have indignation against the holy Covenant, and have
intelligence with them that forsake it; v. 33. some he shall corrupt by
flatteries; and some of them of understanding shall fall: some such as Peter,
and others such as Judas.

The second Calling will be at the end of one thousand three hundred and thirty
five days; which is forty and five years more than the former number: it is
said, blessed is he that comes to these days. At this time all Israel will be
saved, as from their persecuting Enemies, so from sin: and all will be called,
and chosen, and faithful. Rev. 19. Thy People shall be all righteous, Isa.
60.21. All shall be effectually called, and their Children shall be as
aforetime, Jer. 30.20. these shall be of the Church, and like John Baptist,
shall be sanctified from the Womb. No Noah shall have a cursed Cham, no Isaac a
profane Esau, for this would be a grief of heart, contrary to that promise,
there shall be no sorrow. God shall put the Law in the mind, and write it in
the heart, and they shall no more teach every man his Neighbor, saying, know
the Lord; for all shall know him, from the least even to the greatest of them.
They may need to be instructed farther in the knowledge of the Messiah, but no
need to be taught which is the Messiah; no need to be taught as Andrew did
Peter, Joh. 1.41. We have found the Messiah; as the Woman of Samaria did the
Samaritans, Come see the man which told me all things that ever I did, is not
this the Christ? But they may then teach as Aquila and Priscilla did Apollo,
who instructed him in the way of God more perfectly. This second Calling
appears, Zach. 13.9. Two parts shall be cut off, and dye, and I will bring the
third part through the fire, and will refine and try them: I will say, it is my
People; they shall say, the Lord is my God. And we may conceive, that this
second Calling will be by means of the personal appearing of Christ. Zach.
12.10. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and mourn. Rev. 1.7.
Every eye shall see him; they also which pierced him: Not only Judah which
pierced Christ, but also the ten Tribes, Thus as Paul was converted by seeing
Christ, so shall the Jews, And after this, Joseph and Judah shall become one,
and one King shall be to them all: And then every Tribe shall be in its portion
in the Land, and the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and all Saints coming with
Christ, shall stand in their Lot in the City.

2. The Restitution of all things.

We read of a twofold Restitution of all things. The first by Elias, the second
by Christ.

1. By Elias, Mat. 17.12. Elias shall first come, and restore all things; but I
say, Elias is come already. The occasion of what was spoken of Elias, was
Christ's transfiguration, which did prefigure his coming in glory: And the
Disciples from hence seem to conclude, that Christ should then reign in glory.
But this lay in the way, the Scribes say that Elias must first come. To which
Christ gives an answer; in which two things are to be considered:

First, Elias shall come and restore all things. Here Is a plain assertion,
Elias shall come: Which was spoken after John Baptist was come, and gone: And
then this was a truth, Elias shall come.

Secondly, Christ answers, Elias is come already. So both are true, Elias is
come and Elias shall come. As there is then a twofold coming of Christ, so a
twofold coming of Elias; for an Elias is a forerunner of Christ at both his
comings. The first coming of Elias was foretold, Isa. 40.3. The voice of one
crying in the Wilderness. Mat. 3.1.3. this was fulfilled in John Baptist: This
is he that was spoken of by Isaias the Prophet, And Mat. 17.12. Christ said
that John was the Elias which was to precede his first coming. The second
coming of Elias is foretold. Mal. 3.1. Behold I send my Messenger, and he shall
prepare the way before me, and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his
Temple, etc. Mal. 4.1. The day comes that shall burn as an Oven: v. 5. Behold
I send you Elijah the Prophet. Though these Prophecies had some degree of
accomplishment in John Baptist, yet certainly the full accomplishment is yet to
come. For an Elias shall be (...) before the coming of the great and dreadful
day of the Lord. Now this dreadful day must certainly be chiefly meant of the
day of his second coming. For, first, all here foretold cannot be said to be
fulfilled at his first coming: For did this day burn as an Oven, so that all
the proud, and such as did wickedly, were burnt up, and had not root or branch
left them? This threat had not its accomplishment at the destruction of
Jerusalem, for this happened several years after the first coming of Christ;
it is promised, that at that time those that fear the name of God, should go
forth, that is out of their bondage and afflicted state, and should tread down
the wicked; so as that they shall be as ashes under the soles of their feet.
But no such thing was done then, the Saints did not tread down the wicked.
Jerusalem was trodden down by the Romans. This Prediction does well agree with
other Prophecies, of the great destruction of Christ's and the Churches
Enemies; and very much with Peter's Prophecy of the world's perishing by fire.
The time of Christ's first coming is called, The acceptable year of the Lord,
and of proclaiming liberty to sinners, to get forth from their spiritual
Captivity. So it is expounded by Christ, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in
your ears, Luke 4.21. Now how can that so sweet a day spoken of by Esaias, be
the dreadful day spoken of by Malachi? In this dreadful day the Sons of Levi
shall be purified, and the Offerings of Judah and Jerusalem shall be pleasant
as in the days of old. This was not fulfilled at Christ's first coming; for
then the Sons of Levi were the great Enemies of Christ, and had the chief hand
in crucifying him: And then Judah and Jerusalem killed the Prince of Life; so
far were their Offerings from being pleasant, as in the days of old. By this it
appears, that an Elias is yet to come, who shall restore all things, and that
to the Church in general, and to the Jews in particular.

First, To the Church in general: The Apostles first preached the Gospel, and
were Witnesses to Christ; they laid the Foundation, which is Crist, and built
upon that Foundation, Gold, Silver, and precious Stones: Their Doctrine was
pure, and the Truths they preached very precious: They laid no Commands upon
the Disciples, but what they received from the Lord: They planted and watered,
and God gave an Increase. Doctrine was found, and saving; Discipline was good;
Ordinances were rightly administered; and they were the true Worshippers, who
worshipped the Father in Spirit and in Truth. They had the guidance of an
infallible Spirit in what they did, as Apostles and Ministers of Christ: But
false Teachers quickly arose; the Evil One sowed Tares; the Mystery of Iniquity
began to work; and there were those who did build, Wood, Hay, and Stubble:
Damnable Heresies were brought in; and at last the Man of Sin was revealed,
with whom came in Idolatry, Superstition, and all kind of Abominations. But in
the time of this departure from the Faith, Christ has his faithful Witnesses,
bearing a testimony to the truth as it is in Jesus. They prophecy when the
Beast reigns, but in Sackcloth; and at last the Beast slays them: But after
three days and half, the Spirit of Life enters into them, and they stand upon
their Feet, and as they were sown in weakness, so shall they be raised in
power, and be the Angel flying in the midst of Heaven with the everlasting
Gospel. Now these raised Witnesses, and this revived Ministry, will come in the
spirit and power of Elias: And by the spirit of Christ's Mouth will the Man of
Sin now be consuming. And as Elijah did by Fire from Heaven convince the
People, that the Lord was God, and Baal was no God; and by this occasioned the
destruction of the Priests of Baal: Even so shall the Elias which is to come,
preach the everlasting Gospel; and by him Apostolical Doctrine, Ordinances, and
Discipline shall be restored. And this Day shall declare Men's Works, of what
sort they are; and the Word preached shall be Fire, to burn up Wood, Hay, and
Stubble. And then shall Popish Priests appear to be but as the Priests of Baal.
Now by this means Unity shall be restored to the Church: For this Elias will be
a blessed Peacemaker among the Saints, and shall make Brethren to dwell
together in Unity, so that one shall not be of Paul, another of Apollo. Now
sometimes Fathers begetting, and Children begotten through the Gospel, have
fallen asunder. But this Elijah shall turn the hearts of Fathers to their
Children, and the hearts of Children to their Fathers: And that Promise will be
fulfilled, Phil. 3.15. If in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal
even this unto you. And thus the Multitude of the Disciples will be, as in the
Apostle's days, of one Heart, and of one Soul.

Secondly, To the Jews in particular: For they shall be called, and be the
Children of the living God. And so the Adoption, Glory, and Covenants, and
giving of the Law, shall be restored to them, and more than they had under the
Law. And we may well suppose that the Elijah, spoken of in Malachy, will be the
means of the first calling of the Jews. For he shall turn the hearts of Fathers
to their Children, and of Children to their Fathers. Through his Ministry the
Jews shall come to have the same Hearts with their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. Abraham believed God, and his Faith was counted to him for
Righteousness, and he was obedient to the Commands of God. He saw Christ's day,
and rejoiced. And at last the Children shall have the same heart with Abraham
their Father. They shall believe unto Righteousness, and rejoice in Christ's
day. And when Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob shall be in the beloved City, then
their hearts will be to their Children. So this Elias will be, as the
Instrument of turning the Childrens hearts to their Fathers, so the occasion of
the Fathers turning their hearts to their Children. And now the disobedient
will be turned to the wisdom of the Just; that is, of just Abraham. It Is to be
observed, that the Jews great disobedience was, in refusing to hear Christ, and
to obey the Gospel which he preached, which was after John Baptist was
beheaded. Now Elias must turn these disobedient ones to the wisdom of the Just;
which shows, that there is an Elias yet to come, to restore all things: And
when he comes, the Kingdom of the Spirit which was so evident, and eminent in
the Apostles days, shall be restored. And then the Spirit in and by the Word
shall mightily convince the World, wondering after the Beast, of their great
Error therein, whereby they shall be made to hate the Whore, and to eat her
Flesh, and burn her with Fire. Thus much of the restoring all things, by an
(...)et to come.

2. Christ at his coming shall restore all things, Acts 3.21. The Heavens must
receive him till the time of the restitution of all things. Christ will come,
and set all things right: Elias will restore all things of the Primitive
Apostolical Estate: Christ will restore all things of the Primitive State of
Innocence and Uprightness. Elias, all lost through Antichrist's Apostasy,
foretold 1 Timothy 4.1. Christ, all lost by Adam's Apostasy, and shall set the
Saints in a better Estate than Adam had in Paradise. A particular description
of this Restitution is not to be expected; but we must rest satisfied with
those generals which we have in Scripture about it. Rev. 21.5. He that sits
upon the Throne shall make all things new. The Works of Antichrist, yea all the
Works of the Devil shall be destroyed: All Babels will be thrown down, and all
Idols be utterly abolished. The New Heavens and Earth will be created in such
Glory and Beauty, that the former shall not be remembered. And as Light, Grace,
and Peace, shall be most plentifully and abundantly restored to the Church; so
Righteousness, Judgment, and Quietness to Civil States. No Inhabitant of the
Beloved City shall say, I am sick. None of the New Earth shall complain of
violence, or wrong, then the Kingdom shall be restored to Israel; yea the
Kingdom lost by the First Adam, shall be restored to the Second. And a Paradise
will be restored with the Tree of Life in it. In a word, all the dead Saints
shall be restored, and shall live and reign with Christ.

3. A description of the two Beasts mentioned, Revel. 13.

As there has been occasion to mention the Beast, in the foregoing discourse,
so 'twill be requisite to consider the description given of him in the
Scriptures. Two are described in the place last cited. The first rises up out
of the Sea, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, and upon his Horns, ten Crowns.
Some are apt to conceive, that the Roman Empire, as Heathenish, was this Beast:
But this cannot be, because this Beast is said to continue Forty and two
Months. And besides, the Roman Empire, as Heathenish, is that Dragon we read
of, Rev. 12.3. A great red Dragon appeared, having seven Heads and ten Horns,
and ten Crowns upon his Heads. And this Dragon gives to the Beast rising out of
the Sea, his Power and Seat, which is Rome, and great Authority. And it is to be
observed, that the Dragon has Crowns upon his Heads; but this Beast on his ten
Horns, which are the ten Kings, which give up their Power to the Beast. Now for
the better understanding of what we find in this Chapter, about these two
Beasts, we may consider that in Prophetical Style, sometime by Beast is meant
the Fourth Kingdom which was to be on Earth. Dan. 7.23. The fourth Beast shall
be the fourth Kingdom. Revelat. 17.7. I will show thee the Mystery of the
Woman, and of the Beast that carries her, which has seven Heads, and ten
Horns. Here the Beast is the Fourth Kingdom; and the Woman riding the Beast, is
the Ruler of this fourth Kingdom. And as sometimes by Beast is meant the fourth
Kingdom; so sometimes the Head thereof is called the Beast. Revel. 11.7. The
Beast that ascends out of the bottomless Pit, shall make war, etc. Where by
Beast, the Pope, or Papal Head of this fourth Kingdom, the Slayer of the
Witnesses, is meant. This first Beast then is the fourth Kingdom, as becoming
Papal; or as under Popes as the Head thereof, having Rome, which is Mystical
Babylon, for a Seat. This is the Beast with seven Heads, and ten Horns, that is
ruling in that City, which was built on seven Mountains, and which has had
seven sorts of Government, having in himself the Monarchical Power of the
Beast, which before had been in the six preceding Kings, or Regiments, and to
whom ten crowned Kings gave up their Power, which continue one hour with the
Beast, v. 3. John says, I saw one of his Heads as it were wounded to death,
and his deadly wound was healed. That is, taking this Beast with seven Heads
for the fourth Kingdom; so the sixth Head of Roman Emperors was wounded by the
Goths and Vandals, who prevailed so much in Italy, and took Rome.

But now that which did let, being taken out of the way, the Man of Sin was
revealed, and by this means the Pope was advanced, and he becoming Head, and
ruling this fourth Kingdom, kept it alive, and so the deadly Wound was healed.
The time of this Beast's continuance, is Forty and two Months, which is the
time of the Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth; and of the Woman's being in the
Wilderness. Now when this time shall be run out, then, He that leads into
Captivity, must go into Captivity; he that kills with the Sword, must be
killed with the Sword, v. 10. This first Papal Beast then, as sitting on seven
Mountains, and having ten Horns, and Rome for his Seat, shall be destroyed; for
then the ten Kings shall hate the Whore, and eat her Flesh, and burn her with
Fire. And his Seat shall be destroyed under the Fifth Vial. But the Fourth
Kingdom will not be destroyed at this time, though now it will have another
Wound, seemingly deadly given to it; which will be healed, as after is to be
shown, by the second Beast: But that which will be destroyed, will be the Papal
Head of this Beast, as in his Seat at Rome, at the end of the Forty and two
Months, which will be expired long before the Battle of Armageddon, which
should be well observed by the Reader, in relation to what follows concerning
the second Beast. A clear Proof of this we find, Rev. 11.14. Where the Rise of
the Witnesses, and the Fall of the Tenth part of the City, being foretold,
which declare the Forty and two Months to be ended: It follows, The second woe
is past, and behold the third woe comes quickly. So that after the forty two
Months shall be ended, there must be time for the third woe, which will be
caused by the cruel persecution of the second Beast, and that will end in his
final overthrow, and the destruction of that fourth Kingdom, whereof he shall
be the Head.

The second Beast comes up out of the Earth, and has two Horns like a Lamb,
and spoke as a Dragon, ver. 11. And his coming up is after the first Beast
shall be killed with the Sword, and therefore is not in Being during the forty
and two Months; as they conceive, who say, that the same Antichrist in the
forty and two Months time, is here represented under diverse forms, as having a
twofold Original, out of the Sea and Earth, a double body, a twofold shape and
person, being both a Secular and Ecclesiastical person, a Tyrant and a false
Prophet, an Emperor and High Priest. But against this it may be urged, John
calls him another Beast, and why should not we judge so of him? And he comes up
after the other will be destroyed. If he be the same, he must be destroyed with
him, and in him, at the end of the forty and two Months. And if he should be
destroyed with the other, then there would be no Beast after the forty two
Months; but the Scripture gives clear Testimony, that a Beast will be after
this time, and shall continue till he be taken at Armageddon, which will be the
ending of the third woe. By this it appears that they are two distinct Beasts,
one succeeding another. Yet must it be acknowledged, that in some respects they
may be accounted one; as, in respect of Power. For the second Beast executes
all the Power of the first, v. 12. And causes all to worship the first Beast,
which will be as it were revived in this second. For the deadly wound given to
the fourth Kingdom by the ruin of Rome, and of the first Beast there, will be
healed by the coming up of this second Beast. So then, though they will be two
Beasts, yet but one Antichrist, or Man of sin, and so are spoken of, 2 Thessalonians.
24.8. And whereas it is said, the Beast that was, and is not, he is the eighth,
and is of the seven, Rev. 17.11. why may we not conclude thus? the former Beast
is the seventh, and this second is the eighth. Usually they are thus made up,
One is, that is the sixth order of Pagan Emperors, the other is not yet come,
that is the seventh order of Christian Emperors, and then the Pope is made the
eighth. But the former way seems more probable. Thus then, when the forty and
two months Beast shall be destroyed, Satan will immediately send forth another
Beast, that in him the Antichrist, and Man of Sin may be revived, and an Head
may be raised for the fourth Kingdom, and this will be Antichrist.

1. In a better shape and form, more fit to deceive withal; for so great will
be the Light of this Day, that if Antichrist should appear in his old form, he
would be hated of all. Satan will therefore bring him forth in a better form,
that he may have the more Followers: He appears like a Lamb, with a show of
meekness and innocence; and in this the subtilty of the old Serpent will be
seen, who will, as near as he can, imitate the Work of God in raising the
Witnesses, who, when risen, will be more pure and spiritual: so this Beast will
be raised in a better shape, and be transformed as the Witnesses of Christ, and
Ministers of Righteousness, that he may more powerfully deceive.

2. He will have, as another shape, so another Seat. For,

First, Rome, the Seat of the first Beast, will be destroyed under the Fifth
Vial, Revel. 16.10. The fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Seat of the
Beast, and his Kingdom was full of darkness. Not now wholly destroyed, but full
of darkness, and is to continue till the pouring out of the seventh Vial.

Secondly, we may observe, that as two Beasts, so two Babylons as Seats of
those two Beasts, are mentioned in the Revelations. The first, Chap. 14.8.
Where, after the rising of the Witnesses, and their standing with the Lamb on
Mount Sion; it is said, Another Angel followed, saying, Babylon is fallen: Which
is meant of Rome, and the destruction of the first Beast there, and his Seat;
after which the second Beast comes up. And hence it is, that presently after
the Fall of Babylon, and the destruction of the first Beast there, v. 9. A
third Angel followed, saying, If any man worship the Beast, and his Image, and
receive his Mark, the same shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God. This
seems strange, that when Babylon is fallen, and the Beast in it come to his
end, another Angel should be sent to warn Men not to worship the Beast. But by
this it is evident, That when Rome the first Babylon falls, another Beast will
arise; and as he will be a grand Impostor, so there will be great need of this
warning to beware of him. The second Babylon is mentioned, Revel. 16.19. as in
Being at the pouring out of the seventh Vial; for then it is said, Great Babylon
came into remembrance before God. Thus we see it manifest, that there are two
Babylons mentioned in the Revelations: Yet let it be considered, that Babylon
may be taken two ways.

1. Locally, for a particular place and Seat: So Rome is Babylon, and after its
destruction, some other place may be so.

2. Politically, for the Antichristian state, or fourth Kingdom under
Antichrist, as having the Supreme Rule in it. And thus as the two Beasts are
but one Antichrist, so the two Babylons are but one and the same Antichristian
State and Kingdom. An Empire may remain the same when the Seat is changed: as
when Constantine removed from Rome to Byzantium.

Q. But where will the second Babylon, or Seat of this second Beast be?

A. This cannot be determined; but it may be probably conceived, that it shall
be some where in the East. For,

First this Beast will have great power, and shall deceive many by his feigned
Miracles, and shall force obedience; for he causes all to receive his Mark.

Secondly, It is not likely that he shall have power to deceive and persecute
among the Gentile Saints, who had been so long under the power of the first
Beast, in this Antichristian part of the world: For at the end of the one
thousand two hundred and sixty days, the Woman, that is, the Church of the
Gentile Saints, comes up out of the Wilderness, and not to return again; for
the voice from Heaven is, Come up hither: They therefore are to be above, and
not beneath.

Thirdly, we may conceive that this Beast will chiefly act his part among the
Jews, when they shall be brought to their own Land; and will be an Antichrist,
or Man of Sin, raging amongst them, and raising Persecution and trouble to
them. And thus as the first Beast has acted his part amongst the Gentile
Saints, so this second will against the Jews, when they shall be called; and
called they must be: For the River Euphrates is to be dried up, to make way for
the Kings of the East; that is, the Jews so called, because the Kingdom shall
be restored to them: and that by the King of the East, are meant the Jews, may
be proved from Isa. 11.15. When the Lord shall shake his Hand over the River,
there shall be an Highway for the remnant of his People from Assyria. And
Zach. 10.10, 11. I will bring them again from Egypt, and Assyria, and all the
deeps of the River shall dry up. Which doubtless is the same with the drying up
the River Euphrates. And the following words show that we are to understand
thereby, The Pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the Scepter of Egypt
shall depart. Which signifies the wasting, and destruction of the Turkish
Empire, and the bringing down the Pride of the Turk, for he rules in Egypt, and
Assyria; and by this means, way shall be made for the Jews, these Kings of the
East, to return to their own Land: and then will this Beast be their
persecuting Enemy, and shall prevail much against them at last, and cause such
trouble to them, as never was since there was a Nation; and by his feigned
Miracles shall draw in the Kings of the Earth to his assistance, as we see Rev.
16.13. And the place of their gathering will be Armageddon, which being an
Hebrew name, gives ground to conclude, that this gathering will be in Judea;
which also appears, Ezekiel. 39.4. Gog and Magog, the same with that great Army we
read of, Rev. 19. being headed by this Beast, shall fall upon the Mountains of
Israel. This is also manifest from Joel, 3.12, where it is said, They shall
come up to the Valley of Jehosaphat, and the Command is, Put in the Sickle, for
the Harvest of the Earth is ripe: and here it is that the Beast will be taken:
so that we may well conclude, that he will be the great Enemy to the Jews. And
it being so, we may conceive farther, that this second Beast will be the little
Horn, The King of fierce Countenance, the vile person, spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet.

1. The little Horn. It Is manifest that the fourth Kingdom will be last of all
under the power of this little Horn. Dan. 7.23. The fourth Beast is the fourth
Kingdom, the ten Horns are ten Kings, and another shall rise after them. In the
Greek Translation (...), behind them and unawares; and he shall speak great
words against the Saints of the most high, and shall wear out the Saints, and
think to change Times, and Laws; and they shall be given into his hands until a
time, times, and the dividing of time. Compare Dan. 12.6, 7. How long shall it
be to the end of these wonders? The Answer is, For a time, times, and an half;
and then the end shall be. The end of the Beasts Reign, and of the Jews
trouble. For then the Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his
Dominion; that is, the Dominion of the little Horn, to consume, and destroy it
for ever: and then the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall
be given to the People of the Saints of the most high. Now as for the first
Beast, he cannot be this little Horn, because he is to be destroyed long before
the fourth Kingdom will end; and no one of the ten Horns can be this little
Horn, for he rises after them. Therefore the second Beast must be this little
Horn. And as the Gentile witnesses shall lie dead three days and an half, and
then shall rise, and shortly after the first Beast shall be destroyed; so the
Jews great trouble will be in the last three years and half of their suffering
time, and then they shall be delivered, and this second Beast will be taken,
and the fourth Kingdom destroyed for ever.

2. The King of fierce Countenance. Dan. 8.23. In the latter end of their
Kingdom; that is, of the Grecians, when the fourth Kingdom, into which theirs
was to run, shall come near its end, then a King of fierce Countenance shall
stand up, understanding dark sentences, and his power shall be mighty, but not
by his own power. He shall destroy the holy, and the mighty People, that is,
the Jews; and through his policy shall cause craft to prosper in his hand. And
lastly, he shall stand up against the Prince of Princes. Now observe how well
these things agree to this Beast. He may be said to be a King of fierce
Countenance, Rev. 13.11. He spoke as a Dragon. He causes all to receive a
Mark, and endeavors to slay all that will not worship the Beast's Image. V.
16, 17. He does great wonders, making fire to come down from Heaven in the
sight of Men; and he causes craft to prosper in his hand: for by his subtilty
he persuades the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole World to come in to his
assistance, which shows him to be very subtle, and a King understanding dark
sentences. And he is also mighty, but not by his own power. For the Kings of
the Earth give up their power to him, and so he is mighty by their power. And
lastly, which makes the thing most clear, as the King of fierce Countenance
shall stand up against the Prince of Princes, even Christ, so this is plainly
said concerning this second Beast, Rev. 19.11. Christ has this name upon his
Vesture, and his Thigh, King of Kings and Lord of Lords. The same with Prince
of Princes. And v. 19. I saw the Beast, with the Kings and their Armies, and
they make War against him that sat on the white Horse. And lo, here we find
that King of fierce Countenance standing up against the Prince of Princes, viz.
the second Beast making War against him that had a name written, King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords.

The vile Person. Of him it is said, Dan. 11.21. He shall obtain the Kingdom by
flatteries, appearing as a Lamb, meek, and peaceable: but having gotten the
Kingdom, shall do according to his own will, v. 36. And shall exalt himself
above every God. And shall prosper till the Indignation be accomplished. He
shall enter into the glorious Land, and then Michael shall stand up, and at
that time the Jews shall be delivered, and this Beast, this vile Person, with
his false Prophet, shall be taken. Now these things being considered, we may
judge it probable, that this second Beast will have his Seat somewhere in the
East.

In the next place, I shall offer this to consideration, whether what is added
about the Number of the Beast, may not be chiefly meant of this second Beast.
Some things may be observed, which make it probable:

1. This is added in the close of the description of this second Beast. And
seeing this comes up after the other is destroyed, we may judge, that what is
spoken of the Number of his Name, should belong to this Beast.

2. It Is said to be the Number of the Beast, not of the Beasts; which does show
that it belongs to one, and not to both.

3. By the knowledge of the Number of his Name, and Mark, the Beast is known.
Let him that has understanding count the Number of the Beast. Why? Because
thus he may be known. Now as for the first Beast, if we had not other ways of
knowing him, than, by the Number of his Name, we should be much at a loss. For
what has been discovered hitherto of this Mystery? True, Men have found out
the Number 666 in some Names. But what is this for the discovery of the Beast.
And has it been a matter of so great wisdom to find out this Number in the
word (...), or in some other Names? Surely there is much more in it, seeing a
Victory is to be gotten over it, Rev. 15.2. Now for the first Beast, there are
evident Characters given of him, by which he is known, and whereby we may come
to a certainty, and say we know that we know him: but yet the Number of the
Beast remains a Mystery. These Characters we have, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.4. The Man of
Sin opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, and sitting in
the Temple of God, shows himself that he is God. And, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. In the
latter times Men shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to Doctrines of
Devils, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, forbidding to Marry, and commanding to
abstain from Meats. And lastly, in Rev. 17.7. I will tell thee the Mystery of
the Woman, and the Beast which carries her, which has seven Heads, and ten
Horns; It Is evident that Rome is here meant, which was the great city reigning
over the Kings of the Earth. So the first Beast is known sufficiently by other
Characters, though we have not found out the Mystery of the Number of his Name.
Therefore it seems most probable, that this respects the second Beast, who as
he shall be in a better form, and do lying Wonders, and more powerfully
deceive, so it would be more difficult to discern him; but the Elect shall
discern him, for he shall not be able to deceive them, but they shall look
through his lying Wonders, and shall have understanding to count the number of
his Name.

4. Observe those expressions; Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding
count: Which implies, that this is a very aenigmatical and obscure thing; and
'twill be an excellent piece of wisdom to find out the Number of his Name. It
implies also, that this wisdom may be attained. For to some it shall be given
to count: If none shall have it, in vain it is said, Here is wisdom, let him
that has understanding count. This shows that such an understanding shall be
given to some. But where is this Wisdom now? and who has the Understanding to
count? What is there of satisfaction given by any, for the discovery of this
Mystery? Wherefore it seems, that this discovery is reserved for the time of
the second Beast; and God will then give an Understanding to some to know him,
and they shall have this Wisdom to discern the Number of his Name.

For a conclusion of what shall be said concerning this second Beast, let these
three Particulars be observed:

1. This second Beast will be of very short continuance, in comparison with the
former, for he will not much exceed forty and five years. For first, under the
fifth Vial, the Seat of the Beast, and consequently the first Beast will be
destroyed. Secondly, under the sixth, way will be made for the Kings of the
East, and the Jews shall be called, and return to their own Land. Thirdly, from
the time of the first calling of the Jews, till the Battle of Armageddon, where
the second Beast shall be taken, and after which the Jews shall have rest, will
be forty and five years: Which appears, Dan. 12.11.12. From the time that the
daily Sacrifice shall be taken away, shall be One thousand two hundred and
ninety days, and at the end of these days the Jews shall be called: And then it
follows, Blessed is he that comes to the one thousand three hundred and thirty
five days. Why blessed? Because the Jews Enemies will then be all cut off, and
the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the
People of the Saints of the Most High. Now the latter Number is Forty and five
years more than the former, and at the end of them, this Beast will come to his
end.

2. This Beast will have his false Prophet workking Miracles before him. The
Beast and false Prophet are not one person, but must be taken as two distinct
persons, and so are they still set forth. There will be one, in whom the Devil
will be a Lying Spirit, who shall preach up this Beast, and cry up his
Authority, and shall work Miracles before him, causing Fire to come down from
Heaven in the sight of Men; and by this means shall wonderfully deceive, and
draw many after the Beast. As an Elias, and true Prophet of Christ shall come,
so God may suffer a false Prophet to withstand him, even as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses: And as Elias shall persuade the Elect to follow the Lamb; so
this false Prophet shall seduce the Vessels of Wrath, and draw them after the
Beast. And that Elias which shall come may have the gift of working Miracles;
and then as the Magicians of Egypt did seemingly some Wonders, which were done
by Moses and Aaron, so may this false Prophet do somewhat in appearance, like
the Miracles of Elias.

3. This Beast, and false Prophet, will have a most remarkable and strange
Judgment executed upon them, Rev. 19.20. These both were taken, and cast alive
into the Lake of Fire, that is, Hell. Rev. 20.10. The Devil was cast into the
Lake of Fire, where the Beast and the false Prophet are. So the Lake of Fire is
Hell; and these both were cast into it. Which does not only show, that the
Antichristian State and Kingdom, and so the Antichrist and Man of Sin, shall be
destroyed; but it shows that the particular Person, which shall then have
Supreme Power and Command in the fourth Kingdom, and shall stand up against the
Prince of Princes; and that false Prophet, which shall then be so active for
the Beast, even these two persons shall be cast alive etc. Now that we are to
take the Beast and false Prophet for two Individual Persons, may be gathered
from Rev. 20.10. The Devil was cast into the Lake of Fire, where the Beast and
false Prophet are. This is above one thousand years after the taking of the
Beast. So that when the Antichristian State, and Kingdom, shall be wholly
abolished, the Beast and the false Prophet will be in torment. Now this being
cleared, we may observe farther, that they are said to be cast alive into this
Lake. That is, destroyed Body and Soul in Hell. For as this will be such a
Beast as never was since there was a Beast, causing such trouble to the Jews as
never was since there was a Nation; so he, and his false Prophet, shall have
such Judgment as never was before. Korah, Dathan, and Abiram went down quick
into the Pit, Numb. Chap. 16. ver. 30. For the Earth opening swallowed them up,
and so they were buried alive. But this Beast, and false Prophet, shall be cast
alive into Hell. For at this time God's fury will come up in his Face. Ezekiel.
38.18. And the anger of the Lord, will be so exceeding hot against them, for
their most daring wickedness, in standing up against the Prince of Princes (a
greater Sin than that of Korah's standing up against Moses and Aaron) that he
will not respite their full torment till the resurrection of the wicked, above
one thousand years after; but then immediately shall they be cast Body and Soul
into Hell, and be under full torment in both. And as Enoch and Elias, persons
so eminent for Godliness, were translated that they did not see Death, and were
carried alive to Heaven; so this Beast and false Prophet, persons so eminent in
wickedness, shall be cast alive into Hell. This sense is somewhat favored by
what follows: The remnant were slain, (...), the rest; therefore these were not
slain by a bodily Death, but both in Soul and Body were under the power of the
Second Death. Thus much of these two Beasts.

4. The Day of Judgment, and the Worlds perishing by fire.

For the better understanding of what we find in Scripture concerning the Day
of Judgment, take notice of two things:

1. Christ will begin the work of Judgment at his next appearing, 2 Timothy 4.1.
The Lord Jesus Christ shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing and
kingdom. When Christ shall appear, and the New Jerusalem shall come down, and
Christ shall take to himself his great Power and Reign, then he shall judge the
quick and the dead.

Q. What shall Christ then do as a Judge, or what shall be his judging-work at
the beginning of the thousand years?

A. 1. The dead Saints shall be raised, and judged at this time: which is
evident from Rev. 11.15. The seventh Angel sounds his Trumpet, and there were
Voices saying, The Kingdoms of the world are beeome the Kingdoms of the Lord,
and of his Christ. This is at the beginning of the thousand years. Now observe
what is said verse 18. Thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they
should be judged. And what dead are meant, the following words declare; And
that thou should give reward to thy Servants the Prophets, to the Saints,
and to all that fear thy Name, small and great. So by dead in this place, are
meant the dead Saints, and all the dead Saints, even as many as fear God's
Name: All these shall be judged by a sentence of Absolution, and shall receive
he Kingdom which was promised to them.

2. Christ's work at this time, as a Judge, will be to destroy them that
destroyed the Earth, Rev. 11.18. Whence we may gather, that this will not be
the time of raising the Wicked, but of destroying them; not of raising them out
of their Graves, but of sending them to their Graves. Which is also evident
from 2 Pet. 3.7. The Heavens and Earth whieh are now, by the same word are kept
in store, reserved unto Fire against the day of Judgment, and perdition of
ungodly men. Here the day of Judgment is mentioned, and this will be a day of
perdition of ungodly men; (...), of killing, not of making them alive again.
And lastly, The Heavens and Earth which now are, shall then perish by Fire. And
here I shall insist a little upon these words, and show what we are to
understand by the Heavens and Earth which now are, and how they shall perish by
fire; and by this we shall see farther, what the judging work of this day will
be. Consider then,

The Heavens and Earth which are now, do signify the World which now is, both
with respect to that which was before it, and perished by Water, and also to
that which shall be after it, and is to come; even the new Heavens, and the new
Earth, wherein Righteousness shall dwell. And if we consider what World it was
that perished by Water, we shall the better know what World it is that shall
perish by Fire.

Now the Heavens, taken in a proper sense, did not perish, neither did the Body
of the Earth perish; but all the Men upon the face of the Earth perished,
except those in the Ark, and all other living Creatures without the Ark, in
whom was the Breath of Life; and also the Fruits of the Earth. 2 Pet. 2.5.
Bringing in a Flood upon the world of the ungodly. This World of the Ungodly
perished by water. And together herewith, there were Analogical Heavens and
Earth, which also perished by water. Analogical Heavens there were which
perished, and those both Political and Ecclesiastical.

1. Political Heavens: that is, the Superior, Sovereign, and Ruling part of
that World; for, as after shall be shown, thus Heaven is sometimes taken. And
it is to be observed, that the Ruling part of that World was exceeding corrupt:
For, those that were highest in power, were most eminent in wickedness: The
great Men were the greatest Sinners, and did fill the World with Violence,
Rapines, Oppressions, and all manner of unrighteousness, Genesis 6.11. And
therefore God brought a Flood, in which these Heavens perished. For all the
Principalities and Powers of that wicked and ungodly World, were swept away by
the Flood.

2. Ecclesiastical Heavens: Churches on Earth are sometimes called Heaven; the
Kingdom of Heaven frequently in the Evangelists signifies the Church: Rev.
12.7. There was war in Heaven; That is, in the Church. Now the Ecclesiastical
Heavens; that is, the Churches of that World, perished by Water; even all,
except that in the Ark. It Is said, Genesis 4.26. Then began men to call upon the
Name of the Lord. There were Churches of Seth's Posterity, which worshipped
God: But these did at last exceedingly apostatize, as we see, Genesis 6.2. The
Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men, and took them Wives of all that they
chose. And thereupon the Lord says, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man,
for that he also is flesh. Observe these words, He also: the Sons of God were
spoken of immediately before; this [ He also] therefore is meant of the
Churchmember, even he that was called the Son of God was also flesh: Not only
those without, but also those within the Church; not only the Posterity of
Cain, but also the Posterity of Seth, had corrupted their way, and all the
imaginations of their hearts were also evil continually. Now these Heavens did
also perish by water, because of the great wickedness found in them: There was
an Analogical Earth also which perished by water; that is, as Superiors, so
Inferiors; as Masters, so Servants; as the Mighty men, so the mean men; as the
Giants, so the Dwarfs: the Flood swept all away, and one as easily as the other.

And here we may do well to observe, what kind of wickednesses they were which
brought the Flood; there was desperate Apostasy of the Sons of God, there was
Pride amongst them, they became men of Renown; and also cruelty and oppression,
they filled the world with voilence: The Giants in stature were Giants in
wickedness. The old world was an Atheistical and desperately debauched world;
and when God gave space and warning to repent, by Noah's preaching, they
repented not. In a word, it is to be observed, that the world of the ungodly
then was become wholly arbitrary: every one would be sui juris, and not be
subject to, or act by a Law. The mighty men, and Sovereign part of it, were
absolute and arbitrary. They would be arbitrary in ruling others, and exercised
what violence, they pleased; and arbitrary in ruling themselves, giving
themselves up to the lusts of uncleanness; not only taking Wives of the
Daughters of men, but, as Genesis 6.4. also after that, they went in unto the
Daughters of men; to others, that is, besides their Wives, and they took of all
that they chose; and therein the arbitrariness of that world appeared, they
chose by Lust, and not by Law; from their own wills, and not according to the
will of God. The People of God will have God to choose for them. Psalm. 47.4. He
shall choose our Inheritance for us. But these would choose for themselves: This
was the first transgression, Adam would become arbitrary, he liked not Gods
choice, but he himself would choose what Fruit to eat; and we may observe how
displeasing this was to God: Behold the man is become like one of us, Genesis
3.22. to know good and evil; that is, as God is absolute, and his Will is the
rule of good or evil; what he wills is good, and what he nils is to be looked on
as evil. So now Adam would become absolute, to know good and evil and have his
own Will the rule of it; this highly provoked God. It Is his incommunicable
Prerogative to be absolute. This arbitrariness God did avenge, and that
speedily upon him; 1. He must not eat of the Tree of life: 2 He was cast out of
Paradise. He that would be all and absolute, loses all thereby: And when the
old world became arbitrary, a Flood came and swept all away. Thus we see what
world it was that perished by water.

In the next place let it be considered, what Heavens and Earth are to perish
by Fire. And now I shall endeavor to make it manifest, that there are, as
natural, so analogical Heavens and Earth; and Heavens both Political, and
Ecclesiastical. Isa. 34. we have a Prophecy of the Judgments wherewith God will
at last avenge his Church. v. 2. The Indignation of the Lord is upon all
Nations, and his fury upon all their Armies. V. 4. All the Host of Heaven shall
be dissolved; and the Heavens shall be rolled together as a scrole, and all
their Host shall fall down; and the next verse shows what Heavens are meant. My
Sword shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the People of my curse to Judgment.
The Unicorns shall come down, and the Bullocks, for it is the Day of the Lords
Vengeance, and the Year of Recompenses, for the Controversy of Sion. So that
by Heaven here, are meant the Churches Antichristian Enemies, who have been in
Power, and above; and long have had the upper hand in the World. This will
appear also from Hag. 2.6, 7. I will shake the Heavens, the Earth, the Sea, and
the dry Land. This shaking is to make way for the coming of Christ. That it
looks beyond his first coming, is evident from Heb. 12.27. where it is spoken of
as a thing then to come. And why shall these Heavens and Earth be shaken? It Is
for the removing of things that may be shaken, as of things that are made. Not
things as made by God, for this is no reason for their removal, that they are
made by God; therefore by things made, are meant the things made by Men. For as
there are Heavens and Earth made by God, so there are Heavens and Earth of Men's
making, and that both in a Political, and Ecclesiastical sense. There are many
Babels of Men's building. The Turkish Religion and frame, was made by Men. The
Pope, both in his Civil and Ecclesiastical Power, was made by Men. The Popish
Religion, and that Antichristian Form of Worship, and frame of Government,
which Popery does establish, is of Men's making. Now this shaking will be to
remove things made contrary to the Mind of God. And this agrees well with
Peter. The Earth with the works therein, even all Antichristian Works, shall be
burnt up. And with Mat. 13.14. The Angels shall gather out of his Kingdom all
things that offend, and them that do iniquity. There are now many things which
offend God, and good Men; but at last all will be gathered out of the Kingdom.
This appears also from Rev. 6.12, 13. I beheld when he opened the sixth Seal,
and lo there was a great Earthquake, and the Sun became black, and the Moon as
Blood, and the Stars of Heaven fell, and the Hevens departed as a scrole when
it is rolled together. By Heaven is meant the Roman Empire, as heathenish, and
under the Power of Heathen Emperors. It Is well observed by Mede, that
Vniversitas Romana hic a spiritu sancto assimilatur systemati mundi, etc. That
great and large Empire of Rome is likned to the frame of the World. Heaven,
Earth, and Air, are the parts of the World: in the Heaven, are Sun, Moon, and
Stars, and here below, Sea, and Rivers. Now the Roman Empire had its Political
Heaven of Power and Sovereignty, and Sun and Stars in it, and all these were
rolled together as a scroll; the Heathenish Power did pass away. And that
Empire, which at first was Heathenish, is now Antichristian, and must pass
away, as the former did. This World must Perish by Fire. For it is observable,
that the Roman Empire, both as Heathenish and Antichristian, is called the
World in Scripture. Luke. 2.1. There went out a decree from Caesar Augustus,
that all the World should be taxed, that is, the people of the Roman Empire,
Rev. 13.3. All the World wondered after the Beast. Here Is an Antichristian
World. And this World, even the fourth Kingdom as now under Antichrist must
pass away. The Sun, Moon, and Stars, all the Host of this Heaven must perish by
Fire, and all the Elements thereof must melt with fervent heat. For the Plagues
of the Vials shall be poured out upon the Antichristian Earth, Sea, and Rivers,
and Fountains of Waters, and upon the Sun; so that the World wondering after
this Beast shall perish. And the last Vial being poured into the Air, shows the
utter destruction of Satan's Kingdom, who is Prince of the Power of the Air.
And then the great City Babylon falls, and with it, the Cities of the Nations;
and every Island must flee away, and the Mountains shall be no where found;
neither Mountains of Pride, nor Mountains of Prey.

Thus we see it manifest, that there are Heavens and Elements, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, which must perish. Heavens, the Sovereign part of the
Antichristian World; Earth, the Subjected part, all are to be burnt up.

In the next place it is to be considered, by what Fire, For there is, as
Natural, so Fire in an Analogical sense. Now.

1. It Is not to be doubted but that Fire, in a proper sense will be made use
of, to help forward the Judgment of that great day. For as the old World
perished by Water, so the World which now is, must by Fire. Babylon, which is
the Seat of the Beast, must be utterly burnt with Fire. Rev. 18.6. Reward her
as she ha^h rewarded you. Give her blood to drink, for she is worthy; give her
burning, for she is worthy. Give her blood for blood; burning for burning. For
as she has destroyed many of the Saints by Fire, so therefore let her perish
by Fire; as she is spiritually called Sodom, so let her be consumed by Fire
like Sodom. And as Elijah called for Fire from Heaven; so Fire will be called
for from Heaven, to destroy those that destroyed the Earth. And thus as
Analogical Heavens perished by Water, so may Heavens and Earth, both Political
and Ecclesiastical, perish by Fire.

2. Analogical Fire will be made use of, for destroying the Heavens and Earth
which are now. And so the Fire of the Word and Spirit, and judicial Fire.

First, the Fire of the Word, and Spirit. Of which we read, 1 Cor. 3.13, The
day shall declare every Man's work of what sort it is, and it shall be revealed
by Fire. The Gold, and Silver, and precious Stones, shall be revealed by Fire;
and the Wood, and Hay, and Stubble, shall be burnt up. Antichristian Doctrine,
Discipline, Ordinances, Traditions, and Forms of Worship, shall be all burnt
up. The Tares shall be known, Hypocrites shall be discovered, and gathered out
of the Kingdom of God; and there shall be neither persons nor things in it, any
way offensive to any of the sincere Servants of God.

Secondly, Judicial Fire: The great Judgments of that day will be a consuming
fire to the Enemies of Christ; the Light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his
Holy one for a flame, and shall consume the Briars and Thorns; fury and fiery
Indignation shall then devour the Adversaries: Heb. 12.29. Our God is a
consuming fire; In that great Day of Judgment he will so appear: And then
Angels, as Instruments in executing Wrath, will be as fire to burn up the
wicked: Psa. 104.4. He makes his Angels Spirits, his Ministers a flame of
Fire. These flames of fire will be at work, to burn up as the wicked ones of
the Earth, so their works in the Earth at that day.

Thus Fire in each of these kinds, will help to dissolve the Heavens which are
now, and to burn up the works of the Earth. So that we are not to restrain or
limit the Fire here mentioned, to any one sort, but to take it in the largest
and most comprehensive sense: For as there will be work for Fire in each of
these kinds; so all will be at work in that Day of Perdition of ungodly Men.
And when the Heavens and Earth, which now are, shall be dissolved, then will
new be created, wherein pure Religion and Righteousness shall dwell, which will
constitute that World to come, which is ordained for Christ to reign in: And
what shall be done with these Material Heavens and Earth, after the thousand
years, and the finishing of Christ's Judging-work, none is able to determine.

I shall conclude this particular of the Worlds perishing by Fire, with some
thoughts which I have had upon Rev. 15.2, 3. I saw as it were a Sea of Glass
mingled with Fire, and them that had gotten the Victory over the Beast, etc.
stand upon the Sea of Glass, having the Harps of God, and they sing the Song of
Moses, etc.

As the Plagues of the Vials are foretold in the general, verse 1. So in the
next place is shown, what great Joy will be amongst the People of God, because
of the great and mavelous works of God, in destroying their Enemies by these
Plagues, and delivering them from the greatest trouble and danger, that ever
they were in. And then follows a particular description of the Plagues of the
Vials, and the order in which they are to be poured out. Now the second and
third Verses show, that the Saints were represented to John in this Vision, as
being in the like condition with the Israelites, when they beheld the Egyptians
dead upon the Seashore, and rejoiced over them. For when the conquering Saints
are said to stand upon the Sea of Glass, and to sing the Song of Moses; what
does this singing the Song of Moses intimate, but that such a wonderful
deliverance will be wrought at last for the People of God, as that of the
Israelites was at the Red Sea; and such a destruction of their Enemies, as was
that of Pharaoh and the Egyptians there, which will be the occasion of singing
the Song of Moses? For the Saints will be brought into such a strait, as the
Israelites were then in Great Multitudes of enraged Enemies will pursue them;
and as it were a Sea of Glass mingled with Fire, will be before them. We know
what a kind of fire that of Glass burning in a Furnace is. What a dreadful
thing would it be, to behold a Sea of such Glass mingled with fire, and to be
in danger to be driven and forced into it? Now such will be the case of the
People of God at last. Such trouble, such danger, so great a strait as never
was since there was a Nation. Not that there will be such a Sea of Glass, in a
proper sense; but as it is said, John saw as it were a Sea of Glass mingled with
Fire; so a destruction so dreadful will be threatened to the People of God, as
if they were in danger to be forced into such a Sea, and that another Red Sea,
even of fire, more terrible than the Red Sea of Water. But what will the Lord
do for his People, in this so great an extremity? He will even make a way for
them through this, as it were a Sea of Glass mingled with Fire; and the Fire
shall be to them, as the Waters of the Red Sea were to the Israelite, a Wall on
their right hand and on their left: And their persuing Enemies shall perish in
this Sea of Fire, as Pharoh and his Host did in the Sea of Water; and as the
world of the ungodly perished by the Flood. And then shall the so wonderfully
delivered Saints stand upon this Sea of Glass, having the Harps of God; that
is, as the Israelites stood and sang upon the Seashore, when they saw the
Egyptians dead upon it; so in like manner shall the triumphing Saints stand
upon this, as it were a Sea of Glass; and see all their Enemies destroyed in
it: And, as Isa. 66.24. Shall look upon the Carcases of the that have
transgressed against the Lord, whose Worm dies not, neither shall their Fire be
quenched. And they shall they sing the song of Moses, the Servant of God, and
the Song of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints.

2. After the thousand years, Christ will finish the work of Judgment, As the
dead Saints will be raised, and judged at the beginning of the thousand years,
so the dead Sinners after the end of them Rev. 20.11. I saw a great white
Throne, and him that sat on it. And I saw the dead, small, and great, stand
before God: and these are such, who died in their sins, whose names shall not
be found written in the Book of Life. If we compare Rev. 11.18. and 2 Pet. 3.7.
with Rev. 20. it will evidently appear, that some of the dead will be judged at
the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, and at the time when the new Heavens shall
be created; and others of the dead above a thousand years after 1 Cor. 15.23,
24. First Christ, (...), afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. Then
comes the end, (...), afterward comes the end; for this has the same
signification with (...). And therefore, as there is a great space of time
betwixt Christ's Resurrection and the Saints; so there will be also betwixt
that of the Saints, and the Resurrection of the wicked.

5. Signs when the time is near for the fall of Babylon.

Some have taken upon them to declare the set, and appointed time, for the Fall
of Babylon; and the accomplishment of the great things before handled. But I
shall not presume to do this; but shall only hint some signs by which we may
know when the time draws nigh. Christ gave signs, and it is our duty to
endeavor to discern them; and though the wicked shall not understand, yet the
wise shall understand both what God is about to do, and what they ought to do,
Dan. 12.10. We may take notice of two sorts of Signs: Signs in the Nations, and
Signs in, and amongst the Saints.

1. Signs in the Nations, Luke 21.25. Upon the Earth distress of Nations, with
perplexity. This distress is elsewhere set forth, Hag. 2.7. I will shake all
Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come: Isa. 24.20. The Earth shall
reel to and fro, like a Drunkard, and be removed like a Cottage, and the
transgression of it will be heavy upon it. When the Lord shall reign in Mount
Sion, and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients gloriously. As the pains of a
Woman in Travel are a sign that a Child is brought to the Birth; so the
shakings, perplexities, and distress of Nations are their travelling-pains: and
a sign that redemption from Antichristian bondage draws nigh. And as the
Nations troubles are their traveling pains; so there are times in which the
Lord sets himself forth as traveling with Judgments, and as it were pained to
be delivered of them: For iniquity will abound, and wicked men will wax worse
and worse, till the Harvest of the Earth be fully ripe. Sin will become
exceeding sinful; unrighteousness exceeding unrighteous, and filthiness
exceeding filthy: They will sin as Sodom, and declare their sin as Sodom. And
what will the Lord do then? This we see Isa. 43.13, 14, 15. The Lord shall go
forth as a mighty Man, he shall cry, yea roar, he shall prevail against his
Enemies. I have long holden my peace; I have been still, and refrained my self;
now will I cry like a traveling Woman: I will destroy, and devour at once. I
will make waste Mountains and Hills, and dry up all their herbs. But what
follows? and what are these things a sign of? v. 16. I will bring the blind by
a way they know not, and lead them in paths they have not known. I will make
darkness light before them, and crooked things strait: these things will I do
unto them, and not forsake them. The People of God may be blind, as to times
and ways of deliverance; but the Lord knows how, and when; the best way, and
the best time, in which to deliver them.

2. Signs amongst the People of God: Now here I shall mention three; The
scattering of the power of the holy People, or the killing of the Witnesses:
And then next to this, the Serpent's casting a Flood out of his Mouth, to
swallow up the Woman, when she is driven into the Wilderness the second time.
And lastly, the Dragon's War with the remnant of the Woman's Seed: And if there
shall be a concurrence of Providence, and Events, answering the Prophecies,
there will be evident signs given of the downfall of Babylon, as very near.

1. The scattering of the Power of the holy People, Dan. 12.6, 7. One said to
the Man clothed in Linen, How long shall it be to the end of these Wonders?
This is a great Question: How long? 'Twas a Question once asked in Heaven: The
Angel said, Zach. 1.12. How long, O Lord? And the Souls under the Altar cry,
How long? And thus do the Followers of the Lamb on Earth: How long? When shall
Antichrist be destroyed? When shall the glorious Kingdom of Christ come? The
Answer is, When he shall have accomplished to scatter the Power of the holy
People, all these things shall be finished. When the holy People shall be very
low, and Babylon very high, and say, I sit a Queen, etc. then her Plagues shall
come, the Antichristian Sun must go down at Noon; and in the Evening-time it
shall be Light to the Saints. We have great reason to take notice of this Sign;
for it is confirmed by an Oath, Dan. 12.7. The Man clothed in Linen swear by
him that lives for ever, that it shall be for a time, times, and an half; and
when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all
shall be finished. This indeed is spoken concerning the Jews: Three years and
an half must they lie under the power of a civil death, after their being
called, and after their getting some power over their Enemies, whereby the
Pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the Scepter of Egypt shall depart:
even after this, their power must be scattered, and the power of their Enemies
will grow very great, as we see, Rev. 16.14. But then in the midst of those
swellings of Jordan, when it shall overflow all its Banks, shall Jordan be
driven back; and a way shall be made for the people of God to enter into their
rest. This is a sworn, and therefore a sure Sign.

Now we may observe, that the case of the Gentile-Saints will be the same with
that of the Jews* for the dispensations of God will be alike to both. These, as
the Jews, must be scattered and lie dead three days and an half; for the Beast
that ascends out of the bottomless Pit, will make war against them, overcome
and kill them, Rev. 11.6. This same thing is set forth in another Vision, Rev.
12. Where we read that the Woman is driven into the Wilderness, to be there
1260 days, and toward the end of these days, the Woman thinks her self gotten
out of the Wilderness, and says, Salvation is come, etc. But then the Dragon
persecutes the Woman, and she flies into the Wilderness, and is nourished there
for a time, times, and the dividing of a time, which is the same with the three
days and half. Now when such a scattering and killing happens, this will be a
sign of the fall of Babylon at hand, as we see, Rev. 11.13. The Witnesses have
power to shut Heaven, and to smite the Earth with all Plagues, and then the
scattering of Power comes.

2. A second Sign is, that which we read, Rev. 12.15. The Serpent cast out of
his mouth water as a flood, to carry away the Woman. This is the last attempt
against the Woman; that is, the Church of Christ, before she gets out of her
Wilderness-estate, and before the rising of the Witnesses. So that when it
shall appear that the Serpent is about this work, therein an evident Sign will
be given of the very near approach of the Fall of Babylon: For this is a work
to be done in the time of the Witnesses lying dead, and after the Woman is
driven the second time into the Wilderness. Now as for this Flood, we may
observe, that the Serpent has several sorts of Floods to cast out of his
mouth; He has a Flood of Errors and Heresies to cast out: and it is to be
observed, that the Devil has been gathering the Errors and Heresies of ancient
times, and has been casting them out altogether in this time, and many are
carried away by this Flood, but the Elect shall not. He has been casting out a
Flood of Atheism, of Profaneness and Ungodliness, and many have been carried
away with this Flood. There is another kind of Flood, which we read of Isa.
59.19. When the Enemy shall come in like a Flood, etc. Psa. 18.4. there are
Floods of ungodly men. And by Waters in the Revelations, are meant Multitudes
of People, over whom the Woman sits. Now we may conceive, that the Flood is of
this kind, because the Earth helps the Woman by swallowing up this Flood. This
Flood is to be cast out of the Devils mouth: We may observe that all sin, and
so the consequents of it, came originally out of the Serpent's mouth; for the
Serpent spoke to Eve, and so deceived her, and drew her into the transgression:
So Sin entered and Death, and all came out of the Serpent's mouth. In like
manner will the Serpent be speaking to the hearts of men, and persuade them to
gather together and make up this Flood; and by his Instruments, those unclean
Spirits like Frogs, mentioned Rev. 16.13. will speak in the ears of men: And
thus will this Flood come out of the Serpent's mouth. Now when this Flood is
cast out, the Earth helps the Woman; that is, some of the Inhabitants of the
Earth, being led to it by their own interest, swallow up this Flood. And if
such a thing happens after the killing of the Witnesses; that is, a Flood shall
be cast out, and the Earth shall be seen to help the Woman, and to swallow it
up; then so plain and manifest a sign will be given of Babylon's sudden
downfall, that he that runs may read it, and may say to Babylon, Come down and
sit in the dust, yea sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, for thy time
is near to come, and thy days shall not be prolonged: and thou as well as old
Babylon, which was the Glory of Kingdoms, and the Beauty of the Chaldee 's
Excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom. And here we may observe, what
matter of Consolation there is in these Prophecies, when the troubles and
dangers of the Church are foretold in them: For when the Dragon persecutes the
Woman, two Wings of a great Eagle are given to the Woman, and so she flies from
the Face of the Serpent. God will sufficiently provide for the Woman's safety
and preservation, when nothing but utter destruction seems to be coming upon
her; for the persecuting Dragon shall be no more able to overtake and devour
the Woman flying into the Wilderness, than a Beast running upon the Earth, can
catch and devour an Eagle flying in the midst of Heaven. And then when the
Serpent casts out this Flood to carry away the Woman, the Earth helps the
Woman. Here Is this comfort for the People of God, This last design against the
Woman, whilst in the Wilderness, shall most assuredly be made void; for though
Babylon will be above all doubt of failing in it, and her great confidence, and
raised expectations, shall make her say, I sit a Queen, and shall not see
sorrow; yet her Plagues* will suddenly come, and Babylon's hopes, and Sion's
fears shall not come to pass. This Flood shall not, cannot carry away the
Woman, but must be swallowed up in the Earth: the Woman must have help, and we
see that rather than want it, the Earth that hates, shall help the Woman. And
that God which rides upon the Heaven in his People's help, and in his
Excellency on the Sky, shall ride also upon the Earth for their help. And what
comfort is this for the threatened Woman, that both Heaven and Earth will be
against the design of this Flood, and shall utterly make it void. God has said
it, and it must be done: For verily, till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot or one
tittle shall in no wise pass from this and other Prophecies, which the Lord
requires his People to give heed to, till all be fulfilled.

3. The last sign is the Dragon's making War with the Remnant of the Woman's
Seed, Rev. 12.17. Which keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of
Jesus Christ. For this consider,

1. The Woman is the Church of God in this European part of the World, where
the Beast has his Seat, and where he has great Authority: The Church in the
Wilderness, persecuted by the Dragon, but protected and nourished there.

2. The remnant of the Woman's Seed are some who were the Seed of that Church,
which the Dragon would carry away with the Flood, having been begotten in it by
the Word of Truth; but when the Dragon makes this War with them, they are
removed from it, into some other part of the World, which appears by this, it is
said, the Dragon went to make war with this remnant: in the Greek it is (...),
abiit, he went away: He goes away from the Woman, which must be the Protestant
Churches, which the Serpent would carry away with a Flood, to make this War;
therefore this remnant must be elsewhere. So he leaves his Work for afflicting
this Woman to his invisible and visible Angels, and goes away to afflict this
remnant: So that after the War against the Witnesses, and besides the casting
the Flood out of his mouth, to carry away the Woman, he makes War with this
Remnant.

3. This Remnant is known by these two Characters:

1. They keep the Commandments of God, and worship him according to his own
Institutions.

2. They have the Testimony of Jesus Christ. They hold it, yea and must
maintain it and keep it up, notwithstanding the War made against them. Now when
it shall be seen, that the Dragon is gone to make War against such a Remnant of
the Woman's Seed, this will be a great sign of a Day of Redemption from
Antichristian Tyranny drawing nigh. For the next thing which we read of,
concerning the followers of the Lamb, is that the 144000 of the suffering and
sealed Saints, get out of the Wilderness, and stand with the Lamb on Mount
Sion, Rev. 14.1. and then it follows, v. 6. I saw another Angel fly in the
midst of Heaven, with the everlasting Gospel, to preach it to those that dwell
upon the Earth. Where observe, that as the Earth did help the Woman, so for a
reward, the everlasting Gospel shall be preached to those that dwell upon the
Earth. And then v. 8. we read, Another Angel followed, saying, Babylon is
fallen, is fallen, that great City, because she made all Nations drink of the
Wine of the wrath of her Fornication* Now as for this Remnant, this one thing
may be observed. That whoever, and wheresoever they shall appear to be, thus
much may with much certainty and comfort be concluded; that, as the Lord takes
such care of the Woman, that she shall not be carried away of the Flood; so he
will have the like care of this Remnant, that they shall not be destroyed by
this War of the Dragon. For this is all that is said, he went away to make War
with them. It Is not said he shall overcome and destroy them, whereas when the
War against the Witnesses is foretold, it is said, the Beast shall make War
against them and overcome them, and kill them; and we may well suppose that if
God had intended the like effect of this War, it would have been foretold also:
but their comfort will be this, the Dragon shall make War with them, and
afflict them for a time, which will work for their good; he shall not overcome
and destroy them: But when the Lord shall have chastised and humbled them, and
done his whole work upon them by the Spirit of Judgment and Burning; he will
then deliver them, and create upon Mount Sion and her Assemblies, a Cloud and
Smoke by Day, and the shining of a flaming Fire by Night; for upon all the
Glory shall be a defense.

6. Some Advantages by the Knowledge of these Truths.

If any shall ask, as Paul in another case, What advantage has the Jew? So
what advantage has he that knows these Mysteries? What profit is there by
speaking, or writing of them? I may answer, much every way: For,

1. The knowledge of them may have a great Influence upon the Saints, to make
them better Saints, and to promote Holiness and Godliness among them. This is
the use which Peter makes of this Doctrine, 2 Pet. 3.11. Seeing these things
shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
conversation and godliness? v. 14. Seeing ye look for such things, be diligent,
that ye may be found of him in peace without spot and blameless. What things?
The New Heavens, and the New Earth, wherein Righteousness shall dwell. This
World will pass away, and a better will come: What should you do then, but pray
that you may be accounted worthy of that World, and the Resurrection from the
Dead, even of a part in the First Resurrection, and may stand before the Son of
Man? God has left us these Truths amongst his Oracles, and the Oracles of God
are to be reckoned amongst the chief advantages which now the Saints have. Does
the Scripture speak in vain, says James, Chap. 4. v. 5. Why but, if these
truths which the Scripture speaks so abundantly of, are not to be read,
studied, and searched into; then it must be said, that the Scripture speaks much
in vain. Surely the Scriptures do not contain any superfluities of truths; and
if such as preach the Gospel would be able to say as Paul, I have not shunned
to declare the whole Counsel of God; then they should study, and preach these
things.

2. The knowledge of these truths will be Meat to the People inhabiting the
Wilderness, if mixed with Faith in the heart. They are some of the hidden Manna,
and Honey out of the Rock, and a Well in the Valley of Baca. Psa. 27.13. I had
fainted, unless I had believed to see the Goodness of the Lord, in the Land of
the living. David being once amongst the Idolatrous Philistims, was then in the
Land of the Dead, even among such who were dead in sins, and alienated from the
life of God, but then he believed that he should return to Judea, the Land of
the Living; which is so called, Ezekiel. 32.23. Judgments are threatened to the
Jews Enemies, because they caused terror in the Land of the Living. The Woman
being in the Wilderness, her hope and confidence is, to see the goodness of the
Lord in a Canaan. And the dead Witnesses shall be in the Land of the living.

3. The knowledge of these Truths will be matter of encouragement to the People
of God, to stand it out in an evil day. When it is known what Plagues are ready
to come upon Babylon, men will take the more heed that they partake not in her
sins, and that they be not found within the Confines of it. If the great Truth
of the first Resurrection were well improved, what power would it have to keep
men upright in apostatizing times! Heb. 11.35. The Believers of old did not
accept of deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection. If the
hope of a Resurrection, at so great a distance, was such a support, how much
more should it be so now, being much nearer? This expression of a better
Resurrection in Hope, did intimate that they might have had a present one then;
their Enemies, that cast them down, would have given them a Resurrection, if
they would have accepted it on their terms. Even so the Beast, that casts them
down, will give a Resurrection to the Witnesses of Christ, if when risen they
will fall down and worship him. Now what will better encourage the Witnesses to
endure to the end, than the hope of a better Resurrection? Two great
Resurrections are spoken of in Scripture:

1. That of the slain witnesses, Rev. 11.11. After three days and a half the
Spirit, of Life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, and
after ascended to Heaven, and their Enemies, beheld them; and that is all they
do, they cannot kill them again. If any in such time accept of a Resurrection
from the Beast, they must soon fall with him: But let them keep the
Commandments of God, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ, so shall they stand
with the Lamb on Mount Sion.

2. That of the dead Saints at the coming of Christ, they shall live and reign
with Christ. Here are two things much for the comfort of Saints:

1. The godly shall be raised and be with Christ, long before the wicked shall
be raised, and they shall be the Sheep at Christ's right Hand; and after the
wicked shall be raised, and be the Goats at Christ's left Hand. The godly and
wicked dye alike, and Worms devour their bodies, Eccl. 2.16. How dies the wise
Man? As the Fool. How dies the godly Man? As the wicked. But though they dye
alike, yet they shall not arise alike; but Saints first, and they shall be long
in glory; and at last the wicked shall be raised, to shame and everlasting
contempt.

2. The Saints when raised, shall have glorious Bodies; the Wicked shall have
immortal Bodies, capable of everlasting torments; but not glorious Bodies. For
their vile Bodies shall be raised vile, and remain vile for ever. Their Bodies
are vile whilst they live, more vile when they dye, and shall be most vile when
raised again. For as the Souls, so the Bodies of the godly and wicked shall be
in a contrary State. If then the Saints shall have glorious Bodies in the
Resurrection, the wicked shall have vile Bodies: and according to the degree of
glory which the Saints Bodies shall have, will be the degree of vileness in
wicked Men's Bodies. What encouragement is this, to follow the Lamb withersoever
he goes, that so you may have assurance of living, and reigning with Christ!

7. The conclusion of all, in some Counsels and Directions.

1. Receive Christ now, and when he comes he will receive you to himself. Open
to him, and he will open to you. Receive him for Life, and to be your Lord, and
then you may say, when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, we shall also
appear with him in Glory. Live in him and live to him, so may you hope to live
and reign with him. If to you to live be Christ, then to dye will be great
gain, and to rise will be greater.

2. Look for, and love the appearing of Christ: To them that look for him he
shall appear; and give a Crown of righteousness to them that love his
appearing. If you deny your selves, and take up the Cross of righteousness, and
follow Christ, then you shall have the Crown of righteousness.

3. Have your Conversations in Heaven, mind heavenly things, and drive a trade
in Heaven; buy Gold, white Raiment, and Eye Salve of Christ: Get the Powders of
the heavenly Merchant, wherewith the Spouse is perfumed: Walk by a heavenly
Rule, imitate an heavenly Pattern, and aim at an heavenly End; and so look for
a Savior from Heaven.

4. Be of the number of wise Virgins; be Virgins pure, incorrupt, espoused to
Christ: Take him as the Chiefest of ten thousand, and altogether lovely; and be
wise Virgins in getting Oil for your Vessels. Let there be true faith joining
you to Christ, that you may receive of his fullness, grace for grace. Rest not
in a Form, but see that there be the Power of Godliness. Thus shall you go in
with the Bridegroom to the Marriage.

5. Have a righteousness exceeding the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees: For without this you cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Mat.
5.20. This must be,

First, The righteousness of Faith, which is the righteousness of God, laid
hold on by Faith. This the Pharisees would not submit to, but went about to
establish their own righteousness. You cannot be righteous before God, but in
the righteousness of God, even of Christ, God-Man.

Secondly, A righteousness in your works, which must exceed that of the Scribes
and Pharisees, in these two respects:

1. You must be Servants to righteousness. Romans 6.18. Being made free from sin,
ye became the Servants of righteousness. The Pharisees, made their
reighteousness a Servant to them, in that they sought their own praise thereby.
Let yours exceed theirs, in being Servants of righteousness.

2. You must love righteousness, and be Servants to it out of love. Baalam
loved the wages of unrighteousness; the Pharisees loved the ways of
righteousness; but Christ loved righteousness, Heb. 1.9. and so do those that
are Christ's, and therein they exceed the Scribes and Pharisees. And if you
have this righteousness exceeding theirs, consider what Promises are made to
you, Isa. 33.24. Who among us shall dwell with devouring Fire? Who among us
shall dwell with everlasting Burnings? He that walks in righteousness and
speaks uprightness. Interpreters look no farther than Hezekiahs time for a
sense of this place, as if this and what follows had its accomplishment, when
Jerusalem was besieged, and Sennachrib's Army destroyed; which may be part of
the sense, and somewhat that was typical: But doubtless Isaiah looks to the
last days here, as well as in many other of his Prophecies; even to the time
when Jerusalem shall be a quiet Habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be
taken down, v. 20.

Q. What then shall we understand by this Fire?

A. It is such a Fire as the Righteous shall dwell with, and not be hurt by;
and therefore not Hellfire, so they shall not dwell with it. Why should not the
Fire which Peter speaks of be here meant? That Fire to which the World, that
now is in Being, is reserved; called everlasting Burnings, because, as to the
wicked which will be consumed by them, they will be the beginnings of
everlasting burnings. For the ungodly ones, who shall perish by them, shall
never be out of the Fire afterward. Now who shall dwell with those burnings?
who shall live when God does this? and when this dreadful Conflagration shall
be, who shall be like Moses on the Mount that burned, and not be consumed? The
Answer is, He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly. And it is
farther promised, Thine Eyes shall see the King in his beauty. That is,
Hezekiah, say Interpreters, who as in the time of the Siege, he did rend his
clothes, and covered himself with Sackloth; so when that great Deliverance was
wrought, he was seen in his beauty again; but the Chaldee Paraphrase gives a
better sense, which in Latin is thus rendered, Gloriam Majestatis, regis^
seculorum in decore suo videbunt oculi tui. Thine Eyes shall see the King
eternal, as he is called, 1 Timothy 1.17. in the glory of his Majesty. Even that
King spoken of v. 22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the
Lord is our King. And it is farther promised, They shall behold the Land that is
very far off. That is, say some, Senacheribs Siege shall be raised, and then
the Jews shall go abroad in the Land again. But what reason was there to call
any part of Judea, the Land very far off from Jeurusalem? Surely somewhat else
seems hinted; and why may we not think it to be meant of a Land very far off,
in respect of the time of its being? For as we read of times afar off, so there
was a Land far off in regard of the time of its existence, even the new Earth
which is to be created; in which Righteousness shall dwell, and upon which the
Saints shall reign with Christ. This was, in Isaiah's time, The Land very far
off, but now very near, which they that walk in Righteousness shall behold.

6. Pray earnestly that this Kingdom may come. God delights much in such
Prayers. We may see what a large Commission is given for praying for these
things, Isa. 45.11. Ask me of things to come, concerning my Sons. I have spoken
much of them, and do you ask me of them. Ask, and you shall know much of them.
Ask, and they shall come; ask me of them, and you shall have a share in them
when they come. And concerning the works of my hands, command ye me.

1. Command ye me. God has put himself under a Law by his gracious Promise,
Covenant, and Oath. He that Commands all, yields to be Commanded by the Prayer
of his People.

2. Concerning the works of my hands command ye me: Which may either look back
to works already wrought, or forward to works to be wrought. First, to works
already wrought: My Sons are the works of my hands, created to good works, and
formed for my praise. Now do you command me concerning them, and then I will
command their Enemies to let them go free, I will say to the North, give up; to
the South keep not back; bring my Sons from far, and my Daughters from the ends
of the Earth. Secondly, to works to be wrought. I will create Jerusalem a
rejoicing, and her People a joy; I will make the new Heavens, and the new
Earth; and concerning these works which my hands shall make, command ye me.

Those that would at last reign, must now overcome. First, within there is an
Old Man to be overcome, and you must get the Rule of your own Spirits, which is
better than to rule a City. Let Grace reign over Corruption; Spirit over Flesh.
Let Faith, Love, and the Fear of God rule; in patience possess your Souls: Let
there be a Kingdom of Patience, and then shall there be at last a Kingdom of
Power. Secondly, you must overcome without: There is a World to be overcome;
and that both the good, and the evil of it: The good thus; All things are
lawful, but I will not be under the power of any. Covetous Men are under the
power of Riches; let it not be so with you, do you, through Grace, rule them,
and use them as you ought, and let not them rule you. And as for the evil
things of the World, meddle not with them, but keep your selves unspotted of
the World. Save your selves from the Sins, and so shall you from the Plagues of
an untoward Generation. There is a Satan also to be overcome: 1 John 5.18. He
that is born of God keeps himself, and that evil One touches him not. Tactu
qualitativo; that is, by a touch altering the Nature; he shall not destroy the
Divine Nature, or Seed of God in the Regenerate. He touched Adam and he died,
but he cannot so touch a true Saint. There is lastly, a Beast to be overcome?
There is a twofold overcoming the Beast; First, In his temptations and
endeavors to subject the Hearts and Consciences of all to him. So Saints
choosing to suffer from him, rather than to serve him, do overcome. There is a
Victory gotten over his Mark, and over the Number of his Name; when many do
adore him, and reverence and honor his Name, as a Name above every Name, as
exalting himself above all that is called God: they have his Name in greatest
contempt; when some call him the Vicar of Christ, the Head of the Church; and
when he shows himself that he is God: The faithful Witnesses overcome all these
high Titles and great Names, and call him by his right Names; the Antichrist,
the Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition. Secondly, In his Power and Kingdom.
Overcome him in the first sense, and 'twill not be long before the Saints shall
see him overcome in this latter sense. Great Promises are made to Overcomers in
the Second and Third Chapters of the Revelations, and they look to the Day of
Christ's Personal Reign, as the special time for their accomplishment. Not but
that the Spirits of Just Men have the substance of them in Heaven: but when
their Bodies shall be raised, then will be the eminent time of fulfilling them.
For, then shall they rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron, and sit with Christ
upon his Throne. Be Overcomers then, and you shall be able to say at last, as
Joshua did, Not one thing has failed of all the good Word which the Lord has
spoken.

Written by William Alleine, Minister of the Gospel.
FINIS.
Some Discovery OF THE NEW HEAVENS, AND THE NEW EARTH.

ALSO OF The Earnest Expectation of the Creature, to be delivered from its
Bondage, into the Glorious Liberty of the Children of God.

TOGETHER With some Hints wherein it will consist: Gathered out of Holy
Scriptures.

AS ALSO A Guess at the Time wherein it may probably be expected.

Together with the Profitable Uses to be made of it; As in 2 Pet. 3.14.

By WILLIAM ALLEINE, Now with the Lord.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Harris: 1679.

Some Discovery OF THE NEW HEAVENS, AND THE NEW EARTH.
IN the former TREATISE, the passing away of the Old Heavens and Earth, was
handled, and their perishing by Fire: And now I shall add somewhat concerning
the New Heavens, and the New Earth which are to succeed them, as we read. 2
Pet. 3.13. Nevertheless we according to his Promise, look for New Heavens and a
New Earth, etc. And certainly it is not a state of glory in the Heaven of
Heavens, where Christ is, and where the Spirits of just Men made perfect are;
which is here meant. For the New Heavens of which Peter speaks, are not yet in
Being, but are Promised; we according to his Promise look for New Heavens; this
Promise is in Isa: 65.17. Behold I create New Heavens, and a New Earth; these
are yet to be created, Isa. 66.22. As the New Heavens and the New Earth which I
will make, shall remain before me, etc. I have not made them already, but I
will make them. And the time is hinted when they shall be created, Isa. 65.13.
my Servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: my Servants shall drink, but ye
shall be thirsty, my Servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed etc. And
the former troubles shall not be remembered: this Promise has not been already
fulfilled, for the People of God have not been yet in such an estate, as to
leave all their troubles behind them, and to forget them; but such a time shall
be, for (says the Lord) I creat New Heavens, and a New Earth. A New Earth as
well as New Heavens, which Intimates a great change here below. Neither is it
the Gospel-state of the Church, which was to succeed the Legal state, which is
all here meant, for this was in Being when Peter wrote; but the New Heavens,
and Earth were looked for. And lastly, These New Heavens, and New Earth must be
created when the World which now is shall perish by Fire, and that will be at
the day of Judgment, 2 Pet. 4.12.13. Thus we see what we are to rest in, as
meant by the New Heavens, and the New Earth.

In the next place, to show what they are, consider in the general those words
of Peter; 2 Pet. 3.15.16. As our beloved brother, Paul has written unto you,
as also in all his Epistles, speaking of these things: What things? Doubtless
the New Heavens, and Earth are these things, for of these, Peter last spoke;
therefore when Paul speaks of the manifestation and glorious liberty of the
sons of God, and the creatures earnest expectation of it, Romans 8. and also of
the Saints judging the World. 1 Cor. 6.2. These are the same things of which
Peter speaks: but most plainly the New Heavens, and New Earth are spoken of in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, and because Peter says, Paul had written of these
things? this is, conceived to be one of the best Arguments to prove that Paul
was the Author of that Epistle: now Heb. 2.5. he speaks of a World to come,
the same with the New Heavens, and the New Earth and Heb. 12.26, 27. of a
Kingdom which cannot be moved, and of the removing of things which may be
shaken, and in relation to the purifying, and consuming work of that day; it is
said, Our God is a consuming Fire. And somewhat might be gathered out of every
one of Paul's Epistles touching these things; except that to Philemon. Thus in
the general.

Now to come to a more particular unfolding of this Mystery, we are to
consider, that the Heavens, and Earth may be taken these three ways.

First, in a Natural, secondly, a Civil, thirdly, in an Ecclesiastical respect.

1. In a Natural respect; And thus we may conceive that all things below the
Heaven of Heavens (which is the Throne of God, and Seat of the Blessed) are to
be in some respect made new. Indeed the Heaven of Heavens is called the high,
and Holy place, and no change was made in it by Man's sin, and it is so Glorious
already, that we have not ground to conclude it will be made better: but as for
the inferior Heavens, and Heavenly Bodies in them, as Sun, Moon, and Stars,
there is this to be said concerning them: As they sometimes send down some
malignant and hurtful Influences upon this inferior World, which may be
reckoned amongst the Fruits of Adams sin: so in the times of Restitution these
shall cease. I shall mention some places of Scripture which afford us some
ground thus to conclude it, Psa. 11.6. there is this promise, The Sun shall not
smite the by day, nor the Moon by Night; when it is said, The Sun and Moon shall
not smite; this does intimate, that sometimes they do smite Men, and surely
it is Sin; which has been the cause of this smitting. And if this promise of
their not smitting shall be made good to any, in the time of the Old Heavens,
and Old Earth; then much more shall it be made good in the times of the New
Heavens, and the New Earth. The Sun did once beat upon the Head of Jonah that
he fainted, and wished in himself to die, Jonah. 4.8. Certainly it shall not be
thus in the times of restitution, and refreshing: the Sun shall revive and
strengthen, and not cause fainting, and make Men wish to die, Deuteronomy. 3.3.28. His
Heaven, shall drop down Dew. Whilst Israel did keep Covenant with God, the
Heavens were his Heavens: much more when all Israel shall be called, and saved,
the Heavens shall be their Heavens; the Sun, Moon, and Stars, shall be theirs,
so, as that their influences shall not be hurting, and smiting; The Stars in
their courses shall not fight against them, as once they did against Sisera.
Their Heavens shall not be, as many times now they are, Brass over their Heads,
but shall drop down Dew, and the former and the latter Rain that is, Rain in
season shall descend, and there shall not be a Sweeping Rain, which shall leave
no Food behind it. And it is not at all to be doubted, that when the Jews shall
be all effectually called, and enter into their rest, Joseph's Blessing shall
be the Blessing of all the Tribes of Israel, and that in a more ample and
eminent manner than when Joseph had his Lot in Canaan Deuteronomy. 33.13, etc. of
Joseph he said, Blessed of the Lord be his land, for the precious things of
Heaven, for the Dew, and the deep that coucheth beneath, and for the precious
Fruits brought forth by the Sun, and for the precious things put forth by the
Moon, and for the chief things of the ancient Mountains, and for the precious
things of the lasting Hills, and for the precious things of the Earth, and the
fullness thereof, and for the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush. Joseph's
Blessing did then consist in precious things, and that which made all these
precious things, more exceeding precious, was, the good will of him that dwelt
in the Bush; and when Joseph shall be called and United to Judah under one
King, then shall he have the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, and a
Blessing of precious things added thereto. Certainly, we may well conclude that
as the Tribes of Israel had these their Blessings in some Degree, when Canaan
was Conquered, and divided amongst them, so when the Jews shall be called, then
shall they have these Blessings, wherewith Moses the Man of God blessed them,
in the fullness of them: but that the great change which shall be in the Natural
state of things, may be more fully set forth, I shall with such largeness as
the Matter does require, whilst upon that eminent place, Romans 8.19. etc. For
the earnest expectation of the creature waits for the manifestation of the
Sons of God, etc. The Apostle had said, v. 18. I reckon that the sufferings of
this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed in us. Saints after a long time of Suffering, must have a time of
Glory, As there is to be Eternity of Glory in Heaven, so a set time also for
the Church to have great Glory upon Earth. This is proved from the earnest
expectation of the Creature; and from the Saints groaning within themselves,
and waiting for the Adoption, even the redemption of their bodies; The whole
creation groaneth, and Saints groan. What does this import, but that the World
is weary of its present state of bondage, and longs for the time when it shall
pass away in respect of its present corrupt and slavish estate, and be in its
refined, restored, and free state, of which God has spoken by the mouth of his
Prophets? The Heavens would be New Heavens, the Earth would be a New Earth,
they look with outstretched Neck for that happy time when it shall be said, The
Lord bless thee O Habitation of justice, and Mountain of holiness; and when the
Sons of God that have lain among the Pots shall come forth and be as the wings
of a Dove, covered with Silver, and her Feathers with yellow Gold, and so have
their glorious Liberty, and Manifestation.

By Creature here is meant, the World which is now subject to Vanity, and in
bondage to corruption. Its condition is much worse now, by Man's sin, than it
was at first. This condition is contrary to its Nature, It would be restored to
its Primitive State, and is not at rest till it be so.

Here are three things to be considered: First, What the Primitive State of the
Creature was: Secondly, What its present bondage is: Thirdly, What the Liberty
is which it longs for. What the Primitive State of the Creature was, these
Particulars show:

1. The Creature was very good; there was no evil in the Creation. Genesis 1.31.
God saw every thing which he had made, and behold it was very good. Full of
virtue, and Vigor; of beauty, and comeliness, Genesis 2.27. As Trees, so other
things were beautiful to the Eye, there was nothing hurtful and grieving; No
Thorns, or Thistles, for these were a part of the Curse. Solomon complains, all
is Vanity, and vexation of Spirit: 'Twas the Evil and bitter thing Sin, which
was the cause of it.

2. There was Peace in the Creation, a due subordination, and subjection, and
Concord, and agreement; nothing of Rebellion, nothing of enmity, no wasting, or
destruction in any part of the Creation, as a Fruit of enmity.

3. The Creature was made that it might serve for the Honor of the Creator.
God made all things for himself Prove. 16.4. All his works were to praise him.

4. Man was Lord of the Creation. Rule thou over the Fowl of the Air, the Fish
of the Sea, etc. Genesis 1.28. And the Creatures did own Man's Dominion over them,
and became willingly subject to him, the Beasts and Fowls came to Adam, as it
were to do him Homage, and he gave them Names.

2. What the Creatures bondage is? This consists,

1. In the loss of very much of its Primitive virtue, and beauty. Sin has much
defaced, and enfeebled the Creation. Meat has not that strength to nourish,
which first it had Isa. 3.1. we read of the Stay, and Staff; of the Stay of
Bread, and the Staff of Water. If Adam had not Sined this Stay and Staff would
have been a sufficient support of Man's life when its going away.

2. In that enmity which is now amongst Creatures. There is a war in the
Creation; Creature against Creature: In the Sea the greater Fishes devour the
less, the dry Land, and Air are full of Beasts, and Birds of prey.

3. In the sinful abuse of Creatures, they are in bondage to the lusts of Men;
and are many times provision For the Flesh to fulfill it in the lusts thereof.
We may observe, that the First Sin was the abuse of a Creature: God had
forbidden to Men the eating of the fruit of the Tree in the midst of the
Garden; when Man did eat, the Creatures bondage began. This sinful a buse was
its bondage; And this one Creature being thus abused, and brought into bondage,
God did in a way of judgment (as a just recompense of Man's Sin) leave the rest
to be subject to Vanity, and less helpful to Man: Adam delighted in the
forbidden Fruit more then in pleasing God, and therefore was left to love and
serve the Creature, more than the Creator; We may take Notice how this bondage
is set forth in Scripture, 1. Joh. 2.16. All that is in the World, the lust of
the Flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, is not of the Father,
but is of the World. There are these several Lusts in the World, and the World
affords them their several Objects; carnal Delight? are the Objects of the lust
of the Flesh, worldly riches, and Propfits are the lusts of the Eye. And do
please the Eye, Eccles. 5.11. When goods increase, what good is there to the
owners, saving the beholding them with their Eyes; and when these worldly
things are enjoyed, and Men prosper, and grow great thereby, then Pride usually
compasses them about as with a Chain, and so they become the Pride of Life.
Now this is the bondage of the Creatures, to feed the lust of the Flesh, the
lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life. We may observe, that all these lusts
did meet in, and made up the first sin; the Forbidden Fruit was fair to the
eye, there was the lust of the Eye: there was a lust to eat of it, and an
eating to satisfy that lust: so there appeared the lust of the Flesh: and as
the Devil suggested, so Adam and Eve thought to be thereby as Gods, knowing
good and evil; there was Pride; and as this Sin brought in all others into the
World, so we see how the Offspring resemble their Begetter, and how all Adams
Children by generation, do bear the Image of the Earthly Adam. Again see Jam.
4.3. Ye ask that ye may consume it upon your lusts: Lust is a great Devourer;
what great Estates are many times consumed by it? This is a bondage to the
Creature, which would serve men's Necessities, but not their Lusts. And the
Apostle calls such, a dulterers. A dultresses: The Creatures are defiled and
defloured by mordinate love to, and sinful abuse of them. And lastly consider,
Luke. 16.9. where Riches are called the Mammon of unrighteousness: it is a
Bondage to them to be so; they would and should be the Riches of righteousness;
now they are the Mammon of unrighteousness. When they are gotten by
righteousness, Hab. 2.9 Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness; or,
gains an evil gain. Achan's Wedge of Gold was evil gain; Naboth's Vinyard was
evil gain to Ahab. Judas his Thirty pieces of Silver were evil gain to him:
they are also the Mammon of unrighteousness, when not made use of for Men's own
good, or the good of others, which are in want; many have Riches, but not a
Heart to use them; not like Christ who accounted giving best. But they account
having, and keeping best. Lastly, they are the Mammon of unrighteousness, when
employed to promote, and carry-on an evil and mischievous design. Haman's Ten
thousand Talents, which he would give to promote the work of destroying the
Jews, were the Mammon of unrighteousness.

4. The Creatures bondage consists in a subjection to Satan; Adam lost his
Dominion in the Creation, and Satan has usurped it; who by Divine Permission
has sometimes power to make Creatures his Instruments in his evil designs: By
Fire he destroyed Job's Sheep, and the Servants which kept them: By Wind he
overthrew the House where Job's Sons and Daughters were: Sometimes he makes
Creatures his alluring Baits to draw men to sin. Now the Creature groans under
this bondage to Satan, and longs for the time when he shall be bound, and cast
into the Bottomless Pit.

5. In being so much in bondage to men, which are God's Enemies: The Creation
groans under an Antichristian Yoke; and as the Souls under the Altar cry, How
long, O Lord, do thou not avenge our blood? So the Creatures cry, How long, O
Lord, do thou not avenge our bondage on them that oppress us? They long for
the Fall of Babylon, and the Destruction of the Man of Sin; and as when Babylon
shall fall, the Heavens and holy Apostles and Prophets shall rejoice over her:
so also shall the whole Creation, which now groaneth and travelleth in pain.

Thus much of the Creatures bondage, in which we may see the evil nature of
Sin; whereby not only Men, but the whole Creation has been brought in bondage
to corruption. As in things which God has made, His Eternal Power and Godhead,
His Wisdom and Goodness are seen: So in them as made subject to vanity, we see
what an evil and bitter thing Sin is; when Achan sinned, he brought Ruin upon
himself, his Sons and Daughters, Oxen, Asses, Sheep, and Tent, and all that he
had. Here consider:

1. The Creatures forbid these Abuses, and cry out against those that abuse
them. As God complained once, that he was pressed as a Cart laden with Sheaves:
so the Creation complains of being pressed with Man's Wickedness, Covetousness,
Pride, Luxury and Drunkenness, which are a burden to the Creation. And as the
dumb Ass reproved the madness of the Prophet; so the dumb Creatures reprove the
Wickedness of Men: when they love them inordinately, and serve them, and their
Lusts by them: What is their voice, but like that of the Angel to John? See
thou do it not, we are thy fellow creatures, worship God.

2. The abused Creatures will cry against those that abuse it, Hab. 2.11. The
Stone shall cry out of the Wall, and the Beam out of the Timber shall answer
it. When a Town is built by blood, and a City is established by Iniquity, then
the Materials do (as it were) cry for Vengeance on such Builders, Jam. 5.12. Go
to now, ye rich men, weep and howl, for the miseries that shall come upon you;
your riches are corrupt, your Garment Moth-eaten: You will rather let Moth and
rust corrupt them, than amploy them to any good Use; and this Rust shall be a
Witness against you.

3. It Is mercifulness to Creatures to use them well, and cruelty to abuse them;
those that do thus, are cruel to their own Souls, and to the Creatures: Sinners
are cruel to the Creation; Saints are pitiful to it, when they use and do not
abuse Creatures.

Thus much of the Creature's Bondage.

3. What the Creature's Liberty is, into which it shall be delivered?

1. There shall be peace in the Creation: As Christ makes peace betwixt God and
Men, betwixt holy Angels and Men; and will in the time of the New Heavens make
peace betwixt the Saints: so will he also makes peace in the Creation; and that
Promise in Isa. 65.25. may be fulfilled in a literal, as well as a mystical
sense: The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat Straw
like the Bullock; but Dust shall be the Serpent's meat, upon it the Curse shall
remain.

2. The Creatures shall be again very good, and not vanity and vexation of
spirit: They shall recover their lost Vigor and Beauty, Acts 3.21. There shall
be a restitution of all things, (...), est restitutio in pristinum statum; A
bringing back to the First State: Matthew. 12.13. He stretched out his hand, and
it was restored whole like the other. And thus the Earth shall be so restored,
as to have a new State and Face: It shall not be Iron under men's feet, through
want of Rain in the season of it: Neither shall it be barren and unfruitful.
What Elisha did at Jericho, might be for a Type of that which shall be done in
the times of Restitution: 2 King. 2.21. The men of the City said, The
ssituation is pleasant, but the water is naught, and the ground barren; then
Elisha went forth to the springs of water, and cast salt therein. Thus says
the Lord, I have healed these waters, there shall not be any more from thence
death, or barren land. And it is remarkable, what Josephus writes of this
healing of the waters of Jericho, by Elizaeus's Bell; Jud. lib. 5. chap. 4.
This Fountain which before was the cause of Famine and Sterility, was now the
cause of Plenty and Fertility; and so it waters the ground, that where a
little of it comes, it does more good than all other waters which lie long
upon it: There are goodly Orchards, and many sorts of Palm Trees growing by
Brook's-sides; and the fattest being pressed, yield a Juice like Honey: and he
after says, we may call that part of the Earth divine, where whatsoever Fruit
is most dear and precious, is in most abundance. Also in all other Fruits it
surpasses all Countries in the World, for it multiplieth all things, and
increases them sooner there; the cause whereof I judge to be the pleasant
waters, and warm nourishing Air, which inviteth all things to spring, and then
increases them; and the moisture causes all things to take firm root, and
defends them from drought: In Summer the Air of that place is so temperate,
that when it snoweth in other parts of Judea, and is extreme cold, the
Inhabitants in this place do only wear a Linen Garment. Thus he declares the
Fertility of Jericho, caused by that Miracle; and certainly a greater Miracle
than this here will be wrought; for there are promises in Scripture of a great
Fertility, that shall be after the Calling of the Jews, Ezekiel. 36.30. I will
multiply the Fruit of the Tree, and the Increase of the Field, so that ye shall
receive no more reproach of Famine: Verse 35. The Land that was desolate shall
become like the Garden of Eden. What a great Change will there be in the Earth,
when desolate and barren Land shall be like Eden! And as we have ground to
conclude, that many of God's Works wrought among the Jews of old, were typical
of greater Works, which shall be wrought for them at last; for which, see Jer.
23.8. So why may we not gather something from that work of God, in giving them
Water out of the Rock? And that which I would especially hint, is, from Deuteronomy.
32.13. He gave them Honey out of the Rock, and Oil out of the flinty Rock. The
Water is called Honey and Oil: And why? First, Because it was a Supply flowing
from special Grace and Mercy; special Grace adds a great deal of Sweetness to
common Mercies. Secondly, It was an extraordinary Supply in time of great need;
Water in that extremity was as Honey and Oil. Thirdly, It was a Type of Christ;
for, They drunk of that Rock which followed them, and that Rock was Christ, 1
Cor. 10.4. An Eye of Faith looking unto Christ, would make it sweeter and more
pleasant than Honey and Oil. Fourthly, It being Water given them by a Miracle,
might have sweetness and virtue beyond ordinary water: For as the Bread given
them by a Miracle, has the taste of Honey and fresh Oil; so might this
mirhculous Water: When Christ turned Water into Wine, that was far better than
ordinary Wine; the Governor of the Feast said, Thou have kept the good Wine
until now. The other in comparison with this, did not deserve to be called good
Wine: Doubtless that miraculous Wine was the best Wine that ever was drunk; and
why may we not conceive the like of this miraculous Water, which might be
typical in relation to the times of Restitution, in which, even Water, the most
common mercy, shall have much more virtue and pleasantess in it, than now it
has. It Is said of Fire and Water, that they are good Servants, but bad
Masters; and the^ have often been bad Masters, in these times of the Old
Heavens and Old Earth; but in the time of the New, they shall be good Servants
alone, and no more bad Masters to the Saints: The Air also will be sweet,
wholesome, and fructifying, and what has a spiritual meaning, Cant. 4.16. will
be then true in a natural sense also; The North Wind shall awake, and the
South Wind blow, that the Spices may flow forth. No blasting-wind, or that
which will hinder the flowings forth of Fruits, but that which shall farther
their flowing forth: and then the rough wind shall be stayed in the day of the
East Wind.

3. The Creatures shall be delivered from all their usurping and oppressing
Lords. Satan shall not Lord it over them, neither the Man of Sin; they shall be
together in the Bottomless Pit; and all Christ's Enemies will be made his
Footstool, whereby the Creature shall have its so-much longed-for Liberty, and
shall be in Subjection to him, who is to be the desire of all Nations, and of
the whole Creation; of whom it is said, Psa. 8.4. What is man that thou art so
mindful of him, and the son of man that thou visitest him? thou made him a
little lower than the Angels, and have crowned him with glory and honor; thou
have made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands, and have put all
things in subjection under his feet. Which must be fulfilled in that World
which is to come; as is evident, Heb. 2.5, 6. For as to the present state of
things in the World, as now* it is, the Apostle says, v. 8. We see not yet all
things put under him.

4. The Liberty of the Creature consists in the lawful Use of it, 1 Cor. 7.31.
They that use the world as not abusing it. Here two things may be observed:

First, The Creature is to be used, and not enjoyed: Life and Happiness does
not consist in it; carnal men enjoy the Creatures, the covetous man enjoyes his
Wealth, as Dives did, Son remember that thou in thy lifetime had thy good
things. Worldly men have their portion in this life, and say, It Is good to be
here: Now such an enjoying of the Creature holds it in bondage; its Liberty is
to be used well; insist Psa 110.7. it is said of Christ, He shall drink of the
Brook in the way, and then men should lift up the head and heart to him, in
whose favor is their life.

Secondly, The Creature should be used lawfully, and not abused; a lawful Use
is its liberty: There is a natural Use of Creatures, which is for Food and
Raiment, and somewhat for Delight; for Genesis 2.9. Out of the Ground God made
every Tree to grow which was good for Food, and pleasant to the eye. In the
times of Restitution it will be so; Fruits both profitable and pleasant, will
be made to grow: Hos. 2.21. It shall come to pass in that day; that is, when
the Jews shall be betrothed to the Lord: I will hear says the Lord, I will
hear the Heavens, and the Heavens shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall
hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and they shall hear Jezreel: When the
Jews shall be Jezreel, the Seed of God, all the Creatures shall with one
consent serve that Jezreel. What is the reason that now it is otherwise? for
many times the Heavens hear not the Earth, the Earth hears not the Corn, the
Corn hears not men: It Is because for the most part instead of being a Jezreel,
they serve a Jezabel. There is a Spiritual Use also to be made of Creatures;
and so in them, as in a Glass, we should behold the Glory of the Lord, and we
should praise him as the Creator of them, and honor him with them. The great
Whore glorifies her self with what she has: this is the Creature's bondage;
but when the Promise shall take place, Mic. 4.13. I will consecrate their gain
to the Lord. And their substance to the Lord of the whole Earth, then the
Creature shall have its due, and deserved Liberty.

Thus much for the Change which will be in the Natural State of Things.

2. There will be a Change in the Civil State of Things; there will be New
Heavens, and a New Earth, in a political sense; for in the New Earth dwells
righteousness. All Civil Government will be administered in a way of
Righteousness; for as Amos. 5.24. Judgment shall run down like Water, and
Righteousness as a mighty stream. In Antichrist's Kingdom, unrighteousness,
cruelty and oppression has been a mighty Stream; but that sinful Kingdom must
be destroyed, and after this, Judgment shall dwell in the Wilderness, and
Righteousness shall remain in the fruitful Field, and the work of righteousness
shall be peace, and the effect of it quietness, and assurance for ever. Isa.
32.16. there shall not be then, any Throne of iniquity establishing mischief by
a Law. But that which above all does commend the happiness of those Times in
point of Government, is, this Government then will be Theocratical, and Divine;
so that there will be another Divine Commonwealth, more glorious than that of
the Jews heretofore. After the Jews were brought out of Egypt, as God made them
a Church in the Wilderness, so also a Commonwealth; and God himself was
Supreme amongst them, and gave them, as a Moral and Ceremonial, so a Judicial
Law: so that he was their King and Lawgiver, and their Divine Commonwealth
was not to end, till the coming of Christ; according to that Prophecy of Jacob,
Genesis 49.10. the Scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh come. Jacob's
prosperity was to grow at last into a Kingdom, and Commonwealth and to
continue till the coming of Christ. The Scepter of this Kingdom was given to
Judah; now though the Ten Tribes revolted from the Scepter, and after were
carried Captive, and did not return, and so were without a King, and without an
Ephod, etc. yet Judah did remain as a Divine Commonwealth till the coming of
Christ; and Judah had right to the Scepter, though sometimes it was violently
wrested out of the hand of Judah, yet of right it did belong to Judah till
Shiloh came, and then Judahs Scepter did return to him that gave it, and then
the Jews Crucifying the Lord of glory, God did suffer their City to be Trodden
down of the Romans; and then their Commonwealth, till that time continued in
the Tribe of Judah, was utterly destroyed, and they were carried Captive into
all Nations, till the times of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled; and when these
shall be fulfilled, then shall the Jews have again a Divine Commonwealth; And
Joseph and Judah being Joined together they shall have one King, as is evident
Ezekiel. 37.22, 24. I will make them one Nation, and one King shall be King to
them all; David my Servant shall be King over them. That is Christ who shall
reign in Righteousness, and give them Civil as well as Spiritual pastors, even
Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning Ezekiel. 34.23. I will
set up one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my Servant David;
and how happy they shall be then, is shown: I will make a Covenant of peace
with them, and the evil Beasts shall cease out of the Land, and they shall
dwell safely in the Wilderness, and sleep in the Woods: I will make them, and
the places round about my hill a Blessing; there shall be showers of Blessings.
Now as Mr. Baxter once said; It is this Theocratical polity, or Divine
Commonwealth, which is the unquestionable Reign of Christ upon Earth, which
all Christians are agreed, may be justly sought, and the temporal Dignity of
Saints, which would undoubtedly much bless the World. And (he says) whether
there be any other Reign of Christ to be expected; that is, by his visible
personal Abode. This controversy I do not now determine. For my own part I
reverence the Ancients that were of that mind, and many latter that have
followed them. I am my self as merely Neutral in it, as in almost any point of
so great moment so often propounded to my consideration; I oppose them not in
the least: nor am I for them; Now as for the Visible, and personal Abode, and
Reign of Christ upon Earth, having given some arguments for it already: I shall
here add something more, to see whether any contrary, or Neutral Judgment may
be more inclined to the owning of this Truth. And,

1. this truth does clearly spring forth from 2 Pet. 3.13, Nevertheless we,
according to her Promise, look for New Heavens, and a New Earth, wherein
dwells Righteousness. Where we may take Notice of these particulars:

First there will be a great and blessed change wrought in the World so far as
to make all things New, even to the bringing in of a New World. This is the
Saints expectation, we look etc. the Apostles, and other Saints did then, and
therefore we ought, now to expect this New World, consisting of a New Earth, as
well as a New Heaven.

Secondly, this New World shall have Inhabitants in it; for there shall be Men
in it: which may be gathered from those words; In which dwells Righteousness.
If Righteousness, then both the subjects, and the Objects of it, that is Men
living and acting Righteously; and these shall Dwell in this New Earth, they
shall not be as wayfaring Men that tarry but a Night, but shall dwell in it;
They shall not be here, after this New Creation, but a day with Christ of
twenty four hours, and then ascend to Heaven; not a day as Men count a day, but
a day as it is with the Lord: that is, a Thousand years, and a Thousand years,
as one day v. 8. which has been taken as a Periphrasis of the day of
Judgment. This is called, (...) a World to dwell in, and for Men to abide in
so long as to be called Inhabitants. And this Inhabited World is chiefly, that
which Christ is said to Rejoice in Pov. 8.31. Rejoicing in the habitable part
of his Earth, and my delights were with the Sons of Men. This is the Land which
shall be called Beulah. Isa. 62.4. Thou shall no more be termed Forsaken,
neither shall thy Land any more be termed, Desolate: that is, without
Inhabitants, but thou shall be called Hepzibah, and thy Land Beulah; For the
Lord delights in thee, and thy Land shall be Married to Christ; that is,

Thirdly, Christ shall come personally at his time, when the World that now is
shall perish, and the New Heavens, and the New Earth shall be Created. For this
Personal coming is that which the Scoffers derided, asking where is the promise
of his coming? v. 4. Again, this is that which the Apostle asserts. v. 10. The
day of the Lord will come, and come as a Thief in the Night; which Mat. 24.43.
and 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. is affirmed of Christ's second coming, and when the Battle of
Armageddon shall be, then Christ shall come as a Thief. Rev. 16.15. and lastly
the passing away of the Old Heavens, and Earth, and consequently the creating
of the New, will be at the day of Judgment, v. 7. The Heavens and Earth are
reserved to fire against the day of Judgment; and all do grant, that Christ
will come personally at the day of Judgment, and when he comes, all the dead
Saints shall be raised, and appear with him. Now put all these things together.
The Old Heavens and Earth must perish, new must be created. Saints and
Righteouss Men must, after this, dwell in the New Earth; and at this time will
be the day of Judgment. Therefore there must be a Visible, and personal
presence, and reign of Christ upon this New Earth, then to be called Beulah,
and Christ will not marry it, and be presently, after a day, divorced again;
but as the Saints shall dwell in it, so Christ with them. If any shall Object,
that the Judgment shall not be till after the one thousand years, and the
destruction of Gog and Magog, for then it is said Rev. 20.11. Christ shall sit
upon a great White Throne, and the dead, small and great shall stand before
him, and why may not this be the day of Judgment spoken of by Peter? For answer
to this, I shall say, that if this of Peter, and the 20. Rev. be well
considered, and compared together, it will evidently appear that there will be
a day of Judgment begun, at the time of Antichrist's destruction, and the final
fall of Babylon, and the perishing of the World which now is, which is called
by some, the Morning of that great day, and will be at the beginning of the one
thousand years; And a day also after the end of them, called the Evening of
that day.

And as for the Judgment, the Scipture gives evident ground to state it thus:
even by considering it in a threefold step, or degree of it:

1. There is a particular judgment which passes upon all Souls, at their
separation from their Bodies: Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the
Earth, as it was: and the Soul shall return unto God that gave it. The Souls of
all men do at their Death return to God, but in a different manner; some fall
into the hands of the living God, and that is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of revenging justice, and wrath; others having before committed their
Souls into the hands of God, are carried by Angels to Heaven, where an hand of
mercy receives them.

2. There will be a Farther work of Judgment at Christ's second coming, even at
the beginning of the thousand years; which as it is spoken of by Peter, so by
Daniel. 7.26. When the Son of Man comes in the Clouds of Heaven, then the
Judgment shall sit and we may consider what shall be done by that Judgment then
sitting, in relation to the Wicked. The Dominion of the little Horn will be
taken away, and so Antichrist's Kingdom will be wholly destroyed; for the
Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his Dominion, to consume, and to
destroy it even to the end. And then also it will be as Peter says, a day of
Perdition of ungodly Men, even of those who shall then be found standing up
against the Prince of Princes. And Farther in relation to the godly, it shall
be a day to give reward to them, and what reward this shall be, we see, Dan.
7.27. The greatness of the Kingdoms under the whole Heaven shall be given to
the People of the Saints, of the most High, and all Dominions shall serve him;
they shall be judged to reign with Christ. This we see also Mat. 25.15. and
Luke 19.17. What shall be said to those that improve their Talents and Pounds?
Well done good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few things,
I will make thee Ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord;
so as to reign with him. Be thou Ruler over five Cities, be thou Ruler over ten
Cities. At this time the Saints shall be judged to have an Inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ, as it is distinct from the Kingdom of the Father; of both
which mention is made, Ephesians. 5.5.

3. The last step which Christ will take in the Judgment will be after the
ending of the thousand years, and this is that Judgment mentioned Rev. 20.11.
Then the wicked shall be raised, and brought to Judgment, even such whose Names
are not written in the Book of Life, as there it is said, and shall be cast into
the Lake of Fire. At this time also there will be a Farther work of Judgment in
Relation to the Godly. For they shall be then judged to an inheritance in the
Kingdom of the Father. At the Judgment mentioned by Peter they shall have
Judgment for an inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ; and at that spoken of
Rev. 20. Judgment for an inheritance in the Kingdom of the Father. Mat. 25.31.
When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, (...), when he shall have come]
and so after the time of his coming in Glory, he shall sit upon the Throne of
his Glory, and all Nations shall be called before him, and he shall set the
sheep on his Right hand, and the Goats at his Left hand, and now although it
has been Stated thus, that at the beginning of the Thousand years, he shall
set the Sheep on his Right hand, and after the End of them the Goats at his
Left hand, yet it seems more agreeable to the expressions there, to conceive
that both sorts shall be set in this posture together, and shall thus stand
before Christ the Judge, and then the wicked shall be judged to go away into
everlasting punishment, and the righteous into Life eternal in the Fathers
Kingdom. And thus as at Peter's day of Judgment, Being the Morning of it; the
Saints shall be the blessed of Christ, and receive an Inheritance in his
Kingdom, and reign with him; so at John's day of Judgment, or at the Evening of
that day; they shall be the blessed of the Father, and be admitted to the
enjoyment of their Inheritance in his Kingdom. Hence it is, the King shall say
to the Sheep on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom; that is, take your Inheritance in my Fathers Kingdom.

2. It Is most evident from Scripture, that there will be a time in which the
Jews shall be called, and delivered from their spiritual Captivity, which is
upon them, by their blindness and unbelief; and the vail which is upon their
Hearts shall be taken away, They shall be delivered from their outward
Captivity and also be in a state of freedom, Rest and Power; and in this estate
must long continue, even for many generations, as has been shown in the
former Treatise. Now that there shall be a personal coming of Christ, when the
Jews shall be thus redeemed from their Captivity, is most evident Luke 21.23,
24. etc. There shall be great distress upon the land, and wrath upon this
people, and they shall be led away Captive into all Nations, and Jerusalem
shall be Trodden down of the Gentiles, till the times of the Gentiles be
fulfilled. The Gentiles Captivating the Jews, and treading them down, were the
Romans; these Gentiles have their time set, how long they shall Reign. The
Roman Monarchy which did Tread down Jerusalem, in the Letter, and does now
Tread down the Mystical Jerusalem; that is the Church, as we Read Rev. 11.2.
has a period set to it: thus far shall it come, and no farther; thus long it
shall continue, and no longer, that is, at the end of forty and two Months,
reckoning them from the beginning of the latter treading down, mentioned Rev.
11. Rome, the seat of this Monarchy shall be destroyed. And then will the Jews
deliverance from their long Captivity begin: Now what shall happen when these
times of the Gentiles shall be very near their end? This we see v. 25. there
shall be Signs in the Sun. In the Moon and in the Stars, and upon the Earth
distress of Nations, Men's Hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after
those things that are coming upon the Earth; for the powers of the Heavens
shall be shaken, and these show the day of their redemption to be drawing nigh.
v. 28. Now when these times of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled, and there shall
be such a shaking to remove quite away the power of the Gentiles; that is, to
destroy for ever the Roman Antichristian Kingdom, and State; then, at that time
v. 27. they shall see the Son of Man coming with power, and great Glory, which
is his Second personal coming. If any deny this, they will gratify those
Scoffers much, which Peter spakes of, in giving up so clear a proof of Christ's
Second coming.

3. A Third Argument may be taken from Mat. 24.29. Which has been a little
touched, but now shall be farther urged. Immediately after the Tribulation of
those days, that is, when Tribulation comes to this height, to be such as never
was etc. the Sun shall be darkened etc. and then shall appear the sign of the
Son of Man in Heaven, and the Tribes of the Earth shall Mourn, and they shall
see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven with power and great Glory.
This shall be Immediately after the Tribulation of those days, what Tribulation?
this is the last Tribulation of the People of God, which is said to be such
trouble as never was since there was a Nation. This is from the Devil, when he
shall have great wrath because his time is short, it is the Tribulation that Gog
and Magog, mentioned Ezekiel. 39. shall cause, the same with those Kings of the
Earth, and the whole World, which shall be gathered by the Beast and his
Emissaries, to the Battle of that great day of God Almighty; This being the
last Tribulation; when this shall End, then will the year of Christ's, redeemed
come; and the Saints will have rest and peace, and shall sit under their Vines
and fig trees, and have none to make them afraid, Now if there shall be such a
time here upon Earth, that all the Saints troubles shall have an End; and they
shall enter into a state of rest and peace, which shall have no End, (which if
any will deny, they must Write Apocrypha, over a great part of that Scripture,
which was given by Inspiration of God) I say if such a time shall be, then
Christ will appear, personally at that time: for immediately after this
Tribulation, shall appear the Sign of the Son of Man, and they shall see the
Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven, and this his personal coming, for at
this time the dead Saints shall be raised v, 21. He shall send his Angels with
a great Sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather the elect etc. that is, the
dead shall be raised. 1. Cor. 51.52. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. The Trumpet shall sound,
and the dead shall be raised: and Observe by the way, that at this time, only
the elect shall be raised for they shall gather the elect, and besides it is
that coming of which Christ said, none knows the day of it. v. 36. which
certainly is his second personal coming. If the Church therefore shall have a
glorious time on Earth, Christ shall come personally, even at the beginning of
that time.

To this argument it has been answered; that this is the Tribulation, which
Gog and Magog shall cause after the thousand years shall be Ended. But that
this is not the Tribulation here meant, these particulars sufficiently declare:

1. At the time of this Tribulation, there will be a great Apostasy of Men
professing godliness. For the love of many shall wax cold. v. 12. and false
Christ's, and false Prophets shall arise, and deceive many. v. 24. and the Stars
shall fall from Heaven etc. Now no such thing shall happen after the thousand
years, for the Devil shall only deceive the Nations, Gog and Magog, not any
among the Saints, and saved Nations, much less any in the beloved City. Shall
the Sun in the New Heavens be darkened? shall any of the Stars of that Heaven
fall? no certainly; for, Isa. 60.20. Thy Sun shall no more go down, and as the
New Heavens, so the Stars of those New Heavens shall remain.

2. At the Tribulation here spoken of, the powers of Heaven will be shaken,
which is not to be said of the New Heavens, for these cannot be shaken Heb.
12.26. yet once more I shake Heaven, and but once. This shaking will be of the
Antichristian Kingdom, and Heaven, to remove it quite away, that so way may be
made for the New Heavens. Gog and Magog when they shall gather at last, shall
not at all shake the New Heavens. For the shaking is to remove the things that
may be shaken. But the New Heavens shall not be removed, but remain Isa. 60.22.
Yea, the Apostle says plainly, these cannot be shaken Heb. 12.27. That those
things which cannot be shaken may remain, wherefore we receiving a Kingdom
which cannot be shaken etc. The Mount Sinai Kingdom was shaken and removed,
that the Mount Sion Kingdom might be set up, which is not to be shaken, but
stands fast for ever, this is the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ under the Gospel,
which shall continue till the coming of Christ, and then grow up to its
perfection, and then all the Enemies of it shall fall before it, and be the
Footstool of Christ, and he shall be King over all the Earth, and this his
Kingdom is not to be shaken, and removed. It Is most evident then, that this
Tribulation will immediately precede the Thousand years; and then Christ will
come the second time to salvation; and put an End to it, And thus the Argument
here stands, like that Pillar in the Porch of Solomon's Temple called Boaz, in
its strength; and is not at all shaken by what is said against it.

4. Another argument may be taken from 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Then shall that wicked one
be revealed (...), that Lawless one, that will be above all Laws, and not
Subject to any: The Cannon-Law tells us, who this Law-less one is, even the
Pope, who is Solutus ab omni Lege humana, not bound by any Humane Law, nay not
by Divine Laws neither; for he dispenses with those, and binds and looses them
at his pleasure, now this Lawless one must be removed out of the way. It may be
well said of him what the Jews wickedly said of Paul, away with such a fellow
from the Earth; for it is not fit that such a Lawless one should live. God
judges so of him, and therefore has said: The Lord shall consume him with the
Spirit of his Mouth, that is, by the Preaching of the Gospel. The Word shall
consume him, and cast him into a bed of Languishing, and at last he shall
destroy him with the brightness of his coming; that is, at the day of Judgment,
as our English Annotators say well, when Christ shall appear personally: so
that Antichrist will be destroyed by the brightness of Christ's Personal
appearing. Is it so? and must not the Church have Being in the World long after
the destruction of that Wicked One, and be in that glorious, pure, and
peaceable Estate, of which the Lord has spoken so much by the Mouth of all his
Prophets, since the World began? Most evident it is, that it must. And shall
not Christ then Reign upon Earth at that time? The Scripture says so, The Lord
shall be King over all the Earth.

5. The last Argument which I shall now mention, shall be taken from 2 Thessalonians.
1.5. where the Apostle speaking of the Saint's Persecutions and Sufferings,
comforts them with this; It is a righteous thing with God to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you who are troubled, rest with
us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, and with
his mighty Angels. Now this must be meant of his Personal coming, in that his
mighty Angels shall come with him; which argues a Personal coming, as we see,
Matthew. 25.31. The Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all the Angels with
him. And when he shall thus come, then, and not before, shall the Church on
Earth so long persecuted, afflicted, and tossed with Tempests, and not comforted,
have rest and freedom from persecution. The Church must have a peaceable and
glorious Estate upon Earth, but this will not be, till the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, and that in flaming fire, to
recompense tribulation to those that trouble the Saints, and to the troubled
Saints rest: So this shall be at the revelation and appearing of Christ. And
observe farther, what the Apostle says, Rest with us, with us Apostles, and
with the Prophets that went before. What does this hint, but that then the
Apostles and Prophets, and all the dead Saints shall be raised, and come with
Christ, and then the living Saints, the Church, so long under persecution and
trouble in the World, shall have rest with them. And thus I have endeavored by
Scripture to clear this Truth; and little from Scripture it is, which I have
urged against it: but Reason steps in and declares its dissent from, and
dislike of it, fancying some great Absurdities that will attend this Opinion,
and some Difficulties which will press it. Shall Heaven come down and be upon
Earth, says Reason? But as the Apostle says, Who art thou, O man! that
reply against God? So, who art thou, O man! what is thy Reason, that it
should argue against God? Does not the Scripture say, That Christ shall come
from Heaven, and all the Angels with him; and the dead Saints shall be raised
and come with him? If this be for Heaven to come down, and be upon Earth; then
so it must be, for thus much is agreed upon on all hands: All the difference is
about the Time of Christ's Abode, how long he shall continue; some say, but a
day, and that in that short time he shall dispatch all the Work of the last
Judgment. Others do conceive this will take up longer time and it may be well
agreed; If Christ, and all the Angels and Saints, may leave Heaven, and be here
on Earth one Day; why not as well many Days? and if Days, why not Years? and if
Years, why not a thousand Years, as the Scripture says? Certainly Reason has
as much ground to argue against his c^ming at all, as against a longer stay
upon Earth, than one Day, when he shall come. Nay, Reason may argue strongly
from what has been done; that Christ may come, and appear to his People on
Earth: For the second Person, the Son of God, came to Abraham and appeared in a
humane shape, and talked with him, and told him, he should have a Son: And may
we not as well conceive, he may as well appear to the Seed of Abraham, when
they shall be called? He went also to Sodom, and led Lot out thence, and
destroyed Sodom by Fire and Brimstone: And may he not as well come Personally
to save his many Lots, and destroy his Enemies, as he shall at Armageddon? And
consider we farther, that the first coming of Christ was foretold in the Old
Testament, Isa 7.14. A Virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a Son, whose Name
shall be Immanuel: And he was to be a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
grief, and to be cut off. Now if these things should be weighed in the Balance
of Reason, what would it have said, but as Reason did in Mary? How can these
things be? and yet we know that all came to pass. Now this may be well
concluded, that Reason might have more color to have pleaded against the
Prophecies of Christ's first coming, and suffering death; than it can have now,
to plead against his Personal Reign upon Earth: But He came and suffered death;
and Reason may now argue, If he came to be Humbled on Earth, why may he not
come to be Exalted on Earth? If he came to appear in the form of a Servant upon
Earth; why may he not come and appear in the form of a Lord, and of the King of
Kings? And if he was some years upon Earth in his state of Humiliation; why may
he not be for more years here in a state of Exaltation? If he did come to
suffer upon Earth; why may he not come to reign upon Earth? And it is to be
observed, when Christ spoke of his Death, Peter 's Reason withstood it; for
Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord,
this shall not be unto thee. Now I would not suffer my Reason to argue against
his personal coming and reigning, which the Scripture gives such great ground
to believe, lest it should be said as to Peter, get thee behind me Satan. In a
word, it is to be observed that the arguing from conceived absurdities against
any truth, was the great way of the Sadduces in opposing the Doctrine of the
Resurrection. They tell a story of a Woman that had seven Husbands
successively; and ask whose wife she should be of the seven, in the
Resurrection? Questions like to this have been asked, and more may, by such as
are in this matter not knowing, not searching the Scriptures; for if the
Scriptures were well searched, enough would be found, to put to silence the
ignorance in this thing, of many, in other respects, wise Men. Thus much of the
Government which will be Theocratical, even a glorious reign of Christ.

3. There will be a Change in the Ecclesiastical State: Now seeing much has
been written before to set forth the great and happy Change, which will be made
in the Church, (which the business of unfolding the Mystery of Ezekiels Temple
did lead to) therefore I shall add but a little upon these three following
Heads: The glorious Light, the great Purity, and the glorious Liberty which the
Church shall have in the times of Restitution.

1. The time of the New Heavens will be a time of breaking forth of great, and
glorious Light. For the Light of the Moon shall be as the Light of the Sun, and
the Light of the Sun, sevenfold, as the Light of seven days. Isa. 30.26. And
this Light will be a discovering Light, and a healing Light. First a
discovering Light; Light makes manifest. Good, and evil, truth and error will
be made manifest by the Light of the New Heavens. The Gold, and Silver
wherewith some have been Building, the Wood Hay and Stubble wherewith others
have been building, will be seen in that Light. Pilate asked, What is Truth?
Then a full answer shall be given to this question, and it shall be known, What
is Truth; and we may in particular observe that those two great Gospel Truths
will have then a clear manifestation, and discovery; Christ as Righteousness,
and Christ as Lord: Christ as made Righteousness, for the justification of Men,
to cover their sin, and to keep the shame of their Nakedness from appearing;
and Christ as made Lord: Lord of Faith, and Lord of Life: Lord of Soul and
Spirit, of Conscience and the whole Inner-man; and Lord of Body also, and of
the whole Outward-man. Now I ground this upon that Promise Jer. 23.5, 6. and
Jer. 33.14, 15. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto
David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign, and prosper, and execute
Judgment, and justice in the Earth; and in his days, Judah shall be saved, and
Jerusalem shall dwell safely, and this is the Name, whereby he shall be called,
The Lord our righteousness. Christ shall then appear as the Churches Lord, and
righteousness, yea shall account it his glory to appear, for so he shall own
this for a Name and Title. In the other place there is the same promise, only
with this variation: This is the Name whereby he shall be called, the Lord our
righteousness. As Christ shall own this for a Name, so shall the Church too.
In the former Name, we see how Christ is offered, even to be Lord, and
Righteousness; In the latter, how the Church receives him, that is, to be her
Righteousness, and to be her Lord.

In the former we see, God in Christ not imputing sin, but imputing
righteousness without works. In the latter we see faith in Christ justifying
through laying hold on, and applying Christ's righteousness, as that alone by
which the Church shall account her self righteous; but together herewith,
submitting to be guided, and Governed by Christ as Lord; so we find These two
great truths in these Names: The righteousness which justifies, is not our own
at all, but only Christ's, and this, and this alone, is sufficient to justify,
no other is nedeed; no other is required. For observe, It Is not the Law our
righteousness, it is not love to Christ, and evangelical Obedience flowing from
it, which is our righteousness, but the Lord himself, our righteousness; not
any thing we do as Servants, but what the Lord of the Law, becoming a Servant
to it, has done. By this it is evident, the gross Popish Doctrine of the Merit
of men's works, and justification thereby, will not be the Doctrine taught or
received in the New Heavens. New Jerusalem-Light will show the Vanity of this
Doctrine. And as for that more refined and Spiritualized piece of Popery, (and
therefore the more dangerous) which is but of Yester-day, up amongst us; and is
owned by such, who have the persons and parts of the propagators of it in
admiration, and therefore are so ready to own their pernicious Paradoxes, viz.
that Evangelical obedience is to be taken in, as that Righteousness by which we
are to be justified (for so they understand James, when he says, a Man is
justified by works, although James himself gives ground enough for another
sense when he says show me thy faith by thy works) I say this Popery, nay this
Socinianisme will be quite shut out of the New Heavens also, and shall pass
away, as a Morning Cloud before the New Jerusalem-Light. For this shall be the
Churches Name then, as well as Christ's, The Lord our Righteousness. And this
New Doctrine then, will be found amongst the Old things which must pass away,
And amongst the works of the Earth which are to be burnt up.

And then also Christ shall appear as Lord; and Saints shall say, other Lords
have had Dominion over us, but now will we make mention of thy Name. Isa.
26.13. and will henceforth call thee by this Name, The Lord our righteousness,
and will account this our glory to be called by this Name, The Lord our
Righteousness. This Name implies thus much, as given to Christ; He that has
made Christ Righteousness, has made him also Lord; and in that the Churches of
the New Heavens shall be called by this Name, it shows, that all of that Church
shall take Christ as for Righteousness, so also for a Lord. Christ shall be
called by this Name, and therein God joins these two together, Christ as
Righteousness, and Christ as Lord. And what God joins together his People will
not put asunder, for they shall be owned and called by this Name, The Lord our
Righteousness, taking Christ for Lord as well as for Righteousness. Thus the
Light of that glorious day which is to come will be a day discovering Light.

2. 'Twill be a healing Light, and that in Saints, and among Saints. First in
the Saints; that is, in their hearts, and Consciences. All Wounds made there
will be healed, all horrors, all disquieting thoughts, and fears there, will
Vanish before that Light, which shall shine into the heart. For as it is
foretold Mal. 4.2. The Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing in his
Wings. The full and complete accomplishment of this Promise, will be at
Christ's Second coming, as is evident from what follows: Ye shall go forth,
that is, from your bondage, and Tread down, that they shall be ashes under the
Souls of your feet; which was not done at his first coming. Now observe, this
Sun of Righteousness, shall arise with healing in his Wings, what are the Wings
of this Sun? the Beams of this Sun are its Wings; which coming, into the Heart
shall heal it, of all its Wounds, which the killing Letter shall make, which
the Conviction of Sin, especially against Christ, in Piercing, persecuting,
slighting Christ; shall have made. So we find concerning the Jews, when Christ
shall first appear, they shall remember their piercing of Christ, which will
then pierce through their own Souls, and shall cause them to mourn and be in
bitterness as for a firstborn, Zach. 12.10. and Rev. 1.7. The first effect of
Christ's appearing, will be a great mourning and wailing; but quickly after
this comes healing; for the Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in
his wings; and will restore health, and heal all these Mourners of their
Wounds. I shall mention two places of Scripture for the clearing of this; one
is, Jer. 31.18, etc. I heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, thou have chastised me,
and I was chastised, turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord
my God. This is a Prophecy of the calling of the Ten Tribes; none can say that
the fulfilling of this Prophecy is past already, for no such thing has been
yet done amongst the Ten Tribes: Now when Ephraim shall thus bemoan himself,
what shall the Lord say? That we see verse 20. Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a
pleasant child? since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him, still
my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him. And thus the
Lord will quickly comfort Ephraim, and give the Oil of Joy for Mourning. The
other place is Isa. 33.24. When Jerusalem shall be a quiet habitation, a
tabernacle that shall not be taken down: When the Jews shall say, The Lord is
our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King; as verse 20.22.
Then at that time, no inhabitant of Jerusalem, no man walking in the light of
it, shall say, I am sick, for the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven
their iniquities. Sin shall be forgiven, and every Saint shall know it, and
have assurance of it; as is evident from that Promise, None shall say, I am
sick: Surely if there be knowledge of Sin, and no assurance of Pardon, the Soul
will be sick with Sin, guilt remaining in the Conscience will trouble it so
long as it is there; but no Inhabitant shall say, I am sick, therefore all shall
have assurance of the forgiveness of their sins; and this assurance shall
continue with them. Secondly, 'Twill be a healing light amongst the Saints;
many Rents have been made in the Church; Saints by their divisions have made
wounds amongst themselves; through divisions there have been great thoughts of
heart, great heart-burnings; and thence have they come to that Paul complains
of amongst the Galatians, Chap. 5.15. even to biting, and devouring one
another: Now the Light of that Great Day of the Lord will heal all Wounds which
have been made amongst the Saints, by Rents and Divisions; for Christ will
spread his wings, even the beams of his light, which shall then most gloriously
shine forth; and he shall gather all the Saints under his wings, as a hen
gathers her chickens under her wings; and so will restore health to them, and
heal them of their wounds. This we have set forth, Zeph. 3.8, 9. Wait ye upon
me, says the Lord, till the day that I rise up to the prey; for my
determination is to gather the Nations, that I may assemble the Kingdoms, to
pour upon them mine Indignation, even all my fierce anger, for all the Earth
shall be devoured with the fire of my jealously. We may observe what an
admirable harmony of Prophecies there is: This is the same in substance with
that Prophecy of Gog and Magog in Ezekiel. and also with that great gathering of
the Nations to the Battle of Armageddon. Now consider what great mercy God will
at that time bring forth to his People; Then will I turn to the people a pure
language, that they may call upon the Lord to serve him with one consent: There
shall be one Lip, and Language, and that a pure one, and so there shall not be
divisions amongst the Saints, but they shall all speak the same things, and be
perfectly United together; of the same mind, and the same Judgment.

2. The time of the New Heavens will be a time of great purity; this we see
foretold, Ezekiel. 36.25, etc. Great Promises are made to the Jews to be fulfilled
in the latter days; and amongst other things it is promised, that they shall be
made a very pure and holy People. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you,
and ye shall be clean, and from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols
will I cleanse you: a new heart also will I give you, a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will cause you to walk in my Statutes. God promises that this
shall go with their outward Mercies, verse 33. What time I shall cleanse you
from all your iniquities, I will cause you to dwell in the Cities, and the
desolate places shall be built up. Psa. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in
the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness. What is meant by the
Beauties of Holiness? the Church is meant hereby: this is an ordinary
Periphrasis of the Church say our Annotators, the Sanctuary was so called, Psa.
29.2. Worship the Lord in the beauties of holiness; that is, in the Sanctuary:
the true Church is always holy, but then it shall be much more eminently holy;
it shall be even the Beauties of Holiness; that is, very beautiful and glorious
in holiness; yea it shall be the beauties of holiness, having variety of
Graces, even all meeting together, and appearing in their beauty without spot
or wrinkle, or any such thing. As the Sanctuary was called the beauty of
holiness, even the typical Sanctuary; so then tho true spiritual Sanctuary
shall be called the beauty of holiness, and be as perfect and exact in true
holiness, as the worldly Sanctuary was in ceremonial and typical holiness, Isa.
35.8. There shall be an highway, and it shall be called the way of holiness,
the unclean shall not pass over it: But it shall be for those, the
wayfaring-men, though Fools shall not err therein. There has been an highway
of Profaneness, an highway of Superstition, of Antichristian Idolatry, and
great multitudes have gone in this way, and the ways of Sion have been
desolate, very few have gone in these; but at last that highway of
Profaneness, Idolatry, etc. will become desolate, and the way of Holiness and
Godliness will be the great highway, and the wayfaring-men that go in this
way, shall have an unerring Spirit to guide them in it; for the wayfaring men,
though Fools shall not err therein, Isa. 54.11, 12. They shall be a holy flock,
Ezekiel. 36. ult. I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and thy foundations
with saphires; I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles,
and all thy borders of pleasant stones. What does this signify? but that there
shall be a Church at last exceeding pure, which shall be called the beauties of
holiness, Isa. 60.2. The Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be
seen upon thee. The Light of the Glory of the Lord shall shine to the Saints,
and shall shine from them, both for the glorious Works of God wrought for them,
and upon them; and in the Works wrought by the Saints, in which the Image and
Glory of God shall be seen upon them: Rev. 22.4. They shall see his face, and
his Name shall be in their foreheads: Their Professions, their Lives, their
Actings and Conversations, shall be a discovery of God: Upon the bells of the
horses shall be holiness to the Lord, much more upon the foreheads of his
people.

3. In the time of the New Heavens and New Earth, the Sons of God shall have
Glorious Liberty: And this brings me back again to Romans 8.21. The Creature
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the Sons of God: Now for this we may consider, that there is Gracious Liberty,
and Glorious Liberty; there is a Liberty wherewith Christ has made the Saints
free, as Gal. 5.1. and a Liberty wherewith he will make them free; as in this
place, which is also called the redemption of the body: There is a redemption
of the Soul from sin, and of the Body from sufferings: It has been for the
most part with the Saints, as Christ said to Peter, Another shall gird thee,
and carry thee whither thou would not; But in the time of Glorious Liberty it
shall not be so. Gracious Liberty is a Liberty from Evil, and a Liberty in
relation to that which is good; Liberty from Evil, is from the evil of sin, and
of punishment: Liberty from the Evil of Sin is, when a man is made free from
the Reigning power of sin, as in regard of the Outward committing, so from the
inward love of it: Romans 6.18. Being made free from sin, ye became servants of
righteousness. There is a Liberty also from the Evil of Punishment. Romans 8. 1
There is no condemnation to those, that are in Christ Jesus. There is now
correction to them, and therein God deals with them as with sons; but no
condemnation to them; they meet with crosses, but have escaped the curse; die
they must, but the sting of death is taken away. As they look not for life from
the Law, so they need not fear death by the Law. There is a liberty also in
relation to that which is good. Saints have liberty to go where they are sure
to receive that good which they want; they may go, and that boldly to the
Throne of grace, to obtain mercy and find grace to help in a time of need. They
can go to Christ, to receive of his fullness grace for grace Jam. 1.17. Every
good, and perfect gift is from above: some gifts are good but not perfect:
others are good, and perfect, and able to make those perfect who have them.
Creatures are a good gift, for every Creature of God is good; but Christ is a
good, and perfect gift. Knowledge is a good gift; but the Spirit of wisdom,
and grace, of love, and fear, of supplication and adoption is a perfect gift.
Earth is a good gift, Heaven is a good and perfect gift. Now, what a precious
liberty is this to have free access to him, who gives liberally good, and
perfect gifts to those that ask them, and upraideth not? There is a liberty
also to the doing of good; though there is not free will, and power in Nature
to do that good, which is acceptable to God, yet there is by grace, when any
are made free from sin thereby; those that are partakers of the Divine Nature,
and have, the seed of God in them, will be free, ready and willing to do good.
I will run the ways of thy Commandments when thou shall enlarge my Heart. Jam.
25. the Law is called the Law of liberty: to men in the flesh, it is a Law of
bondage; to men in the Spirit, it is a Law of liberty. The Law in the Head only,
may be but a Law of bondage, so the Law in the Lips; but the Law in the Heart,
which has the Law of the Spirit with it, is a Law of liberty. I go bound in
the Spirit said Paul. It Is gracious liberty to go bound in the Spirit, both to
the doing, and suffering the will of God; and to be constrained by the love of
Christ to live to him. Thus much of Gracious Liberty, for some introduction to
what is to be said of Glorious Liberty. And as for Glorious Liberty; that, the
spirits of just men have in Heaven, going to God the judge of all, to Jesus the
Mediator, to the General Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn. But the
glorious liberty mentioned by Paul, is that, which the Saints shall have in the
New Heavens, and the New Earth. For it is that which the Creatures long for, and
look to have some benefit by, and therefore is not meant of the State of Glory
in Heaven. Now, that some discovery may be made of this, let some few
particulars be observed.

1. To be free from War, and the evils, and mischief that attend it, is a
Glorious Liberty. And this shall be the Saints happiness at last, when all
things shall be made New. Isa. 40.1. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my people speak
comfortably to Jerusalem, tell her that her Warfare is accomplished. In the
times of restitution, after the destruction of the Man of Sin, and the calling
of the Jews, there shall be no learning of War any more: Isa. 2.4. but swords
shall be beaten into plow-shares, and spears into pruning hooks. Now there is
War, Nation against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom: And Saints are called
to sight the good fight of faith; But when the Beast and false Prophet shall be
taken, God will make all Wars to cease, to the ends of the earth.

2. Glorious Liberty will consist in being free from temptations; Adam was at
first free from sin, but not from temptations: There shall be at last a better
Paradise for the Saints, than that in which Adam was placed; in which there
shall be no Serpent to tempt; Satan is now following the Saints with his
temptations; and he has his Messengers to buffet them: but in the time of
Glorious Liberty, he shall be bound and cast into Prison, and never suffered to
tempt one Saint any more; for when he shall be loosed out of his Prison, he
shall deceive the Nations, Gog and Magog, but not the Saints in Paradise. When
the Sons of God in Job's time came before God, Satan came also among them; and
he was at Joshuah's right hand to resist him. What a Glorious Liberty will it
be for the Sons of God to present themselves before the Lord, and no Satan
among them? The Saints will be also free from the Worlds temptations; for
neither the persons, nor the things of the world shall allure them to evil; the
forbidden Fruit will not then be looked on as fair, and good to be desired:
nothing of the Old World shall come upon the heart; as the things of Egypt did
upon the hearts of the Israelites in the Wilderness, Isa. 65.17. And nothing in
the New Heavens and Earth shall prove a snare; Saints shall not be tempters to
Saints; no Eve shall tempt an Adam; no Peter will then turn Satan, that is, a
tempter: And none of the Unconverted shall then be tempters to the Converted;
the Sons of God shall not look upon the Daughters of men; neither shall the
Woman which now sits upon the Scarlet-colored Beast, having a Golden Cup in
her hand, full of abominations, be in that World, to tempt any to commit
Fornication with her; for Satan the great Tempter being bound, and the seducing
false Prophets being taken, and cast into the Lake of fire; that does intimate,
that all other Tempters and Seducers will be bound up from deceiving and
tempting any of the Saints of the New Heavens and New Earth. And lastly, Saints
will not be exercised with God's temptations of trial: Thus once God tempted
Abraham, and the Israelites in the Wilderness, to prove them, and to know what
was in their hearts, Deuteronomy. 8.2. Now Faith is many times put to the trial in
this way; but then Faith and other Graces, will be found to praise in a
constant and vigorous exercise of them, and thereby will it be seen what is in
the heart.

3. Glorious Liberty consists in a freedom from Persecution and Sufferings, for
the Gospels sake: Whilst the Man of Sin remains, and Satan is going to and fro
in the Earth, Saints must look to suffer: the Cross must be taken up, if men
will follow Christ; in this time, all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must
suffer persecution, but at last the Man of Sin will be destroyed; all the
Enemies of Christ shall be made his Footstool; then the troubles of the Saints
shall be recompensed with tribulation, and then the troubled Saints shall have
rest; none shall hurt or destroy in all the holy Mountain of God.

4. Saints will be free of that City, whose Name shall be, The Lord is there;
that City that has Foundations, whose Light shall be like a Stone most
precious, whilst abroad: they shall have the light of it to walk in; and they
shall have right to enter in through the Gates into the City; and to eat of the
Tree of Life there, and to drink of the Waters of Life. The Worshippers of the
Beast account it a great liberty to be free to buy and sell in the great City
Babylon, but all the joy they have, and delight they take herein, will end in
crying, alas! alas! for in one hour so great riches will come to naught. How
much better will it be with the Sons of God, when they shall have right to
enter into the great City, New Jerusalem, and to eat of the Tree of Life there,
and to live for ever? After Adam had sinned, the Way of the Tree of Life was
guarded, that he might not eat thereof, and live for ever: Whence it is
gathered, that the Tree of Life had a Virtue to have perpetuated Life, and to
preserve men from old Age, Diseases, and Death, if he had not sinned, and had
once come to eat of it. Now as Adam lost the right to eat of that Tree of Life,
which was Typical and Sacramental so a right to eat of the Tree, the Tree of
Life, is now given to the Saints, which by Faith they eat of; and it is promised
to those that do overcome, that they shall eat of the Tree of Life in the midst
of the Paradise of God; which is Christ, whom they shall behold in his Glory;
and so they shall live for ever, a holy, and a happy Life.

Thus in some few particulars, somewhat of that Glorious Liberty which the Sons
of God shall have in the time of the New Heavens, and New Earth, has been
shadowed out; when, how much soever they are despised now, yet they shall be
made a Praise in the Earth; yea, an Eternal Excellency, and the Joy of it. This
is the Glorious Liberty which the Creatures would be delivered into, they would
be subject to, and serve the Sons of God; and will readily yield up their
Glory, if that may contribute any thing to the happiness of the Sons of God:
Isa. 60.13. The Glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, etc. to beautify the
place of my Sanctuary, and to make the place of my feet glorious; thou shall
suck the milk of the Gentiles, and the breasts of Kings: For brass I will bring
gold, for iron I will bring silver, for wood brass, and for stones iron. I will
also make thine Officers peace, and thine Exactors righteousness. Now that the
Saints may, in a time, that they with the Creatures groan under a sore bondage,
rejoice the more in hope of this Glorious Liberty; let a few things be
considered:

1. Present Bondage is no way to be compared with future Liberty: The Bondage
whilst Antichrist reigns, is not so grievous, as the Liberty when Christ shall
reign, will be glorious: Bondage will not be for ever; it will end well; and
when Liberty comes, it will be so glorious, that Saints shall remember no more
their anguish, for the joy they shall have in Christ's taking to himself his
great power to reign. What was Joseph's anguish and trouble, to the joy which
after he had? What was David's great affliction in the Wilderness, to his great
glory which he had when advanced to the Throne?

2. Bondage and Affliction makes way for glorious Liberty; Joseph's great
Sufferings and Bondage did work for him a greater weight of glory: Psa. 105.17.
He sent a man before them, even Joseph who was sold for a servant. Joseph was
sold by his Brethren, but sent by God: his Brethren sold him for a Servant, but
God sent him to be a Lord: His Brethren sold him, to make void his Dreams; but
God sent him, that his Dreams might be made good: And being sold, his Feet were
in Irons, until the time that the Word came: Sometimes, after a Word and
Promise is given, it seems to go away; hence some asked, where is the Promise of
his coming? but though the word may seem to be quite gone, yet it will come. As
Christ is he that shall come, so the Word is that, which shall come. David said
in his haste All men are Liars. Samuel, and Nathan and Jonathan, and who-ever
had spoken of a Kingdom which he should have, even all Liars; but in the end
the word came. And next it is said, The word of the Lord tried him. The tarrying
Word is a trying word; It tries Faith, and Love and other Graces, which holding
out, and enduring the trial, are found unto praise. And the word having had its
work in trying him, Then the King sent, And loosed him, even the ruler of the
People, and let him go free. He made him Lord of his house, and ruler of all
his substance, to bind his Princes at his pleasure, and to teach his senators
wisdom.

3. The worse the bondage grows, the nearer the Sons of God, are to Glorious
Liberty. Isa. 9.1. At first he lightly Afflicted the land of Zebulon and
Napthali afterward more grievously; such is the Lords dealing with his People,
first, more lightly, it is, that he afflicts them, at last more grievously. The
Churches last trouble is thus set forth in Scripture, such trouble as never was
since there was a Nation. Now, that the hope of this Glorious Liberty may be
the more confirmed,

1. Have an Eye to the All Sufficiency of God. When God made Promises to
Abraham that he should have a Son, and that his Seed should be multiplied, and
that Kings should come out of him; these things being hard to be believed, God
sets himself forth in his All Sufficiency, Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God,
and therefore able to make good my Promises. Isa. 49.23. They shall bring thy
Sons in their arms: Kings shall be thy Nursing-fathers, and Queens thy
Nursing-mothers: they shall bow Down to thee with their faces to the Earth, and
lick up the dust of thy Feet. But v. 24. a doubt is raised, shall the Prey be
taken from the mighty, or the Lawful Captive delivered; rather, as in the
Magin, shall the Captivity of the just be delivered? Is this any way likely?
But, thus says the Lord, even the Captives of the mighty shall be taken away,
and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered; for I will contend with him
that Contendeth with thee, and will save thy Children: and I will feed them
that oppress thee, with their own flesh, and they shall be drunken with their
own blood, as with sweet wine, and all flesh shall know that I am thy Savior,
and thy redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob. Though Satan be mighty, and
Antichrist be mighty, yet all flesh shall know that the Lord is more Mighty;
and therefore the prey shall be taken from the mighty, and the Lord will turn
the captivity of the just as the streams in the South.

2. Have an Eye to the Faithfulness of God, for he is faithful who has
Promised. God has spoken by the mouth of all his Prophets of these thing Acts.
3.21. And is not this enough to stop all contradicting Mouths, who ask, where
is the promise of these things? The Scripture is most copious, and abundant in
foretelling, and declaring these things. Paul in all his Epistles has spoken
of these things; and all the Prophets have spoken of them. So then, great
ground there is for Faith in this, that glorious liberty shall come And it is
observable that these Promises are not barely propounded and held forth, but
they have a Sealing, and confirming Word added to them, As Rev. 19. After the
prophecy of the Lambs Marriage it is farther said, These are the true sayings of
God, and John was commanded to write; that is, for the Generations to come,
Rev. 21.5. He that sat upon the Throne said; Behold, I make all things New and
he said unto me, Write. Does God give a Command that this be written for our
learning, and shall not we read? and then it is again added; These words are
true, and faithful. Rev. 22.6. The Angel said to John after some promises
given, These sayings are faithful, and true, and the Lord God sent his Angel to
show to his Servants the things which must shortly be done. Should not then all
the Servants of God endeavor to know, and wait for these things, v. 16. I
Jesus have sent mine Angels to testify these things in the Churches.

Is it not then the duty of Churches, and all believers in them, to know these
things, and to set their Seals to them that they are true? and should not these
things be taught among the Churches? thus Daniel having foretold the
destruction of the four Monarchies in his interpretation of Nebuchadnezzars
dream, concludes all thus: The dream is certain, and the intepretation thereof
sure.

3. The Sons of God, even because they are Sons, shall have this Glorious
Liberty, Exodus 4.23. Let my Sons go that they may serve me. Isa. 43.6. I will
say to the North, give up, to the South keep not back; bring my Sons from far,
and my Daughters from the Ends of the Earth. Jer. 31.20. Is Ephraim my dear
Son? I earnestly remember him still, I will surely have mercy on him. Now by
this which has been thus briefly Laid down concerning the New Heavens, and
New Earth, somewhat of the glory of them does appear, which is well worth the
waiting for; and the glory being so great, so desirable, there is reason
sufficient that we should be ready to do, and contented to suffer, what the
Will of the Lord is, in order to our sharing in the happiness, and glory of
that blessed time and state. A right to enter into that City, is incomparably
better than all the riches, and glory of this world, which is to perish. And
when we hear these glad-tidings of great joy to come, why should it not be with
us according to that of Solomon? Prove. 25.25. As cold waters to a thirsty Soul,
so is good News from a far Country. As cold waters to a thirsty Soul, so
should the good News be of this better Country, and World to come. This may be
a Well for the Sons of God to refresh themselves at, when they are going
through the valley of Baca. But let two things be considered, that none may be
ashamed of their Hope of these things.

1. Gracious Liberty is the way to Glorious Liberty: Liberty from bondage to
the flesh, to our own Wills, and lusts, to Satan, and the World, and the having
of a heart enlarged toward God, and his Commands, is absolutely necessary to
this, that we may have a Lot in these things. Except a Man be born again, he
shall not see the Kingdom of God; As not the Kingdom of God in Heaven, so not
that which shall be when Christ comes from Heaven.

2. We must be ready to take up a Cross, and to choose sufferings for the sake
of Gracious Liberty to serve God: so are we in the way to Glorious Liberty.
This was Moses his choice for himself, and the Israelites, Exodus 8.27. We will
go into the Wilderness to sacrifice to the Lord our God, as he has commanded
us. They went into the Wilderness to have Gracious Liberty to serve God, and
God led them through the Wilderness into Canaan, where they had, as gracious so
Glorious Liberty. In like manner, the Woman, the Church of Christ, and his
faithful Witnesses, go into the Wilderness for Gracious Liberty, and prefer
that, before buying, and selling in the great City Babylon; and these must come
up out of the Wilderness, leaning on their Beloved, and stand with the Lamb
upon Mount Sion, and at last they shall have Glorious Liberty in the great and
Holy City Jerusalem.

And thus having handled Peter's Doctrine of the New Heaven, and the New Earth;
let the Use which he makes of it be in the next place considered by us, and put
in practice: this we have 2 Pet. 3.14. Wherefore, seeing ye look for such
things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot and
blameless.

Here are two things to be observed:

1. Saints in the Primitive times did, and Saints now ought to look for the New
Heavens, and the New Earth.

2. Those that look for these things, should with all diligence look to this,
that their present state and carriage in this World, be suitable to the hopes
of such glorious things in the World to come. For the first, we shall do well
to consider, that the Doctrine of the New Heavens and New Earth, was
Apostolical Doctrine; and the looking for them was an Apostolical practice. In
the Primitive times this Doctrine was more taught, and better known, than now
it is; Saints at so much a greater distance from these things, did more
generally expect them, than now they do, when they are so much nearer: And we
have not only an Apostolical example and practice for it, but if we look
higher, even to Heaven, we shall find a Pattern there, which calls for our
imitation; for, as we should do the will of God as it is done in Heaven, so we
should expect the accomplishment of the Will and Word of God, as it is expected
in Heaven. Let Us consider then what example Heaven does afford us; now this is
the example of Christ himself; Heb. 10.12, 13. This man after he had offered
one Sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down at the right hand of God, from
henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool. When Christ was
upon Earth, he expected Glory in Heaven, which he has; and being in Heaven, he
expects Glory on Earth, which he shall have: He looks to have all his Enemies
made his Footstool, and to be King over all the Earth, and to have the Saints
reign with him. Christ knows, that thus it shall be, and the thoughts of it are
pleasing to him: Isa. 63.4. The day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year
of my redeemed shall come: Christ knows that day, and has it in his heart;
it is a day of joy and gladness in his heart. And thus as the Creatures have an
earnest expectation of that day, so has Christ himself; and he has been
expecting it ever since he went to Heaven: for it is said, From henceforth
expecting; that is, from the first time of his sitting down: He is upon the
Father's Throne in Heaven, and expected to be upon his own Throne in the New
Jerusalem, which shall come down out of Heaven: And Christ will expect till it
be done; For as it is from henceforth, even ever since he went to Heaven; so,
till his Enemies be made his Footstool. Now, seeing Christ expects these
things, ought not we to expect with him?

2. The Angels do expect these things; for if Christ does, then we may conclude
the holy Angels do also, seeing they are to come with him; which they do well
know, for they understand Scripture-Prophecies, and the time also, which is
revealed in Scripture for the fulfilling of them; for an Angel made Daniel
understand a Prophecy, and the time of its accomplishment: Dan. 9.22. As there
are things which the Angels desire to look into; so also which they look for;
as the passing away of the World which now is, and the creating of the New
Heavens, and the New Earth.

3. Saints in Heaven do expect these things; Saints on Earth do long to see
these things of Heaven; and the Saints in Heaven do long to see the things of
the New Heavens, and the New Earth* For if it be not beneath Christ to expect
them, then it is not beneath glorified Saints to look for them. Now, that
glorified Saints do know and expect these things, we may conclude thus: We read
Luke 9.31. that Moses and Elias being with Christ on the Holy Mount, they spoke
of his Decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem: Now if his Decease was
known by them before its accomplishment; we may as well conceive that his
Victory over his Enemies, the New Heavens and the New Earth, and his Kingdom in
them, are made known unto them, and expected by them; and not only the Things,
but the Time also, when all shall be done: My ground is this, Both their Things
and the Times are revealed in Scripture; as we see by the several numbers of
years mentioned in Daniel, and the Revelations; Now what is revealed in
Scripture concerning Christ, the Saints in Heaven do know; as in particular the
things concerning the Kingdom of Christ, and the time of its coming; which I
conclude from 1 Cor. 13.12. Now I know in part, then shall I know as I am
known; That is, I shall know that perfectly then, which now I know in part.
This is an evident Truth; the Saints know that of Divine Mysteries perfectly in
Heaven, which here from the Scriptures they know in part; and so we may suppose
that they know when the 1260 Days began, and when they will end. Thus we see
how these things are expected in Heaven by Christ, by the Angels, by the
Saints; and it being so, these things follow hence:

1. The things which are to be done on Earth are very great things; the
subduing of all Christ's Enemies, will be a very Glorious Work, for Christ has
a great, earnest, and constant expectation of it; the New Heavens and the New
Earth will be very glorious, for they are the expectations of Heaven: Isa.
11.10. it is said, His rest shall be glorious; and when shall this be? verse 11.
When the Lord shall set his hand the second time to recover the remnant of his
People, etc. The first recovery was from Babylon; this second will be when the
Jews shall be called, and when the Outcasts of Israel, and the dispersed of
Judah shall be gathered from the four Corners of the Earth.

2. The expectations of Christ's Enemies on Earth, are but a vain thing; for
there are expectations in Heaven quite contrary to these; and which, think we,
shall be performed? surely the expectations of Heaven. Babylon expects to
continue in her Pomp and Power, and looks that Sion shall be her Footstool; but
Christ expects till Babylon be made his Footstool. I sit a Queen, says
Babylon; but what says the Lord to her, Come down and sit in the dust; there
shall be no more Throne. I am no Widow, says Babylon; but thou shall know
Widowhood, and loss of Children, says the Lord. I shall not see sorrow, says
Babylon; but what is the Word of the Lord concerning her? How much she has
glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment of sorrow give her,
Rev. 18.7.

3. If these things be so much expected in Heaven, how much more should they be
expected on Earth? If where there is no sin, nor sorrow, but perfect holiness
and happiness; then sure, the Saints here in this present evil World, have
great reason to be much in the thoughts and expectation of these things. As
therefore it is the duty of Saints to look for these things, so let me give a
few Directions for the right performance of this Duty.

1. Expect the same things which Christ expects; He expects till his Enemies be
made his Footstool; he expects the Fall of Babylon; he expects to be revealed
from Heaven, and to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in them that
believe: And these things should the Saints on Earth look for; even the blessed
hope, and glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.
Thus we are sure our expectations shall not perish, because they are Christ's
also: but the expectation of his Enemies shall perish, and their hope shall be
as the Spiders Web.

2. Expect because Christ expects; he knows what he expects, and has
sufficient ground for his hope, and has power to make good his own
expectations. Now when the Saints want some Stay and Support for their hope,
and their Hearts like Moses his Hands are heavy, they should look to Christ's
Hope, and this will be to their hearts as Aaron and Hur were to Moses his
hands, they stayed them up, and so they were steady, till the going down of the
Sun, and till Amalech and his People were discomsited by Joshua with the edge
of the Sword. 3 Expect as Christ expects. Hopes on Earth should bear the Image
of Heavenly Hopes; there is no fear, no taking thought in Heaven: Hope deferred
does not make any heart sick there; but there is joy of hope. As Christ expects
that his Enemies be made his Footstool, so he laughs at their Imaginations and
Contrivance against him, and has them all in derision. Such should the Saints
hope be here, and so they shall be able to say of Babylon the Man of Sin, and
all that give up their power to him; as Isaiah did of Sennacherib, when he
besieged Jerusalem: Isa. 32.22. The Virgin, the Daughter of Sion has despised
thee, and laughed thee to scorn; the Daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head
at thee. The Power and threats of the Romish Beast, with all that take part
with him, should not shake the hearts of the faithful Witnesses, but they
should shake their Heads at him, and laugh him to scorn. Surely there is little
cause to fear those who shall very shortly be Christ's Footstool.

Christ expects also with Constancy and Perseverance; there is perseverance in
the hope of Heaven; Christ expects till his Enemies be made his Footstool:
Christ's hope is like himself, The same yesterday, to day, and till all be
accomplished which he hopes for: Nothing on Earth weakens the hope of Heaven,
no changes, no scattering of the Power of the holy people; no Death of the
Witnesses make any the least alteration in the hope of Heaven. Now such should
the Saints hope be on Earth, even the same in all changes; they should hope
when the Beast kills the Witnesses, and those that dwell on the Earth rejoice
over their dead bodies, as well as when the Witnesses have power to shut
Heaven, and to smite the Earth with all Plagues as often as they will: they
should hope not only when a deadly Wound is given to the Beast, but when that
deadly Wound is healed; and when Babylon triumphs and glories most, then may
Sion hope the more, and rejoice most of all in her hope. For when Babylon
says, I sit a Queen, am no widow, and shall not see sorrow, then her plagues
shall come in one day, Rev. 18.8. That is, a very short time after this her
vain triumph: For, when having been under great Fears, and these passing away,
she says, The bitterness of death is past; and comes forth delicately like
Agag, then if the Saul's that should do it, will not, some Samuels will be found
that shall hew that great Whore in pieces.

And secondly, when her plagues come, quick dispatch will be made with her,
even in a day as it were; yea in one hour, so great riches, and glory will come
to naught.

Thus we see what the expectations of Heaven are, which do call for such hope
on Earth as that which Peter exhorts. 1. Pet. 1.3. Be sober, and hope to the
End. For the grace that is to be brought unto you at the Revelation of Jesus
Christ. And thus we see it is the Saints duty to look for these things, and how
they should do it.

Q. But here it may be asked as the Disciples did of Christ; When shall these
things be? Seeing we are to look for them, we would gladly know when we may
expect them, at least when the time is near.

A. For answer to this, it may be said, as Elijah did to Elisha, Thou have
asked a hard thing. It Is indeed a hard thing to tell when the time will be; yet
certain it is, that the time is revealed in Scripture, when the Jews shall be
called, when Babylon shall fall, and the two Beasts shall be destroyed: and why
is it revealed, but that first or last Men might come to the knowledge of it?
Daniel understood by Books the number of the years of the Jews Captivity in
Babylon: though it was but a very short time before the expiration, viz. in
that very year in which Babylon was taken Dan. 9.1. and why may we not hope, it
may be given to some beloved ones, to understand by books the number of the
years of the Churches desolations, some little time, at least, before the
accomplishment of them?

We may observe three numbers in Daniel and one in the Revelations, which
concern the times when these things shall be brought to pass. The first is Dan.
8.14. How long shall be the Vision of the daily Sacrifice: and it is answered,
unto Two thousand and three hundred days; that is, years: for so the rest of
the numbers are interpreted; and why should not these days be so taken also?
The other two are mentioned together Dan. 12.11, 12. From the time that the
daily Sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that makes desolate
set up, shall be One thousand two hundred and ninety days.

Blessed is he that comes to the thousand two hundred and five and thirty
days. The fourth number is Rev. 11.2, 3. Forty and two months, and a thousand
two hundred and sixty days, being the same time. Now, it is upon good ground
conceived, that the 2300 days, and 1335, will end together, and that the 1290
days, and the 1260 days will also end together. The grounds of this conception,
I shall after lay down in the distinct handling of these Numbers, and 'twill be
of great Use to clear this, because if we cannot find out the right Epoch of
every one of these numbers, yet if we can find the Epoch of one of them, by
that we shall know when all the rest will end. I shall take notice of these
numbers distinctly, but chiefly insist upon one of them ( viz.) the 1290 days,
and endeavor to find out the Epoch of it: for I think the great mistake
hitherto has been about its Epoch.

First, of the Number 2300 days Dan. 8.14. some would understand [ days] here
in a proper sense, and so take them as setting out the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes his Persecutions, but this is very improbable, for seeing that the
other numbers mentioned in Daniel are taken by general consent for so many
years, why should not these be so taken also? And besides; Antiochus his
Persecutions were but for six years, as Pererius has shown out of the First
Book of Macchabes. But 2300 days make six years, three Months, and twenty days.
This appears farther, by considering, who is meant by the little Horn, Dan.
8.9. who should tread down the Sanctuary and host till the 2300 days should be
finished. Now Antiochus Epiphanes was not this little Horn, seeing the
Characters do no way agree to him. For,

1. It Is a little Horn at his first Rise, and afterward waxes great. But it is
evident that Antiochus was great at first, being the Son of Antiochus Magnus,
who left him a great Kingdom.

2. This little Horn was to wax great to the South, and to the East, and to the
Pleasant Land; but Antiochus did not so: not to the East, for he was put to
flight, and expelled out of the East; by the Citizens of Elamis in Persia. Not
in the South; for he had a repulse in Egypt by the Captains of Ptolomeus, and
was forced thence by the threats of Popilius, the Roman Ambassador: and after
his Cruelties in Judea, his Armies were overthrown and put to flight by the
Jews, and their Captain Judas Macchabaeus,

3. The acts of this little Horn are extended to the time of the end, yea the
last time of Indignation. v. 17. At the time of the end shall be the Vision,
That is; its fulfilling. And I will make thee know what shall be in the last
end of the Indignation; the same end with that, Chap. 11.35.40. Chap.
12.4.9.13. by this it is evident, that Antiochus Epiphanes was not this little
Horn, and therefore the days are not meant of the time of his persecution.

Neither was the fourth Monarchy, when it first became so, this little Horn.
For the Roman Power was very great before the Grecian Monarchy was subdued by
it; so great, that it awed much Antiochus, as appears by what was said of
Popilius. Neither was the first Beast, or Antichrist in his first estate as
Pope, and as being in his Seat at Rome, this little Horn; for he never did wax
great to the East, and to the South, and to the pleasant Land, but only in the
West; therefore we must conclude, that the second Beast spoken of, Rev. 13.
shall be this little Horn which shall wax great to the East, and to the South,
and to the pleasant Land. It Is said v. 24. He shall destroy the mighty and holy
people, and also he shall stand up against the Prince of Princes: he shall not
only stand up against Christ in his Members; but also, which shows it to be
another distinct standing up, he shall stand up against the Prince of Princes;
that is, Christ in person, Rev. 19.16.

Obj. This little Horn must arise out of one of the four notable Horns of the
Grecian Monarchy; how then can we judge this little Horn to be the second
Beast, which rises up when the fourth Monarchy draws very near to its end?

A. The little Horn will come forth in the last time of the fourth Monarchy,
and be the Head of it: and as heretofore, so then, that which was under the
Grecian Monarchy, in part at least, will come under the fourth Monarchy again;
and this little Horn will then arise out of one of the four Horns; that is, out
of one of those Kingdoms or Countries, which before made one of the four; and
we have most reason to conceive, that in Graecia will be that Horn, because
it is said, that he shall wax great to the East, and to the South, and to the
pleasant Land.

Obj. But it is said, Dan. 8.23. In the latter end of their Kingdom, when the
Trespassers are come to the full, then shall the little Horn arise. Their
Kingdom, what is that but the Grecian?

A. To this I spoke somewhat formerly, that this is to be understood so, as
that it shall be fulfilled in the time of the fourth Kingdom; and it is called
their Kingdom, because theirs did run into the Fourth, and was in it. Now to
clear this more fully; consider first, That these Four Kingdoms in the first
representation of them are set forth as one body, appearing as a great Image of
a Man, the Head whereof was Gold, the Breast and Arms of Silver, the Belly and
Thighs of Brass, the Legs of Iron, and the Feet part of Iron, and part of Clay:
When the time of its destruction comes, the Stone breaks all, even the whole
Image in pieces: Dan. 2.35. Then was the Iron, the Clay, the Brass, the Silver
and the Gold broken to pieces together, and became like the Chaff of the Summer
Threshing-floors, and the Wind carried them away, that no place was found for
them: So then, the latter end of the Fourth, is the latter end of the Third;
yea, and of the Second and first also. Hence thirdly we may gather, That all
the Kingdoms, all the Dominions and Powers, which shall be in any of those
Nations and Countries, which formerly were, or now are under any of the four
Kingdoms, represented in that Image, standing in opposition against Christ,
shall be all smitten by the Stone, and thus broken in pieces. This will be the
first work of the Stone, which after this, will become a great Mountain, and
fill the whole Earth. Fourthly, The smiting will begin at the Feet of Iron and
Clay: so it is said, Dan. 2.34. The Stone smote the Image upon the Feet that
were of Iron and Clay, and brake them in pieces. The Head was in the East, and
other parts were in the East, or toward the East; the Legs, Feet and Toes came
down to the West. Now, they are the Feet and Toes that are first broken in
pieces; that is, the Fourth Kingdom, as in this Western part of the World, in
the destruction of the first Beast at Rome: and the extreme parts of the Toes
will first be broken in pieces, and then will the Stone proceed to the Legs,
Thighs, Belly, Breast, Arms and Head, till all be destroyed together. And
therefore as this great Body grew downwards, so it shall die upwards, beginning
at Vltima Thule.

Obj. Shall we think that the Holy Spirit making a discovery of Alexander's
Kingdom, and the four Kingdoms which were to stand up out of his, would
immediately pass from these, over so vast a space of time, and on a sudden come
down to speak of what should be in the last times?

A. So it is; and we are necessitated to conceive so: For first, it is when the
Transgressors are come to the full; that is, when their number is filled up,
and the number of their Iniquities is filled up also: when they are
accomplished, Dan. 8.23. This little Horn will fill up the number of the
Transgressors; when he comes he will be the last. Secondly, He will be broken
without hand, v. 25. this last Transgressor will not be destroyed as the
former; they were broken with hands; the Babylonish Transgressors by the hands
of the Medes and Persians; they by Grecian hands, and the Grecian by Roman
hands: But the last Transgressors without hand; that is, such a hand as the
others were destroyed by; for the Lord himself shall destroy them, and then the
slain of the Lord shall be many.

2. It Is usual with the Prophets in their Prophecies, to leap on a sudden from
their times, to the very last times of all, delighting to be in view of them,
and to be speaking of them hereby comforting themselves, amidst the calamities
of their times, and also laying up comforts in store for the Saints in all
ages, viz. by prophesying of these times of ruin to all their enemies, and of
the restitution of all things; it is usual with them, having the Wings of the
Dove, to fly to these times that they may be at rest. Thus Isa. 1. The prophet
complains of Sin, and bewailes the Judgments which it brought upon the Jews,
and then on a sudden he is carried by the Spirit to the very last times v.
25.26. I will purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin; not only
purge, but purely purge, or according to pureness, which is to be done, when
the Jews shall be called; and I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and
thy Counselors as at the beginning. Surely they must be the last Judges of the
World that shall be as the first, and Counselors at the end of the present
World, who shall be like those at the beginning; and then Chap. 2.1. etc. he
goes on to declare these blessed times. It shall come to pass in the last days
that the Mountain of the Lords House shall be established in the top of the
Mountains, etc. See also Isa. 11.30.18. to 26. Thus we see grounds to conclude
that this little Horn must be the second Beast, and Objections answered. And
one thing more is very worthy of our observation concerning him. That is, As he
shall wax great so it shall be only toward the East, and toward the South,
and toward the pleasant Land. Nothing is said of his waxing great toward the
West. The Lord, it appears by this, will be gracious to this Western part of
the World, where the first Beast has been so long tyrannizing, and exercising
so much Cruelty: so that though he shall destroy Wonderfully, and prosper and
practice; yet it shall not be in that part, where the Witnesses prophesied in
sackcloth 1260 days, And now having spoken so much of this little Horn, which
was very necessary, that we may better know what to Judge of the 2300 days,
when they began and when they will end; let this come into consideration in the
next place,

1. That the 2300 days, and the 1335 days will end together; for first the
1335 days bring us to the end of the days of trouble and affliction to the
Saints; and to the end of those days at which Daniel shall stand up in his Lot,
Dan. 12.13. so it is in Dan. 8.19. I will make thee know what shall be in the
last end of the Indignation, that is, when he that shall prosper and practice,
and destroy the mighty and the holy people, shall come to his end, and be
broken without hand. This will be at the end of the 2300 days, and of the
1335. And doubtless, this last end of the Indignation, and the breaking of this
little Horn, that shall stand up against the Prince of Princes, without hand;
shall be the pouring out of the last Vial, Rev. 16.17. Then secondly,

At the end of 2300 days the Sanctuary shall be cleansed; then all shall be
cleansed; then all shall be pure and clean as it ought to be, in the Church and
among the Saints. Now compare with this Chap. 11.35. some of them of
understanding shall fall to try them, and to purge and to make them white; but
how long shall this trying time be? to the time of the end, because it is yet
for an appointed time; this is spoken concerning the Jews after their first
Call. Now when shall this time end? When the 1335 days end, of which it is
said, Blessed is he that waits and comes to them, because then the trying
time will be over; for at this time the Sanctuary shall be perfectly cleansed:
so there will be no more need of afflictions and sureffings to try, and to
purge them, and to make them white.

2. The 2300 are to be accounted to begin at the time when Daniel had his
Vision: This I gather from Dan. 8.13, 14. How long shall be the Vision
concerning the daily Sacrifice? And he said unto 2300 days. How long shall be
the Vision? that is, how long from the beginning to the end of it; how long
from the first representation of these things in the Vision, to the
accomplishment of them? how long from the time of the Prophecy to the time of
the performance? Now Daniel said, v. 1. In the third year of Belshazzar a
Vision appeared to me. Belshazzar reigned but three years, and in his third
year, but after Babylon was taken, Daniel had this Vision. For v. 2. He says,
when I saw, I was at Shushan in the Palace; Now Shushan was in Persia; thither
he was carried after Babylon was taken; so he had this Vision at the beginning
of the Persian Monarchy, and that we must take to be the Epoch of this Number:
And if any one can find out and give an exact account of years, since the
beginning of the Persian monarchy, then I think I may undertake to tell, when
they will end. And consequently when all the other Numbers mentioned will come
to their end. A late Author, who has labored much to find out the true
account, fixes the period of this Number in A. D. 1701. but for my part, I
shall only declare what I am most inclined to believe; which is, that it will
not be till about 1731. those that have Books and leisure, may do well to try,
what by searching they can find out, of the certain Number of years since the
beginning of the Persian-monarchy: which would be a thing of great Use, if it
could be found out. Thus much of the first Number 2300 days.

The second and third have an Epoch, which next is to be enquired into: This
Epoch is the time of taking away the daily Sacrifice, and setting up the
Abomination, that makes desolate, Dan. 12.11, 12. Here our enquiry must be to
know what is meant by the daily Sacrifice, and when it was taken away.

1 What is meant by the Daily Sacrifice? Now the generality of those that look
for Redemption in Israel, do take the Jewish Sacrifices and Worship to be here
meant, which were abrogated by the coming of Christ. To these, Julian out of
his hatred of Christianity, gave countenance; and he was willing to have them
brought into Use again: and so they conceive the Daily Sacrifice was taken
away, etc. when Julian gave liberty to the Jews to rebuild the Temple; from the
doing of which they were miraculously hindered.

But this puts a strange sense upon the words; for here is taking away, and
setting up; the taking away is to give opportunity for the setting up of
somewhat in the room of what is taken away; and therefore the taking away is
first mentioned: and so if we must understand the Jewish daily Sacrifice,
'twill be, as if it had been said, the Daily Sacrifice and the Jewish Worship
was taken away, which was a great Abomination, and an Abomination that would
make desolate set up; and this Abomination which was to be set up, was the
Temple and Jewish Worship, which was indeed the Daily Sacrifice. And thus the
sense will come to this, the Jews Worship was taken away, to make way for the
setting up of the Jewish worship; an Abomination was taken away, to set in an
Abomination; the Daily Sacrifice was taken away, to set up the Daily Sacrifice.

Secondly, The Daily Sacrifice must be taken here in a good sense; that is, for
the pure worship of God, spiritual, evangelical worship, set forth under a
Legal Name: and thus the sense will run clear, pure Religion and Worship in the
free and public exercise of it, was that, which the Enemies of it would
prevail to take away, and set up an Abomination, a false Religion, corrupt and
impure Worship in the room of it, which would bring great desolation upon the
true Church, and such as would worship in spirit and truth; and would be a very
great desolating thing to true Religion; and by this means the World would come
to be filled with abominable Doctrines, with abominable Idolatries, with
abominable Will Worship and Superstition.

Now for the farther clearing of this, that the Daily Sacrifice is to be taken
in a good sense, and not in an evil sense, let us consider a little a parallel
place before mentioned, Dan. 8.11, 12, 13. He magnified himself to the Prince
of the Host, and by him the Daily Sacrifice was taken away, and the place of
his Sanctuary was cast down. I have proved before, that this was to be done in
Gospel Times, by what was said concerning the little Horn: Now most evident it
is, that in this place the daily Sacrifice is to be taken in a good sense, for
it is joined with the Truth, an Host was given him against the daily Sacrifice,
and it cast down the Truth to the ground. The Truth and the daily Sacrifice
suffer together; and then it is asked, How long shall be the Vision concerning
the daily Sacrifice, to give the Sanctuary and Host to be trodden under foot?
and he said, unto 2300 days; then the Sanctuary shall be cleansed, and the
daily Sacrifice restored. Now the daily Sacrifice being taken in a good sense
in this place, why should it not be so in the other? both speak of
Gospel Times, and both mention it, as a great calamity to the Church to have it
taken away: and doubtless it must be taken in the same sense in both places;
there is only this difference, that taking away in the Eighth Chapter, is
meant of the great Calamity which shall come upon the Jews after their First
Call; and that in the Twelfth Chapter, of a desolation to come upon the
Churches of the Gentile Saints. And thus we are quite beaten off, from making
that mentioned concerning Julian, our Epoch there, where we find pure
Religion, and the true Worship of God to be eminently cast off by the
generality of men professing Christianity; and in the room of it a false
Religion and Worship set up: so that true Religion in comparison with its
former state, becomes a desolate thing, maintained and owned but by a few. This
is to bring us to a right understanding of the daily sacrifice, and the
Abomination set up, that so we may stand upon a sure foundation in our Inquiry.
And so I come to the next thing, which is,

2. When the daily Sacrifice was taken away. And here I shall consider, first
what we find foretold in the New Testament concerning this, which may be a help
to us in this Inquiry: and secondly what we find in Ecclesiastical History, of
the fulfilling of things foretold in the Scripture. Now for the former of
these, let two places of Scripture be considered. The first is Rev. 11.2. The
court which is without, measure it not, for it is given to the Gentiles; and
the holy City shall they Tread under Foot. That which I would here take notice
of for our present purpose, is, the Name given to those to whom the outward
Court is given; which is, Gentiles. Now these are called Gentiles in opposition
to those that are called Jews, that is, such who were Jews inwardly, as Paul
says. It Is observable, in the same Book of the Rev. the true Worshippers are
called Jews. Rev. 29. and 3.9. I know the blasphemy of them which say they are
Jews, and are not, but the synagogue of Satan, and do lie. This Intimates,
that some were Jews, and did not blaspheme in calling themselves so; others
were Heathens, who yet would have been called Jews. So the Gentiles there
spoken of, are Jews turned Gentiles, and Christians turned Heathens; yet, such
as would keep up a Name for being Jews and Christians: which argues a great
Apostasy. Now observe this, when such an Apostasy did eminently appear, and Men
proffessing Christanity did turn Heathens, and took up the way of the Heathens
in many things in their worship; then the daily Sacrifice began to be taken
away, and the Abomination that made desolate was set up, these Gentiles it is
said, Tread down the Holy City, and that is the head of the 42 Months, and
1260 days. But before these Gentiles get into such power, and grow so
numerous, they must have a time to become Gentiles; and we may well conceive,
there may be a considerable space of time betwixt their first becoming
Gentiles, and there getting into such power, as to be able to carry it in the
outward Court against the true Worshippers, the Jews inwardly, and to tread
down the Holy City. So then the time of the Jews turning Gentiles, of
Christians becoming Heathens, is the head of the 1290 days; and the possessing
the outward Court, and the Treading down of the Holy City, is the head of the
42 Months, and of the 1260 days, 30 years after the former. Thus much for the
first place: The other place is 1. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. Now, the Spirit speaks
expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the Faith, giving
heed to seducing spirits, Doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy,
forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from meat. This place shows how
Jews should turn Gentiles, and Christians become Heathens; and also shows how
the daily Sacrifice was taken away, and so will be of great Use to help us in
our inquiry after the time, when this was done; for when the Doctrine of Devils
was taught and practiced, when there was a prohibition of Marriage, and when
there was a command to abstain from meats, then the daily Sacrifice began to be
taken away, and the Abomination was set up which proved so desolating a thing
to true Religion, and to the People of God. Now Mr. Mede's interpretation of
the Doctrine of Devils, rather Demons, is generally known and embraced coming
with such evidence, that it is not to be rejected: this Doctrine of Demons he
concludes to be that which taught the worshipping of Saints departed, wherein
Christians turned Heathens, for they symbolized with them herein; it being the
custom of the Heathens, to deifie and worship their Heroes when dead; who were
a middle sort of Powers betwixt their sovereign Gods, and Men, being mediators
betwixt them. And like to these were the adored Saints among Christians, whose
Relics were trusted-in, as Powers defending their Cities, as appears by some
passages which he quotes out of Basil and Chrysostom; and these he takes to be
meant by the Mahuzzim, or God of Forces: Dan. 11.38. This kind of Idolatry
began, says he, after Julian; the Reader may see more in his Apostasy of the
latter-times. Now God was no longer worshipped in truth, when this Abomination
came in, of worshipping Saints, and trusting to their Mediation and
Intercession, and making them Protectors. God says, My Glory of religious
worship, and of Christ's Mediation and Intercession, I will not give to
another: If men do it, they certainly in this do cast off the daily sacrifice,
even the true worship of God: and besides there is no Abomination more
desolating and destructive to true Religion, than for men to usurp a Power to
command things contrary to the Commands of God, and to forbid what God allows;
as Marriage, and Meats: no more desolating Doctrine, no more desolating
Principle than this, That Men may take upon them to make Laws about Worship and
Matters of Religion; when men think to mend God's Institutions, and to make a
better Religion then what God has left us in his word; this is the ready way
to mar all, and so take away the daily sacrifice, and to set up that
Abomniation which makes all desolate. Now this I take to be the true Epoch
1290, ( viz.) the time when Christians thus turned Heathens, and the Doctrine
of Demons was taught and practiced, and then these desolating Abominations
were set up; In which the Apostle sets forth the Apostasy of the latter days;
and doubtless the Head of this Apostasy is the true Epoch of these Numbers
1290, and 1335 days.

Secondly, Let us see what we can find in Ecclesiastical History, of the
fulfilling of these things foretold in the Scripture, and when this Apostasy
began; so as that the true Worshippers had cause to take up the Psalmist's
complaint, O God, the Heathen are come into thine Inheritance, thy holy Temple
have they defiled: They are gotten into the outward Court, and we fear they
will drive all the Worshippers shortly thence, and possess it wholly
themselves, and at length tread down the holy City also. Now here I shall make
use of some Collections of a late Author, declaring when this Apostasy began,
which he makes the Epoch of the 1260 days; this has been the great mistake
hitherto, as I conceive from what has been before laid down: and we have great
ground to conclude, that what has been pitched upon for the Head of the 1260
days, is indeed the Head of the 1290 days: Now let us take the particulars of
the Apostasy in that order in which the Apostle gives them to us.

1. He says in the general, Some shall depart from the Faith: some Sayings of
Augustine are mentioned, which show a great departure from the Faith in his
time: As we who are called Christians, do not believe in Peter, but in him in
whom Peter believed: This does intimate that some pretending to be Peter's
Successors, did begin to claim such a power and Right as this: And what greater
departing from the Faith, than to come to this, to believe in men? And again,
reprehending the Popes arrogance who suffered themselves to be called Gods: He
says, he that would seem to be God, when he is man, does not imitate him, who
when he was God, for our sakes was made man; is not this a departing from the
Faith? Again, says he, the Catholic Faith believes Heaven to be the first
place, the second Hell; as for a third, we are wholly ignorant; neither is it
found in Scripture: this intimates a departing from the Faith in this thing.
Again, good works do not precede Justification, but follow the justified: this
also intimates a departing from the Faith, when an opinion of Justification by
Works began to be taken up. This was about the year 393. that he wrote thus:
And about 393. began Humane Traditions to grow into request; and a Monkish
Life, which was conceived to be a meritorious thing, and that thereby men might
be freed from Hell, and obtain a true, certain, and plentiful hope of eternal
Life. Epiphan. Contra haeres. says, Among many other things, showing the great
Defection, A. 396. whence is this Image Worship, and the Design of the Devil?
Men introduce Images to be worshipped, having the Mind adulterated from the One
and only God.

2. For the second thing; The Doctrine of Demons, and of Saint-worship:
touching this, a saying of Epiphanius is mentioned; The Body of Mary was truly
holy, but not God; her-self was indeed a Virgin, and to be honored, but not
given us that we should worship her: she her self was worshipping him, who was
born of her self. We may be sure of this, that he observed Divine Honor to be
given to her, which was the occasion of his writing thus. A Saying of Augustine
also is mentioned to this purpose; It is not our Religion to worship dead Men,
they are honored for our imitation-sake, but are not to be worshipped for the
sake of Religion; nor are we to Consecrate Temples to them, for they will not
be so honored of us. Now that of Epiphanius is referred to A. D. 396. as the
other to 399. This shows that the Doctrine of Demons was then taught, and had
too much heed given to it. And did not this tend to the taking away of the
daily sacrifice? and was it not an abomination making desolate?

3. Touching Prohibition of Marriage; It was endeavored in the Council of
Nice, A. 326. to make a Decree, That Bishops and Elders should refrain from
their Wives: But Paphnutius opposed himself to the whole Council, urging that
of the Apostle, Marriage is honorable among all men; and so far prevailed,
that a Decree of Liberty was brought forth: But in An. 396. the second Council
of Carthage was held (says Helvicus) which made a Law against their Marriage,
and this was confirmed in the Council of Toledo in Spain, with an Allowance to
have Concubines, A. 400. and likewise Siricius who was Bishop of Rome from A.
385, to 398. (as says Alfred, in Chron. Paparum) imposed single life upon the
Clergy, endeavoring to justify it by abusing those words of Paul. They that
are in the flesh cannot please God. Thus we see when forbidding to Marry came
in, viz. A. 396.

4. As for a Command to abstain from Meats, which is the last thing mentioned
by the Apostle. Socrat. lib. 5. says, That about the year 396. Laws were made
about Meats, and other things were instituted, which he called Jewish Rites,
which made Augustine complain, That about this time Religion was so corrupted
with Traditions and Humane Rites, that the very condition of Jews under the
Law, was much more easy than that of Christians under the Gospel: And
Dionysius Bishop of Corinth did, in an Epistle, admonish another Bishop, not to
load Christians with heavy burdens, Ceremonies, and Traditions, nor obtrude
upon his Brethren single Life. Thus we have seen somewhat that History does
afford touching the Apostasy foretold by the Apostle. These things before
mentioned, and more, may be seen in Wolfeus his Centenaries. Now, seeing the
great things of the Apostasy foretold by the Apostle, appear to have been
commanded and practiced, in and about the year 396, therefore that year is most
likely to be the Epoch of that Number 1290 days, and that then the daily
Sacrifice began to be taken away; and if so, then we may easily conclude, about
what time the Jews will be called. Thus much of the Second and Third numbers.
And lastly touching the 1260 days, I would have it considered,

1. That the 1290 days, and the 1260 days will end together: for we may
observe Rev. 16.10, 12. that the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Seat
of the Beast, and so destroys that, and consequently the Beast, as in that
Seat; then the sixth Angel pours out his Vial upon the River Euphrates, that a
way may be made for the Kings of the East. These Kings of the East are the
Jews, and chiefly the ten Tribes. Now we may well suppose a calling of the Jews
before this, it may be a considerable time: They are called Kings, at the time
of the sixth Vial, which supposes their calling before, and getting into such
power as to be called Kings; as the Israelites, when brought out of Egypt, and
gathered into a body, then were a Kingdom of Priests. And besides, it is said,
he shall save the Tents of Judah first: therefore their calling is before the
sixth Vial, and so we may suppose, it will be at the end of the 1260 days. For
my part I conceive that the Jews first Call, at least the Call of those of the
Tribe of Judah, will be at the time of the Witnesses being raised. Which seems
hinted, To. 11.15. If the casting away of them be the reconciling of the World;
what shall the receiving of them be, but Life from the dead? Life to the dead
Witnesses; a civil Life, and Spiritual to them in a far more eminent degree
than before; and also a Spiritual Life to many of those that were dead in sins;
and then the fullness of the Gentiles will begin to come in.

2. The first appearence and Rise of the Man of Sin, or first Beast, is not to
be reckoned for the head of this Number 1260 days. It Is evident he did begin
to appear about the time of the great Apostasy, and the taking away the daily
Sacrifice. It Is observable in the year before mentioned 196. There was a
division of the Empire upon the death of Theodosius, and division was the way
to ruin; and in few years after, Alaricus took Rome, and the Bishop of Rome
beg^^ to usurp the power of the Keys, as appea^^ by a saying of Augustine: The
keys are delivered to the whole Church, and not to one Peter, and then a little
after, the Horns of the Beast appear.

3. If we would pitch upon the right time for the beginning of the 1260 days,
let us consider two places which give us two eminent marks of that time; the
first is Rev. 11.2. his having such power, as that he thereby treads down the
Holy City; the other is Rev. 13.5. power was given him to continue, Gr. (...),
to make War, 42 Months; we may well conceive he might have his Being some time
before his making War, and before he was able to tread down the Holy City. Now
upon that supposition, that the 1290, and 1260 days will end together, and that
the head of the former number being reckoned to be about 396, it does Appear,
that the head of the latter must be 30 years lower.

4. At the Rise of the Witnesses the 1260 days will end, and then the Beast's
time also will be run out: But we must consider in what sense this is to be
taken, that is; then the time of his Treading down of the Holy City, and his
making War, so as to prevail therein, will have an end; for so it is said, That
he shall tread down and make War so long. Now when the Witnesses shall be
raised, they shall begin to grow into a City, and considerable body. For then
144000 are said to be upon Mount Sion. They get out of the Wilderness and
afflicted estate, and begin to be a Mount Sion, and to tread down that wicked
City Babylon: for the tenth part of it then will fall, and soon after, the
other parts, and Rome it self; and at this time the Witnesses will be able to
make War with the Beast, and first shall slay 7000 Names of Men, and then shall
overcome and kill him. For he that kills with the Sword, must be killed with
the Sword: when the tenth part of the City falls, and the 7000 Names of men are
slain; then a deadly Wound, not to be healed, will be given to the first Beast:
True, he may do somewhat toward his defense, but all in vain. So that his
warring time, so as to conquer and prevail by it, will then be ended, and his
42 Months completed at the rising of the Witnesses.

And thus, Although I had declared some resolutions not to meddle with the
times, farther than to give some signs of them, yet being earnestly pressed to
it, I have adventured to do somewhat in this matter, which has been so much
disparaged by former mistakes, and the too positive determination of such who
have built upon a wrong foundation. My aim has been to get the surest ground I
could from Scripture to proceed upon: a little time will bring these things to
light by the accomplishment. In the mean time, it is much that we do or may
understand by Books, which give us sufficient ground to conclude, that the
1290, and 1260 days are come very near to their end; and my hope is, that they
will not reach beyond the year 1686. If Chronology be right it is very probable
they will not, they may end before; and then soon after, Rome will come to its
end, and none shall help it: And when these days beforementioned shall be run
out, then we may conceive the work of pouring out the Vials will begin; for
that any of them are poured out already, I take to be a mistake: Their Plagues
are the last Plagues, and in them will the wrath of God be filled up; what a
Vial is poured out upon, will be destroyed for ever, for it brings the last
Plague upon that thing it destroys; and at the end of these days the true
Worshippers that did go forth of the outward Court, and went into the
Wilderness, bearing good Seed with them, shall come again into it with joy,
bringing their Sheaves with them, and drive out those Gentiles that possess it.
And as an handful of Corn was still in the earth even in the worst of times; so
after the end of these days, the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon, and
they of the holy City, which then shall begin to be built again, shall flourish
like the grass of the field. And what is foretold of the Jews, Isa. 60.22. we
may apply also to the Gentile Saints: A little one shall become a thousand, and
a small one a strong Nation, I the Lord will hasten it in his time. The
faithful Witnesses, and that remnant of the Woman's Seed, which keep the
Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, is a Flock, though
a little one, and but a small one; but this little one shall become a thousand,
yea quickly increase to 144000. and this small one a Nation, yea a strong
Nation; I the Lord will hasten it in his time: and when God hastens, nothing
shall hinder. God gives to every seed his own body, 1 Cor. 15.38. The seed is
very small, the body which God gives it, is many times very great. It Is so in
the Works of Nature; what a tall, spreading, vast-bodied Oak grows out of a
small Acorn! and much more in the Works of Grace; there is a Seed that serves
God, Psa. 22.30. What a vast body will God give to this seed! 'Twas a vast body
that was represented to Nebuchadnezzar in a Dream, in that Image which he saw,
reaching from Chaldaea, and Persia in the East, and coming down as far as the
utmost bounds of the Western-parts: but that body which God will give to the
Seed that serves him, will far exceed this; for Christ will have a Kingdom at
last, that shall fill the whole earth, which shall never be destroyed, as the
Image which Nebuchadnezzar saw, must be. Thus much to show that these things
are to be looked for, and when they shall come.

2. Saints should with all diligence look to this, that their present Carriage
and state be suitable to their expectations of such glorious things hereafter.
Here are three Branches of the Apostles Exhortation, which deserves to be a
little insisted on: 1. Be diligent that you may be found of him in peace. 2. Be
diligent that ye be found of him without spot. 3. Be diligent that ye be found
of him blameless.


1. Be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace: All will be found of
Christ at last, though some put him far out of their thoughts, and like Cain
wander from the presence of the Lord, yet at last he will find them out: for at
death he will find them; at Judgment he will find them; and what will they do
then but cry out with exceeding anguish and horror, as Ahab did to Elijah, Have
thou found me, O mine enemy? Now seeing all shall be found of him, be therefore
diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, and that in a peaceable state,
and a peaceable frame.

1. In a peaceable state; and that first a justified state, for that is a
peaceable state: Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God.
Our care should be to be found in a justified estate, that so we may appear as
Christ shall, without sin: compare with this place, Phil. 3.9. That I may be
found of him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that
which is by the faith of Christ, the righteousness that is of God by Faith. And
if it be thus, then we shall be found of him in peace. Here observe,

First, we must be found in him, if we would be found of him in peace, Romans
8.1. There is now no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus. If in him
by faith, if in that Name of his, The Lord our righteousness, there we are in a
strong tower, and safe from wrath and vengeance.

Secondly, We must not have any thing to do with our own righteousness in the
matter of Justification; Not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law:
What Law is here meant? There is an abrogated Law, and an established Law; the
abrogated Law, is the Ceremonial Law which was given to the Jews, and had the
shadow of good things to come; and Christ the Substance being come, the Shadows
flee away. The established Law is the Moral Law, established in and by the
Gospel. Now it is not only the righteousness of the abrogated Law, which must
not be had, but the righteousness of the established Law, which is to be
excluded from the business of Justification. To this, Evangelical Obedience
must be yielded, and in observing it, we must confess that Christ is Lord to
the glory of the Father; but when we have yielded it, we must not have it for a
justifying righteousness; for in relation to this also it was that Paul said,
not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law; as is evident from Romans
3.28, 31. we conclude a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law.
What Law? even without the works of the established Law; for he adds, do we
then make void the Law through faith? No, we establish the Law; a man therefore
is justified by faith without the works of the established-law, and without
that evangelical-obedience which all true believers, and justified persons do
yield to it, and therein serve Christ as their Lord. They that would have
Christ, and justification of life by him, must not have their own
righteousness, no not their evangelical righteousness, nor harbor such a
dangerous, such a corrupt and evangelical Notion about justification as that
is. Now whereas, those that would bring in our evangelical obedience, and
intrest that in the business of justification, do it, because they suppose the
Doctrine of justification by their imputed righteousness alone, is Antinomian,
and tends to the making void the Law; Paul spakes of such an objection as this,
do we make void the Law through faith? no, we establish the Law. It may be
better asked of such, Do ye not make void Christ to your selves by establishing
your own righteousness; and so from a vain fear of Antinomianisme, run to
Antichristianisme? sure the Orthodox believer, who holds fast the faith which
was once delivered to the Saints, may say to such as Paul did to the Galatians
Chap. 1.6. I marvel, that you are so soon removed to another Gospel, from him
that called you into the grace of Christ, which is not another Gospel, save
that there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ.
But if after so much ado to discover this New way to attain to justification
Our English R. B. had concluded as the Romish R. B. did, with a Tutissimum est,
etc. this had been ingenious.

3. The righteousness we should have, is the righteousness of Faith; but that
which is by the faith of Christ, not that which is by the love of Christ, not
that which is by the sincere serving of Christ, but that which is by the faith
of Christ. Most true it is, that where there is faith, there will be love and
obedience. Faith, that is unfeigned, and love that is sincere, can no more be
parted than Fire, and heat and nothing provokes more to love, nothing does more
vigorously promote evangelical obedience, than a true lively faith; who will
love most said Christ to Simon? He that had most forgiven said Simon, and
Christ said, thou have rightly judged. Faith will purify the heart, and reform
the Life. In the business of sanctification, and holy living, Faith works by
love; but in the matter of justification, love does not work by faith to the
completing of it.

4. The righteousness which is of God, by faith, is that alone, which we must
have for our justification. An imputed righteousness, which was the gift of the
Father, was fulfilled by the son, of which the Spirit does convince, and is
received, and applied by Faith; this is that which we must have, if we would be
justified, Romans 5.18, 19. By the righteousness of one the free gift came upon
all men, for the justification of Life. And by the Obedience of one shall many
be made righteous, Christ was obedient in his Life, and obedient in his Death;
he was obedient in doing, and in dying: the Law said, do this, and live; The
Man that does them shall live in them, Gal. 3, 12. Do, and do all; do, and do;
perfectly, do, and continue to do. Man stood bound to this that by such doing
he might glorify the sovereignty of God, and honor him as his Creator. Now
Christ putting himself in man's stead, this he did, and most highly glorified
the sovereignty of God, when he being in the form of God, and equal with God,
humbled himself and took the form of a Servant. Again the Law said, not doing
thou must die: In the day thou eatest thou shall die the Death. Now Christ
became obedient to Death, whereby all that do believe are delivered from, and
need not be in bondage, through fear of Death; consider then what the Law
says, and what Christ has done, and bring both together, and be found
trusting in him, and in what he has done; so shall you be found in a justified
state, and so in peace.

2. A sanctified state is a state of Peace. There is no peace says my God to
the Wicked Isa. 48.22. But he spaketh peace to his Saints, Psa. 85.8. The pure
in heart, shall see God. Except a Man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom
of God, in which is peace, and the joys of the holy Ghost. In Christ Jesus,
neither circumcision avails any thing nor un-circumcision, but the New
Creature; the New Creature, the Man made after God; who has concerning the
former conversation, put off the Old Man, is in a state of peace.

2. Be diligent that ye may be found of him in a peaceable frame. A peaceable
State and a peaceable frame go together; when God is at peace with men, they
shall be at peace with him: who ever can look to Christ in Heaven as their
peace, they have the Spirit destroying that enmity, which is in their Hearts
against God. Be at peace with the sovereignty of God. Say not as those enemies,
we will not have this Man to reign, over us; but as Thomas, my Lord, and my
God. Not as Pharaoh, who is the Lord that I should obey him? but as Joshua, As
for me, and my house we will serve the Lord. Be at peace with the Commands of
God, say as David, O how do I love thy Law? As Paul, I delight in the Law of
God after the inner Man. Be at peace with all the Truths of God; receive them
in the light, and love of them, in the Life, and power of them, so as to obey
the truth, and be found walking in it. Be at peace with all the dispensations
of God; even with such wherein evil comes, as well as with those wherein good
comes. Be at peace with all the people of God. Love those whom God loves, whom
Chrst has redeemed, and the spirit has sanctified. Thus much of the first
Branch of the Exhortation.

2. Be diligent that ye may be found of him without spot.

Q. But who is, or can be in this life without spot? Noah had his spot; Lot had
his spot; David had his spot, and Peter had his spot.

A. None in this life are altogether without spot, 'twas Christ alone who was
absolutely without spot, Heb. 9.14. He offered himself without spot to God:
and, he was a lamb without spot and blemish 1 Pet. 1.19.

2. Be such now, as that you may comfornably hope to be without spot, and to be
made perfect in Holiness, when your Souls shall be separated from your Bodies,
and that you may appear so at the Judgment. If now you are regenerated, If now
you have faith working by love, If now you have repentance unto life, if Christ
be yours, and you Christ's; then you shall be at last altogether without spot.

3. Take the right course to be Without all spots of guilt, and to have an
unspotted Justification: To this an unspotted righteousness is necessary,
personal righteousness is not so. As Christ is the Lamb without spot, as he
offered himself without spot to God, so therefore his Sacrifice was the
Sacrifice without spot, his righteousness which he fulfilled was the
righteousness without spot: and if this be imputed to us, and trusted in by us,
we shall obtain a justification without spot; whereas men's personal
righteousness has its spots, their Holy things have iniquity in them; and if
our personal righteousness must be the righteousness for our justification,
what will that be but a spotted justification? and that will be none at all.
Cant. 6.10. The Spouse is said to be fair as the Moon, and clear as the Sun. In
holiness, in grace wrought, In evangelical Obedience, she is but fair as the
Moon, having her spots like the Moon; but in her justification, she is clear as
the Sun, not having any spot of guilt, or sin imputed remaining on her: clear
as the Sun, because clothed with the Sun of righteousness; the true spouse of
Christ is the Woman clothed with the Sun, in respect of Christ's righteousness
imputed to her; some there are that will choose rather to be clothed with the
Moon, their own personal righteousness. But who are most likely to go away
justified? Those that are clothed with the Sun, or those that are not, nay will
not be otherwise clothed then with the Moon? surely these at best are but like
Jacobs Cattle, spotted and speckled, it may be said of such as 'twas concerning
Joshua, Zach. 3.3. Now Joshua was clothed with filthy Garments: and what
should be done, but as the Lord commanded concerning Joshua, take away the
filthy Garments, and cloth him with change of raiments? Thus it must be, if you
would stand justified before him, and be accepted in his sight. Those that will
not embrace Christ's counsel, buy of me white raiment, that thou may be
clothed, make my righteousness thine own: cannot be justified, and saved, for
no unclean thing shall enter into the Kingdom of God. Now if you trust to your
personal righteousness, and have not Christ's imputed to you, you are but an
unclean thing, for this is an undeniable truth: Those that have not Christ for
righteousness have not true holiness. Those that are without imputed
righteousness, are without personal, evangelical righteousness, for 1. Cor.
1.30. Christ is made righteousness and Sanctification, and so, whatever show of
holiness may be made, whatever holy duties are performed, yet such have not
true holiness, because Christ is not sanctification; and he is not
sanctification, because he is not righteousness. So that it is clear, if you
have not imputed righteousness, and so justification through Faith in it, you
have not inherent righteousness, nor true holiness, and therefore cannot expect
to see God; for without holiness no man shall see the Lord, you cannot go to
Heaven without holiness, and this you cannot have, but from Christ; and not
this from Christ, unless you have him for righteousness; you cannot have that
which you make the condition of justification unless you have Christ for
rightousness. If without imputed righteousness then without true holiness. And
if so, you will come near the case of those mentioned Mat 7.22. if not fully up
to it: Lord Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name etc. Have not we taken
thee for our Lord? have not we believed, and yielded evangelical obedience? Yea
we have done it, and will prove both. Our Faith appears, for in thy Name we did
cast out Devils; that was, through Faith in thy Name: and our evangelical
obedience appears: for we owned thee for our Lord, and prophesied in thy Name;
our works have been done in thy Name; we have done good, and we have done it in
thy Name. And now we present our Faith as a work to thee; and we present other
works, and duties with our Faith, and we are bold to plead our Faith and our
works before thee, and look now to be accepted of thee; behold here the
condition fulfilled by us, here is the causa sine qua non, and so what was
required on our part, is performed, and now we expect thou should perform thy
part, Lord, Lord open to us; thus they plead. But what is Christ's answer?
depart from me, I know you not, ye workers of iniquity; you are neither
justified nor sanctified, and therefore what should you do here? I know you
not, therefore you are not justified; I have no delight in you, you find no
acceptance with me, one thing is lacking, you have none of my righteousness; it
was preached, and offered to you, but you rejected it, and would not have it
imputed to you; and whereas you boast of your Faith, and good works, you did
not serve me as I would be served: I see no true holiness or evangelical
obedience in all that you did; for you did it to be justified by it, and so did
not the will of my Father in Heaven, but your own wills; my Father never
required your obedience for that end, for another he did; and therefore I
cannot reckon you amongst the workers of righteousness. And you call me Lord,
but that is but a part of my Name; you divide my Name, and you do not call me
by my evangelical Name, The Lord our righteousness, and therefore, I cannot
call you by that Name, The Lord our rightteousness, but the workers of
iniquity. The great plea of the Old, and our in this great point of
justification) New Socinians, is, that imputed righteousness makes void
personal righteousness and holiness; but we see better ground to conclude, that
the denying and rejecting of an imputed righteousness makes void personal
righteousness, and holiness; and so this puts men quite besides the way of
justification and salvation. What reason is there then, that you should embrace
this branch of the exhortation? Be diligent to get an interest in that
unspotted righteousness whereby you shall have all spots of guilt done away,
and so attain an unspotted and perfect justification. But before I leave this
particular, let one thing be considered. This error about justification by
inherent righteousness, seems to be the very first that was brought into the
World, about matter of religion; which may be gathered from the History of Cain
and Abel, Genesis 4. it is said, Abel brought of the firstlings of his flock, and
offered a Sacrifice to the Lord, in which there was bloodshed for the remission
of sins, and in this Christ was offered, and slain typicaly, and so he was a
Lamb slain from the beginning of the World. For, as the rock was Christ, so
this Sacrifice was Christ; In this the Law was fulfilled. Thou shall die the
death, Abel did die the death, ( viz) in the firstlings of his flock, which did
die the death; typfying Christ; and in offering this Sacrifice, Abel did well,
taking the right course to obtain justification of Life, and he was accepted of
God, and what he did was imputed to him for righteousness. On the other side,
Cain brought of the fruit of the ground, and expected that this offering, this
work and Service of his, should procure his acceptance with God, and his
justification before him. But what came of it? To Cain, and to his offering,
God had no respect: Cain was not justified hereby, that is the meaning of it,
as appears by what follows. If thou do well shall thou not be accepted. But
if thou do not well, sin lies at thy door. Observe, that sins lying at the
door is the contrary to being accepted, now the meaning of sins lying at the
door is, that sin is not pardoned, but the guilt of it remains; sin, that is,
the punishment of sin is at the door, ready to come upon thee, and therefore
thou art not justified; so this doing well, and not doing well, is spoken with
respect to the offerings then made, and to the end which they aimed at in their
offerings, which was, that they might be accepted, and justified. Abel did
well, he took the right course to be justified, but Cain did not well; Abel did
well, in seeking his justification, and acceptance, by an imputed
righteousness, and thus his sin was carried from his door, never to come near
it again; but Cain did not well, in seeking his justification and acceptance by
his personal righteousness, and by a work which he did. For notwithstanding
this, Sin lay at his door. So Abel was justified, and became righteous Abel, as
he is called Mat. 23.25. But Cain went away not justified, for which he was
very wroth, and slew his brother Abel, who was the first Martyr; and he
suffered upon the account of this great fundamental truth, of justification by
an imputed righteousness, Sealing it with his blood. If you would then be found
in peace, being found in a justified estate, see that you be not found in this
way of Cain, but in the way of Blessed Abel, who by Faith offered unto God, a
more excellent Sacrifice, than Cain, etc. See Heb. 4.11.

4. Be without the spots of the Not-Children of God, and of such as are in an
unregenerate state, Deuteronomy. 32.5. Their spot is not the spot of his Children.
There is a great deal of difference betwixt the spots of the Not-Children of
God, and of the Children of God, for these have their spots. There are spots in
dead Carcases, and spots sometimes in living bodies; so there are the spots of
men dead in Sins, and of those that are alive to God. Sin reigning, Sin loved,
Sin committed without repentance, Godly sorrow, and reformation, is the spot of
men dead in sin, and of the Not-Children of God. Sin hated, sin loathed,
resisted, over which there is mourning after a godly sort, is the spot of those
that are quickened, and made alive to God. Let Us take Notice more particularly
of some spots of unregeneracy, which you must have purged away, if you look to
reign with Christ.

1. That spot of looking on the forbidden fruit as the fairest, and best; this
is a spot of unregeneracy. There began the first sin, and this is the issue and
product of it in corrupt Nature; a lusting after the forbidden fruit as the
fairest, this is the very image of the Earthly Adam. When Men can take, and eat
freely of the forbidden fruit, as more sweet, and pleasant because forbidden,
this is a manifest spot of the Not-Children of God. Such there are to whom
stolen waters are most sweet, and Bread of secrecies is pleasant; but the dead
are there, and being there, are in the depths of Hell.

2. To love, worship, and serve the Creature more than the Creature; to have
more care of the body than of the Soul, more regard to things temporal, then
eternal: to things earthly than to things Heavenly; this is a spot of
unregeneracy, and forbidds such to look for any inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ, and of God.

3. To love darkness; and hate the light; to love sin, and hate holiness, to
love the wicked, and hate the godly; is a spot of the Not-Children of God.

4. Delight in lying, is a spot of the Not-Children of God. Isa. 63.8. He said
surely they are my people, Children that will not lie, so he was their Savior.
But of such as will ly, such as delight in it, and make a practice of it, what
does the Lord say of such? surely they are Children that will ly, and therefore
are not my people, and to them I will be no Savior.

5. The mark of the Beast is a spot of unregeneracy, and of the Not-children of
God; this is either in the forehead, so as openly to own the power of the
Beast, and to profess to be his Worshippers; or in the right hand, to do the
work of the Beast and to give up their power to him, this is a spot of the
Not-children of God. for of such it is said Rev. 14.9. If any Man Worship the
Beast, and receive his Mark, the same shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of
God. they that believe as the Pope will have them believe, and Worship
according to his ordinances, and Commands, have his marks upon them, and are
not owned by the Lord as his, neither may expect any inheritance in his Kingdom.

6. Strive to be more and more cleansed from those spots, which the Children of
God, in a regenerate state, are too often defiled with. Thus,

1. Take heed of the spot of Pride. This is a hateful spot, which many times
defiles even the Children of God. Knowledge too often puffs up, gifts many
times puff up; the People of God should esteem others better than themselves,
but too apt they are to esteem themselves better than others. God would not
have his Children defiled with this spot. To prevent this in Paul, there was
given him a Thorn in the flesh, that he might not be lifted up in his Spirit
through the abundance of Revelations.

2. Take heed of the spot of covetousness, too much love to the World is many
times the spot of the Children of God. We read in Scripture of the idolatry of
covetousness, and of the iniquity of covetousness. There is the idolatry of
covetousness; I mean, that degree of it, which is a serving of Mammon, and is
inconsistent with the serving of God; of which Christ said, ye cannot serve God
and Mammon. This is that which excludes from the Kingdom of God, and makes men
incapable of an inheritance there, Ephesians. 5.5. Now this degree of covetousness
shall not be found in the Children of God. But there is besides this, mention
of the Iniquity of covetousness; which though it come not up to that degree of
idolatry before spoken of, yet it is iniquity; and the least degree of
covetousness is iniquity: and the iniquity of covetousness when it is in the
people of God, begets fatherly displeasure in God, Isa. 57.17. For the iniquity
of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him. But this smiting is in order to
the healing of this distemper. I have seen his ways, and will heal him. Take
heed therefore, as of that Idolatry of covetousness which is the spot of the
Not-children of God, so also of all Iniquity of covetousness.

3. Take heed of the spot of carnal security, and of negligence, and remissness
in duties; carnal security, slumbering, and sleeping was the spot even of the
wise Virgins; they neglect their watch, the Bridegroom comes, and finds them
sleeping. The thoughts of our going hence, and Christ's coming, should dwell
upon our hearts. What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch, and be not cold
and lukewarm, but be zealous and repent, be fervent in Spirit, serving the
Lord. Like Elias, Jam. 5.17. He prayed earnestly, or he prayed in prayer; so
pray in prayer, hear in hearing, do in doing.

4. Take heed of Babylonish spots, come out of her my people that ye partake
not in her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, superstition,
will worship; to be of a persecuting Spirit to beat fellow servants, these are
sins, of Babylon, and the People of God are sometimes in some degrees defiled
with these; which, if they hearken not to the call, partake not in her sins,
may bring some of the temporal Plagues of Babylon upon them.

3. The last branch of the Exhortation, is, be deligent that ye may be found of
him blameless, for this consider.

He that has the righteousness of Faith is blameless, so far as to be without
guilt; for he that believes is justified from all things Acts 13.39. No sin is
charged upon him to his condemnation, He is the Blessed Man, to whom the Lord
does not impute Sin. For he has an absolutely blameless righteousness imputed
to him, and received by Faith, which renders him blameless in respect of guilt.

Again he that hates the evil that he does, and complains of his body of sin, O
wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of Death? is so far
blameless that the evil he does, is charged not upon him, but sin that dwells
in him it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.

Lastly he that has sincerity of grace, is blameless in a Scripture-account,
and in a gracious esteem of God. A Noah, who was righteouss in his generations,
upright, and sincere toward God, is perfect, and blameless: A David, a Man
after God's Heart doing all his wills, is blameless. A Job, who is an upright
Man, fearing God, and eschewing evil, is blameless, and a perfect Man: such as
Zachary, and Elizabeth, who walk in all the Ordinances and Commands of God, are
blameless. Such as these are blameless in God's Gracious account, though not in
their own. They see much in themselves to bewail, much to be humbled for, much
to repent of, much that they blame themselves for, when God is yet pleased to
call them blameless Now be diligent that you may have that simplicity, and
godly sincerity, which may encourage you to hope, that God will out of his
abundant grace, and great love toward you, account you blameless. Avoid as much
as possible every thing blame worthy, and do what is commanded, and after all,
pray That you may be accounted worthy to escape the Judgments, which shall come
upon the World of the Ungodly, and to obtain that World which is to come, and
to stand before the Son of Man.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Benjamin Harris, at the Stationers Arms at the
East End of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
THE Accomplished Ladies Delight, in Preserving, Physic, Beautifying, and
Cookery: The Second Edition, with Large Additions Price 2 s.

War with the Devil: Or, the Young-Man's Conflict with the Power of Darkness;
Discovering the Corruption and Vanity of Youth, the Horrible Nature of Sin: In
a Dialogue, between an Old Apostate, and a Young Professor: The Fifth
Impression. Price 1 s.

The Second Part of the War with the Devil; The Grand Impostor Discovered: Or:
The Quakers Doctrine weighed in the Balance, and found wanting. A Poem, by way
of Dialogue; wherein their Chief and most concerning Principles are laid down;
and by the Authority of God's Holy Word, thereby Refuted. Price 1 s.

Animae Astrologiae: Or* A Guide to Astrologers; with a New Table of the Fixed
Stars, Rectifyed for several Years to come; and diverse other Illustrations: By
W. Lilly, Student in Astrology, Price 1 s. 6 d.

Summons to the Grave: Or, A Tim^ly Preparation for Death. Demonstrated in a
Sermon; Preached at the Funeral of John Norcost: With Two Elegies thereunto
prefixed, By the Author of War with the Devil. Price 8 d.

The History of the Young Converted Gallant: Or, Directions for the Reading of
that Divine Poem, War with the Devil, Showing the Readers thereof, how to Read
the same Poem aright in these four Respects, etc. First, In reference to the
Substance or History thereof. Secondly, In reference to the Intent or Mystery
thereof. Thirdly, In reference to the Consequent Doctrine thereof. Fourthly, In
reference to the Practical Application thereof. Compiled in a Poem; By John
Mason, Gentleman of Fordham in Cambridge-shire. Price 1 s.

The Beauty, Vigor and Strength of Youth bespoke for God: In a Sermon, lately
Preached to Young Men, from the Twelfth of Ecclesiastes, on Verse the First. By
Thomas Powel, Minister of the Gospel. Price 6 d.

Blessed Rest for the Burdened Sinner: Or, The only Center of the Soul. Wherein
is Discovered, First, Who he is that Invites, and calls Sinners to this Rest.
Secondly, The Encouragement to come unto him for Rest. Thirdly, Many
Obstructions and Impediments, which keeps back Sinners; with their
Unreasonableness answered. Fourthly, The Rest, that every one shall have, that
comes unto Christ. Delivered in several Sermons, from Matthew the 11.12. By
John Hopwood, Preacher of the Gospel.

The Mystery of the Temple and City. Described in the Nine Last Chapters of
Ezekiel, Unfolded. Also, these following Particulars are briefly handled:
First, The Calling of the Jews. Secondly, The Restitution of all Things.
Thirdly, The Decription of the Two Beasts, Rev. 13. Fourthly. The Day of
Judgment, and the World's Perishing by Fire. Fifthly, Some Signs of Times, when
the Fall of Babylon is near. Sixthly, Some Advantages, which the Knowledge of
these Truths will afford. Seventhly. The Conclusion of All, in some Counsels
and Directions. By William Alleine, M. A. sometimes Preacher of the Gospel at
Bristol.

The Spirit of Delusion Reproved: Or, The Quakers Cause fairly Heard, and
justly Condemned. Being an Answer to William Penn, George Fox, George
Whitehead, George Keith, Edward Buroughs, and several others, the most leading
Men amongst them: wherein their Horrid Perversion, and False and Dangerous
Interpretations of above Fifty Distinct Texts of Holy Scripture are plainly
Evinced. By Thomas Wilcon, Rector of Arrow in Warwickshire. Price 1 s.

Come and Welcome to Jesus Christ: Or, A plain and profitable Discourse upon
the Sixth of John, and Thirty seventh Verse. Showing the Cause, Truth and
Manner of the Coming of a Sinner to Jesus Christ, with his Happy Reception, and
Blessed Entertainment. By John Bunyan, Author of the Book, entitled, the
Pilgrim's Progress. Price 1 s. 6. d.

The Seaman's Spiritual Companion: Or, Navigation Spiritualized. Being a New
Compass for Seamen. By William Balmford; and Recommended to the Christian
Reader by J. F. Price 1. s.

The Life and Death of Mother Shipton: Being not only a True Account of her
strange Birth, and most Important Passages of her Life: But also of her
Prophecies, now newly Collected, and Historically Experienced, from the Time of
her Birth, in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, until this present Year,
1679. Containing the most Important Passages of State, during the Reign of
these Kings and Queens of England following.

Henry the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, King James,
K. Charles the First, K. Charles the Second.
Strangely preserved amongst other Writings belonging to an Old Monastery in
Yorkshire; and now Published for the Information of Posterity.

An exact Discovery of the Mystery of Iniquity, as it is now in practice
amongst the Jesuits, and other their Emissaries: With a particular Account of
their Antichristian and Devilish Policy. By Titus Oats, D. D. Price. 6 d.

A Salve for Soul-sores; being a Discourse on Christ's friendly Admonition to
Peter, wherein the Fall and Rising of Peter is at large considered; the Craft,
Potency, and Malice of Satan (that Arch-Enemy of our Salvation) discovered: His
yvarious Wiles, Stratagems, and Machinations invalidated: Several choice and
excellent Gospel-Truthes handled, and cleared from the Calumnies and Objections
of Gainsayers.) Here is also Milk for the Weak, Meat for the Strong, Music
for the Melancholic, and Wine for the Wounded: Here the Tempted may be
succored the Oppressed relieved, the Mourner comforted, and the Wanderer
directed. Delivered in sundry Sermonrs at first; and now published for the
benefit of God's Church in general. To which are added, Four Sermons, Preached
upon Sacramental-Occasions. By Thomas Powell, Preacher of the Gospel; and One
whom Satan has winnowed.

Of the Causes and Cure of sad disconsolate Thoughts in Christians: By one of
their sympathizing Fellow Members, W. Traughton.


