Absalom's Conspiracy; OR, THE TRAGEDY OF TREASON.
THere is nothing so dangerous either to Societies in General, or to particular
Persons, as Ambition; the Temptations of Sovereignty, and the glittering Luster
of a Crown, have been guilty of all the fearful Consequences that can be within
the compass of imagination: For this, Mighty Nations have been drowned in
Blood, populous Cities have been made desolate, laid in Ashes, and left without
Inhabitants: For this, Parents have lost all the sense and tenderness of
Nature; and Children, all the Sentiments of Duty and Obedience; the Eternal
Laws of Good and Just, the Laws of Nature and of Nations, of God and Religion,
have been violated; Men have been transformed into the cruelty of Beasts, and
into the Rage and Malice of Devils.

Instances both Modern and Ancient of this, are innumerable; but this of
Absalom is a Tragedy whose Antiquity and Truth, do equally recommend it as an
Example to all Posterity, and a Caution to all Mankind, to take care how they
imbarque in ambitious and unlawful Designs; and it is a particular Caveat to
all young men, to beware of such Counselors, as the old Achitophel, lest while
they are tempted with the hopes of a Crown, they hasten on their own Destiny,
and come to an untimely End.

Absalom was the third Son of David by Maachah, the Daughter of Talmai, King of
Geshur; who was one of David's Concubines; he seeing his Title to the Crown
upon the score of lawful Succession would not do, resolves to make good what
was defective in it, by open force, by dethroning his Father.

Now the Arts he used to accomplish his Design, were these: First, He studied
Popularity; he rose up early; he was industrious and diligent in his way; he
placed himself in the way of the Gate; and when any man came for Judgment, he
courteously entered into Discourse with him. This feigned Condescension, was the
first Step of his Ambition. Secondly, He depraved his Fathers Government; the
King was careless, drowned in his Pleasures; the Counselors were evil; no no
man regarded the Petitioners; Absalom said unto him, See thy matters are good
and right, it is but reason that you petition for; but there is no man that
will hear thee from the King; there is no Justice to be found; your Petitions
are rejected. Thirdly, He insinuates what he would do if he were in Authority;
how easy access should be to him; he would do them Justice; he would hear and
redress their Grievances, receive their Petitions, and give them gracious
Answers. Oh that I were made Judge in the Land, that every Man might come unto
me, and I would do him Justice. And when any man came to do him Obeisance, he
put forth his hand, and took him, and kissed him: And thus he stole away the
Hearts of the People from their Lawful King, his Father and Sovereign.

But all this would not do; he therefore joins himself to one Achitophel, an
old Man of a Shrewd Head, and discontented Heart. This Achitophel, it seems,
had been a great Counselor of David's; but was now under some Disgrace, as
appears, by Absalom's sending for him from Gilo, his City whither he was in
discontent retreated; because David had advanced Hushai into his Privy Council;
and no doubt can be made, but he was of the Conspiracy before, by his ready
joining with Absalom so soon as the matters were ripe for Execution.

Absalom having thus laid his Train, and made secret Provision for his intended
Rebellion, dispatches his Emissaries abroad, to give notice by his Spies, that
all the Confederates should be ready at the sound of the Trumpet, say, Absalom
Reigns in Hebron; and immediately a great Multitude was gathered to him: For
the the Conspiracy was strong; some went out of Malice, and some in their
simplicity followed him, and knew not any thing.

David is forced to fly from his own Son; but still he had a Loyal Party that
stuck close to him. Achitophel gave devilish Counsel, but God dissappointed it
strangely: For Hushai pretending to come over to their Party, put Absalom upon
a plausible expedient. which proved his Ruin. So impossible is it for Treason
to be secure, that no person who forms a Conspiracy, but there may be some, who
under pretense of the greatest kindness, may insinuate themselves, only to
discover their Secrets, and ruin their Intentions, either by revealing their
Treason, or disappointing it; and certainly, of all men, Traitors are least to
be trusted: For they who can be perfidious to one, can never be true to any.

The Matter comes at last to the decision of the Sword. Absalom's Party are
defeated, and many slain, and Absalom himself seeking to save himself by flight
in the Wood, is entangled in a Tree, by his own Hair, which was his Pride; and
his Mule going from under him, there left him hanging, till Joab came, and with
three Darts, made at once an end of his Life and the Rebellion. Thus ended his
youthful and foolish Ambition, making him an Eternal Monument of Infamy, and an
instance of the Justice of Divine Vengeance, and what will be the Conclusion of
Ambition, Treason and Conspiracy against Lawful Kings and Governors; A severe
Admonition to all green Heads, to avoid the Temptations of gray Achitophels.

Achitophel the Engineer of all this Mischief, seeing his Counsel despised, and
foreseeing the Event, prevented the hand of the Executioner, and in revenge
upon himself, went home and hanged himself, giving fair warning to all
treacherous Counselors, to see what their Devilish Counsels will lead them to
at last: Mischievous Counsel ever falling in Conclusion upon the Heads where
first it was contrived, as naturally as dirty Kennels fall into the
Common-Sewer.

Whatsoever was written aforetime, was written for our Instruction: For Holy
Men of God, spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

FINIS.
London, Printed in the Year, 1680.


