A SERMON Preached at OXFORD, BEFORE Sir Will. Walker, MAYOR of the said CITY;
Upon the 26th. of July 1685: Being the Day of THANKSGIVING, For the DEFEAT of
the REBELS IN Monmouth's REBELLION.

By Charles Allestree, A. M. and Student of Christ-Church.

OXFORD, Printed for Henry Clements, and Sold by Joseph Hindmarsh, at the
Golden-Ball in Cornhill over against the Exchange 1685.

Judges 5.31. And the land had rest forty years.

The whole verse runs thus,

So let all thine enemies perish, O LORD: but let them that love him, be as the
sun when he goes forth in his might. And the land had rest forty years.


IT is very easy for any Man, that considers the context of these words, and
the story upon which they are founded, to foretell the series of my ensuing
Discourse, and to recollect in his mind both the subject matter that arises
naturally from hence, and also to surmise the distinct sort of prosecution,
which at this time, upon this solemnity and occasion, I intend to make: For
whoever surveys the passages in this History and compares them with the
particulars of our late UNNATURAL REBELLION, will find such an Harmony and
Agreement, such a suitable Resemblance in every leading and preparatory
circumstance, that the same Trouble of representing the Affairs of one WAR,
will be a complete draught of all the occurrences of the other; And as the
parallel runs exact in most of the great Lines of both these Invasions, so (I
trust, by the mercy of God) the event will be answerable in all points, and
prove so too, that our Land as well as Palaestine, upon this Miraculous and
providential Defeat of our Enemies, may find the blessing annexed here in the
Text, of obtaining REST for FORTY YEARS.

In this chapter Deborah and Barak are making an (...), a Song of Victory to
the most High God, for the deliverance of Israel from the calamities of War,
from the danger of falling under a foreign Yoke, and of being oppressed by an
insulting, and devouring Enemy. Here we may observe Sisera, captain of the Host
of Jabin, King of Canaan, the irreconcilable enemy of Israel, bidding defiance
to the Israelites Army, and invading the country with such powerful Forces, as
on the one side gave certain hopes of victory and success to the Aggressors,
and threatened no less, on the other, than an utter Ruin and Extirpation both
of the People and their Government for ever. For the preparations (which Sisera
made against this expedition) seemed so formidably great, and consisted of such
vast Numbers of Experienced and Disciplined Men, that He bore himself above
Danger and Opposition, and looked for no more trouble in the Conquest of the
Land, than the Fatigues of an Orderly March could put him to.

Even the Mother of Sisera was so confident of her son's Triumph, that she only
waited for an express of the News of it; She did not in the least doubt of the
event of Battle, or think that it could possibly be determined otherwise, than
on her Sons side; She knew his strength, the courage of his Soldiers, and the
Conduct of their Leader, and therefore only wished for the Time of Action, and
to hear of the Engagement, being possessed with a strong Belief, that Conqest
must follow on course, and attend the Victorious Arms of her Son: In her
Richest Ornaments and best Attire, she staid at a convenient distance from the
Camp, expecting hourly to be brought to share in the solemnity of the Triumph:
She looked out at the Window, and cried through the Lattess, why is his chariot
so long in coming? Why tarry the wheels of his chariots? Have they not sped?
Have they not divided the prey, to every man a Damsel or two? to Sisera a prey
of diverse colors, a prey of diverse colors of Needlework, of diverse colors of
Needlework on both sides, meet for the Necks of them that take the spoil? v.
28.30.

So that you see the great thoughts, and the swelling expectations, they had
conceived of their Armies success, and that they dreamed of nothing but Laurel
and Conquest and so be invested in the full spoils of the Israelites. All the
Advantages that the prospect of victory could lay before them, was the sole
entertainment of their thoughts. The Slaughter of their Enemies, the Plunder of
Cities, the Rape of Women, and the Slavery of Captives was the common discourse
and expectation of these Invaders, and animated them with vigor and resolution
to maintain the Fight:

And yet if we advert to the end, we shall find the discomfiture of these
Forces, the Army shattered and defeated, and the General flying in a poor
disguise, in a habit beneath the dignity of a private Soldier, shifting for
himself in Woods and Lanes, and secret Recesses enduring the hardships of
Hunger and Thirst, deprived of sleep and all the conveniences of Life, and
supplicating at last at a Lonely house for a cup of Water to cool his Natural
Thirst, and to refresh his Spirits with a draught of moisture and sleep. To
that distress was this Mighty General reduced, that He who, some hours before,
had all the stores and provisions of the Country at his command, and the
richest pavilion in the Camp to rest in, with his Troops and Guards about him
for his Protection, looked now upon the offer of a little Milk, upon the
Accommodation of a private lodging, and the promise of a Woman's attendance, to
be not only the greatest kindness and relief to him in his distress, but also
the best security to his Person, as he lay down to take his Natural rest and
refreshment.

And yet as miserable and as deplorable as his condition really was, it could
not move any pity, or procure any commiseration to his Person; The remembrance
of his preceding cruelties, and the sense of the miseries He intended to have
acted upon Israel, extinguished compassion, and left no room for the common
effects of Humanity, so that the invitation of Jael, who diverted him from the
Road, into her House, proved a snare to him; She fully resolved upon his Ruin
and execution, and by one Generous stroke to revenge the disturbance he had
brought upon the Children of Israel; neither the softness of her Sex, nor the
tenderness of her Nature could restrain her hands from acting an Holy violence,
or from assaulting the Person with Death, that designed her Countries slavery;
she knew, that all Rebels and Invaders have lost their natural Right, and
forfeited the protection of those Laws which they come to subvert and destroy;
She knew, that in Extraordinary cases, every Person, of what ever sex, is
obliged to turn both Judge and Executioner too, of their enemies, and that
nature invests Mankind with as much Authority over the lives of Rebels and
Invaders, as over Wolves and Tigers and other Beasts of Prey; and that we ought
to embrace the first occasion to hunt and pursue 'em to Death; because in these
Instances, every delay of Justice, or Dilatory expectation of a legal Process,
may be dangerous, and expose the Government to a second shock, For the flight
or escape of an Arch-Traytor (which cannot by any method of restraint so
effectually be prevented as by Death) may enable him to prosecute his pretenses
again, and animate him with more Vigor to attempt a second Trial, and to
revenge the disgrace of his former miscarriage;

Guided therefore by this principle, and moved by an Impulse from Heaven, She
took a hammer, She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmans
hammer: And with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head, when she
had pierced and stricken through his Temples. At her feet he bowed, he fell, he
lay down: at her feet he bowed, he fell, where he bowed, there he fell down
dead. v. 26.27.

Thus was the end of Sisera; the calamity he intended to bring upon others, was
executed upon himself, and returned upon his own head; He died Ignominiously,
and perished by the weak hand and instrument of a Woman, and (as it ever
happens in all Routs and Disorders) left his Soldiers scattered and divided in
such small parties in the Country, that they became an easy prey to their
Adversaries, and were slaughtered without making any considerable resistance or
defense.

When this Heroic exploit was wrought, and Vengeance fully taken upon Sisera,
Jael stood openly at the door; and was prepared both to observe the Flight and
pursuit of the enemy, and also to receive the Addresses, and Congratulations of
the Israelites for her service: She saw the Troops and the Chariots flying, and
promiscuous Havoc and slaughter that was made of the enemy; And though this
indiscriminating way of destruction might tend in some measure to the
establishment of peace again, and be a Political means to restore the happiness
of Israel, yet still she knew, that the Glory of putting an end to all Future
Fears, was her work alone, and solely to be ascribed to her Magnanimity and
prowess. For what advantage can it be to a Nation, to destroy barely the common
herd of Soldiers, whilst the chief Captain is escaped in safety, and remains
alive, to take all opportunities of renewing his pretenses again, and fomenting
the causes of War hereafter? The security of Public peace consists principally
in the death of him, whose Authority began and commenced the Invasion, and
whose Popularity and Interest prevailed upon others to espouse and abet his
cause with the utmost hazard of their lives; Now this political safety was
wrought by her and perfectly accomplished in the destruction of Sisera; and yet
to make the security more lasting, and to engage the protection of providence
over the Nation, for the future, She calls Barak, the son of Abinoam, to share
in the joy, and to return Thanks to Heaven for the deliverance. She shows him
the Trunk and body of Sisera, and relates the Holy Arts she used to abuse his
credulity, and bring him absolutely under her own power; And when all the
History was finished, and a full contemplation taken of God's miraculous
providence in this Victory, Barak jointly with Deborah (who at that time judged
Israel) makes a solemn Form of Thanksgiving and Address to the Lord for his
Mercies; And it is observable that this return of praises, this National
acknowledgment procured the Blessing, which is mentioned here in the Text, That
the land had rest forty years.

By the word REST, is understood a freedom both from Foreign and Domestic
enemies. For though in this place it is occasionally mentioned, as an Issue
flowing from the defeat of Foreign Forces, yet it must comprehend and take in
the other sense also. For if a respite from Civil War was not equally meant, as
well as an universal peace abroad, what advantage could it be to the Israelites
to be freed from the Invasion of their Neighbors, and yet be up to the ears in
Blood themselves, and be cutting one another Throats at home: It would be the
exchange of one misery for another of a more dreadful and afflicting nature; so
that in short by REST I understand an uninterrupted enjoyment of peace.

I. -- From these words I shall first treat of the happiness, which peace in
general brings to a Nation.

II. -- Secondly, I shall represent the great advantages of enjoying peace for
so considerable a Duration, as the space and compass of FORTY YEARS amounts to.

III. -- And lastly, I shall discover by what means this Blessing of seeing
Public peace entailed upon us and conveyed down to posterity, may best be
attained; and that is by returning Praise and Thanksgiving to God for every
remarkable Instance of his providence, and more particularly for every great
deliverance which he has wrought for a Nation.

But before I proceed upon these Heads, I shall crave leave to show the
concurrence of our REBELLION with this which I have described to you from my
Text; and shall examine by the way the reasons and pretenses that gave Birth
and Growth to it; and in this prosecution I shall tie my self up to the method
of tracing it in these several parts of Resemblance, both in the formidableness
of the Invasion, the greatness of our enemies hopes, and their utter defeat at
the last.

We are assembled here, in obedience to our SOVERAIGNE's command, and in
pursuit of his pious inclinations to render our utmost tribute of Praise and
Adoration to Heaven, for the signal deliverance which God has been pleased to
vouchsafe this Nation, and for the mercy of rescuing us from the miseries of a
Civil and Intestine war: A War, that in all appearance seemed to have been
contrived for the destruction of all that is dear to us, and to have involved
us all in Rapine and Blood: A War, that shak'd not only the Foundations of our
Religion but what was coequal to Christianity it self) our MONARCHY too, and
was raised by SONS of BELIAL to have extinguished this glory of our ISLE, this
race of HAEREDITARY MONARCHS, and the light of the Gospel also: A War, that was
undertaken upon such colorable pleas, and carried such visible danger along
with it, that not only the present Age but future Generations were likely to
feel the Bloody effects of it, and Unborn Children might hereafter have been
made sensible of it is Rage, and have been subject to the dismal consequences of
it: A War of the greatest Horror and Dread that ever History could give an
Instance of, or our own apprehensions frame an Idaea off; For so violent were
our Inflammations at home, occasioned by the false suggestions of an Unruly and
Fanatical party, so much heightened and improved were our discontents by these
Men's industry and care, and so conscious were the fugitives abroad of our
distractions, and of the good affection the Multitude bore to their cause, that
they presumed on Victory, and did not on the least question that success would
crown their enterprise. Their expectations were raised to that pitch, that in
all their debates they had not any apprehensions of being defeated, but their
discourse was founded upon the supposition of the ruin of the Government, and
so their thoughts were wholly employed in the contrivance and choice of a new
Frame or Model to be erected in it is stead. For when the two GRAND REBELS had
concerted their measures, and agreed upon the INVASION, they neither of 'em
imagined, that in the several Kingdoms, where they resolved to Land, they
should meet with such opposition from the King's Forces, as should be
sufficient to retard their progress, or make any compitent head against them;
No, they swallowed that point, and took it for an indisputable proposition,
that the present Establishment must expire and end. All their debates in
Council rested upon this complex Question, whether Monarchy should be totally
abolished, and a new Commonwealth created upon it is Ruins? And though their
divided Interests would not suffer them to come to a full resolution in the
matter, and they left the dispute to be decided by a conference hereafter, or
(what is more likely) by the Sword, yet their deportment evinces the great
assurances and hopes, and the full persuasion, they had of success. For though
this subject was not adjusted betwixt them, yet they centered in this
resolution to attempt the Invasion, and make a descent upon this Island, in
several places at once, that so the King's Forces might be distracted, and
their friends have an opportunity of coming with ease amongst them, and joining
one of their Armies which would have been a difficult task to men in remote
places, had there been but one ARMY in the Field to invite and receive them.
And yet this cautionary method did not so much argue distrust and fear as
prudence; For they could not be so divested of common reason, as to think that
a whole Nation would run mad together, and as well vacate their Oaths of
Allegiance, as cancel all those other obligations, which the endearments of our
Sovereign's Reign have laid upon us; some show of resistance they could not
choose but apprehend, and think that the principles of Loyalty, which the
Church of England teaches, would unavoidably detain her True sons under strict
sense of Duty and obedience to their Prince. However the numbers they dreaded
of this sort were infinitely overballanc'd by the prospect of all the divided
Sects and Malcontents flowing into their Army: So that, in much confidence,
they undertook with all the Mercenary powers, they could collect abroad, to
hasten to Sea, and begin their Voyage not doubting but, upon their first
appearance upon English-ground, and Publishing a Declaration of the Reasons and
Motives that induced them to COMBINE, Ten thousands of unwary People would have
been prevailed upon to join in the same Cause, and assist them with their
utmost might and endeavors.

And indeed there were two pretenses started, which being adverted to, and
supposed to be the real truth, would have proved of more moment and advantage
to the late TRAITOR's cause, than all the succors he brought along with him.
The first was the common pretext of protecting Religion, which though it never
did nor ever can advance a Rebellion; yet never failed of being made use of to
this purpose in every Civil War that has been commenced in a Christian society.
And the second was, the pretext of Title and Proximity of Blood.

Now these two considerations are very great Incentives, and are apt in their
own nature to engage Mankind upon very violent courses for the preservation of
'em: For what would not people that have a zeal for God's worship, and an
honor for the Royal stock, be inclined to do, to secure the purity of
Religion, and to maintain the Descent of the Crown in the Right Line? And yet
(as I said just now) Religion is the worst thing in the World to countenance or
support Rebellion: All it is precepts being of a direct contrary tendency, and
enjoining us Obedience to the Supreme powers under no less penalty than eternal
damnation. And Christ who refused to have his person defended by violence, will
not surely have his Religion propagated by such means.

But however granting that Men might lawfully take up Arms for the maintenance
of the True Religion: yet, even upon this supposition, No man can be authorized
to raise Rebellion in these Kingdoms. For has our RELIGION been in the least
danger of being invaded or snatched from us? Do we not enjoy it, and are we not
likely to have it continued in all it is essential purity, and primitive
Holiness to our posterity for ever. Have we not the free use of the Sacraments,
and all the Ordinances of God uncorrupted for the assistance of our Devotion,
and for the enlivening of our Faith? And have we not the promise of our King
for the continuance of these spiritual enjoyments to us? Of a KING, that never
had the imputation and scandal of breaking his Word, or dealing unsincerly in
any Instance of his Life? This is so remarkable a Character, and so peculiar to
his Majesty, that even his Adversaries had never impudence enough to assault
him with this charge, or to deny him the honor of being always Just and true
to his engagements. We cannot therefore have any color to doubt of the
continuation of our Religion, or suspect the faithfulness of that DECLARATION,
which of his mere Grace and voluntary motion, he was pleased upon his first
coming to the CROWN to make to his Honorable Privy Council, and renewed again
in the same Terms in a greater solemnity, before the Three Estates assembled in
Parliament. Can any thing be more irrational and absurd, than to entertain an
opinion, that He who in private, betwixt himself and some Humble petitioner,
has ever proved punctual and observant of his Word, should now at the last turn
inconstant to his ancient course, and violate his Faith to a Nation, when the
whole Kingdom would become witnesses of his falsehood and upbraid him with
praevarication? Such a dishonorable carriage on our parts would not only be a
diminution of that Respect, which this Nation has ever been used to return
their Respective Monarchs, but it would be senceless and ridiculous in it self,
and contradict the common rules of reason.

And yet if Men will be harkening to their own suggestions of fear, and study
their own disquiet so much, as to distrust every promise, and conclude it vain
and elusory, because it is possible it might have been given with an intention
to deceive, yet there is one unerring sort of Trial, one way of exploring Truth
and convincing our selves, and that is by a continued Series and Flux of TIME.
For those that will not at first give credit to a bare asseveration, must
believe the reality of that Man's intention, that made it, when there is nothing
done in the Revolution of time, but what strengthens and confirms it: Now we
have had half a years experience of our KING's government over us, have had
leisure enough to observe the Justice of his Reign, and find all events
answerable to his first Assertion, that HE WOULD MAKE IT HIS ENDEAVOR TO
PRESERVE THIS GOVERNMENT BOTH IN CHURCH AND STATE, AS IT IS NOW BY LAW
ESTABLISHED.

For have not all the Vacancies, that belong to the disposal of the CROWN been
carefully filled and supplied with Men of Great learning and Abilities to
support our Religion, of Great zeal and inclination toward it, and whose
secular Interest is inseparably bound up in the preservation of it? And can
there be any furer Argument of the KING's sincerity, than his readiness to make
choice of such instruments to fill the vacant places in the Church, who are
every way qualified to maintain the Established Religion, both in their
Abilities, and willingness of mind, and also are prompted to it from the
consideration of their own Temporal Concernments? All arguments conspire for a
sure belief of the KING's resolution to keep inviolabely his WORD, and there
neither is nor can be any single instance produced to weaken or invalidate the
credit of it.

So that granting we might fight for our Religion, if it was in danger of being
lost, yet no man upon this Plea, can be justified in his attempts upon the
present constitution and Government, and it is surely much better and more
agreeable to the precepts of Christianity, to sit still, and enjoy it with
content and Thankfulness, than by engaging in Rebellion to lose and destroy it.
For that would certainly have been the Issue, and we could have had no Religion
at all, had God, in punishment to this Nation, suffered the late Rebellion to
have been prosperous and successful. For what Religion could HE have been
supposed to have been zealous for, who had so far debauched the natural light
of his conscience as to esteem Adultery and Rebellion to be no sins? I grant
that, in a sudden Transport, men may sometimes be hurried upon the commission
of ADULTERY, and yet, upon a serious and particular repentance, be reconciled
to the Church, and prove very good Christians again; But He, that in his cooler
thoughts, at the last Hour, with all his senses entire, and the full use of his
judgment, shall undertake to palliate the sin, or extenuate the guilt of it, is
in a fair disposition to receive any Religion, and may easily be brought to
embrace the ALCORAN, and exchange Christianity for Mahometism. So that if
Religion can at any time bear mankind out in opposition to the Higher Powers,
it would with much more reason have justified us against the late REBEL's claim
and pretensions, even allowing his Title to have been just; But indeed our
Divine institution can do no such thing, it is as far from giving Indulgence to
invade any Man's Right or Property, as it is from excusing any seditious
practice against a Lawful Governor: though it must necessarily have obliged us
to have resisted his Usurpation upon another score, upon the account of the
Insufficiency of his Title, which comes next to be considered.

Now this is a subject which has been searched to the Bottom, and examined
ABOVE with all the fairness of procedure imaginable, in a Venerable, Just and
August consistory of men: And as it has been rejected there upon a serious and
Impartial enquiry, as Fabulous and without Ground, so no doubt but, upon a
rational discourse, it will appear so to every considering man. For First I
will take these Two preliminaries for granted; That every Father has a greater
tenderness and affection for his Son, than his Brother; especially if there be
no disobedience in his Child, nor any deformity in his Person to alienate his
Love from Him; And Secondly, I shall suppose, that it tends more to the Honor
of a Father to have his Kingdom descend directly down upon his Son, than to
demise it to a Brother or to any Collateral branch of His family.

Now these things being premised, it is very obvious to recollect that never
Father loved a Son with greater passion and tenderness, than our late most
excellent Sovereign did the Duke of Monmouth; and never any man had stronger
Reasons, or more forcible Inducements to engage his love; For the personal
qualifications and address of his Son, the filial Duty and respect he always
used to return in his Younger years, were so many motives to extort the utmost
Tribute, which nature in this kind, could pay; so that the KING grew lavish and
profuse in his bounty, He heaped honors upon him, and loaded him with riches,
and not only advanced him as high as 'twas possible for a subject to be
promoted, but (what was infinitely above all honors) gave him the first place
in his affection: And when his Kindness had fixed him in that station of
Grandeur, as to render him popular and courted by a Faction, when he presumed
by the instigation of his party to lay claim to the Crown, and assert his
Legitimacy by the promiscuous mouths of the Rabble, and caused it to be
whispered abroad, that there were not only witnesses, but Records under hand
and seal of his Mother's Marriage to the King: His Majesty (out of a just
regard to the sacredness of Truth, and without diminishing his love to him) did
not only declare upon the word and honor of a Prince that there never was any
contract of Marriage betwixt Him and the said Duke's mother, but summoned the
pretended witnesses before him in Council, to speak their knowledge, and give
in their evidence concerning the matter inquestion; Now they all of 'em
severally disclaimed the knowledge of any such thing, or the being conscious of
any Records that could attest it, and only said that their names were abused
for the support of a Lie, without their privity or consent. And this
transaction, and the King's positive Averment was enrolled in all the Courts of
Record in Westminster, with the hands and attestation of every member of
Council at the bottom of it.

Now this Affair was transacted at a season, and in such a Juncture, when the
KING had been several years married to the Queen without any hopes of Issue by
Her. So that if truth had been industriously concealed and stifled at first for
the better facilitating the treaty of Marriage, and for the removing the
impediments, that might obstruct this Illustrious Princess her consent to the
Alliance, because upon such a discovery her children must have been postpon'd,
and allowed to have only a secondary relation to the CROWN, yet now it might
have been owned and publicly avowed without any detriment or damage to her
Interest; and yet notwithstanding this favorable conjuncture, and the
extraordinary kindness of the KING toward him, his Legitimacy is disclaimed,
and absolutely denied with the solemn protestations of his Father; which is an
undeniable evidence, that these were the words of soberness and truth;
delivered purposely by that ADMIRABLE PRINCE to prevent the effusion of blood,
and the great slaughter of Men, which must unavoidably follow the belief of
starting of such a title. Nay even MONMOUTH himself no more believed that he
was the lawful son of the late KING, than any man of this Auditory, or I that
am arguing for the truth against this opinion; For in his Letter to our present
SOVEREIGN (which you may find attested by the hands of two Reverend Bishops,
and other worthy divines of the Church of England, Men of such approved
integrity and sincerity that they cannot be supposed to cheat the World with a
Lie) he voluntarily declares, that his Father assured him, that He never was
married or promised in marriage to his Mother.

Now what clearer proof or demonstration can be offered to invalidate the
belief of this man's right to the Throne, than to have his Legitimacy disowned
by himself, and protested against by his Father, at a time when he loved him
above all wordly enjoyments, and could receive no possible advantage by
concealing the secret, and keeping it from the knowledge of the World? And yet
the matters are thus clear, and it is evident beyond dispute, that RELIGION
cannot justify REBELLION, neither had MONMOUTH any sort of right to the
Imperial CROWN of this Realm, yet we know what a dangerous and formidable
Rebellion was lately raised in the Western parts of this Kingdom upon no other
ground, but the impudence of imposing these two falsehoods upon the World. Some
people even against demonstration, will have that which makes for their
Interest, and suits best to their inclinations, pass for truth; or at least
they will lay hold of it and embrace it as such, because it may contribute to
promote their Revenge and Ambition, or advance some other secular concernment:
So that when the misguided Prince had sucked in these false principles, and
landed in the West to make good his claim, his Abetters flocked to him in so
great shoals and numbers, and saluted him with such cheerfulness and
acclamations of joy, that in a very little time he grew so strong, that neither
he nor any of his followers dreaded the event of War, or apprehended a defeat
of so numerous a body of Men, of proportionable courage and Resolution; They
presumed at first on victory, and thought their own strength sufficient to
conquer and overthrow the opposition of their enemies; and yet they had such
moral assurances of new supplies, and so great an expectation of their Forces
being multiplied, and increased with the additional succors and Auxiliaries of
Men, that would be induced to follow their example, that they turned their
thoughts to the consideration of dispensing Rewards, and dividing the great
Offices of state amongst themselves. To this stupendous height was their
confidence advanced! and in all probability it had not been a vain or an
impracticable supposition, had not the KING in his wisdom provided for the
preservation of his Throne and Person by securing, under strict guards and
restraint, all those disaffected Citizens, whose principles and discontents
rendered them justly suspected and obnoxious to the Government, and by this
providential policy cut off the supplies of money, which was secretly conveyed
through their hands, and transmitted for the assistance of the Rebels, and for
the maintenance of the War. (And by the way I cannot but observe that all those
persons who in other places were thus confined and imprisoned for a time, are
infinitely obliged to his Majesty's goodness and care, for using this
compendious method to secure them from the Temptation of running into
Rebellion, ruining their Families, and damning their own Souls for ever.) When
therefore the source that fed this REBELLION was stopped, when the Nerves and
sinews of War were shrunk, and moneys fell short in the Camp, they then
resolved, by one bold attempt, to attack the ROYAL ARMY, and by the advantage
of a surprise to force their way into some other Country for Relief and
Assistance: Now this contrivance was formed with so much Art, and managed with
so much Dexterity, Prudence, and Conduct, that had not God interposed, and
miraculously baffled them with his own mighty hand, more visibly than by any
Humane power or strength, they had not only made themselves masters of the
Field and Cannon, but had ravaged the Country, seized the Richest spoils and
Treasures of the Camp for their Booty, and all the Ensigns of Honor had been
so many Trophys of their victory. But (...), the Providence of God disappointed
their designs; the Stars in their course fought against Sisera, and even as
inconsiderable and as unintelligent creatures lent their Aid, and contributed
to the overthrow of our Enemies; For their Horse were not able to sustain the
Onset, or bare the discharge of a Volley without confusion and disorder; but
fled upon the first shock, leaving their Infantry exposed to several varieties
of death, which were justly inflicted upon them without Discrimination or Mercy.

Even the GENERAL himself, upon this discomfiture consulted his safety by
Flight, and attempted his escape in such an ignominious Habit, that he appeared
really in outward show, to be of that Low Rank and Order of Men, to which the
hainousness of his crimes had degraded him, and the justice of the Laws
condemned him to before. He tried Two days the extremity of Fortune, and was
not only divested of Friends, but deprived even of the common sustenance of
Life, Sleep and Necessaries. He durst not venture himself abroad into the hands
of Ingenious men, being pressed down with the load of his own Guilt, and
fortified against a surrender of himself by the greatness of the Reward, that
his head was pris'd at; But chose rather to abscond himself in Thickets and
Woods, and to relieve his hunger with Peascods and green Fruit, than to expose
himself to the mercy of a People, whom he had justly provoked to the highest
degrees of Outrage and Violence; When he had languish'd in this condition, and
fed upon Bare Nature so long, that he groaned under more Corporal weaknesses
and Agonies of mind than the purchase of a Kingdom could recompense, He was at
last seized by the vigilance of the Soldiery, and conducted safe to the Royal
presence, being insensible of his Guilt and offering no manner of excuse for
the Cruelty of his Invasion: The sentence and Doom he received here was
proportionable to the greatness of his crimes; for though it was circumstantiated
with Mildness, in regard to the honor of his former Quality, yet death being
the end and satisfaction of the Law, and every man measuring the Ignominy of it
by the crimes that produce it, and his Treasons being of the deepest Dye, we
may pronounce that he dyed with more Shame and Disgrace than Sisera, being made
a spectacle to the World, and falling by the Hands of a public executioner at
last; And so let all thine (AND THE KING's) enemies perish, O LORD: but let
them that love him be as the sun, when he goes forth in his might. And the
land had rest forty years.

From these words I proposed first to treat of the Happiness, which PEACE in
general brings to a Nation.

I. -- Now I shall no further prosecute this subject, or handle it in any
larger method, than as it is introductory and leads me to the consideration of
my next Head; because it is so plain and evident in it self that it needs no
Illustration or proof. Every man will allow, that PEACE has the same important
influence over the Body politic, as Health and vigor of Constitution has over
the Natural one. Without it no enjoyment can be relished, no pleasures tasted,
no Innocent Friendship or conversation delighted in, but even those things,
which otherwise would prove the most grateful Accomodations to the palate,
become nauseous or Insipid. And is not mankind exactly in the same case, for
all manner of enjoyments, amidst the Noise and Rumors of War? How are the
Generous and Great Spirits (that spend themselves and their stock too in the
improvement of the public) sunk at the News, and let fall their endeavors,
since the next Victory may ravish the Glory of their work from them, and render
it either a prey to the Conquerors Avarice, or a Victim to his Superstition?
How visibly, in such a juncture, is Generosity and Charity checked and
discouraged? since the next decisive Battle may not only alienate the Revenue
it self, but possibly erase the name, and make the memory of the benefaction to
be lost too: How deserted and unimprov'd lie all the Arts of Trade and
Husbandry? how visibly must prodigality be advanced? and the concerns of
Families neglected? because it is evidently the same thing in effect to enjoy
no stores or provisions at all, as to see 'em either Plundered from 'em in the
Barn, or trodden down in the Field before Maturity: the same thing for mankind
to leave no estate behind 'em for their children, as to see it violently seized
before their eyes, and taken possession of by Rebels and Strangers: nay more,
how dangerous and sufpected do even our Friendships, in the time of civil War,
become? For no man can have such an assurance in another, but he may reasonably
fear that some Temptation may prevail upon him to betray and Sacrifice his
Friend, and so the considence, he supposed in him, may turn his snare and Ruin;
In short, not only our Temporal enjoyments but even our Spiritual concernments,
Religion suffers and almost expires in the heat and fury of a civil War; But in
the Affluence of peace, we may (like the Israelites in Goshen) enjoy a cheerful
serenity, and participate of all the Desirable blessings that God and Nature
can furnish us with, whilst all the World around us is in Darkness and
Confusion. The Land prospers and flows with Milk and Honey, Commerce and Trade
are improved, the reputation of a Nation exalted, the Sacred person of our KING
revered at home, and adored abroad for his Grandeur and Magnificence, the
honor of God and his Religion promoted, and the great business of Devotion
carried quietly on without interruption or molestation; and in fine all the
blessed advantages, that tend either to render us happy here or hereafter, lie
before us. PEACE therefore being so great a Blessing in it is consequences and
effects, I shall, in the Second place, recount the happiness of a Nation, that
is possessed of it for the space and compass of FORTY YEARS.

II. -- Forty Years is not only a very great period of our Time, but has, ever
since the flourishing of the Patriarchs been esteemed the most considerable
portion of Man's life, in any Climate of the World; It must needs therefore be
acknowledged a Blessing, deserving our utmost thanks, to enjoy this long series
and succession of Time, in a constant serenity of Peace without any molestation
of War to chequer or pall the enjoyment of it. For whoever duly considers the
time of Infancy, and observes how little obnoxious those tender years are to
the impressions either of private calamities or public sorrows, must abstract
from the Computation all Minors or children under the Age of discretion, and
date the beginning of his account from the expiration of Sixteen years at the
least: (for before the completion of that time, no person can in a due measure
contemplate his own sufferings, or be truly sensible of the miseries of State)
and from thence measuring the compass of Forty years, the sum reaches to the
period of a Man's ordinary Age, or at least it brings him to that height and
degree of it, which by the constitutions of all Kingdoms upon earth, is
dispensed from Military service, and exempted from Attendance in War: So that,
in this sense, the bestowing of PEACE for Forty years, is in effect the
granting a lease of it for a Man's whole life.

But since Number it self is not Infinite, much less so inconsiderable a
quantity of it, and Forty years of Peace must speedily be run out and swallowed
up in War, let us consider the great Advantages that this PROMISE brought to
the public, or to a new Race of men under other circumstances, that did not
share the full time of peace, nor knew the beginning of it is Reign, and let us
examine the great reason, which they had, to value the happiness of so many
Halcyon days, as had elapsed over the Nation before their Birth.

Now we know that the Israelites were a sort of people that wandered in the
Desert, and for some time had no fixed or certain habitation to reside in; And
even the Country which they did possess at last, was of a very narrow compass
and extent, easily traveled through in a few days March, and as easily measured
with the Number of a few Paces. They were surrounded on all sides with enemies,
and they that hated them were their Neighbors; They had no Garrisons or
Frontier Towns either to defend their Boundaries, or enlarge their Borders: And
as they did thus lie open to the encroachments of every Invader, so they never
were freed from the Incursions of their enemies without a particular Miracle
and Providence of God; and it is observable that they-lost more men in their
Engagements, and in disputing their Spot of Ground, than any of the Four
Monarchys of the World ever lost at a time in a single pitched Battle; and
these Encounters came so frequent and so thick upon them, that it is deservedly
esteemed a Miracle, that they were not dispeopled and brought to excision. Is
it not therefore, judging by all Humane measures, a vast happiness to a Nation
in these circumstances, to be freed from the Terrors and destruction of War,
and to enjoy peace and plenty for so considerable a season, as might enable 'em
to repair their Losses with a new race and production of Inhabitants, and give
'em time by Natural causes to increase to that degree of strength, as should
empower them to oppose and repel the force of their Enemies. So that certainly
upon this consideration, upon the account of the growth and Peopling the Land
again, it was an inestimable Blessing to obtain the security and promise of
Rest for Forty years.

And is our condition so distinguishable in this particular from the children
of Israel, that Rest of the same duration will not be equally as great a
kindness, and lay as universal an obligation upon us, as it did upon them? Have
we not the like reason to rejoice upon the same confidence and assurance, being
seated in a Climate so desirable, as invites not only the Visits, but the
Depredations of our Neighbors? Does not the Richness of our Soil, the
Fruitfulness of our Land, and the Treasures of the Inhabitants become a
Temptation for the Inrodes of Invaders from abroad, or for the Assaults of
Domestic enemies at home? Is not the happiness of this Island such an
Invitation to Ambition, as Beauty is an allurement to a Rape? And have we not
been so constantly harrass'd, and almost dispeopled with War, that in all the
History of England, for the space of Six hundred years and upwards, ever since
the CONQUEST, there has not been so long a Vacation, as to comprehend the space
of half this time, and give us a succession of PEACE for Twenty years together?
But either Intestine broils have disturbed our Rest, or Foreign Invasions
called us to the vindication of our Honor, and to the Defense of our Country,
by the Sword. Have we not reason therefore to lay hold of the promise of Rest
for Forty years, and to embrace it with all the joyfulness imaginable, and
diligently enquire after the Means of attaining and securing it? which I told
ye, in the last place, was to be accomplished effectually by returning Praise
and Thanksgiving to God, for every Signal Deliverance which he has been pleased
to vouchsafe to a Nation.

III. -- Now it is highly reasonable upon this Account, because in all
victories God has not only a signal share and part in the purchase; but some
there are so miraculously atcheiv'd, and wonderfully wrought, that the whole
operation is solely to be ascribed to his immediate power and efficiency, and
not to any humane policy and Conduct. And of this Nature was the Deliverance
which we commemorate this day, being visibly effected by his Mighty hand and
outstretch'd Arm. We know that in all Engagements, the Glory of a Conquest
(however purchased) is ever imputed to the Bravery of the General, that
commanded and led the Soldiers on; And surely in a Christian State we ought to
advance the glory higher, and refer it solely to God, who in a peculiar manner
is styled The LORD OF HOST: Now this standing Appellation of Honor, which he
has been pleased to give himself, was not barely a Temporary title, appropiated
to the constitution of the Israelites, because he personally led them to War,
fought their Battles, and governed them by a THEOCRICY, but is adapted to the
state and condition of all the EMPIRES upon earth, because in every Country, he
does in an eminent manner preside and Govern all Occurrences of War; And his
providence, in no Instance of Humane Affairs is so visible as in the Disposal
of the events of Battle. Not unto us therefore, not unto us but unto thy Name
be all Honor and Glory.

But the Best way to raise our Gratitude proportionable to the Deliverance, is
to take a Prospect and full view of the Complication of Miseries, which the
mercy of God has released us from.

Now what a Load and oppression of Grief must there needs have been upon the
Spirits of the present Generation of Men in the late REBELS success? In that
nothing that was Sacred, nothing that was Dear, nothing that was innocent,
could have been supposed to have remained inviolated in his prosperous and
Triumphant Rebellion. Majesty it self and the Royal Dignity must have been
Sacrificed, and trodden under Foot: All the Religious parts of our Devotion
would have been prostituted to His, and his Accomplices superstitious Avarice;
The Revenue of the Church must have been alienated, and made an Oblation to his
greedy Appetite and Sacrilegious Desire. All the properties of the Subject
would have been exposed, and lain wholly at the mercy of these Invaders. The
Liberties of a Freeborn People would have been Subject to his Arbitrary Will
and pleasure; and in short the Lives and Fortunes of all Englishmen had been
absolutely dependent upon the Breath of his mouth, and, what is more, all these
Miseries would have been entailed upon Future Generations, and plagued
Posterity for a succession of many Rolling years together.

And shall not we in the lowest posture of Devotion and Humility, think our
selves obliged to return our Thanks to Almighty God, that the Breath of our
Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord is not taken in the Pit that was prepared
for him, but is escaped as a Bird from the snare of the Fowler? Shall not our
Gratitude rise in some Degree and Proportion to the sense we conceive of the
greatness of the Blessing? And shall not our Breasts be filled with true
Notions of the Deliverance, and express it is motions in a suitable Return of
Praise and Thanksgiving, for all the Mercies that he has showed to Israel, and
the wonders he has wrought for his Servant David?

Let then the meditation and Reflection upon these Calamities, which by a Signal
providence we have escan'd excite in us a hearty Thanksgiving not only for this
late Deliverance, but also for all the Public Mercies which his Goodness has
poured down upon this Nation.

To him therefore, who is the Giver of all Victory, be ascribed all Glory and
Honor, from this time forth and for evermore.

FINIS.

