Animadversions On that part of Mr. ROBERT FERGVSON'S BOOK, Entitled, The
INTEREST of REASON IN RELIGION, Which Treats of JUSTIFICATION: In a LETTER to a
Friend.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

SIR,
I Return you with Mr. Ferguson's Book my hearty thanks for the Loan of it. I
have read it, and find many things well said in it. And where I find anything
otherwise, I impute it not to his want of ability if the Cause would bear it;
but the Cause it self in those particular Instances which I suspect him to be
defective in. For neither he nor any other, of what ability soever he be, can,
as Solomon says, make that straight which God has made crooked, Eccles. 7.13.
And therefore the greater the parts be of any man, who yet cannot make work of
a Cause he undertakes, it does but make me so much the more doubtful of the
goodness of that Cause, if it were any whit doubtful to me before.

I will give you one instance of this nature out of Mr. Ferguson's book, Chap.
2, Sect 10. Where he asserts that Mr. Sherlock's Notion (as he calls it) of
Justification, is not any ways maintainable but by perverting innumerable
texts from their plain and natural Sense to a Metaphorick: and that it is
accompanied with this fatal unhappiness of turning agreat part of the Bible
into mere insignificant and empty Metaphors. P. 402. 403. And then represents
Mr. Sherlock's notion thus. That we are only justified by believing and obeying
the Gospel of Christ. That the Sacrifice of Christ's death and the
Righteousness of his life have no other influence upon our acceptance with God,
but that to them we owe the Covenant of Grace: That is, God being well pleased
with the obedience of Christ's life and the Sacrifice of his death, entered
into a new Covenant with mankind, wherein he promises pardon of Sin and
eternal life to those who believe and obey the Gospel. So that the
Righteousness of Christ is not the formal cause of our Justification, but the
Righteousness of his life and death is the Meritorious Cause whereby we are
declared Righteous and rewarded as Righteous persons. The Covenant of Grace,
which God for Christ's sake has made, pardoning our past sins and follies, and
rewarding a sincere though imperfect Obedience. The Gospel by its great
arguments and motives and powerful assistances, forms our minds to the love
and practice of Holiness, and so makes us inherently righteous: and the Grace
of the Gospel accepts and rewards that sincere Obedience, which according to
the Rigor and Severity of the Law could deserve no reward. P. 404.

Mr. Ferguson having made this recital out of Mr. Sherlock's book, knew not how
as it seems to make good his charge therefrom; unless Mr. S. would be so kind
as to grant what Mr. F. does affirm, but Mr. S. himself no where asserts. And
therefore although he grants in P. 416. That in reserence to the mere demands
of the Gospel we may in a proper sense be said to be justified; Yet he says
that in reference to the Law, which is that alone which accuses us, we cannot
in any prepriety of speech be said to be justified, but that justification,
wheresoever it regards our discharge from the accusation of the Law, must be
taken Metaphorically; (he means I suppose) unless we are discharged from that
accusation by having the righteousness of Christ imputed to us. Whether this be
true or no, I shall put to the Trial afterward.

But in the mean time, pray you consider how little reason Mr. F. had to go
about to charge Mr. S. with holding Justification in a Metaphorick sense,
unless he had first showed us, that according to M. S's sentiment of
Justification before represented, he had made something else necessary to it,
than that which is an answering of the demands of the Gospel, which yet he has
not done that I can see. But indeed M. F. is so far from doing that, as that he
has done the quite contrary, as you cannot but perceive, when you compare Mr.
F's concession and Mr. S 's notion touching Justification together: for Mr. F.
acknowledges, as I said before, that in reference to the mere demands of the
Gospel we may in a proper sense be said to be Justified; and M. S. says no
more, as M. F. recites him, but that we are only Justified by believing and
obeying the Gospel. And if to believe and obey the Gospel be not to answer the
demands of the Gospel and no more, pray you get Mr. F. to tell us what is. But
if it be, then Mr. F. instead of making good his charge against M. S. has
himself even fairly acquitted and discharged him from it, and might well have
taken himself off here, and saved himself the labor of further prosecution.

But however, though M. S. does not, yet it seems Mr. F. does hold, that we
must be Justified, if Justified, at all, by answering the demands of the Law as
well, as of the Gospel, although the Scipture tells us that he that abides in
the Doctrine of Christ (which is the Gospel) he has both the Father and the
Son. Rep. Jo. 9. And because Mr. F. is of opinion that the demands of the Law
must be answered or else we cannot be Justified, therefore he thinks Mr. S.
ought to be so too, which if he can persuade him to be, then he doubts not, but
that he shall be able to make good his charge against him.

And therefore to lay a foundation for a necessity of a perfect legal
Righteousness unto Justification, though not inherent in our selves, yet by
derivation of it from our Savior, in whom it was, he does in effect assert the
Original Legal Covenant to remain still in force, notwithstanding the
establishing with men the Evangelical: and that in order to our Justification,
it is not enough to have an Evangelical Righteousness to answer the demands of
the Gospel, but that we must also have a perfect legal Righteousness to answer
the demands of the Law, though not in our selves but, by derivation from
another, as was said before.

Whether this be not so, judge, I pray you, by his own words, comparing what he
says in P. 411. and P. 414. which are these. Now as the introduction of the
law of faith has not abrogated the law of perfect obedience, but this as well
as that does remain in force, each of them requiring a conformity to its own
demands: So supposing us to answer all that the Gospel requires, yet the other
law abiding uncancelled, and we being all guilty of the violation of its terms,
there lies accordingly a charge against us, from which by Justification we are
to be acquitted. p. 414. And again p. 411. That secluding not only the
righteousness of Christ's life, but the satisfaction of his death as the
Matter, and the imputation of it as the formal Cause of justification, it seems
repugnant to the immutability and essential Holiness of God, to justify us
upon an imperfect obedience, the Law which requires a perfect remaining still
in force, and denouncing wrath in case of every failure.

By all which you will perceive, I suppose, that Mr. F. holds that the Law
remains still in force, requiring a perfect obedience unto justification, and
for want thereof and in case of every failure, denounces wrath. And that
therefore unles the satisfaction of Christ's death and the righteousness of his
life were formally imputed to us, ( ie. (as I suppose he means) so as that we
may be said to have made satisfaction in and by him, and perfectly kept the Law
in and by him by having his obedience and satisfaction imputed to us) it would
be repugnant to the immutability and essential Holiness of God to justify
upon an imperfect Obedience.

In which assertions of his there seem to me to be two grand mistakes, besides
that of a formal imputation he speaks of. The first is in holding the law to be
still in force, not only in requiring obedience to it self by way of Duty,
which is true, but in requiring perfection of Obedience as a Condition of
Justification, and in its Rigor and severity in denouncing wrath in case of
every failure. Secondly, In that he holds, that though we should answer all
that the Gospel requires both in respect of a righteousness of inherent Grace,
and of a personal sincere obedience, yet we could not be justified without the
formal imputation of a perfect legal righteousness, as aforesaid, and that
these two are grand mistakes indeed, I shall endeavor to demonstrate to you.

In opposition to the first of them, I conceive the Scripture will warrant me
to affirm, That God by founding a new Covenant, a Covenant of Grace, with the
world in his Son Jesus Christ and his Mediatory undertaking, has Rescinded or
Superseded the Rigor and severity of the original Law in two things. First as
a legal perfection of obedience was by it required as the Condition of
Justification and life: And Secondly, as it did denounce wrath and Condemnation
in case of every failure.

Although the original Law of nature, the moral Law be eternal and unchangeable
in requiring obedience by way of Duty, yet it is not so in the foresaid Rigor
and severity of its Sanction.

To establish the Law again in this sense after the Covenant of Promise is
made, would be according to the Apostle's reasoning to make faith void, and the
Promise of none effect. Romans 4.14. Gal. 3.18. For the old and new terms of
Justification cannot consist together, without the one evacuating the other. If
by Grace (says the Apostle) then is it no more of works: otherwise Grace would
be no more Grace. But if of works, then it is no more Grace; otherwise work is
no more work. To. 11.6. And again, whosoever of you are justified by the law ye
are fallen from Grace, Gal. 5.4. By the interposition of Christ we are redeemed
from the Sanction or Curse of the Law, which curses every one that continues
not in all things which it requires, and that for this very end, that the
blessing of Abraham (viz. of being Justified by faith according to the terms of
the new Covenant) might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.13,
14. Intimating, that this blessing of the new Covenant could not have taken
place, if the Curse of the old had still remained.

When St. Paul says, that the Ministration of Death written and engraven in
stones is done away (2 Cor. 3, 7. Compared with v. 11.) I pray you what of this
was done away by the Introduction of the Evangelical ministration, if not the
Rigor of the Condition of escaping the Curse of it? For from that it is that
it is denominated the Ministration of Death and Condemnation, and it is done
away as such a Ministration. For otherwise the Law engraven in stones, as it is
a Rule of and obligation to Duty, is not done away: In this sense indeed Christ
did not come to destroy the Law, Mat. 5.17.

This benefit by Christ in God's making a new Covenant and granting new terms,
upon account of his undertaking, is not limited to some men only, but extended
to all. In this sense Christ died for all men without exception. And it is not
unlikely, but that one reason at least, why God in his wisdom and goodness
thought it meet to vouchsafe unto the whole race of Adam these new and gracious
terms of recovery after the fall, when no such thing is granted the lapsed
Angels, was this, because the Condemnation, into which the Angels fell, was by
their own personal actual rebellion without Temptation from another; whereas
the Condemnation, into which all the posterity of Adam fell, proceeded
originally from his and his wives transgression, (and that from the temptation
of the Devil) and not from the personal act of their Progeny.

And that the benefit of freeing men from the Rigorous Sanction of the Law by
the active and passive obedience of Christ, in which the new Covenant is
founded, is as extensive, as ever the effect of Adam's disobedience was in
subjecting all men to condemnation according to the Rigorous terms of the Law,
is I conceive plainly asserted by the Apostle, when he says in Romans 5.18. as
by the Offense of One Judgment came upon all men to Condemnation: even so by
the Righteousness of One the free gift came upon all men unto Justification of
life. By the free gift, which comes by the Righteousness of Christ upon all men
unto Justification of life, I understand the New Covenant. For this free gift
can neither be the righteousness of the One here spoken of, but that which is
procured by it, Nor yet justification it self, for that is the effect of it. So
that we cannot in reason understand it otherwise than of some middle thing, and
that in all probability can be none other than the Grace contained in the New
Covenant, which Covenant God by a most gracious grant and free gift has
vouchsafed to all men for the Righteousness sake of Christ here spoken of, in
which remission of Sin and eternal life are promised upon condition of faith.
And this exactly agrees with what the same Apostle says Ephesians. 2.8. when he
says that by Grace we are saved through faith, and that not of our selves, it
is the gift of God: that is, it is the Grace and gift of God, that now we may
be saved by faith; a favor which the Law never afforded; for the Law is not of
faith, but the man that does them shall live in them. And when the Apostle
says this free gift came upon all men unto justification of life, we are not
to understand it, I conceive, as if Justification in act came upon all men
universally by the righteousness of Christ and this free gift, but that for the
sake of the one and in the other, such gracious terms are granted and offered
to all men without exception, as by which they may attain unto justification of
life actually, if they do not wilfully neglect and reject them. And less than
this I see not how the Apostle's words can signify, if you consider the nature
of the Comparison he makes between the effects of the first Adam's disobedience
and the second Adam's obedience in reference unto all men without exception of
any. As by the disobedience of the former all men were brought under an utter
incapacity of being justified and saved so long as the original Covenant in the
Rigor of its Sanction remained in force, So by the obedience of the latter all
men are put into a capacity of being justified and saved by virtue of new terms
in the new Covenant, which are obtained thereby, and by which the old terms are
Cancelled or Superseded.

These things being so, I leave you to judge whether there be any need of or
any occasion for such a formal imputation of Christ's righteousness unto our
justification to answer the Law in its demands of perfect legal obedience as a
condition of it, and the accusations thereof for want of it, as Mr. F. contends
for and Mr. S. opposes For this demand and this accusation was taken off so
soon as the new Covenant founded by God in Christ's active and passive
obedience took place. And this benefit of having new terms of life granted,
which accrues to the world by Christ's Mediatory undertaking, does not at all
depend upon our believing in Christ, but is absolutely free, and that wherein
he has been aforehand with us and with all men which have been born into the
world since the Covenant of Grace did first commence, and remains made good to
them whether they believe it or no. So that from thence forth no man shall be
condemned for want of a perfect legal Righteousness, but only for want of an
Evangelical righteousness.

And because this is a matter of weight, I will add yet something further to
prove, that this new Covenant, by which the terms of the old are canceled, is
made and established in Christ, not only with some part of mankind, viz. Such as
shall be saved, as some would restrain it (who think it in the nature of it
absolute and not conditonal, no not in reference to particular persons, which
yet it must needs be, if made to all, unless all were eventually to be saved)
but it is made with all men universally. And to this purpose I pray you consider
the declaration of God's grace and favor to all mankind in those words of his
to Abraham Isaac and Jacob, mentioned no less than five times in the book of
Genesis, viz. In thee and in thy Seed shall all families, all Nations of the
earth be blessed. Chap. 12.3. and 18.18. and 22.18. and 26.4. and 28.14. By
which the unbelieving Jews indeed understood, that in time all Nations should
become proselytes to Judaism, and their Nation become the head of all Nations,
and the Messiah a glorious visible head over them. But in opposition hereto and
to their expectations of Justification by the Law, St. Paul interprets it to be
meant of the Covenant of Grace established in Christ with all Nations and
Families of the Earth, who are all so far blessed hereby, as to have new-terms
of Salvation granted them, Gal. 3. For, whereas they understood by seed the
whole posterity of Abraham in Jacob's line, as if all Nations should be blessed
in them; St. Paul restrains it only to Christ, as all Nations were to be blessed
in him, as head of the Covenant verse. 16. He says not unto Seeds as of many,
but as of one, and to thy Seed which is Christ. And then that the blessing
promised to all Nations in this Seed was the Covenant, appears by the next
words in verse. 17. And this I say, that the Covenant, which was confirmed
before of God in Christ, the Law which was 430 years after cannot disanull,
that it should make the promise of none effect. This Covenant we see was then
confirmed of God in Christ, not then first made, for it was extant in the world
before. And to the same sense St. Paul had said before in verse. 8. The
Scriptures, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through Faith,
preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, in thee shall all Nations be
blessed. And when he says, that God in those words preached the Gospel unto
Abraham, it is all one as to have said he declared to him the Covenant, for
Gospel here and Covenant in verse. 17. are two words indeed, but signify the
same thing, as frequently they do elsewhere. And St. Peter expressly calls that
promise to Abraham the Covenant. Acts 3.25. And besides St. Paul declares what
the nature and substance of that Covenant or Gospel was, which is extended to
all Nations in that promise, and that, he says, was, that God would justify
the heathen through Faith; which is a brief description of the Covenant of
Grace. These things then being so, that God has established a new Covenant
with all men, and thereby cancelled the Rigorous Sanction of the Primitive Law,
as that required perfection of Obedience as the Condition of Justification, I
now leave you to judge whether Mr. F. does not build the necessity of the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto Justification in the sense he asserts
it necessary, upon an imaginary foundation and groundless Supposition, and if
he do, that foundation being removed, that which he builds thereon must needs
fall.

Having I hope, Sir, by this time satisfied you, and clearly evinced, that I
have not without cause charged Mr. F. with the former of the two grand mistakes
above mentioned, I shall now proceed to endeavor to do the like touching the
Second, which Second, as you may remember, was in that he holds that although
we should answer all that the Gospel requires, both in respect of a
righteousness of inherent Grace, and of personal sincere obedience, yet we could
not be justified without such a perfect righteousness imputed to us, and
derived upon us, as would adequately answer the demands and accusations of the
Law. That thus he holds is evident by what he says in p., 414. and in other
passages in the same Section.

I shall not need here to do again what I have done already, that is; to prove
the non-necessity of the imputation of such a righteousness unto us for our
Justification, as every way answers the demands of the Law, as considered in
its original Rigor and severity. That which remains for me to do, is to
demonstrate to you, that M. Ferguson is under a mistake in denying that our
answering all that the Gospel requires in a righteousness both of inherent
Grace and personal sincere obedience, is a vailable to justification, without
the imputation of Christ's righteousness in Mr. F's sense, and withal to show
that we are said in a proper sense to be justified by believing and obeying the
Gospel; and that Mr. F. had neither ground nor fair pretense to charge Mr. S's
sentiment of being justified by believing and obeying the Gospel, with any such
absurdity or inconvenience, as that it is not maintainable without perverting
innumerable texts from their plain and natural sense to a Metaphorick.

Only let me premise this, that it would always be remembered, that whatever
benefits do accrue to us by virtue of the new Covenant, are owing unto Christ
and truly attributable unto him, in whom, for whose sake, and upon account of
whose undertaking the Covenant it self, and all the benefits of it are
vouchsafed unto men. And accordingly this Covenant in Scripture is said to be
confirmed of God in Christ, Gal. 3.17. to be the New Testament in his blood,
Mat. 26.28. and his blood to be the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Heb.
13.20. And he himself given for a Covenant of the People, Is. 42.6. and all the
promises of God are in him yea, and in him amen. 2. Cor. 1.22. What ever then
depends upon this Covenant, depends upon Christ, and accordingly the benefits
promised in it, Remission of sin, and eternal life are in Scripture ascribed
unto him. And although Faith, as comprehending repentance and sincere
obedience, be imputed for righteousness, yet it is not for its own sake that it
is so, but for Christ's sake, and all by virtue of the divine will which has
of mere Grace and favor appointed that so it shall be.

This being premised, I proceed now to show, that we are justified by God upon
our believing and obeying the Gospel, and that in a proper sense, and that our
believing and obeying the Gospel is our Evangelical righteousness; upon the
taking place whereof in men, God accounts, and by the doctrine in the
Scriptures declares them just, and deals with them accordingly, which is his
justifying of them.

To this end let it be considered, that this Covenant, as founded by God in the
righteousness of Christ's life, and Sacrifice of his death, does consist of two
parts, of Conditions required by God, and to be performed by men; and of
promise of benefits made by God and to be performed by him, but to be received
and enjoyed by men. The Condition, upon which promise of benefits is made by
God, is that which Mr. S. rightly calls a believing and obeying the Gospel. And
the benefits promised upon the aforesaid condition, Mr. S. truly says are
pardon of Sin and eternal life. That such promises are made and upon such
conditions, appears every where in Scripture, where things of this nature are
spoken of, as every one knows, that knows the Scripture: and Mr. F. himself
stands declared no enemy to the Doctrine of the conditionality of the promises.

Things then being thus settled between God and all men in this Covenant, the
enquiry upon every man's trial will be, whether he has performed the
condition required on his part in believing, repenting, and sincerely obeying.
If it be found that he has, he is thereupon as truly and in a proper Sense
justified, that is accounted and by the Gospel declared and pronounced
Evangelically just and righteous, i. e. in the sense of this Evangelicall Law,
as he would have been in the sense of the Original Law, in case he had observed
the terms of that.

And had I been to have written to Mr F. I would have enquired of him, which of
these things now mentioned he would or could deny, being all so perfectly
agreeable, as they are, to the tenor and very letter of the Scripture? Will
he, or can he deny belief in the Gospel, and obedience to it to be the
Condition, upon which God in the Gospel or new Covenant has promised pardon of
Sin and eternal life? or, which is the same, that he has promised these
benefits to such and to no other?

This I take for granted he will not deny.

Next I would demand whether Faith, Repentance and sincere obdience, be not all
that is required of men themselves by God in the Gospel to make them
Evangelically righteous, and capable of the saving benefits promised in the
Gospel? If they be (and I believe Mr. F. will not deny them to be so, from one
of his own assertions p. 414.) then I further query, whether these do not
denominate a man Evangelically righteous, or righteous in the gospel sense, as
well as the doing all that the Law required would have denominated a man
legally righteous, or righteous in the sense of the Law?

And further whether men from those qualifications aforesaid, are not in
Scripture so denominated? As for instance, Faith, which is, as I have said,
comprehensive of repentance and sincere obedience when saveing, this, as the
Scripture tells us expressly, was counted to Abraham for righteousness, Romans
4.3. Gal. 3.6. And we are told also; that the Scripture, speaking of this in
reference to Abraham, was not written for his sake only, but for us also to
whom it shall be imputed if we believe on him, who raised up Jesus our Lord
from the dead. verse. 23.24.

And then for Evangelical or sincere obedience, that comes in also for a share
in denominating a man righteous, in a gospel sense: He that does righteousness
is righteous, says St. John, 1 Ep. 3.7. and he speaks it of that righteousness
which men themselves do in a course of sincere obedience, and not of the
righteousness of another imputed to them. In the righteousness which he has
done shall he live says the Phophet, speaking of a man that shall turn from
all the sins which he has committed, and shall observe all God's Statutes, and
do all that which is lawful and right, Ezekiel. 18.22. If then Faith, Repentance
and sincere obedience, be all that the gospel requires to denominate a man
righteous in a gospel sense, and to make him capable of the promised benefits,
Then all those in whom these are found, are by God in the Gospel declared and
pronounced righteous men; which Declaration is their Justification: For what is
done in this kind by the gospel on Earth, is done also by God in Heaven.

No man sure that understands and considers what he says, will deny this to be
Justification in a proper sense, nor assert it not maintainable without
perverting the scriptures from their plain and natural meaning to a Metaphorick
sense, whereas its most evident, it stands backed with the Scriptures,
understood in their plain proper and genuine sense.

But because Mr. Ferguson was somewhat sensible, that he could not duly infer
any thing from Mr. S's own words, touching his apprehensions about
Justification, but what was agreeable to the Notion of justification in a
proper sense, in reference to the demands of the gospel, as you may perceive by
what he says toward the beginning of the page 416. And because he had a great
mind to fasten something by way of retortion upon Mr. S's Notion of
Justification, as if it had not been maintainable to be Justification properly
so called, without wresting the Scriptures from their plain and proper sense,
(which was the the thing Mr. S. charged on them, whose opinion Mr. F.
undertakes to defend;) therefore Mr. F. insinuates to his Reader that Mr. S's
Notion does imply (unless he will allow that we are Justified by being made
righteous by the perfect Righteousness of Christ imputed to us,) such a
Justification, as cannot be properly so called nor maintained to be such,
without perverting the Scriptures from their plain and proper sense, to that
which is but so Metaphorically. And to this end he takes it for granted that
Justification in Mr. S's Notion of it, contains in it remission of Sins; and
then argues that remission of Sin is not Justification in a proper sense, and
consequently that Mr. S's Notion of justification cannot be made good from the
Scriptures, without understanding them in an improper sense.

But if Mr. F. would have done this designed business indeed against Mr. S. he
should have done one of these two things, which yet he has not done. Either
first showed that Mr. S. has defined justification by pardon of sin, or
Secondly, that according to his Notion of it, it must be so defined; neither of
which he has done that I find. And therefore he does but beat the air, while
he would have his Reader think he is beating Mr. S.

That pardon of sin is promised in the Covenant of Grace to those that believe
and obey the Gospel, Mr. S. does indeed assert, and that according to the
Scriptures: and this pardon, when vouchsafed, does discharge us from whatever
lay against us, either from Law or Gospel, and is called in Scripture a not
mentioning our sins unto us, Ezekiel. 33.16. the remembering them no more, Heb.
10.17. a not imputing of them, Romans 4.8. 2. Cor. 5.19. but then these are two
distinct things, to justify a person against an accusation of not believing
and obeying the Gospel, and the conferring upon him the benefits promised to
those that have. If they be not different, but one and the same thing, then the
giving of eternal life it self, is an assentiall part of our justification as
well as the forgiveness of our sins, for that as well as the forgiveness of
sins is promised to those who believe and obey the Gospel. And I think no man
yet ever asserted, that the giving of eternal life was justification it self,
but a benefit promised to those who are justified, according to St. Paul, Romans
8.30. Whom he Justified, them he also glorified: Justification is God's
imputing righteousness to men, or their faith to them for righteousness: and
thus Abraham was justified by having his faith imputed to him for
righteousness. But pardon of sin is his not imputing to them their Trespasses:
and I must needs say, I cannot apprehend how the imputation of faith for
righteousness, and the non-imputation of sin can be all one.

God in justifing men, avoucheth and pronounces them to be such as to whom he
has promised pardon, that is true believers, such as have performed the
condition of the promise. But then the counting of this performance of the
condition for righteousness unto them is one thing, and the conferring on them
the benefit promised on that condition is another, as I said. If God had
promised pardon only upon account of what Christ has done and suffered for
Sinners, without any condition to be performed on their part, then they would
have had title to pardon without the justification I speak of: But since it is
otherwise, a man's title to pardon is not cleared without being justified in
order thereto, as a performer of the condition.

Moreover the clearing the equity of God's proceeding in pardoning some, and
not other some, depends upon this, viz. That he can justify one sort to be
such as have repented, and performed the condition on which he promised pardon;
whereas he cannot do so concerning the other. Ezekiel. 18. And when I consider
this, I cannot see, but that we have as much reason to think it meet and
necessary, that there should be such a difference between justification and
pardon as has been intimated, as there is to believe, that its fit and
necessary, that the reason and equity of god's proceedings should be cleared
before Angels and men, in pardoning some and not others. And if this be found
agreeable to reason, then you have an evidence from the reason and nature of
the thing why it should be so, as well as from the Scriptures to show that it
is so.

Yet its very true also, that there is so very close and inseparable a
connection between Justification and Remission of Sin, as that the Scripture
(which does not always nicely difference things which yet are distinguishable,
but sometimes terms things by the same name, which differ only but in some
respect, and sometimes denotes things of the same nature, by different phrases
and forms of speech,) I say the connection between Justification and Remission
is so close and inseparable, as that the Scripture sometimes speaks of them
promiscuously, scarcely leaving any difference to be discerned between them;
which I conceive has led so many to place Justification in Remission of Sin,
as are of that Judgment.

Such is Romans 4.6, 7. for one, where the blessedness of the man, to whom God
imputes Righteousness without works, is thus described by David, as St. Paul
says, reciting his words, saying,: Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Where you will hardly perceive any
difference made between the imputation of Righteousness, and forgiveness of
Sins, unless we distinguish between righteousness imputed, and the blessedness
of having sin pardoned as consecuent upon it; which I think may very well be
done. For the Apostle does not say, that David describes the Justification of
the man to whom God imputes righteousness withont works, when he says,
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven; but the blessedness of such a
person who is so justified, or to whom righteousness is imputed. Which
blessedness he places in the forgiveness of sins, and being restored to the
Divine favor. So that these words of David, as I said, are not a description
of Justification, but of the blessedness a man comes to be possessed of by
being justified. The reason and design of the Apostle in reciting these words
of David, I shall show afterward.

Again, Acts 13.39. is another such Scripture, where it is said, that by him all
that believe are justified from all things, from which they could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. Where to be justified, and to be delivered from
the desert of sin, seem to be the same: Unless you will distinguish (as well
you may) between that from which we are delivered, to wit, the obligation to
Punishment, and that by means whereof we come so to be delivered, to wit, our
being justified: and then to be justified from those things, signifies no more
here, than by justification to come to be pardoned and so delivered from
condemnation.

But if you will understand Justification in a large sense, as comprehending
and taking in with it its effects, (in which sense faith it self is often to be
understood,) then indeed it includes pardon of sin: and then in this sense to
be pardoned is to be justified, and to be justified is to be pardoned. In which
sense or respect it may be it is, that many renowned both Persons and Churches,
have made little or no difference between Justification and remission of sin.

And now, Sir, if what I have suggested have any weight in it, (which I submit
to trial) then you may see, that there is a Justification of believers properly
so called, plainly and without figure asserted in Scripture, and yet not
consisting in that imputation of Righteousness neither, which Mr. F. so much
contends for; nor yet in Remission of Sin neither, the necessity of which he
would infer in case the other be denied; but in the imputation of that
believing and obeying the Gospel for Righteousness, to which Mr. S. says,
pardon is promised: And if so, then Mr. F. has only showed us what he had a
mind to do, but not at all performed what he undertook.

But when Mr. F. asserts, That unless we are justified by the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness in his sense of Imputation, we cannot be said to be
justified properly, but only to be pardoned, and that to be pardoned is not to
be justified properly: he proceeds therein upon a mistaken ground, and
confounds the terms and conditions of the original Law and Gospel Covenant
together. For he supposes, that in order to our Justification in a proper
sense, we must one way or other have such a Righteousness as will answer the
demands of the Law in point of perfect obedience, and of the Gospel otherwise,
and which will justify us against all accusations to the contrary. And that
therefore we having no such Righteousness of our own, we cannot be justified
but by having the Righteousness of Christ made ours by Imputation, that we may
therewith answer the demands and accusations of the Law. Or in case we should
not be justified by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ to answer the
demands of the Law, yet that then we must be justified by being pardoned, and
Pardon is not Justification properly so called.

But while he argues at this rate, he overlooks what God has done to supersede
and relax the rigorous terms of the primitive Law, by a new Law of Grace
established in Christ with all Mankind, and according to which he will now
proceed with us, and not according to the rigorous demands of the primitive
Law. By reason of this, to wit, God's relaxing the old and introducing new
terms of Justification and Life, it follows, that neither a perfect Legal
Righteousness is now necessary to Justification, nor yet that Justification
must consist only in pardon of Sin, though we have no such Righteousness
inherent or imputed (in Mr. F's. sense of Imputation) as will answer the
demands of the Law in point of perfection.

Such a Righteousness is not now necessary to Justification. First, because
that which once made it necessary to that end, is now relaxed by a new Law:
this I have showed before This new Law does not relax the duty due by the old,
hut alter the condition onwhich the divine favor was at first enjoyable, and
has now made sincere obedience to it and to the Gospel, the condition of it
instead of sinless perfection: And it grants pardon of all past offenses
against both, to such as are justified against the accusation of not having
performed the Condition, and of all after-offences also, that are consistent
with godly sincerity: By reason whereof an answering the old demands of the
Law, absolute perfection, is not now necessary to justification, neither as
inherent in us, nor as imputed to us, otherwise than as Christ's perfect
righteousness is imputed to us in the fruits and benefits of it, which is quite
another thing than the imputation of his righteousness it self to us; differing
as much as the ects of his mediation differ from the benefits received thereby.
. Secondly, because by this new Law the Righteousness, which consists in a
penetential regenerating obediential Faith, is made the condition upon which
Pardon and Life are promised: And because likewise the performance of this
Condition is by God counted to us for Righteousness, like as a fulfilling of
the Legal Condition would have been counted our Legal Righteousness, had we
never sinned.

Although the Righteousness of Christ's Active and Passive Obedience, is that
Righteousness by which the Covenant it self, and the benefits of it, were
conditionally obtained for us, and granted to us: And although it is of God's
mercy, and by virtue of Christ's Merits, and the Promise and Ordination of God,
that we come to have any title to Pardon and Life, when we have performed the
Condition, and not by virtue of any merit or desert in the performance it self;
yet this Righteousness of Christ does not entitle us to Pardon and Life, until
we have performed the Condition on our part required thereto, which is such a
believing as aforesaid. And in the last issue we are accounted by God Righteous
or Unrighteous, according as we have, or have not performed the Condition.

God's design toward us is to restore us to happiness, and in order thereto to
recover and bring again into our Nature those Virtues in which our likeness to
God at first did consist; by the loss of which we became miserable, and without
a recovery of which we cannot be happy. And as most suitable to this design,
God has made such a Faith the Condition of Pardon and Life, as by which the
renovation of our Nature is gradually wrought, and without which we have no
ground to expect those benefits, how desirable soever they are to us, and
notwithstanding all that Christ has done and suffered to obtain them for us.

To suppose that God accounts us Righteous, and so confers a title to Pardon
and Life, only by the Righteousness of Christ imputed, without respect to our
being renewed in the Spirit of our minds, and sanctified by Faith, is to
suppose him acting disagreably to his own design and method of Grace in
recovering us from our undone condition. To think we are made Righteous only by
what our Savior has done without us, without being renewed by a work of Faith
within us: To suppose we are by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
delivered from the danger of the Hell without us, without being at all freed
from the Hell within us, which consists in unnatural Lusts, and the uneasy
effects of them: To imagine that God should restore us to a participation of
the privileges of his Children by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness,
without restoring us at all to a participation in the Divine and New Nature of
his Children, is absurd, and that which is opposed by the constant tenor of
Divine Doctrine in the holy Scriptures: And yet these are but the natural
consequences of the Doctrine of being justified by the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness alone, and of being justified by Faith alone as abstracted from
it is effect of renewing us. And if either of these Doctrines were true, we
might have an immediate title to Pardon and Salvation without Repentance, and
without being born again; unless we will suppose that Justification does not
immediately entitle us to these; which to suppose is as absurd as any of the
rest: For what, I pray you, would such a Justification signisie?

And then as concerning the other thing, viz. That if we have not by the
Imputation of Christ's perfect Righteousness, a Rightteousness to answer the
demands of the Law, that then, as Mr. F. infers, we can have no Justification
but what consists in the remission of Sins; I answer: That for the same reason
that we are accounted Righteous upon our performing the Condition of the
promise, pardon cannot be our Justification, but a benefit consequent upon it.

For if God's owning or avouching the Condition to be performed on our part (as
he does when it is performed) on which he has promised Pardon and Salvation,
be his justifying of us, or his accounting us righteous according to the tenor
of the Covenant of Grace, as indeed it is; then Pardon is not our Justification
it self, but one of the benefits unto which our Justification by virtue of the
New Covenant does entitle us: for the one is promised but on condition of the
other. And as the thing promised, and the Condition on which it is promised,
are not the same, so neither is the reckoning or accounting us righteous, as
having performed the Condition of the Promise of Pardon, and the actual Pardon
it self, the same; but so much as these differ, so much does Justification and
Pardon differ.

But yet for all that, I do not deny but that in a large sense, as
Justification is opposed to Condemnation, it may comprehend remission of Sins.
That is, if by Condemnation you understand both conviction of impenitency
(which is the opposite to Justification properly) and the obligation or
obnoxiousness thereby to suffer the pains of the second Death: And by
Justification both a vindication from impenitency and unbelief (which is
Justification properly) and also a discharge thereby from obnoxiousness to
eternal punishment, then, as I said, Justification thus opposed to condemnation
does indeed include in it remission of Sin; though when strictly and most
properly considered, Justification seems to be one thing, and Pardon of Sin
another.

It is wont to be alleged, That when St. Paul says in Romans 4.6. that God
imputes Righteousness without Works; the meaning is, That he imputes the
Righteousness of Christ to us without any Works of ours at all, Legal or
Evangelical, External or Internal. And because great stress is laid on it by
some, I will briefly show how the Context directs us to another sense of those
words.

The Scope of the Apostle in this and the former Chapter is to prove, that
Justification proceeds from God of Grace and favor, and not of Debt. To make
this good, he shows here that it must needs be so, because it is vouchsafed not
unto such who have been always righteous (for he had proved before, Chap. 3.
that there are none such, but that all, both Jews and Gentiles have sinned) but
to such as have been ungodly, when once they believe, and therefore cease to be
so, and become sincerely righteous. And the Apostle's reason depends upon this
manifest truth, That such as have once sinned can never by any after-works,
which they can do, merit the Divine favor as a Debt due to them by desert of
their Works, nor are capable of that favor upon any other terms, than what God
of his mere Grace is pleased to appoint as the Condition of it, as he has done
that of Faith. For to him that works not (says he) but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted to him for righteousness, ver. 5.

And to prove as well as to assert that God justifies none upon account of
their having been always righteous, and in his favor (as some Jews fancied
themselves to have been upon account of their observing the Law of Moses, as he
in the Gospel who said, All these have I kept from my youth up) he shows out
of the Psalms of David, how that the ancient godly Jews did always esteem
their happiness of being in God's favor, not to proceed from the merit of
their Works in observing the Law of Moses, but from the Grace and Mercy of God
in forgiving their Sins, and accepting their sincere endeavors to please him.
Even as David (says he) describes the blessedness of the man to whom God.
imputes righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven, and whose sins are covered, ver. 6, 7.

And you may easily discern, if you observe it, that what is said in this sixth
and seventh verses, is to back and make good what he had said in verse. 5.
touching God's justifying men upon their believing, notwithstanding they had
been in a state of ungodliness before: And to show that if he justify such men
upon such terms; Justification must needs proceed of Grace, and not of Debt or
merit of Works, of which he had spoken verse. 4. saying, Now to him that works
the reward is not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt. So that in making a Judgment
of what Works St. Paul speaks, when he says, Righteousness is imputed without
Works, verse. 6. if you do but take your rise from what is said in verse. 4.
touching such Works, the reward of which is reckoned not of Grace, but of Debt,
and so follow the discourse and the design of it to verse. 6. you will find that
you cannot fairly turn aside to another, but must needs understand him to this
sense, to wit, That the Righteousness which is by Faith, of which he had spoken
in verse. 5. is imputed without such Works as make the reward to be not of
Grace, but of Debt, mentioned v. 4. His Argument runs thus in other words:
They, to whom God imputed Righteousness heretofore, were such as stood in need
of forgiveness from God; therefore they could not possibly merit his favor.

And although St. Paul does not improve the words of the Psalmist further than
to prove that no man is restored to the Divine favor and the blessedness
consequent upon it, without forgiveness of Sins, and that therefore it must
needs be of Grace, and not of Debt and Merit that any man attains it by being
justified, this being his end in alleging them: Yet it is also evident by the
words immediately following those the Apostle here recites, That Godly
sincerity is the conditional qualification required of such to whom the favor
of forgiveness is vouchsafed: For it is there said, Blessed is the man unto whom
the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose Spirit there is no guile: No guile
notes the Sincerity I speak of, Psalm. 32.2. And it is to the same sense, when in
the writings of the New Testament Faith, as the Principle of Sincerity and of
the Divine Nature and Life, is made the Condition of Pardon.

And now if what has been said amounts to any fair account of the Apostle's
scope and design in those forementioned verses, and of the sense of the several
Phrases by which it is expressed (and I leave you to judge whether it does or no)
then I can see no reason, why by Righteousness imputed without Works we should
understand the Righteousness of Christ, but rather the Righteousness of Faith
properly understood; which Faith the Apostle there expressly affirms to be
imputed for Righteousness, but does not so much as mention Christ in those
verses, much less the imputation of his Righteousness unto Justification, as
exclusive of all manner of Works. It is not the Righteousness of Christ, but
Grace and Faith, that are in this contexture of Scripture opposed to Works: Nor
are Works opposed to Faith neither, but under the notion of Merit, as they make
the reward to be of Debt, and not of Grace. And when I say this, I do for all
that with all thankfulness acknowledge and profess, That the Righteousness or
Obedience of Christ's Life and Death does with a high hand operate to our
Justification, and so as neither our Faith nor any thing in us, or done by us,
can do, but in a way altogether transcending it, though not in Mr. F's. way of
Imputation; nor is it in this Scripture set forth as it is in others.

It Is true indeed, the Righteousness the Apostle treats of in this place is
styled Righteousness imputed: But the reason is not, because it is not inherent
in the persons themselves to whom it is imputed, but in Christ, and made theirs
only by imputation; for it is the Faith of the Person himself that is here said
to be counted or imputed to him for Righteousness. And the reason, why it is
called a Righteousness imputed, may be, because it is not naturally, and of it
self, or in its own nature a Righteousness that would justify a man, as Adam's
was before his fall, but it is only by Divine Institution, Grace and Favor
that it is so; God justifies us freely by his Grace, Romans 3.24. It is of Faith,
that it might be by Grace, as it follows, Romans 4.16. As it is by the
Justification or Ordinance of a King that such a piece of Coin passes current
for so much, whether it be of the intrinsic value or no, even so by virtue of
God's institution, and for Christ's sake, Faith is made to pass for, and to be
reckoned and accounted to us for Righteousness, and to entitle us to those
benefits, which in its own Nature it does not merit. If it were a perfect
Righteousness in its own Nature, as Adam's was, it would need no Pardon to
accompany it, as it does, and would secure us as well from temporal as eternal
death, which yet it does not: But it being a Righteousness by Institution and
Grace; how far it shall be beneficial to us, and to what ends and purposes it
shall serve, depend wholly upon the good will and pleasure of God, and are
knowable only so far to us, as he has been pleased to put them into promise,
by virtue of which promise made upon condition of such Righteousness, and not
by merit of the Righteousness it self, we come to have a title to the promised
benefits, such as are remission of Sin and eternal Life.

But Mr. F. cannot understand, but that it is repugnant to the immutability and
essential Holiness of God to justify us upon an imperfect obedience, the Law
commanding that which is perfect, and thinks for him to do so would be to
pronounce an unjust person just.

But he should consider, That God in justifying us does not pronounce us just,
as not having sinned (for that is impossible for him indeed to do) but as having
performed the Condition, on which he in his Gospel Covenant has promised to
pardon our Sin. And in doing this he does not prouounce unjust persons just;
for they are just with an Evangelical Righteousness, just in the Gospel sense,
and so styled from place to place in the Scripture, as I have showed. And
although the Evangelical Righteousness and Obedience, upon which God is pleased
to justify us, be imperfect, if measured by the Law, yet it is perfect as to
its end appointed by God, when measured by the Gospel, by which we are to be
tried whether we be righteous or unrighteous: And whosoever (being adult) is
not righteous in this sense, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 69.
but those that are thus righteous shall go into life eternal, Matthew. 25.46.

But supposing Evangelical Righteousness or Obedience to be Comparatively
imperfect, whether compared with what man in innocence had, and was capable to
perform; or whether compared with a gradual perfection of Righteousness and
Obedience of the same kind; and supposing it to be only sincere obedience
according to the present circumstances a man is in: Let us weigh and consider
whether or no it be not consistent with the Holiness of God to justify men
upon such Righteousness and Obedience when found in them, when withal we take
in what has been done by Christ the Mediator to make way for it. I conceive
Mr. F. does not suppose, that God by the Holiness of his Nature is naturally
and necessarily restrained from showing favor to men, after once they have
been guilty of Sin, and have made themselves obnoxious to the effects of his
high displeasure; for if he were, we were all still in an ill case, and there
would be then no such thing as Grace extant in the World, which yet is so
illustrious and glorious, as that it is the very subject matter of the Gospel.
Grace and mercy are as essentially in God as Holiness: And therefore we must
take heed of framing such notions of his Holiness as to leave no place for the
exercise of his Grace and Mercy. God no doubt is at liberty to recede from his
own right, as well as men are, in remitting debts and pardoning offenses to
what degree, and upon what terms he pleases, only he, as Rector of the World,
has respect therein unto good order and government.

Supposing all this, we must suppose again that such acts of Grace and Favor
toward offending Sinners, as do not in the least encourage them to continue in
Sin, nor any other Creature in the whole Creation that is innocent to fall into
a state of like Rebellion as man has done, but are of a quite contrary
tendency, will very well consist with the end of his Government, as he is
Rector of the World, and with the Righteousness and Justice of the Governor
himself. Now the reason and end of executing Justice upon Delinquents is either
to recover them themselves to good order and behavior, or to deterr others
from falling into like Rebellion against God: For otherwise God delights not
in the death (as such) of him that dies, Ezekiel. 18. Provided then that these
ends of Government be secured in showing favor, the stighteousness and Justice
of God will never suffer any disparagement, how great soever the Grace and
Favor be that is showed to Offenders. But now that God in justifying men upon
account of sincere obedience and inherent righteousness, considering what has
been done by our Lord Christ to make way for it, and to bring things to that
issue, does not in the least countenance Sin past, or encourage to the
committing of it for time to come, but that which is altogether contrary
thereunto will sufficiently appear, if you consider these two things.

First, That notwithstanding God is so good and gracious, so merciful and ready
to forgive as he is, yet he would not grant any terms at all of receiving us
into favor again, having once sinned, except his own dear Son himself would
take upon him our Nature, and become a Sacrifice, to make an Atonement for our
Sin; nor spare him when he had undertaken so to be, notwithstanding that great
love wherewith he loved him, but delivered him up to death for us all, when he
undertook to become a propitiation for our Sins, rather than we should have no
terms of pardon granted. God's granting terms of pardon and restoration to his
favor upon no cheaper terms, did clearly demonstrate him to be an enemy and
hater of Sin in the highest, and so irreconcilable to it, as that no Sinner
could have any ground to hope to escape the punishment due to it, but upon
observing that Condition of escaping it, the obtaining of which cost so dear.
In that Christ thus suffered in the flesh, he condemned Sin in the flesh (as
the phrase is, Romans 8.3.) and that effectually, and with a witness. Hereby he
condemned it in the sight of Heaven and Earth, yea, and of Hell too, as a thing
most abominable to God, and contrary to his Nature, and to the goodness and
equity of his Laws and Government, when deliverance from the desert of it could
be obtained at no cheaper rate or easier terms, than the Son of God his
suffering in the Sinners stead; no not upon repentance it self without this. In
that God has thus set forth his Son to be a propitiation for Sin through Faith
in his Blood, it is to declare his Righteousness in the remission of Sins that
are past (that he is righteous although he forgive) and that he might be just
even when he is the justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3.25, 26.

Secondly, When God for Christ's sake, and for what he has done and suffered,
did grant terms of Grace, by which we Sinners might come to be justified,
pardoned, and saved; yet they were such, and none other, but what tend to
reclaim us from Sin and Rebellion, and to reduce us to obedience, and of Rebels
to make us to become good Subjects. And in doing this, God is far from
countenancing Sin, or doing any thing disagreeable to the righteousness,
wisdom, and goodness of his Government; indeed so far from it, that it highly
commends and sets these off.

The terms of favor granted for Christ's sake are such as these; That
believing and being persuaded in our own minds that God is good, and ready to
forgive for his Son's sake, we heartily repent that ever we rebelled against
him, and that we desist from continuing in our Rebellion any longer, and that
we return to our duty, and sincerely endeavor to please him in all things for
the future. It Is true indeed, God knows, that by reason of the wounds and
disease we got by our fall, and while we were in rebellion, we have brought so
great debility upon our selves, as that though we do return to him, yet we
cannot do him such service now, as man was capable of performing before the
fall, and his running into rebellion; and therefore he is content for his Son's
sake, to accept of such service, as we in this state of weakness and frailty
are capable of performing, provided we do the best we well can, and make use of
all helps and means afforded us, whereby we may gather strength, and grow
better, and do better; and are heartily sorry that ever we have made our selves
so incapable, as we have done, of doing him better service. These and such like
are the terms granted us for Christ's sake.

But without some such Change as this God has not promised to receive any man
into favor. Now then, if it be not inconsistent with the righteousness and
wisdom of his Government, for God to offer and promise to receive Sinners into
favor again upon these terms and conditions (and I cannot think Mr. F. will
say it is:) Then it cannot be inconsistent therewith for him to own that they
have performed these conditions, when indeed they have, and so to own them now
for his true and faithful Servants and Subjects to their power, and according
to the term set in his act of Grace, which is his justifying of them, or the
imputing to them for righteousness such their faithful service as they are
capable of performing.

These things considered, I dare appeal to Mr. F's. better and more impartial
Judgment, whether it be not consistent with the Holiness of God to justify men
upon the terms aforesaid. I confess I cannot possibly understand, why it should
not as well consist with the Holiness of God to justify us upon our believing,
and upon our obeying the Gospel too, as it is to do it upon our believing
alone: And Mr. F. does not think that God does justify us at all, or impute
righteousness to us at all in one sense or another, without our believing. So
that the imputation of righteousness to us for our justification, in which
sense soever we take it, depends upon our own act in believing, and so likewise
is the application of what Christ has done and suffered for our justification
suspended upon our believing. In what Notion soever you understand the
application of the righteousness of Christ's life and satisfaction of his death
to be made; as whether by being imputed to us in it self, or vertually by
having our Faith for the sake thereof imputed to us for Righteousness; yet
still this application depends upon our believing, because God has made that
the condition of it, without which Christ shall profit us nothing.

I take notice further, how Mr. F. by his Notion of having the Righteousness of
Christ imputed to us otherwise than in its effects, is led to think and say
that our Sins also were otherwise imputed to Christ than in the effects of
them. To say (says he) that our Sins were imputed to Christ in the effects of
them, but not in the guilt, is to contradict all principles of Reason: For
guilt and obnoxiousness to punishment being equipollent phrases, he cannot be
supposed to be made liable to the last upon the account of our Sins, without
having been brought under the first; p. 410.

Nor is it imaginable, let me say, how any person should come under the guilt
of Sin, that has not been accessory to the fault: For guilt implies two
things; a fault committed by him that is guilty of it, and the being under an
obligation thereby to suffer the punishment due to it, and this obligation of a
guilty person to suffer proceeds from the demerit of his fault or crime. And
will Mr. F. say that Christ was guilty of our Sins by being in the fault? Or
that he came under an obligation to suffer by being in the fault, and from the
demerit of the fault? God sorbid. Christ was no otherwise obliged to suffer for
our Sins, than by his own voluntary consent in concurrence with the will of God
his Father, in offering himself as a Sacrifice to make an Atonement by his own
Blood. And after this manner indeed by being a Sacrifice the Beasts in time of
the Law, that were offered in Sacrifice for Sin, did bear the Sins of those for
whom they were offered. But I should think he were little better than a Beast
in his understanding, that should say those Beasts were guilty of the Sins of
those, for whom they were offered in Sacrisice.

But it is true, as one truth leads to another, so it is too commonly seen, men
are tempted to commit one error to^ defend another, which I think is the Case
now before us. Otherwise Mr. F. would hardly have ventured to say Christ was
brought under the guilt of our Sins, and had the guilt of them derived upon
him, but only the better, as he thought no doubt, to accommodate his Notion of
our being in the Innocence and Righteousness of Christ, by having it imputed to
us, and derived upon us.

But this is not the only inconvenience that attends this Notion of having the
Righteousness of Christ it self imputed to us for our justification, and not
only in its happy effects; for it seems to me to oppose the doctrine of
forgiveness of Sin: Nay, I pray you consider, whether it does not evacuate it,
and leave no place for such a thing. For if we, in Mr. F's. Law sense, have by
Christ paid all the Debt the Law could any ways demand of us, both in point of
obedience and of suffering for our disobedience, by having his obedience and
sufferings themselves imputed to us, and not only in the beneficial effects of
them: How then, I pray you, can we be said to be forgiven by God, to whom the
Debt thus paid was due? Does that man forgive a Debt to me which I have paid
him by another, though not by my self? A Legal Discharge I may have in such a
case from the Creditour, but no man will say he has for given me my Debt.

I think it will best become us to say, as the Scripture does, That God for
Christ's sake has forgiven us; and not to say we have paid him what in the
rigor of Justice he could demand of us, if not more, to wit, perfect obedience
and suffering too, which the Law in its utmost rigor never demanded nor
required. We may well and thankfully take up with this, That God, in
consideration of what Christ has become, done, and suffered for our sakes, for
our benefit, has past an Act of Oblivion to remember our Sins and Iniquities
no more, provided, and on condition that we repent of our rebellion against
God, and return to our Loyalty and Duty in obeying him truly, sincerely, and
heartily, as every one does that so believes, as thereby to become capable of
being justified, pardoned and saved.

Furthermore consider I pray you, That if Christ's fulfilling of the Law be so
imputed to us, as that we are looked upon as having fulfilled it in him, how
could it then be necessary that Christ should dye for our Sins? If we by the
imputation of Christ's fulfilling the Law have paid the whole debt of Obedience
which was owing to it, we should then owe no debt of Suffering for the breach
of it, and consequently Christ would not have needed by suffering to have paid
any such Debt for us, no more than for himself, who had no Sin to suffer for.

Again, consider yet further, That if Christ has paid our whole debt of
Obedience to the Law by fulfilling it for us, and then imputing it to us, is
there not by this Notion, if admitted, a way paved and prepared for Libertines,
to think that then they need not pay it too? to think that God is no such
austeer Creditour as to exact the same debt twice; first of the Surery, and
then of the Principal too? And let me tell you this, Sir, that I have very
great reason from my observation formerly, to be confident, that it was from
this Opinion, which Mr. F. now defends, touching the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to us otherwise than in its blessed effects, that Antinomianism
took its first rise among us in this Nation, and Ranterism also out of that.
For how else could it be possible that men should fancy themselves pure and
perfect, and free from all Sin in the midst of those abominations some of them
gave themselves up to, but only that they thought themselves to be so by having
another's righteousness imputed to them, so as they to become formally
righteous by it, as he himself was, save only in the point of imputation. I
must confess I cannot think that any Doctrine that is of the Gospel indeed,
which is a Doctrine according to Godliness in the whole and every part of it,
can be so liable, as this is, to natural inferences tending to ungodliness, or
to weaken that which is in the Doctrine of Justification rightly understood
against Ungodliness.

But on the other hand, when the promise of the great benefits of remission of
Sin and eternal Life, is suspended upon our being righteous by a righteousness
inherent in us, such as consists in Repentance, Faith, etc. this becomes the
greatest motive to Godliness imaginable, and so comports directly with that
which is God's great design by the Gospel, which is to recover man again to
Happiness by Holiness, from which he first fell by transgression.

But that you may have down weight in this Argument, and more if more can be, I
will offer one thing more to your consideration, which perhaps may deserve it,
and that is, Whether those that deny the inherent Grace of Faith and
Sanctification by Faith to be imputed for Righteousness in Justification, (as
they usually do, who hold that Christ's Righteousness it self is so imputed) do
not thereby make themselves guilty in some respect, and to a degree, of the
pernicious error of the false Apostles and Judaising Christians, for which in
the gross they were charged with falling from Grace, with making Christ to
become of none effect to them, and with perverting the Gospel of Christ. For I
think I shall make it evident that their error lay in two things, (unless you
will add thereto their opinion of meriting) the one in denying the necessity of
Internal Righteousness unto Justification; the other, in holding an external
one in conjunction with Faith in Christ to be sufficient to that end.

Now whether Mr. F. himself does deny inherent Grace to be at all imputed for
Righteousness in our Justification, or whether that it only is so, I confess I
cannot say: But certain it is, that he denies it to be sufficient without the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness in the sense of imputation wherein he is
opposed. One while he grants that in reference to the mere demands of the
Gospel, we may in a proper sense be said to be justified; p. 416. At another
turn he says, that, secluding not only the righteousness of Christ's life, but
the satisfaction of his death, as the matter, and the imputation of it as the
formal Cause of Justification, it seems repugnant unto the immutability and
essential Holiness of God to justify us upon an imperfect obedience (such as
he accounts Evangelical obedience to be) the Law which requires a perfect
remaining still in force, and denouncing wrath in case of every failure. By
which he seems to hold (how consistently with what I before recited, do you
judge) that it is inconsistent with the Holiness of God to justify us upon an
Evangelical Righteousness, because imperfect.

But whether Mr. F. joins the imputation of Christ's Righteousness and the
imputation of inherent Grace together in the business of Justification, or
whether he wholly denies the imputation of the latter, and affirms only the
imputation of the former, I shall not further enquire. But it is well known that
those who are wont to plead the same cause with Mr. F. touching the necessity
of the imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto Justification, and in that
sense wherein he is opposed, are wont also to exclude inherent Grace, as being
neither imputed for Righteousness in Justification, nor as necessary thereunto
antecedently. Mr. E. Polhill (a Gentleman doubtless of a good Spirit) another
of Mr. S's. Antagonists, in his answer to him says in p. 75. In Justification
no other Righteousness can take place, but the active and passive one of
Christ, which answers the pure and righteous Law in every thing. And in p. 321.
he says, Obedience to God's commands is indeed the way to Heaven, but its no
where made an ingredient into our Justification. And p. 365. speaking of Phil.
3.9. says, that the Apostle in this place does not only exclude external
Pharisaical righteousness, but even inherent Graces in the matter of
Justification.

And the common opinion of those that have gone that way has been, That
Sanctification is subsequent to Justification, and not so much as in order of
Nature going before it, or to be any ingredient in it, and consequently not
essentially necessary to it. Now then, that which I say is this; that if I can
make it appear, that the denying the necessity of internal righteousness unto
Justification was one part of the grievous error of the Judaising Christians,
it will be enough to spoil the reputation of the same opinion, though found in
better men than they were: And whether I shall not make it evidently to appear
so to be, I shall leave you to judge, after you have weighed what I shall now
lay before you.

Their Crime was, I conceive, a partial revolt or turning unto the worst of
Judaism, saving their retaining a profession of Faith in Christ; to think that
an external righteousness without an internal, was available to justification
and salvation. The unbelieving Jews, to whom they turned in part, were quite
degenerated from their worthy Ancestors, and all that remained faithful among
them, who all held the internal Grace of Love to God, fear of him, uprightness
of heart toward him, truth in the inward parts, necessary to interest them in
his favor, and the blessing of the everlasting Covenant.

But the degenerate Jews thought an external Righteousness, such as Paul had
while a Pharisee, and such as would justify them in the sight of men,
according to the terms of the political Covenant, by which they were externally
governed by God as they were his Commonwealth, would justify them as to their
eternal estate. Of which grand mistake our Savior ( Matthew. 5.) labored to
convince them, by showing that no less was required by God in order to that,
than an inward purity, and upbraided them with their making clean the outside
of the Cup and Platter, when within they were full of extortion and excess, of
ravening and wickedness; with their appearing outwardly Righteous unto men,
when within they were full of Hypocrisy and iniquity, and told his hearers
that except their Righteousness exceeded theirs, they should never enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven: that except they were born again they could not see the
Kingdom of God.

Now it was to this monstrously corrupt part of Judaism to which the Judaising
Christians did revolt, or turn rather (for many of them were Gentiles,) because
without this, their error in adhering to the Law of Moses as necessary to be
observed, would not have been so damnable as the Scripture represents it to be,
calling it a perverting the Gospel of Christ, a being removed to another
Gospel, a falling from Grace, a making of Christ to become of none effect to
them, (Gal. 1.7. and 5.2, 4.) which it would not have been, if there had been
nothing else in it than a persuasion that they were under an obligation of
observing the Law of Moses, as well as the Law of Christ.

For there were many thousands of the Jews which believed, who were yet zealous
of the Law of Moses, and thought themselves still under the obligation of it, (
Acts 21.) who yet could never be said upon that account to be fallen from
Grace, or to be removed from the Gospel of Christ to another Gospel, so long as
they were really for an internal Righteousness as necessary to Justification
and Salvation, as well as an external. For all the faithful Jews under the Law,
before the Law and after the Law, yea and all the Gentiles too, that had this
internal Righteousness, as well as an external, were all justified through the
Grace of God exhibited in the universal Covenant made in Christ, and granted
for his sake, whether they had any explicit or distinct knowledge of that
Covenant, or not, or of Christ in whom it was confirmed. In every Nation he
that fears God and works Righteousness is accepted of him: and if the
Uncircumcision did but keep the righteousness of the Law, the internal
Righteousness designed by it, their Uncircumcision was counted for Circumcision.

When on the other hand he was not a Jew at any time (in the sense there spoken
of) who was one outwardly in the flesh only, but he was a Jew which was so
inwardly, and Circumcision was that of the heart in the Spirit of the Law, and
not in the Letter only, whose praise or approbation was from God, whether it
were from men or no, Romans 2.

St. Paul would never have become as a Jew to the Jews to gain the Jews, as he
did in observing Jewish Rites ( Acts 21.) and in circumcising Timothy: nor have
said as he did, that God had received such Christian Jews, who yet made
Conscience of Jewish difference and distinction of meats and days (Romans 14.)
if a mere persuasion of being under the obligation of the Law of Moses had been
so dangerous and damnable, as he affirms the error of the Judaising Christians
to be.

The very nature of the opposition, which the Apostles made against the error
of the Judaising Christians in their Epistles to the Churches among whom they
were, sufficiently discovers to us the nature of their error to be the placing
Justification in an external Righteousness, and not in an internal. When St.
Paul had said, if they were Circumcised Christ should profit them nothing, and
that they were fallen from Grace that would be justified by the Law, and that
the true Christians waited for the hope of the Righteousness which is by Faith,
or which Faith produces; he gives this reason of all, saying; For in Christ
Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith
which works by Love, i. e. by causing Love to God and Men, Gal. 5. And again,
for in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but a new Creature, Gal. 6.15. And if any man be in Christ,
he is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17.

And the Gospel is declared by St Paul to be the ministration of Righteousness,
not in the Letter of the Law, but in the Spirit or internal Righteousness which
was required in the Law, and more plainly and expressly in the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.
and that Christians must serve in newness of Spirit, and not in the oldness of
the Letter. And the benefits of the new Covenant of having God to be our God,
and our Sins pardoned, belong only to them who have his Laws put in their mind,
and written in their heart, Heb. 8. And that those, who are born after the
Spirit by regeneration, are Children according to promise or tenor of the New
Covenant, when as those, who were born after the flesh, and adhering only to
the Letter of the Law for an external Righteousness, were Children of the
flesh, or Legal Political Covenant: And this is set forth in an Allegory
touching the two Covenants, Gal. 4.

All this serves not only to let us see the nature of that Righteousness, by
which the Judaising Christians could not be justified as they expected, but
also by way of opposition to that, truly and plainly to represent to us the
nature of that Evangelical Righteousness, by which (in subordination to
Christ's Righteousness) we must be justified if ever justified; both which
doubtless were the true design of the Scriptures I have brought together, that
you uright see the harmony and concurrent testimony of the Scriptures in this
matter.

By this time I presume you perceive, that the difference between the two sorts
of Judaising Christians, the better and the worse, lay much in this one point,
to wit, that the one did, and the other did not hold internal Righteousness
necessary to Justification: For, excepting in this, they seem both to have been
of one mind, both in professing Faith in Christ, and in holding themselves
under the obligation of the Law of Moses for Circumcision and other Legal
Rites. Now then, if that very thing made so great a difference between them, as
I have showed, what shall we then think of that opinion, by which some better
men among us than the corrupt Judaising Christians were do thus far agree and
fall in with them, as they do in denying internal Righteousness of inherent
Grace to be necessary to our Justification, or that it does enter it, or is any
ingredient in it, but think it perfectly subsequent to it, not so much as
admitting it to take place, or to come into being, until we are first
justified; nor so much as admitting that Faith in it self is imputed for
Righteousness, but only the Righteousness of Christ as apprehended by Faith: I
say, what shall we think of this? Can we possibly think the same opinion to be
a grievous error in the Judaising Christians, and yet to be Orthodox and
Innocent in others?

Doubtless where this opinion is as practically held as it was by the corrupter
sort of the Judaising Christians, it is as criminal and dangerous as it was in
them; but so it is not, I confess, where it is held only speculatively, as I
suppose it to be by all those of that persuasion that are Regenerate and truly
good. For they hold Regeneration and the inherent Grace of Sanctification
necessary to Salvation, though not to Justification; and in holding this they
practically hold it necessary to Justification, even then while in speculation
and opinion they hold no absolute necessity of it in order thereto. For the
practicing upon this better principle, as believing Regeneration and
Sanctification necessary to Salvation, and becoming Regenerate, Sanctified, and
internally Righteous thereupon, they come thereby to have this Evangelical
Righteousness imputed to them for such as it is, that is for Righteousness; for
so it is in the eye, and according to the tenor of the Evangelical Law; which
Imputation is their Justification. This God does, although they do not know and
believe all this, but think they were justified before they were sanctified
(which by interpretation is to think they were accounted righteous before they
were so) that they were accounted righteous in the Righteousness of another,
before they were at all righteous in themselves. But God proceeds in justifying
men, not according to by-opinions in men, while consistent with real Holiness,
but according to what they are indeed and in truth in the temper of their
hearts, and tenor of their lives.

I have said thus much to ease those of the opinion I oppose, as much as I can.
For by reason that it is counter-ballanced by better principles in many, it is
not so dangerous in them as it was in the corrupt Judaising Christians. It was
in them indeed mortiserous and damnable if practiced upon and persisted in,
because there was in them no such thing to counter-ballance it in its
operation, as a persuasion of the necessity of internal Righteousness unto
Salvation, no more than unto Justification, as there is in these.

And in this very respect, and their opinion of merit, doubtless it was, that
the promoters of this grand error were charged with perverting the Gospel of
Christ, and those that practically adhered to them therein, with falling from
Grace, and depriving themselves of the benefit of Christ's death. And the
reason of this is plain; because the Grace of God in the Gospel is limited and
restrained in the last issue and event unto men's becoming Regenerate and
internally righteous, as the condition without which they shall neither be
justified, pardoned, nor saved by the death of Christ, or any thing he has
done for the Salvation of Sinners. And therefore those false Teachers, that
taught Justification and Salvation attainable by Christ without such internal
Righteousness, might well be charged with perverting the Gospel of Christ, and
those Christians with falling from Grace, who closed with them in that opinion:
For therein they departed and fell off from the true Notion and Idea of the
Grace of the Gospel, and the terms on which all the saving benefits are in the
Gospel promised by Jesus Christ.

Now although this opinion of the nonnecessity of the inherent Grace of
Sanctification unto Justification is checked and controlled in its operation in
those that are full of the sense of the necessity of it unto Salvation; yet by
what has been now represented it seems in it self, and abstracted from the
better principle I have mentioned, to be the first step toward falling from
Grace in the sense before explained, and is of dangerous consequence, when it
takes place in men who have no such sense of the necessity of internal
Sanctification unto Salvation. For in such case, Libertines and Carnal men will
be apt to bear up them selves in hope (as is much to be feared they too
frequently do) that if their believing only, abstracted from its effects in
renewing men, be sufficient to procure the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
to them for their Justification in the fight of God, or otherwise of it self to
obtain it, that then it will be sufficient also to save them, in as much as the
Scripture says, whom God justifies, them he also glorifieth, and styles the
Justification of men, Justification unto life, and if God justify, who is he
that condemns? And in this very respect, it is much to be seared, that this
opinion too frequently becomes a snare of Death, and a stumbling stone to many,
to content themselves with that which is but a dead Faith, and some external
form of Devotion and Righteousness without the internal, in mortifying all
inordinate affection, and in governing their thoughts and passions; and to
think themselves safe and in a good condition upon account of that, to the
betraying of their Souls to destruction. And whether it may not be pronounced
concerning all those who expect Justification and Salvation upon account of
their believing and hoping in Christ, and of an external Righteousness without
an internal, that they are fallen from Grace, and that Christ shall profit them
nothing, as well as it was concerning the corrupt Judaising Christians, is a
question I think you will easily resolve.

When we see then how fatal it was to the unbelieving Jews and Judaising
Christians to mistake the tenor of God's Covenant, and the nature of the
Covenant-Righteousness, and to introduce a Righteousness of another kind into
the place and office of the internal Righteousness which is by Faith, it may
well make wary men cautious, how they entertain any opinion that is in any
degree like unto it.

It has been a mistake of the Scriptures about the nature and kind of the
Evangelical-Covenant-Righteousness, that has occasioned our Disputes about it
in these latter times, as well as it did among Christians in the Apostles
times, though the difference has not been altogether so great, nor perhaps so
dangerous now as it was then. And if it may not be burdensome to you, I will
very briefly give you yet some farther account of my thoughts and apprehensions
of the nature of this Righteousness, and of the sense and meaning of some of
those Scriptures that treat of it, and have been mistaken on the one side, or
on the other.

The tenor of God's Grace in the Gospel is to exhibit, declare, and show, that
since man by his fall has made the enjoyment of felicity, and the avoiding of
misery, by perfect sinless obedience, impracticable, that yet God will for
Christ's sake, as having undertaken for us, receive him into favor again upon
condition that he do but heartily desire, resolve, and sincerely endeavor for
the future to become obedient, and to please him in all things so far as he is
able with the helps and assistances internal and external, which God will
vouchsafe, and heartily repent that ever he did otherwise; and that upon the
same condition he will pardon all past sins and future failings also, so far as
they are consistent with sincerity of Love and Obedience. This is summarily the
glad tidings which by the Gospel is published to the World.

And a practical belief of this glad Tidings is that which God accounts unto
men for Righteousness, as being the New-Covenant-Righteousness. And that is a
practical belief of it, when men so believe it as to practice according to it,
in repenting and sincerely obeying, in hope of the promised benefits. And this
godly sincerity is the Righteousness of the New Covenant or Gospel, as
distinguished from the Righteousness which is of the Law, either as that
imports perfect sinless obedience, or else only an external Pharisaical
Righteousness.

The Evangelical Righteousness before described, is in the New Testament
sometimes styled the Righteousness of God, as opposed to the unbelieving Jews
and corrupt Judaising Christians own external Pharisaical Righteousness, Romans
10.3. Phil. 3.9. And this is called their own Righteousness, as being only of
their own choosing, and not of God's appointing, as the condition on which they
promised themselves Justification in the sight of God, when he had promised
them no such thing. And the internal with the external Righteousness of godly
sincerity is called the Righteousness of God, and the Righteousness which is of
God, partly because it is of his institution, and partly because it is of his
operation. It is the Righteousness of God, because it is of his institution. He
has in and by the New Covenant ordained, That this shall be accounted and
taken for that Righteousness upon which he will accept men as Righteous, and
justify them as such against all condemnatory accusations: This is his
Institution and Revelation in the Gospel, in which this Righteousness of God is
said to be revealed from faith to faith, Romans 1.17. to wit, as that which is
the object of Faith, or that which is to be believed to be the stated terms on
which God will now justify and save men. And that it is meant of a
Righteousness inherent in men, the rather appears by the antithesis in the next
words, where on the contrary it is said, the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; Where the
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, is put in opposition to the
Righteousness of God.

It is the Righteousness of God also, because it is of his operation and
working in us. It is of his Creation, and therefore called the new Creature,
the new man created after the Image of God in Righteousness and true Holiness,
the Divine nature, begotten of God by the word of Truth, born, not of the will
of man, or of the will of the flesh, but of God. And it being of his
institution and operation, it must needs be of his approbation too. This
Evangelical Righteousness is called the Righteousness of God in the same sense
in which the Christian life is called the life of God, Ephesians 4.18. not the life
which he himself lives, but the life which he commands, and the life which by
his Grace he enables men to live. As the Sacrament is called the Supper of the
Lord, because it is of his institution: so is this inherent Righteousness and
Justification by it, said to be the Righteousness of God for the same reason.

To restore fallen man to this Righteousness, and to acceptance with God and
Justification thereby, and to render him capable of the happiness designed him
in another World, was the reason of sending Christ into the World, and of his
suffering for us, and of all the rest of his Mediatory undertaking. For that I
take to be the plain meaning of 2 Cor. 5.21 (When I compare the foregoing
verses therewith, noting God's design of reconciling us to himself by Christ,
which is done by an inward change of mind and will.)
. He has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him, that is, by means of him. Parallel to which is 1
Pet. 3.18. Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God.

This inherent Righteousness is called the Righteousness which is of God by
Faith, because it proceeds from God by the means of Faith, and not without it,
Romans 3.22. Phil. 3.9. by believing that God will justify and save men by Jesus
Christ in this way, and upon these terms of becoming inherently righteous, and
not otherwise, men come to be so, that they may be justified and saved.

I have the rather given this brief Gloss upon these Scriptures, because I find
Mr. Polhill still, as others have done before him, will needs understand that
this Righteousuess is meant of the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and
that it is called the Righteousness of God, because it is the Righteousness of
Christ, which is God, But methinks he and they should consider, that because
the Righteousness of Christ is the Righteousness of him that is God as well as
Man, that therefore it is nowise likely it should ever be imputed to us any
otherwise than in its blessed effects, and consequently that which they surmise
cannot be the sense of the Scriptures aforementioned. For as such it is a
mediatorial righteousness, a Righteousness resulting from his conformity to the
Law of his Mediation, which was a Law peculiar to himself alone. And it seems
very rational to think this righteousness no more communicable to us, otherwise
than in its happy effects, than the acts and office of his Mediation are. And
although, upon the account of its being so transcendent and glorious a
righteousness, it is a very great ground of consolation and of confidence to
us, that for the sake of it our Evangelical righteousness will be accepted with
God, and all our defects, so far as consistent with sincerity, freely pardoned,
yet it is a great question, whether it will agree with Christian modesty to
presume our selves invested therewith, any otherwise than in the beneficial
effects of it, unless there were more ground for it than we can find in
Scripture. We may well bethink our selves, whether it be not a Garment too rich
and glorious for us to wear, and proper only for the person of the Mediator,
the Son of God himself.

If it shall yet be demanded, that if this be true, that we are justified upon
account of all other inherent Grace, as well as that of Faith, then how comes
it to pass that in Scripture Faith is still said to be imputed for
righteousness, and not love or humility, or the like? If there should be no
other reason but this, yet this might well satisfy us in this enquiry, viz. in
that this Grace of Faith above any other, is in the nature of it adopted and
fitted to subserve God's design, in recovering us from the state of sin and
misery, into which we were sunk, unto a state of holiness and happiness, from
which we were fallen.

God's design was to restore us to happiness by holiness, and to make his own
Grace glorious in the eyes of his Creatures in doing of it. And when you have
well considered it, I think you will find that there is no one Grace or Virtue
that could be so serviceable to God in this design, as Faith: Nay, which is
more, that those Divine Virtues themselves which constitute the New Creature or
Divine Nature (without which we are not capable of being made happy) could not
have been introduced and brought again into the nature of fallen man, but by
Faith. I will suppose that you cannot imagine, how God should restore us to
happiness without reconciling us to himself, and being reconciled to us: Nor
how he should reconcile us to himself without making some Overtures of Grace to
us: Nor how he should be reconciled to us without our submitting to his terms
of Grace. And if not, I can easily show you that we cannot be affected and
wrought upon by God's overture and offer of Grace, so as to answer his end in
making it, nor submit to, or comply with his terms of Grace without believing;
and consequently that the execution of God's design in restoring us to
happiness, and of glorifying the riches of his Grace therein, depends very much
upon Faith, and more on that, than on any other Grace or Virtue whatsoever.

First, We cannot be affected and wrought upon with God's offer of Grace, so as
to give him the glory of it in thankful acceptance, due acknowledgments, and
suitable returns in loving him that showed such love to us, without this Grace
of Faith. For the sense of God's Grace in offering to sinners, through Christ,
pardon, restoration to his favor, and salvation at last, upon condition of
repentance, cannot enter into the heart of man, but by Faith. And the reason
hereof is, because the offer of Grace, and the things offered by Grace, are
matter of supernatural revelation, which do not further affect, than they are
believed, as I shall farther show in the next particular.

But by believing that God of mere Grace in and by Christ has promised pardon,
acceptance into favor, the assistance of his Spirit, and eternal life unto
Sinners (otherwise under condemnation) upon condition of repentance and a
sincere returning unto God; I say by this belief we come to trust in, and rely
upon that Grace, and on Christ as an All-sufficient Savior for those promised
benefits, even in the performance of that Condition, and that in opposition to
all opinion of meriting them by that performance, or by any thing we can do.
And it is by this belief and affiance that God receives from us the glory of
his Grace, and Christ the honor of his performance for us: which answers one
of the great ends designed by our recovery; for which cause it may very well be
one reason why this Faith, rather than any other Grace, is said to be imputed
to us for Righteousness. For we are told expressly, that it is of Faith that it
might be by Grace, Romans 4.16. That is, to cut off all pretense of merit, the
same saving benefits are promised, and on the same Condition, to wit, that of
Faith, to Heathen Idolaters, Sinners of the Gentiles, as was to the strictest
observers of the Law of Moses: The reason in the close of the verse, gives that
to be the meaning. And accordingly Faith, whether it be in one that has been a
great sinner, or in one of a more inoffensive life, has God's Grace, not Man's
merit, for its object on which it does depend for all, and accordingly
attributes and ascribes all to it, Gal. 2.15, 16. Which is one reason we see of
God's electing of it to be the Condition, on which his great and precious
promises are made, and may well be a reason also of his imputing it to men for
Righteousness when they do believe.

For by the account we have why Abraham's Faith was imputed to him for
Righteousness, we have reason to believe that our giving to God the glory of
his Grace and Goodness, Truth and Power, by this belief and affiance, and to
Christ the honor of his undertaking, is of such high acceptance with God, as
that he of his goodness is pleased to honor and reward it by imputing it to us
for Righteousness. For we see when Abraham's Faith in God's promise, touching a
numerous Issue, had nothing to lean upon but the Goodness, Veracity, and Power
of God, and that these carried it with Abraham against all doubts and
objections that might arise from the utmost humane and natural improbabilities
of ever coming to pass, so that he gave glory to God in being fully persuaded,
that what he had promised he was able also to perform; that St. Paul has told
us that therefore, or for this very cause, his Faith was imputed to him for
righteousness, Romans 4.21, 22.

But the glorifying the riches of his Grace was not all that God had in design
in our recovery, but also the Renovation of our nature, and the restoring us to
happiness thereby: And Faith is as necessary and useful for the accomplishing
this part of God's design, as it was to effect the other, and therefore
secondly, this may be another Reason why Faith is imputed for Righteousness,
and why it is said to be so, rather than any other Grace.

Without believing we cannot comply with the terms and condition on which
Pardon and Salvation are promised, and without which they are not to be had,
and that is in being renewed in our nature. For without believing those Motives
that tend to persuade us to comply with, and submit to the terms or condition,
on which God for Christ's sake has promised to pardon us, to receive us into
favor, and finally to save us, we can never actually comply with those terms
or that condition, and consequently without that can never be capable of
receiving the benefits promised on that condition.

For it is Faith, as it takes in those Motives in their strength and persuasive
efficacy, that becomes a vigorous and operative principle of all other Graces,
Repentance, Love, Obedience, and the like, by which our nature becomes renewed:
All which depend upon our believing. And therefore well may our Faith be named
and put for all the rest, as comprehending them in it, when it, rather than any
other Grace, is said to be imputed for Righteousness. To make this evident, I
shall suggest two things to you.

1. That they are the great Motives of the Gospel, the Grace of God and Love of
Christ to lost man, the good hoped for, and the evil feared, the good promised
to those that are good, and the evil threatened to those that are evil, that
operate upon the mind and will in men, to the producing that change in them, by
which they become new men, sincerely good men. If we love God, it is because he
loved us first, 1 John 4.19. If we live to Christ that died for us, it is
because the love of Christ constrains us, 2 Cor. 5.14. If we are made partakers
of a Divine Nature, it is by the great and precious promises that we are so, 2
Pet. 1.4.

And 2. the operation of these Motives of the Gospel upon the mind depends upon
our believing, and so consequently do all those happy effects in heart and
life, which are produced by the operation of those Motives. For until the
reality of those Motives are believed, they have no existence or being in the
Soul, and where they have no being they have no operation. The Word preached
did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it, Heb.
4.2. The Love, Grace, and Favor of God to Sinners, in giving Christ for us,
and of his Love in giving himself for us, and intending and promising us the
benefit of pardon and salvation thereby only upon condition of our Repentance
and Conversion unto God, being all of them things invisible, and not objects of
sense, do not affect us, or persuade us to repent, and in good earnest turn to
God, that we may be pardoned and saved, until we really believe these things.
It is our Faith, or the credit we give to the Revelation which God has made of
these things, that gives them an existence or being in the Soul, and upon that
depends the efficacy and power of their prevailing with us to become new men.
Faith is the substance or subsistence of things hoped for, and the evidence or
conviction of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. Unless men first believe that God is
so good, merciful, and gracious to men, notwithstanding they have sinned
against him, as to pardon and save them, if they repent and become sincerely
obedient for the future, and not otherwise, they will never deny ungodliness
and worldly lusts, when they are solicited thereby to gratify the flesh. Men
must first believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him indeed, before they will seek his Grace and Favor by
becoming such, and doing that upon which, and not without which, he has more
or less declared his Grace and Favor is to be obtained and found. Without this
Faith it is impossible to please God; it is impossible to leave off those
things by which they have displeased him, and to betake themselves to do those
things that are pleasing in his sight, Heb. 11.6.

It was the belief that all good men had before the Law and under the Law, that
God would keep Covenant and mercy with those that love him and keep his
Commandments, and not otherwise, that brought them so to love him and to keep
his Commandments. It was their belief that there is forgiveness with him that
he might be feared, as an encouragement to men to fear him, that prevailed with
them to fear him indeed, Psalm. 130.4. It was the hope which even the Heathen
Ninevites had (from the natural Notion they had of God, and from their
observation of his general and common goodness to the World, notwithstanding
men's sins) that if they did but repent and leave their sins, forgiveness might
possibly be obtained, that caused them to turn from their evil way, and from
the violence that was in their hands, Jona. 3.8, 10.

Now then, since so much as you see depends upon Faith, as Repentance,
Conversion, Regeneration, and all inherent Righteousness and Holiness of
living, there is great reason why it should usually be mentioned, as that which
is imputed for Righteousness, rather than any other inherent Grace, and in the
name, and as the representative of all the rest, as being the productive cause
of them all.

By the way you may observe then, that since it is as you see the Operation of
the great Motives of the Gospel as believed, that in conjunction with the
operation of the Holy Spirit effects that great Change in men, by which they
become regularly capable of all the blessedness of pardon and salvation which
the Gospel reveals, it must needs be very necessary for such as you, who are
ministers of the Gospel, to insist much upon those Motives in your discourses
to the people, and to inculcate and work them into their minds. To set life and
death, heaven and hell before them, and to convince them of the reality of such
a future state, and of the inseparable connection that is between happiness and
their duty, and between a sinful and hypocritical life, and their eternal
misery. And to convince them that every one shall have in the next World
according as he chooses in this, he that chooses the right way shall come to
the right and best end, as he that chooses the wrong shall certainly come to
the wrong and worst, and that every he that shall perish hereafter, is a self
murderer.

And likewise to set in the peoples eye the preventing grace of God, what he
has already done for us, as a most affecting motive tending to reconcile us to
him, and to think well of him, as of one that never sought our ruin, but as
pitying us, and taking compassion on us, when we had brought it upon our
selves, and not pursuing the advantage we have given him against us, nor
revenging himself on us. But contrarily contriving a way of our recovery from
sin, and from the misery into which that has brought us, yea, though it cost
him very dear to do it, in giving his Son to dye for us, when he could not
otherwise do it with satisfaction to himself in reference to the honor of his
Government.

Besides, he has done this for us men, and for our salvation, when he has
past by the fallen Angels: Christ the Son of God did not take hold of Angels,
the Apostate Spirits, to rescue them out of that destruction and misery into
which they plunged themselves, and yet has taken hold of the seed of Abraham,
of the humane nature, to rescue and pluck mankind out of the horrible pit of
destruction, into which we were fallen, Heb. 2.16.

And now, is not all this Grace of God and Love of Christ, which thus far is
unconditionate, and absolutely free and unsought for on our part, and
altogether antecedent to any thing done by us to obtain it, a wonderful motive
thankfully and joyfully to accept of those most reasonable and gracious terms
of our Recovery, which God in the Gospel has offered us?

When it shall be considered, that God of his mere commiseration and compassion
toward us, has now tried us once again, when we were all but as dead men
before him, and has put us in a way once again of being happy; with what face
can we slight, despise, and abuse such Love by rejecting those gracious terms
of reconciliation, that were procured for us on such costly terms as the
sufferings of the Son of God amount unto? But if we do, and after all this will
persist in our rebellion against Heaven, how can we possibly expect that any
other way or terms of pardon and salvation should ever be offered unto us
again? How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, and so mercifully
and freely offered us, and that on no harder conditions neither, than to cease
our wilful rebellion against God, and to become dutiful and loyal under his
easy yoke and gentle Government by the Evangelical Law? Heb. 2.3.

If then such mighty Motives as the Love of God, and his Son Christ Jesus our
Lord, so wonderfully expressed, and the hope of Heaven, and the fear of Hell,
will not work upon us to repent, to change our minds, and amend our lives, and
to become new Creatures; what greater Motives, think we, can God use to
persuade men by? Doubtless they are these Motives will do it, if any thing will
do it: and for that reason they should (as I said) be insisted on by those,
whose special business appointed them by God is to win Souls.

And as these Motives should be much and often inculcated upon the minds of the
people for the reason aforesaid, so for the same reason they should be managed
with all the advantage, in respect of circumstance, that can be thought on, to
reach their end, in operating powerfully upon the people's Souls. Such for one
is plainess of speech, as the phrase is, 2 Cor. 3.12. and not as Moses, who put
a vail over his face. By which plainness of speech (if it be what I mean)
things are fitted and prepared for the understanding and capacity of the
meanest, whose salvation God has designed as much as the salvation of the more
learned and wise. If Peter will express his love to his Master indeed, he must
as well seed his Lambs as his Sheep, Joh. 21.15.

And by how much the more matters so affecting in themselves, as the Motives of
the Gospel are, are delivered with an inward sense, seriousness and gravity, by
so much the more they will command attention and consideration from the people,
and the sooner sink down into their hearts, and the more powerfully operate
upon the mind and will.

And if the experience of many (among whom I number my self) be of any
consideration in place of proof, then the intermixing Scripture Texts in Divine
Discourses, aptly applied, and wisely managed, is much more edifying to the
people, than such Discourses without that can be, though otherwise for the
matter of them, they may be agreeable to the Scripture. For besides that so
doing greatly helps memory and retention of the matter, without which the
operation of the matter vanishes with the matter it self: And besides also the
benefit of growing thereby into better acquaintance with the Scriptures, the
Mine of these Motives of which I speak, and of becoming able by use to reduce
scattered Texts of one and the same import to heads of Doctrine; I say besides
all this, and more which might be said, it tends greatly to bind the matter
delivered the faster upon the Conscience, when it shall come so visibly armed
with authority from Heaven, as by that means it does; and when the Laws and
Statutes of that Kingdom shall be produced, laid open, and urged to make it
good and enforce it. The Scriptures themselves will be found of more authority
in the Consciences of men, than the best words men can speak, though never so
rational and true. In a word, as Apollos was a man mighty in the Scriptures, so
he mightily convinced his hearers by the Scriptures, Acts 18.24, 28. I need not
mention unto you how much it was St. Paul's manner to reason out of the
Scriptures of the old Testament, before those of the New were in being, when he
had to do with those that owned them, Acts 17.2. and 28.23. Nor how our Lord
Christ himself collected and brought together the things concerning himself,
which were scattered up and down in Moses and the Prophets, and expounded them
to his Disciples, and thereby opened their understandings, and caused their
hearts to burn within them; and that, I think, is not unlike the operation of
the Motives of the Gospel I have been speaking of, Luke 24.27, 32, 45, 46.

There is one thing more which I must add to obviate an objection; and another
to explain and confirm something I have asserted. I know some, and perhaps your
self, will be ready to object, That the tenor of my reasoning touching God's
imputing Faith it self, and other inherent Grace for Righteousness in
justifying men, tends to confound Justification and Sanctification, and to make
them all one. But that follows not at all: For Sanctification is the
constituting or making men Evangelically righteous or holy by the joint
operation of God's Holy Spirit, and the Evangelical Doctrine; but Justification
is God's pronouncing or declaring them, as he does in the Gospel, to be
righteous according to the terms of the Gospel, as having performed the
condition upon which forgiveness of Sin and eternal Life are therein promised.

Justification is a Juridical act of God as Judge, which does not make a man
righteous as sanctification does, but upon trial pronounces him to be so, and
by it the person tried is acquitted and discharged from the accusation of
unbelief, impenitency, and wilful disobedience to the Gospel, and so also from
Condemnation it self. So that Justification is not Sanctification, but
supposes it as antecedent thereunto, at least in order of nature. Whom he
called them he also justified, says St. Paul, and whom he justified them he
also glorified, Romans 8.30. He does not say, whom he justified them he also
sanctified, but them also he glorified. Sanctification is not brought in
between Justification and Glorification in that golden Chain, but is placed in
order as going before both in effectual calling.

The other thing I would add for explanation and confirmation is this: Whereas
I have said that the Faith which is imputed for Righteousness, is comprehensive
of Repentance and Obedience to the Gospel: Now least you should not be
satisfied therewith, I shall give you this plain account why we cannot
reasonably understand otherwise. For the Scripture does exclude such from
sharing in the saving benefits of the Covenant, as are impenitent,
unregenerate, and disobedient to the Gospel, Luke 13.3. Joh. 3.3. Romans 2.8. And
if so, then no man can share in those saving benefits, whereof Justification is
one, until his Faith does produce Repentance, Regeneration, and Obedience,
unless you will suppose that which no man does, that these are no efffects of
Faith, For he that believes is born of God, is to a degree renewed to his
likeness, 1 John 5.1.

And when I say thus, I am not of opinion that men cannot be justified until
they have fulfilled some time in a course of holy living and new obedience,
internal and external. But when a man so believes, as that such a real change
is thereby wrought in the heart, as is the beginning of a new life for the
present, and the foundation of a holy life for the future, then undoubtedly he
passes out of an unjustified into a justified state. This change in the mind
and will by means of Faith, does first constitute a man a good man; and when
this change first takes place, then God's Laws are first put into the mind, and
written in the heart, upon which God promises in the New Covenant to be our
God, and that we shall be his People, and that he will be merciful to our
unrighteousness, and our sins and iniquities to remember no more, Hebr. 8.10,
12. and 10.16, 17.

And it is observable, that the qualification upon which God in the New
Covenant here mentioned, promises to be our God, and to forgive our sins, is
not mentioned under the Name or Notion of Faith or Believing, but of having the
Divine Laws put into the mind, and written in the heart. Which would be
somewhat strange, if this writing the Law in the heart were no part of the
Condition, without which God will not vouchsafe unto any man that great benefit
of the Covenant, Justification.

There is no doubt indeed, but that though Faith be not here mentioned, yet it
is supposed and employed, in as much as without it the Law cannot be written in
the heart in the sense we speak of it now.

But then, when at other times Faith only is mentioned, as that which qualifies
men for Justification, and as the Condition of the promise of Pardon and
Salvation, yet then this writing of the Law in the heart is also to be
understood. For it is not to be imagined, that the putting of the Law into the
mind, and writing it in the heart, would be mentioned in a description of the
tenor of the New Covenant, as that qualification upon which God will be our
God, take us for his people, and forgive our sins, (which imply Justification)
if any Faith, or Faith in any respect short of producing this effect, would be
available and sufficient unto Justification.

It Is true, the Scripture in some places tells us that Faith is imputed for
Righteousness, without telling us what, or what manner of Faith this is: But
then in other places it is plainly described to us by the nature of its
operation, as that it purifieth the heart, Acts 15.9. works by love, Gal.
5.6. overcomes the world, 1 John 5.4. and sanctifies the whole man, Acts
26.18.

We see then, that the inseparable effects of Faith, as here the writing of the
Law in the heart, are sometimes mentioned as those things which qualify us for
the blessing of the Covenant, and sometimes Faith it self only. But if we will
take the whole testimony of the Scriptures together, we shall find that both
are intended: And why then should we contend, as some do, about dividing these
in qualifying us for Justification, as parts of that Evangelical Righteousness
which will be imputed to us for Righteousness?

After all this, let me tell you, Sir, That there is a sense in which it is not
disagreeable to the Scripture, to say that a man is justified by such acts of
Evangelical Righteousness or Obedience, as do not take place till long after he
first believes, and believes to Justification. And thus Abraham's believing,
mentioned Genesis 15.6. which was not until some years after he first believed, is
said to be imputed to him for Righteousness. And many years after that again he
was justified by yielding obedience to God's Command about offering his Son,
James 2.21. And somewhat of like nature is also said of Noah, Heb. 11.7.
compared with Genesis 6.9, 22.

But these things are said, I conceive, in reference to the continuance of
their Justification, and not to their Justification at first. For as those acts
of believing, repenting, etc. which do first constitute a man a new Creature,
are at first imputed to him for Righteousness, so all after-acts of Evangelical
Obedience and of Faith it self are still imputed to him for Righteousness to
the continuance of his Justification. To which agrees that reading of Revel.
22.11. which runs thus, let him that is righteous be justified still; and the
Righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, Romans 1.17.

But otherwise, if the righteous turns away from his Righteousness, and
commits iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the wicked
man does, all the Righteousness which he has done shall not be mentioned: In
his trespass which he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in
them shall he die, Ezekiel. 18.24. Again, when I say to the righteous he shall
surely live; if he trust to his own Righteousness (i. e. his former
Righteousness) and commit iniquity, all his Righteousness shall not be
remembered, Ezekiel. 33.13. Now the just shall live by faith, but if he draw back,
my soul shall have no pleasure in him, Hebr. 10.38. If then you do but consider
upon what terms men are at first justified, and upon what terms they continue
to be so afterward, you will easily perceive it to be a great and most
important truth to say, That we are justified by believing and obeying the
Gospel.

These things, Sir, which I have thus done by way of Essay, without regard to
method, I submit to your consideration. I know right-well it is in vain, if I
had a mind to it (which yet I am far from) to impose upon you, or to persuade
you to receive any thing for truth farther than it brings it is evidence to be
so along with it. And it were to wished that every one were able to discern
when it does so: But that is a thing rather to be desired, than expected in this
our present state in this World. But it is Argument enough to treat one another
so almost as if we did, if we have not apparent reason to think we are but
insincere and dissembling friends to Truth, and love it not for it self, nor
any further, than it will accommodate us in some secular or carnal respect or
other: and it is not easy to determine when we have apparent reason so to
think. And therefore I conclude it safest for our selves rather to err in
treating one another in our differences better than we deserve, than worse. And
so to do is better for them also that differ from us, so far as they differ
from Truth; yea, and better for the Truth it self too. For it is often seen,
that when a prejudice is taken up against the persons of men, be the Cause
never so just, the Truth it self is the less esteemed, if not shrewdly
suspected, because held by them; especially when its evidence is not written as
with a Sun beam. So that when we, by an undue behavior in pleading the Cause
of Truth, draw upon our selves disrespect from them whom we would draw from
Error, we prevaricate in the matter, and act cross to our own design: A thing
which some engaged in Controversies have been to blame in.

However, it will be our wisdom in reading of Books of this nature to mind the
Argument, and to take little notice of any unbecoming girds or reflections,
unless it be to bewail them, and to endeavor to follow, as indeed there is
need, that saying of our Savior, let him that reads understand, Mark 13.14.
Thus desiring, that you and I, and all other Christians, may speak the truth in
love, in love both to it and men, and receive it in the love of it, that we may
be benefitted by it, I take my leave, and remain as ever,

Your most affectionately to serve you in all offices of Christian love and
respect, etc.
April 22. 1675.
FINIS.
Books printed for, and sold by Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-head in St,
Paul's Churchyard.
H. Mori Opera Theologica, Folio. Price 1 l. 10 s.

Dr. More's Reply to a late Answer to his Antidote against Idolatry, with the
Appendix, Octavo. Price 4 s.

Spencer dissertatio de Urim and Thummim, Octavo. Price 3 s. 6 d.

Frederici Lossi Observationes Medici, Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d.

Epigrammata Juvenilia in quatuor parts divisa, Encomia, Seria, Satyras and
Jocosa, per Guilielmum Speed. Price bound 9 d.

Dr. Smyth's unjust man's doom: as examined by the several kinds of Justice,
and their obligation, with a particular representation of Injustice, and danger
of partial Conformity, Octavo. Price 1 s.

Dr. Smyth's two Sermons at the Assizes in Suffolk, Octavo. Price 1 s.

Mr. Hallywell's Discourse of the Excellency of Christianity, Octavo. Price 6
d. -- Account of Familism, as it is revived, and propagated by the Quakers,
Octavo. Price 1 s.

Some Opinions of Mr. Hobbes considered in a second Dialogue between Philautus
and Timothy, Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d.

Breerwood's Enquiries into the Diversities of Languages, Octav. Price 2 s. 6 d.

A Stop to the Course of Separation, or the Separation of the new Separatists
condemned, etc. Octavo. Price 1 s.

Libertas Ecclesiastica, by Will. Falkner, Octavo. Price 5 s.

The Mystery of Iniquity unfolded, or the false Apostles and the Authors of
Popery compared, in their Secular Design, and means of accomplishing it, by
corrupting the Christian Religion, under pretense of promoting it, Octavo.
Price 1 s.

Mr. Sherlock's Discourse of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and our Union and
Communion with him, etc. Octavo. Price 2 s. 6 d.

Mr. Sherlock's Defense and Continuation of the Discourse concerning the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and our Union and Communion with him, with a
particular respect to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and the Charge of
Socinianism and Pelagianism, Oct. Price 5 s.

Dr. Webster's History of Metals, wherein is declared the signs of Ores and
Minerals both before and after digging, etc. Quarto. Price 5 s.

The great Duty of Self. Resignation to the Divine Will: By the late Pious and
Learned John Worthington, D.D. Octavo. Price 2 s.

A Discourse concerning the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, and our
Sins to him, with many useful questions thereunto pertaining, Resolved.
Together with Reflections more at large upon what has been published
concerning that Subject, by Mr. Robert Ferguson in his Interest of Reason in
Religion; and by Dr. John Owen in his Book styled Communion with God. By Tho.
Hotchkis, Oct. Price 2 s.

An Account of Mr. Ferguson's Commonplace book, in 2 Letters, Quart. Price 6 d.

The Comparative Anatomy of Trunks, together with an account of their
Vegitation grounded thereupon; In 2 Parts: The former read before the R.
Society, Feb. 25. 1674/5. the latter, June 17. 1675. the whole explicated by
several Figures in 19 Copper Plates; presented to the R. S. in the years 1673.
and 1674. by Nehemiah Grew, M. D. and Fellow of the R. S. in Octavo. Price 4 s.
6 d.


