PATIENCE ^. H. ^an. Hove. Sculp:


The ART of PATIENCE AND Balm of Gilead UNDER ALL Afflictions* An APPENDIX to
the ART of CONTENTMENT, By the AUTHOR of The Whole Duty of Man.

It is good that a Man should both hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of
the Lord,

Lam. 3.26. The Second Impression with Additional Prayers Suitable to the
several Occasions.

LONDON: Printed by R. Smith for E. Mory, at the Three Bibles in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIV.

Licensed, October. 14. 1693.

THE PREFACE.
THIS Tract meeting with so Candid a Reception, at its first Appearance, has
Encouraged it to make a farther Essay; And what was omitted in the former
Impression, is incerted in this: viz. The Prayers annexed to the several
Sections, which doubtless will prove very acceptable and Practical to the
Contemplative. The Original Part of this Discourse, was Extracted from a
Foundation, Bp. Hall 's Ba^m of Gilead.
laid by a Learned and Reverend Prelate, upon whose Basis this Superstructure
is Erected: He, like a Wise Master Builder laid the Corner Stone, as a Pattern
for others to imitate; and they which attain to his height of Perfection, shall
enjoy what Christ said to his Disciples, In their Patience, they shall possess
their own Souls.

And indeed, we never wanted more Motives to excite us to this Duty, than now:
When this Virtue appears so dissentaneous to most Dispositions: But I would to
God those Turbulent Spirits would listen to the grave Council of St.
Chrysostom, If with a Desire of Judging, thou would needs be a Judge, I will
show thee the Judgment Seat, which shall be adventageous to thee, and no way
touch thy Conscience; Let thy Mind and Thought sit down to give Sentence, call
forth all thy Offenses, and begin to say with thy self, Why have thou done this
or that.

This private Examining of Themselves would soon make these Public
Controllers, of all others, by plausible Pretenses of Reformation; look nearer
Home, and subdue that in themselves, they are apt to spy in others. St. Paul
blamed their Course, whose manner was to go from House to House, Tit. 1.13.
Esau, that lost the Blessing, was Hunting; but Jacob that enjoyed it, and the
Inheritance, kept at home, Genesis 17.30. The Just Man, says Solomon, first
accuses himself; And Judah spoke humbly of an Offender, when he said, She is
more Righteous than I, Genesis 38.26.

But let such hot Spirits take along with them this Information, That Obedience
is better than Sacrifice; and that he which gives Grace to the Humble, is also
said to resist the Proud: And they may be well assured, that this Counterfeit
Coin will prove dross when it comes to the Test. It is an easier Task for
Malcontents to reprehend others, than to amend themselves; as those who have
blemished Eyes, think the Sky ever cloudy. Nothing more common with troublesome
Dispositions, which have not known the way of Peace, than to be ever
Contending, seldom Contented.

The Elements, though in quality diverse, yet they accord, for the Constitution
of the Corporeal Nature: And I would to God, that all who profess and call
themselves Christians, would accord together for the Conservation of Church and
State, That Peace may dwell in our Land: We are all sheep of that Fold, whereof
Christ is the Shepherd; Stones of that Building whereof he is the chief Corner
Stone; Branches of that Vine, whereof he is the Stock; We have but one God for
our Father that Created us; one Savior that Redeemed us; and one Holy Ghost
our Sanctifier, that adorns us.

We are here but Pilgrims and Strangers, and we shall one day find, that a
Peaceable Christian Life, with a good departure hence, shall bear a greater
Value than all Temporal Enjoyments, can afford us; In pursuance of which, let
us all endeavor to learn these following Instructions, by which means we shall
not only attain to be Scholars, but Proficients in this School of Patience,
and acquire that Conquest over our unruly Passions, and inordinate Affections,
but shall be enabled cheerfully to run with Patience the Race which is set
before us, looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who for
the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the Shame, and is
set down at the Right Hand of the Throne of God, Heb. 12.1, 2. and therefore,
beseech we God, That Mercy and Truth may meet together, that Righteousness and
Peace may Kiss each other; and that his Glory may dwell in our Land until we
come to inhabit in the Land of Glory.

THE CONTENTS. With a Prayer to every SECTION.
Sect. 1. OF the Connection between Humility, Meekness and Patience. Page 1
Sect. 2. In time of Sickness. Page 12 Sect. 3. Affliction of Conscience. Page
26 Sect. 4. Remedies against Temptations. Page 47 Sect. 5. Imbecility of
Grace. Page 56 Sect. 6. Loss of Reputation. Page 62 Sect. 7. Of Public
Calamities. Page 68 Sect. 8. Loss of Friends. Page 80 Sect. 9. Of Poverty. Page
85 Sect. 10. Of Confinement. Page 91 Sect. 11. In Exile. Page 97 Sect. 12. Of
Blindness and Deafness. Page 102 Sect. 13. Of Sterility. Page 111 Sect. 14.
Want of Repose. Page 116 Sect. 15. Of Gray. Hairs. Page 121 Sect. 16. Of
Mortality. Page 130 Sect. 17. Of Judgment. Page 143 Sect. 18. Spiritual
Conflicts. Page 149 Sect. 19. Character of Patience. Page 157 The Close. Page
162
The ART of PATIENCE AND Balm of Gilead UNDER ALL Afflictions*
SECT. I. Of the Connection between Humility, Meekness and Patience.
1. GOD, the Fountain of Goodness, from whom comes Every Good and Perfect
Gift, Jam. 1.17. has laid down such Rules and Precepts in Holy Scripture, that
whoever is Diligent in the search, Shall find in them Eternal Life, John 5.39.
We are commanded to Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which no
Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. and to practice those Celestial Duties of
Humilty, Meekness and Patience.

2. HUMILITY is first a Duty we owe to God, which is to have such a Sense of
our Unworthiness, and his Excellency, as may operate in us a lowly and
unfeigned Submission to Him: Now, this Submission is twofold; First, To his
Will; Secondly, To his Wisdom. The Submission to his Will is of two sorts,
Obedience and Patience: Obedience is our yielding up our selves with alacrity
to do what his Divine Will and Pleasure command us; and to enable us to perform
This, Humility is exceeding necessary: And to acquire this Obedience, we must
endeavor to possess our Hearts with the Sense of that great unspeakable
Distance, between God and us. To consider Him a God of Infinite Majesty, Power
and Glory; and we poor Worms of the Earth: He of Infinite Purity and Holiness;
and we polluted and dead, in Trespasses and Sins: He of Power able to do all
things; and we nothing, but by his Divine Assistance.

3. A Second sort of Submission to his Will, is Patience; the Subject Matter of
our Discourse. This consists in suffering his Will, as that of Obedience did in
acting it; and is composed of a voluntary yielding to what ever Afflictions God
is pleased to inflict upon us: In this, Humility is a great Assistant and
renders things easy to us; persuading us not to murmur, or repine at any thing
God does; but let what Afflictions soever come, though in the heaviest kind, we
may be always ready to say, Thy Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven: And
with old Eli, when that great Affliction came of Gods threatening the
Destruction of his Family, he loss of the Priesthood, the Cutting off both his
Sons in one Day; yet considering it was the Lord, enabled him calmly to yield
to 'em, saying, Let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.18. The same Effect
it had on David, in his Affliction; I was dumb, I opened not my Mouth, because
thou did it, Psalm. 39.9. God doing it, silenced all Murmurings and Repinings
in him: And it must operate the same Effect in us, in all our Afflictions, if
we intend to acquire this Duty of Patience.

4. THEREFORE, when ever God strikes, we are not only Patiently to endure his
Rod, but kiss it also; that is, be truly thankful, that he is pleased not to
Give us over to our own Hearts Lusts, Psalm. 18.12. But still continuing his
tender Care over us, sending Afflictions as so many Messengers, to call us to
himself. From whence we may learn, what an absurd Folly it is to murmur at
those Stripes, which are designed so graciously.

5. THIS Duty is not completed, by only a Quietness and Thankfulness under
Affictions; but there must be Fruitfulness also, or all the rest will be of no
Advantage; which is the production of that, for which the Afflictions were
sent; viz. the Amendment of our Lives: So that, in Time of Affliction, it is a
necessary Duty to examine our Hearts and Lives, and make a severe Scrutiny what
Sins have provoked God to scourge us; and whatsoever we find our selves guilty
of, humbly to confess to him, and immediately to forsake them; Redeeming what
we have lost, the Time to come.

6. OUR next Duty concerning Patience, is, That we are as much bound to comply
with one sort of Sufferings, as another, whether they be immediately from God,
as Sickness, loss of Friends, or the like; or whether it be from Men, who
sometimes are Instruments of afflicting us; and cannot prejudice us, without
Gods Permission: And God may as well create the Instruments of punishing us, as
to do it directly Himself; for it is a Counterfeit Patience* that pretends to
submit to God, and yet can bear nothing from Men. We see an Instance of Holy
Job, who is recorded in Sacred Scripture, as a Pattern of true Patience; he
made no such Difference in his Afflictions; but took the loss of his Cattle,
which the Chaldeans and Sabeans robbed him of, with as much Meekness, as he did
that which was consumed by Fire from Heaven. Therefore, whatever we suffer from
Men, if it be never so unjust in respect of them, we are humbly to confess it
is most just in respect of God; and instead of looking upon them with Rage and
Revenge, as the vulgar custom of the World is, we are to look up to God, and
acknowledge his Justice in the Affliction; imploring his Pardon most earnestly
for those Sins, which have provoked his wrath against us, and patiently and
thankfully to bear those Sufferings, till He shall in his own good time, see
fit to remove them; still saying with Job, Blessed be the Name of the Lord, Job
1.21.

7. A Second sort of Submission in Humility, is to the Wisdom of God; and that
is, to acknowledge him Infinitely Wise: And whatsoever he does, we must confess
it the best and fittest to be done: And this Confession we are to put in
practice, both in his Commands, and in his disposing and ordering of all
things. First, Whatsoever he commands us to believe, we are to believe, how
impossible soever it seems to our shallow Understandings. Secondly, To do
whatever he commands us, how opposite soever it be to our Carnal Reason and
Humor; and to conclude in both, that his Commandments are most reasonable, and
not grievous, 1 John 5.3.

8. NEXT, we are to submit to his Wisdom, in disposing and ordering of Things;
which is to acknowledge, He desposes of all things most wisely: Not only to the
World in General; but in what concerns every one in particular: So that, in
what Condition soever we are in, We are to be Content, 1 Timothy 6.8. and not to
be impatient and disturbed, at any Choice which God makes; since he chooses for
us, who cannot err: But to leave all things to him, to fit us with such an
Estate and Condition, as he sees best for us. Perhaps, it may not please our
unreasonable Humors, because we cannot live in that Splendor equal to our
Superiors: And the Reason is, we are so full of our selves, that we can see
nothing beyond it. We expect God should place us where we please, though by it
he discomposes the whole Scheme of his Providence: But he, like a wise
Master Builder, knows that every Stone is not fit for the Corner, not every
little Rafter for the main Beam: And sure, there cannot be a more vile contempt
of the Divine Wisdom, than to dispute his Choice, who knows what is fitter for
us, than we do our selves. Therefore, when ever we are disappointed of any of
our Aims or Wishes, let us not only patiently, but joyfully submit to it, and
acknowledge, that it is certainly best for us, it being chosen by the unerring
Wisdom of our Heavenly Father.

9. HAVING spoken of the Humility due toward God; I am now to speak of
Humility, as it concerns our selves; which will be no less necessary than the
former. This Humility is of two sorts; the first is, the having a mean and low
Opinion of our selves; the second is, being content that others should have so
of us. The first of these is contrary to Pride, and the second to Vainglory.
Pride cast the Angels out of Heaven; and it is the greatest Sin the Devil has
been guilty of: And we may frequently find in Scripture the hainousness of it,
Prove. 16.5. Every one that is proud in Heart, is an abomination to the Lord;
and in Chap. 6. among many things which the Lord hates, a Proud Look is set as
the chiefest. It is indeed a most prolifick Vice, and there are few Sins to
which it is not either Parent or Nurse to: There are many places of Scripture,
which shows the detestableness of it; I shall only add one, James 4.7. That God
resists the Proud, but gives Grace to the Humble.

10. AND the means of relinquishing this Sin of Pride, is performed by
Humility, by these Directions: First, We are to consider the hainousness of the
Sin, with that Regret as may operate in us no petty Contempt, but a deep and
irreconcilable Hatred against it. Secondly, To be vigilant over our Hearts,
that they foment not any Originals of it, never suffering them to feed on the
Phantasm of our own Magnificence: But when ever such Cogitations arise, let us
reverberate it immediately with the Memorial of some of our Follies and Vices;
so we may make this very Motion of our Pride an occasion of Humility. Thirdly,
We are to make no Comparison of our selves with those we think are more foolish
and vicious than we are, lest we fall into the same Snare with the Pharisee,
Luke 16.11. Extol our selves for being better: But if we will compare, and
associate our selves, let us do it with the Wise, Sober, and Religious; and
there we shall find, we come so far short of 'em, that we can have no high
Esteem of our selves, but rather a more Submission to Humility, than we had
before. Lastly, Let us humbly and earnestly invoke the Almighty, That he would
eradicate all Degrees of this Sin in us, and make us of the number of those
that are Poor in Spirit, Mat. 5.3. to whom the Blessing even of Heaven it self,
is pronounced and promised.

11. THE next Vice in opposition to Humility, is Vainglory; which is a
hungring and thirsting after the Praise of Men: and first, that it is a Sin,
the Words of our Savior prove it, John 5.44. How can ye believe, that receive
Honor one of another? So it is not only a Sin, but such a one as hinders the
Reception of Christ into the Heart. Secondly, The great danger of this Sin is
such, if it keep Christ out of our Hearts, it brings us to inevitable
Destruction; for all our Hope of escaping the Wrath to come, depends in our
Reception of Him: And this Sin where ever it takes Possession in the Minds of
Men, it endangers the being guilty of many others; and he that seeks so much
for popular Applause, may be in danger of the Mobile's Hissing, and without
Repentance, in danger of Hell Fire, Mat. 5.22.

12. THIRDLY, The Folly of it is, we pursue after a Blast of Wind, the Breath
of Men, which affords us no real Advantage. Secondly, It is not only
unprofitable, but dolorous and difficult also; for he that eagerly seeks
Praise, is not Master of himself, but must suit all his Actions to that end and
purpose; and contrary to what his own Reason and Conscience dictates to him, he
must take care to do what will bring him in Commendations; and so captivates
himself to every one that has a Tongue, to extol him. And this Sin is further
prejudicial, when it is used in Religious Duties, or any Christian Acts, it
destroys all the Fruits of it: They that pray, or distribute Alms to be seen of
Men, must accept of that for their Portion, Mat. 6.2. Verily, I say unto you,
They have their Reward; for they must expect none from God, but the reward of
those Hypocrites, that love the Praise of Men, more than the Praise of God: And
they that make such a miserable Exchange, are not only guilty of Folly, but are
in danger of losing their own Souls, Mark 8.36.

13. AND the Remedies against this Vice, are these: First, We are to keep a
strict Watch over our selves, and to observe in any Christian Duty, whether we
consider the Praise of Men; or in the most indifferent Action, whether we have
not an earnest Inclination to it; and if we find our selves leaning that way,
we must endeavor to have a a strict Eye upon it; and whenever we find it
moves, reprehend and resist it. Secondly, Let this be our Design, to please
God; that when we intend any thing, we may make this inquiry, whether it has
his Approbation: and then we shall have no time to think what Praise it will
bring us from Men; for it is a greater Benefit for us to please God, who is
able to give us Eternal Rewards; than Men, whose Applauses are vain and empty;
and none of us can but think it reasonable, to make the former our only Care.
Thirdly, If at any time we receive Praise of Men, let us not be fond of it, nor
think a tittle the better of our selves: If it be Virtue we are esteemed for,
we must remember it came from God, and return him the Glory; and not imagine
any belongs to our selves. Indifferent Actions can deserve no Praise, and bad
Ones ought to set us a trembling; else that Woe of our Savior belongs to us,
Luke 6.26. Woe unto you, when Men speak well of you; for so did their Fathers
to the False Prophets: and there is not a greater Appearance of an hardened
Heart, than when Men make their Sins the Object of their Glory.

14. THE next Virtue is Meekness, which is composed of a calmness and quietness
of Spirit, opposite to the Rage and Impatiences of Anger. This Virtue is a Duty
to God, of which I have already spoken of under the Head of Humility; and may
be exercised toward our Neighbor, and our selves: I shall begin with that
toward our selves. First, The advantage we receive by it is this, We have the
Blessing which Christ pronounced, Mat. 5.5. Blessed are the Meek; not only in
the World to come, but in this; They shall inherit the Earth: and indeed none
has a more perfect Enjoyment, than Meek Persons: For the Impatient can never
enjoy the greatest Prosperities; and the uneasiness of this Passion is such,
that it raises Storms within their own Breasts, and a Perturbation upon their
Spirits.

15. SECONDLY, We acquire Honor by it; for we resemble Christ, that blessed
Pattern of Meekness: Learn of me, says he, for I am meek and lowly in Heart,
Matthew. 11.28. And by it we conquer our selves, and our unruly Passions, which
is the noblest Victory. Thirdly, It makes us deport our selves like Men,
whereas Anger transforms us to the Fierceness and Wildness of Savage Beasts:
The One is esteemed, and the Other abhorred; every one shunning an outrageous
Man, as they would a tameless Beast. Moreover, Meekness infers a sober Mind;
whereas Anger is direct Madness, and renders him incapable of being his own
Master; exciting him to those things, as himself, in his serious Temper,
utterly detests. Many Men have committed those things in their Rage, which they
have repented all their Life after. Therefore, seeing how much Anger resembles
Beastiality, a mad Man than a sober Man, let us embrace this Virtue of
Meekness, and abandon the contrary Vice of Anger.

16. MEEKNESS, in the next place, makes the worst Condition tolerable and
easy; and if we meekly bear any Suffering, it takes off the Edge, that it
cannot wound us; whereas they that rage, whets it, and makes it sharper than it
would be; as in the case of reproachful words, which in themselves do no
prejudice to our Bodies nor Estates; all the mischief they can do, is to make
us angery; and then the Anger will create more Strife and Debate, and animate
the Espoused Party but more against us: Whereas he that Meekly passes them by,
is never the worse but the better; for he shall he rewarded of God for that
Patience: And St. Paul to Titus, gives us this Advice, To speak Evil of no Man,
to be no Brawlers, but gentle, showing all Meekness unto all Men, Tit. 3.2.

16. AND the means to obtain this Virtue, are these: First, To make a deep
Impression in our Minds, of the Loveliness and Benefits of Meekness, together
with the Deformity and Mischief of Anger. Secondly, To set before our selves
the Example of our Blessed Lord and Savior, who endured all Reproaches and
Torments, with a perfect Patience, that was Led as a Sheep to the Slaughter,
Isa. 53.7. That when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered,
threatened not, 1 Pet. 2.23. Thirdly, To be very vigilant in preventing the
beginnings of Anger; and to that end, we must mortify all inward Peevishness
and Frowardness of Mind, which is a Sin in it self, if it proceed no further;
but if cherished, will break out into open Effects of Danger. Therefore, when
ever thou find'st the least Motion of it within thee, make as much haste to
check it, as thou would to quench a Fire in thy House: And be sure to keep a
strick watch over thy Tongue, that it break not out into any angry Expressions;
for that Breath will fan the Fire, not only in thine Antagonist, but thy self
too: Therefore, though thy Heart be ardent within, suffocate the Flame, that it
break not out; and the greater the Temptation is, the more earnestly call upon
God to assist thee to conquer it. Fourthly, Often call to mind the great
Punishments thy sins have deserved; and then, whether thy Afflictions be from
God or Man, thou will acknowledge them to be far short of what thou deservest;
and wilt be ready to blush at thy great Impatience.

A Prayer for Meekness and Humility.
O Most Blessed Lord God, the Perfect Pattern of Humility and Meekness; infuse
into me, I humbly beseech thee, those Excellent Graces, whereby I may be fully
convinced of my own Wretchedness, and Evidently behold that I am sinful Dust
and Ashes; Lord work in me such a lowliness of Mind, that I may in the
sincerity of my Heart confess and acknowledge that I am less than the least of
all thy Mercies, and justly deserve the greatest of thy Judgments: Give me, O
Lord, a Contrite Spirit, a Meek and an Humble Heart, and chase from me all
Pride and Vanity of Mind, whereby I may become lowly, yea base and vile in my
own Eyes.

2. ROOT out, O Lord, from me all perverseness of Spirit, and wholly dispossess
it of its residence; that I may be fit to entertain that good Spirit of thine,
and thou may take delight to dwell and remain with me: Grant that I may every
day be more humbled with the sight of my own Unworthiness, and Spiritual Wants,
and to esteem my self as nothing without thee, but always acknowledge my own
frailty and weakness: O, let me wholly depend and rely upon thee, and ascribe
the Praise and Glory of whatsoever good is wrought in me, or by me, unto thee
alone, who art the God of my Strength, the Author and Giver both of Grace and
Glory, and the Beginner and Finisher of every Good Thing, which is wrought in
any of thy Servants, to whom be all Honor and Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

SECT. II. In time of Sickness
1. WHAT should we do in this Vale of Tears, but condole each others Miseries?
Every Man has his weight, and happy is he whose Burden is so easy, that he
may assist his Neighbors. Many have waded through a Sea of Sorrows; and the
Angel of the Lord, that has Redeemed their Souls from Evil, and led them
within few Paces of the Shore, offers to lend thee his Hand; to guide thee in
this dangerous World, wherein every Error is Death: Let us follow him therefore
with a humble Confidence, and be safe in the View and Pity of the woeful
Miscarriages of others, and take warning by their sad Misfortunes.

2. THOU art on thy Bed of Sickness, and with holy David, Roaring all the day
long, Psalm. 32.3. for the Extremity of thy pain, measuring the slow Hours, not
by Minutes, but by Groans: Thy Soul is weary of thy Life, Job 10.1. through the
Intolerable Anguish of thy Spirit, Job 7.11. Of all temporal Afflictions, this
is the sorest: And Job 1.21. after the loss of his Goods and Children, could
yet support himself, and Bless the God that gives and takes: But when his Body
was tormented, and made one Boil, then his Patience is extended so far, as to
curse (not his God, but) his Nativity, Job 3.3. Let the day perish wherein I
was born, and the night in which it was said, there is a Man Child conceived.
And King Artaxerxes questioning with his Cup bearer Nehemiah, could say, Why is
thy Countenance sad, seeing thou art not Sick? Nehem. 2.2. employed that the
Sick, of all others, has just cause to be dejected. Humane Crosses are at a
distance, but Sickness is in our Bosoms: Those touch Externaly, these
Internally our Selves: Here the whole Man suffers. What could the Body feel
without the Soul that animates it? How can the Soul (which makes the Body
sensible) choose but be most affected with that Pain, wherewith the Body is
afflicted? Both Partners are perplexed to encounter so fierce an Enemy, and the
sharpest requires the most powerful Resistance. Therefore let us recollect our
selves, and summon all the Powers of our Souls, to engage with so violent, and
potent an Enemy.

3. THY Body is by a sore Disease confined to thy Bed: I should be sorry to
say, thy self were so. Thy Soul, which is thy self, I hope is at a distance
from thee; but however it is content to take a share in thy Sufferings, soars
above to the Heaven of Heavens; and is prostrate before the Throne of Grace,
imploring for Mercy and Forgiveness; beholding the Face of thy Glorious
Mediator, interceding for thee. Unhappy were we, if our Souls were locked up in
our Bosoms, that they could use no Motions, but what our lumpish Bodies could
contribute* But, blessed be God, he has animated us with active Spirits, that
can move themselves, while our Bodies lie still; that can be so agil in their
Motions, as they can pass from Earth to Heaven, ere we can turn our wearied and
sick Bodies to find ease.

4. AND how much shall we be wanting to our selves, if we do not make use of
this Spiritual Agility; sending up these Spirits of ours, from this brittle
Clay of our Bodies, to those Regions of Blessedness, that they may from thence
Extract Comforts to alleviate the Sorrows of their heavy Partners. Thus if thou
imployest thy better part, no Pains of the Body can make thee miserable* that
Spiritual Part of thine shall ere long be in Bliss, whilst this piece of Earth
lies putrified in the Grave. Why do thou not then, even now before thy
Dissolution, improve all the Powers of it to thy present Advantage? Let thy
internal Eye still behold the Face of thy God in Glory, whilst thy Corporal
Eyes observe those Friends at thy Bedside, which may pity, but cannot help
thee.

5. THOU art pained with Sickness: Consider se^iously from whence it comes, and
what makes it so bitter to thee; Affliction comes not out of the dust, Job
5.6. Could thou but hear the Voice of thy Disease, as thou now feel the
Stroke of it, it has proclaimed loud enough, Am I come up hither without the
Lord, to torment thee? The Lord has said to me, Go up against this Man, and
afflict him, 2 Kings 18.25. Could thou perceive the Hand that smites thee,
thou would be eager to kiss it; since it is the Father of all Mercies,
Comfort and Consolation, that lays these Stripes upon thee: He that made thee
and bought thee at so dear a Price as his own Blood; it is He that chastises
thee: And can thou think He would scourge thee, but for thine own Advantage:
For what tender Father is there, but has Bowels of Compassion, and never takes
the Rod in hand, out of a Pleasure to chasten that Flesh, which is derived from
his own Loins? Or is it any ease to him, to make his Child smart and bleed? But
rather himself suffers more than he infl^cts, and would be content to Redeem
those Stripes with his own; yet he sees the Chastisement proper, not to spare
him for his Frowardness, and Tears; but will plead, he had not loved him, if he
had not been so kindly severe: And Solomon gives us this advice; Chasten thy
Son while there is Hope, and let not thy Soul spare for his Crying, Prove.
19.18. And if we that are evil, know how to give loving and beneficial
Correction to our Children, how much more shall our Father which is in Heaven,
know how to Chastise us for our Advantage? So as we may sing under the Rod,
with the Blessed Psalmist; I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are right, and
that thou in Faithfulness have afflicted me, Psalm. 119.75. Might a Child be
made Arbiter of his Chastisement, do we think he would adjudicate himself to be
Corrected? Yet the discreet Parent knows he shall wrong him, if he give not due
Correction; as having learned of wise Solomon, Prove. 23.14. Thou shall beat him
with the Rod, and shall deliver his Soul from Hell. Love has its Strokes,
says St. Ambrose, which are the sweeter, the harder they are inflicted.

5. DO thou not remember the Message the two Sisters sent to our Savior,
John 11.3. Lord, behold he whom thou love, is Sick. Were it so, that Pain or
Sickness, or any of the Executioners of Divine Justice, ere let loose to
tyrannize over thee at Pleasure, to render thee perfectly Miserable; there were
just Reason for thy utter Diffidence: But they are stinted, and march under
Commission; neither can they be allowed to have any other Limits, than thy own
Advantage. Had thou rather be Good, or be Healthful, I know thou would
embrace both, and think thy self in a happy State: For who is so little in his
own favor, as to imagine he can be the worse for faring well. But he that made
thee, has a far greater Inspection into thee, than thine own Eyes can have; he
sees thy Vigor is turning wanton, and if thy Body be not sick, thy Soul will:
If he therefore think it fit to take down thy worst part a little, for the
preventing of a Mortal Danger to the better, what cause have thou to complain,
yea, rather not to be thankful? When thou have felt thy Body in a distemper of
Fullness, thou have gone to Sea on purpose to create a Sickness; yet thou
knew that turning of thy Head and Stomach would be more painful to thee,
than thy former Indisposition. Why then should not thy All-wise Creator take
Liberty to Cure thee with an Afflictious Remedy.

7. THOU art now Sick: Were thou not a long time Healthful, and can thou not
take that patiently which God has allotted thee? If thou have enjoyed more
days of health, than hours of sickness, how can thou think thou had cause
to repine? Had the Divine Wisdom thought fit to mitigate thy many days pain,
with the Ease of one hour, it had been worthy of thy Thanks: But now that he
has requited thy few painful hours, with years of perfect health, how
unthankfully do thou repine at thy Condition? It was a gross mistake, if thou
did not from all Earthly things expect a Vicissitude: They cannot have their
Being without a Change; as well may Day be without a Succession of Night, and
Life without Death, as a Mortal Body without Fits of Distemper: And how much
better are these momentary Changes, than that last Change of a Misery
unchangeable? It was a deplorable Word that Father Abraham said to the Rich
Glutton; Son, remember that thou in thy Life time receivest thy good things,
and Lazarus evil things; but now he is Comforted and thou art Tormented, Luke
16.25. How happy then are we, that are here chastned of the Lord, that We may
not be Condemned of the World! O then, welcome Fevers, and all other Diseases
of the Body, that may quit my Soul from Everlasting Burnings!

8. THOU complainest of Sickness; and many have effused Tears for their
superfluity of Health; condoling the fear and danger of losing God's Favor,
for their not being Afflicted. Bromiard tells us of a Devout Man, that
complained at his Prosperity, as no small Affliction; whom God soon after
accommodated with Pain enough, according to his Desires: The poor Man was
joyful at this Change, and looked upon his Sickness as a Mercy; for so it was
intended by him that sent it. Why are we too much dejected with that, which
others complain the want of? Why should we find that so tedious to our selves,
which others have wished to enjoy? There have been Medicinal Agues, which the
wise Physician have cast his Patient into, for the Cure of a worse Distemper. A
secure and illegal Health, however Nature takes it, is the most dangerous
Indisposition of the Soul: If that be healed by some few bodily Pangs, the
advantage is unspeakable. Look upon some vigorous Gallant, that in the height
of his Spirit, and heat of Blood, eagerly pursues his Carnal Delights, thinking
of no Heaven, but the free delectation of his Sense; and compare thy present
Estate with his: Here thou lie groaning and sighing, panting and shifting thy
weary Sides, complaining of the slow motions of thy tedious Hours; whilst he is
frolicking with his jocund Companions, Carousing his large Healths, sporting
himself with his wanton Delilah, and bathing himself in all sensual Pleasures:
And tell mo whether of the two thou think in the happier Condition? If thou
art not shrunk into nothing but Sense, and have not cast off all Thoughts of
another World, thou would pity the Misery of that Atheistical Jollity, and
gratulate to thy self the advantage of thy humble and faithful suffering that,
which will at last make thee ample Satisfaction, by yielding thee the peaceable
Fruit of Righteousness, Heb, 12.11.

9. THY Pain is grievous; but do thou not hear the great precedent of
Patience crying out from his Dunghill, O that my Grief were thoroughly weighed,
and my Calamities laid in the Balance together! For now it would be heavier
than the Sand of the Sea: Therefore my words are swallowed up; for the Arrows
of the Almighty are within me, the Poison whereof drinks up my Spirits: The
Terrors of God do set themselves in Array against me, Job 6.2, 3, 4. Do thou
not hear the Man after God's own Heart speak of the Voice of his Roaring, Psalm.
22.1? He that shrunk not from the Bear, the Lion, nor Goliath of Gath, is now
drenching his Bed with his Tears. Psalm. 6.6. Do thou not hear the Faithful
crying out, I am the Man that has suffered Affliction by the Rod of his Wrath,
etc. Surely against me he is turned; he turns his hand against me all the
day; my Flesh and my Skin has he made old; he has broken my Bones, Lam. 3.1,
3, 4. Consider the Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, the great Favorites of
Heaven; some on Gridirons, others in Boiling Caldrons; some on Spits, others
under Saws; some in Flames, others crashed with the Teeth of Wild Beasts; some
on Racks, others in Fiery Furnaces: Most of 'em in such Torments, as in
comparison, thy Pains are but a Sport. But to leave Mortality and sinful Dust
and Ashes, thou may behold the Son of God, and Lord of Life, the King of
Glory, God blessed for ever, sweating drops of Blood in his dreadful Agony; and
may hear him cry upon the Tree of Curse and Shame, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.46. Alas, What are we capable to suffer, in
proportion of these Tortures? What are we, that we should think much to share
with the best of God's Saints; nay, even with the dear and eternal Son of his
Love, our ever blessed Redeemer? Had not God prescribed this their way to
Heaven, they had not waded so deep in Blood.

10. WHY do we repine to wet our feet where they waded? If from these Holy Ones
we turn our Eyes, we shall find Examples among mere Pagans: For instance, He
who we used to account infamous for Voluptuousness, Epicurus the Philosopher;
who, on his Dying-day, when he lay extremely tormented with the Stone in the
Bladder, and a tearing Cholick in his Bowels, as it were grasping for Life; yet
even then, writing to his Idemeneus, can out of the strength of his
Resolutions, profess his Cheerfulness, and can style even that day Blessed. It
was the same Mouth that could boast, that if he were frying in the Brazen Bull
of ^alaris, he could there find Contentment. What should I tell thee of a
Mutius Scaevola, who in a Glorious Revenge, voluntarily burnt off his Right
Hand, not without the Envy and Pity of his Enemies; or of a Regulus, that after
so high a Provocation; offers himself to the worst of the merciless Fury of his
Tormenters? Why should thou admire, says wise Seneca, that some should be
well pleased to be Scorched, Wounded, Racked, or Killed? Frugality is a pain to
the Riotous, Labor a punishment to the Lazy, Continence a misery to the
Wanton, and Study a torture to the Slo^hful.

11. ALL these are not in their own Nature difficult, but we are infirm and
inconstant. Shall Pagans attain to this height of Magnanimity by their
Fortitude! And shall we Christians droop under gentler Sufferings! We profess
the advantage of Faith to uphold and cheer us: But poor Ethni^k Souls! they
never heard of a Merciful God to Comfort 'em: They never knew those sweet
Messages from Heaven, Call upon me in the day of Trouble, I will deliver thee,
and thou shall Glorify me, Psalm. 50.15. Come unto me all ye that Labor, and
are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest, Matthew. 11.28. Strengthen ye the weak
Hands, and confirm the feeble Knees: Say to them that are of a fearful Heart,
Be strong, fear not, behold, your God will come with Vengeance, even God with a
Recompense: He will come and save you, Isa. 35.3, 4. They had not the Heart of
a Job, to say, I know that my Redeemer lives, Job 19.25. Nor the Eyes of a
Stephen, to pierce the Heavens, to see their Savior standing at the Right hand
of God: But out of their Vigor elevated with an arrogant Ambition of that Fame
which they believed, would survive 'em: Whereas, we Christians know that we
have the Father of Mercies to stand by us; a Redeemer to deliver us, a
Comforter to strengthen and refresh us, sweet and infallible Promises to
sustain us: And at last, a Crown of Eternal Glory to reward us.

12. THOU art pained with Sickness: View not what thou feel, but think what
Punishment thou have deserved: Wherefore does a living Man complain, a Man for
the punishment of his Sin? Lam. 3.39. Alas, the Wages of every Sin, is Death, a
Death of Body and Soul, Temporal and Eternal: Any thing below this, is Mercy.
There is not the least of thy Transgressions but has merited the infinite
wrath of a just God, and more Torments than thou art able to undergo. What,
do thou complain of Ease? Where thou owe a thousand Talents, thou art bid
to Take thy Bill, and write down Fifty, Luke 16.6. Will thou not magnify the
Clemency of so favorable a Creditor? Surely, were every Twig which creates a
Smart, a Scorpion, and every Breath thou sendest forth, a Flame: This were yet
less than thy Deserts. Oh, the infinite goodness of our Indulgent Father, that
uses so gentle a Correction to us! Tell me thou nice Patient, if thou can not
suffer these Stripes, how thou will endure those that are infinitely sharper?
Alas! What are these Trifles to that Hell which abides for the Impatient? There
are Torments without Mitigation; eternal Pains without Intermission; which thou
can not suffer, nor avoid: Fear them, and murmur not at these; prostrate thy
self low under the hand of God, and be thankful for a tolerable Misery. How
graciously has the Wisdom of God thought fit to temper our Afflictions, if
they prove sharp, they are not long, and if long, not over sharp; that our
Strength might not be depressed by those Trials we undergo. Therefore aspire a
Contentment in thy self, and thy Languishment will be easy, or thy Pain soon
over. Extreme and Everlasting are Terrors reserved for the Wicked hereafter,
that are durable, painful, and not capable of any Relaxation. What a Moment is
it that thou do suffer? Yea, nothing, in respect of Eternity, which thou must
either hope for, or fear. Endure a while patiently, that thou may not be
infinitely Miserable.

13. THOU complainest of Pain: Of what use were thy Patience if that were
mitigated? God never gives Virtues without an intent of their Exercise. To what
end were our Christian Valor, if we had no Enemy to Encounter? Thus long thou
have supinely slept in a secure Garrison, where thou have heard no Trumpet, but
thine own, and have turned thy Drum-head into a Table for Dice, lavishing out
thy days in varieties of idle Recreations: Now God draws thee forth to the
Field, and shows the an Enemy; where is thy Christian Fortitude if thou
recoilest, and chusest rather to fly than resist? And is this a proper
Character for thee, who professest to sight under his Banner, who is the
Conqueror of Death and Hell? Is this the way to that happy Victory, and to
acquire a Crown of Glory? If thou faint in the day of Adversity, thy Strength
is but small: Be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might, Ephesians.
6.10. Encounter with that fierce Enemy, wherewith God would have thee
assaulted; look up to him, who has said, and cannot fail to perform it; Be
faithful to the Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10.

14. THOU art surpised with Sickness; accuse thy self for it; Who forbid thee
expecting so sure a Guest? Thy Frame of Body should have prompted thee to other
Thoughts: Do thou perceive this living Fabric made up as a Clock, consisting
of many Wheels? and imagine that some of 'em shoud not be ever out of order?
Could thou think that a Cottage not strongly built, and standing so bleak in
the very Mouth of the Winds, could for ever hold firm and strong? Or art thou
not amazed it has out-stood so many blustering Blasts, utterly unruined? It
was scarce a patient Question which Job asked; Is my Strength the Strength of
Stones? or is my Flesh as Brass? Job 6.12. Alas! thy best Metal is but Clay,
and fading Flesh, is but Grass; the Clay mouldereth, and the Grass withers.
Why do we reckon of any thing, but Misery and Fickleness in this woeful Region
of Change? If we will needs over-reckon our Condition, we do but assist to
aggravate our own Wretchedness.

15. THOU art retired to thy sick Bed, be of good Comfort, God was never so
near thee, never so indulgent to thee as now. The Whole, says our Savior,
needs not a Physician, but they that are Sick, Mat. 9.12. The Physician comes
not but where there is necessity, and where that is, will not fail to come: Our
Wants is motive enough to Him, who took our Infirmities, and bare our
Sicknesses, Mat. 8.17. Our Health alienates him from us; but whilst thou art
this Patient, he cannot be from thee. The Lord, says the Psalmist, will
strengthen thee upon the Bed of Languishing, thou will make all his Bed in his
Sickness, Psalm. 41.3. The Comforter does not only visit, but attend thee: If
thou find thy Bed uneasy, he will soften it for thy Repose. Can thou not
read God's Indulgence in thine own Disposition? Thou art a Parent; Perhaps thou
affectest one Child more than another, though all dear enough: But if any of
them be cast down, thou art more careful about that than the rest: How thou
pitiest and pliest it with Offers and Receipts? With what silent Anxiety do
thou watch by it, listening for every Breathing, jealous of every whispering,
that might break its Slumber, responding its Groans with Sighs; and, in fine,
taking such Care that thy greatest Darling seems the while neglected, in
comparison of this under Affliction. How much more shall the Father of Mercies,
be compassionately Intent upon the Sufferings of his dear Children, according
to the Proportion of their Afflictions?

16. THOU art wholly entertained with the Extremity of thy pains: Alas, poor
Soul! Thy dimness perceives nothing, but what is near thee: It is thy sense
which thou followest, but where is thy Faith? Could thou inspect the end of
thy Sufferings, thou would rejoice in Tribulation: Let Patience have her
perfect Work; and thou shall once say, It is good for me that I was afflicted.
Thou might be jocund long enough, ere thy Jollity could make thee happy:
Yea, Woe to them that laugh here, Luke 6.25. But, on the contrary, Our light
Affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and
eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. O blessed improvement of a few Groans! Oh
glorious Issue of a short Storm of Sorrow! Why do we imitate Christians, if
nothing but Flesh and Blood? And if better, we have more cause of Joy, than
Complaint; for whilst our Outward Man perishes, our Inward Man is renewed
daily, 2 Cor. 4.16. Our External Man is Flesh, our Internal is Spirit;
infinitely more noble, than this living Clay that we carry about us. Whilst
our Spirit gains more than our Flesh is capable to lose, what reason have we
not to boast of the Bargain? Let not then these close Curtains confine thy
sight, but lift up thine Eyes to Heaven, whence thy Soul came, and view there
that Crown of Glory, which thy God holds forth to all tha^ overcome: And then
Run with Patience the Race that is set before thee; looking unto Jesus, the
Author and Finisher of our Faith, who is set down at the Right Hand of the
Throne of God, Heb. 12.1, 2. Then cheer thy self with the Expectation of that
Blessedness, which if thy To^ments were no less than those of Hell, would make
more than ample Amends for all thy Suffe^ings.

17. THOU art sick to Death: And have received the Sentence of Mortality in thy
self; thy Physician has given the up to act the last Scene: Neither art thou
like to rise till the General Resurrection: How many are lately expired, that
would have thought it a great happiness to die thus quietly in their Beds? Whom
Storms of War has hurried away furiously into another World; not suffering
them to ta^e leave of that Life, which they were forced to abandon: Whereas
thou have leisure to prepare thy self for the Entertainment of thy last Guest;
to set both thine House in order, and thy Soul. It is no disadvantage to thee,
thus to behold Death at a distance, and to observe every one of his Paces
toward thee; that thou may put thy self into a fit Posture to meet this grim
Messenger who Ushers thee to Immortality; that dying thus by Degrees, thou have
leisure, with the Patriarch Jacob, to Summon thy Children, to bequeath them thy
last Benediction: and being encompassed with thy sad Friends, now in thy long
Journey to a far Country, thou may take a Solemn Farewell, as going somewhat
before them to the appointed happy Meeting Place of Blessedness: And lastly,
That one of thine own may close those Eyes, which shall in their opening, see
the Face of thy most Glorious Savior; and see this Flesh, now ready to lie
down in Corruption, made like to his unspeakable Glory.

A Prayer for a Sick Person.
O Most Gracious, and Merciful Lord God, the only Author of our Health and
Being; thou castest us down upon our Beds of Sickness, and sometimes draws the
Curtain between the World and us: O Lord, my time is in thy hand; and I know
not how soon my change which thou have appointed shall be; whether this Week,
this Day, this Hour, yea, or this very Moment. O Lord, sanctify unto me this
thy present Visitation, which my Sins have long since deserved; heal my Soul,
which in great bitterness has sinned against thee, and then if it stand with
thy good Pleasure, heal my Body, and raise it, that I may glorify thy Holy
Name in the Congregation of the Righteous.

2. BUT if in thy Omniscency thou have otherwise determined, that this
Visitation shall put a period to my frail Mortality; I humbly beseech thee, to
fit and prepare me for that last and great change: Wean me from all the fading
pleasures and vain allurements of this sinful World, that I may become a meet
partaker of thy Heavenly Kingdom: Send down, O LOrd, thy Light and thy Truth
into my inward parts, that I may understand thy Wisdom secreetly: Support the
weakness of my Faith, that I may with a strong Assurance lay hold upon the
Blood of Jesus* by whose Merits I expect Salvation, and to Reign with thee in
thy Heavenly Kingdom. Amen.

SECT. III. Affliction of Conscience.
1. THY Sin is ponderous upon thy Soul: Bless the Omnipotence, thou art
sensible of it. Many has more weight, and boasts of Ease. There Is Music in
this Complaint; the Almighty delights to hear it, next to the Melody of Saints
and Angels. Pursue and continue these sorrowful Notes, if ever thou expectest
Comfort. It is this Godly Sorrow, that works Repentance to Salvation, not to
be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. Weep still and be not too much hastly to exhaust
thy Tears; for they are precious, and rendered fit to be reserved in the Bottle
of the Almighty, Psalm. 56.8. Over-speedy Remedies may prove injurious to the
Patient: And as in the Body, so in the Soul; Diseases and Tumors must have
their due Maturation, 'ere there can be a Cure. The Inwards of the Sacrifice
must be three times rinsed with Water, Lev. 1.9. One Ablution will not serve
turn. But when thou have Evacuated thine Eyes of Tears, and unloaded thy Breast
of leisurely Sighs, I shall then, by full Commission from him that has the
Power of Remission, say to thee; Son, be of good Comfort, thy Sins are forgiven
thee, Mat. 9.2.

2. THINK not this Word merely formal, and forceless: He that has the Keys of
Hell, and of Death, Rev. 1.18. has not said in vain, Whose Sins ye remit, they
are remitted, John 20.23. The Words of his Vicegerents on Earth, are ratified
in Heaven; only the Priest under the Law, has power to pronounce the Leper
clean, Lev. 13.3. Had any other Israelite done it, it had been as unprofitable,
as presumptuous. It was a good Expression that fell from Elihu; When a Man's
Soul draws nigh unto the Grave, and his Life to the Destroyer, if there be a
Messenger (of God) with him, an Interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto
that Man his Uprightness; then He (i. e. God) is Gracious unto him, and says,
Deliver him from going down into the Pit; I have found a Ransom, Job 33.22, 23,
24. Behold! this is thy State, thy Souls Life is in danger of the Destroyer,
through his powerful Temptations: I am (howsoever unworthy) a Messenger sent to
thee from Heaven; and in the Name of the Almighty that sent me, do here upon
thy serious Repentance, before Angels and Men, proclaim thy Soul fixed in the
Court of Heaven: The Invaluable Ranson of thy dear Savior is accepted for
thee; so thou art delivered from descending into the Pit of Perdition.

3. OH, happy Message, thou replyest, were it received with Comfort! But, Alas!
my heart is possessed with deep Grounds of Fear and Diffidence, not easily to be
removed: That convicts me, whilst you offer to acquit me; and positively
acquaints me, I am a worse Criminal, than a Spectator can imagine: My Sins are
beyond measure heinous, such as my Thoughts tremble at; and Tongue dare not
express to God that knows 'em, against whom only they are committed. If there
is Horror in their very Remembrance; what will their be then in their
Retribution?

4. THEY are bitter things thou urgest against thy self; no Adversary could
plead worse: But I admit thy vileness; be thou as wicked as Satan can make
thee: It is not his Malice, or thy Wickedness, that can exclude thee from
Mercy: Be thou as sordid as Sin can expose thee, yet There is a Fountain opened
to the House of David, Zach. 13.1. (a bloody Fountain in the Side of thy
Savior) for Sin, and for Uncleanness. Be thou as Leprous as that Syrian was of
old, 2 King. 5.18. if thou can but Wash seven times in the Waters of this
Jordan, thou will be clean; Thy Flesh shall come again to thee, like to the
Flesh of a little Child: Thou shall be at once sound and innocent. Be thou
stung with the Fiery Serpents of this Wilderness; yet if thou cast thine Eyes
to that Brazen Serpent erected for thy Malady, thou will find Cure. Wherefore
came Christ into the World, but to save Sinners? Add, if thou will, Whereof I
am Chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. Thou can allege no worse by thy self, than the best
did before thee; who, in the Right of a Sinner, claims the Benefit of a
Savior.

5. WERE it not for Sin, what use were there of a Redeemer? Were not Sin
heinous, how should it require such an Expiation, as the Blood of Christ? The
magnitude of thy Sins, merits but to magnify the Mercy of the Forgiver: To
remit the Debt of Farthings, were insignificant; but to forgive thousands of
Talents, is the height of Bounty. Thus God deals with thee: He permits thee to
run on to so deep a Sum, that when thy Conscious heart has proclaimed thee a
Bankrupt, he may infinitely oblige thee, and glorify his own Mercy, in
crossing the Reckoning, and acquitting thy Soul. All Sums are equally
dischargable to the Munificence of our Great Creditor in Heaven: As it is the
Act of his Justice, to expect the least; so it is of his Mercy to forgive the
Greatest. Had we to do with a Finite Power, we might sink under the Burden of
our Sins: But having an Infinite Power to attend us, let thy Care be to lay
hold on that Infinite Bounty; and as thou art an Object of Mercy, sinful, and
miserable enough; so conclude thy self (as thou art) a Subject proper to
receive it as a Penitent Believer. Open and enlarge thy Bosom, and assume this
Free Grace, and close with thy Blessed Savior; and in him, possess thy self of
Remission, Peace and Salvation.

6. COMFORTABLE Expressions, thou confessest, to those that are capable of
them: But what is this to me, that am neither Penitent nor Believer? Alas! That
which is Honey to others, is Gall and Wormwood to me; who want the Grace to
Repent, and Believe as I ought. Why art thou so imprudent and unjust, as to
conspire with Satan against thy own Soul? Why will thou be so unthankfully
injurious to the God of Mercies, as to deny those Graces which his good Spirit
has bestowed upon thee? If thou were not penitent, why are these Tears? What
means these Sighs and Passionate Expressions of Sorrow, which thou utterest? It
is no Temporal Loss that afflicts thee; nor Corporal Distemper that thus
disquiets thee: Doubtless, thou art Soul-sick, thy Spirit is wounded within
thee; and what can thus affect thy Soul, but sin* Or what can this Affection of
thy Soul be for Sin, but true Penitence?

7. THOU repliedst; I am indeed sorrowful for Sin, but not upon the right
Grounds: I grieve for the misery that Sin has brought upon me, not for the
evil of Sin, but for the Punishment, not the Offense; for my Peril, not for the
displeasure of my God. Beware, lest an undue Humility cause thee falsely to
accuse the Graces of God's Spirit: Thou art no competent Judge, whilst thou art
under Temptations. Had not thy Sorrow a relation to God, why would thou Sigh
to Heaven? Why would thy Heart challenge thee for unkindness in Offending? And
to cry out of the Sordidness not of the Peril of thy Sin? What renders the act
of thy Sin to be sinful, but the offense against the Divine Majesty? How can
thou be sorry that thou have Sinned, and not be sorry that thou have Offended?
Tell me, What is it thy Conscience primarily suggests to thee in this
impression of thy Sorrow? Is it thou shall be Punished, or that thou have
Sinned? And were it put to thy Choice, Whether thou had rather enjoy the
Favor of God with extremity of Pain, or continue in his Displeasure with Ease?
Or if Liberty were tendered to thee, that thou might freely sin without danger
of Punishment? Whether does not thy Heart rise at the Condition, as ready to
fly in the Face of the Offerer? Besides Fear and Horror, do thou not find an
internal Indignation at thy Miscarriage, and such a detestation of thy Sin,
that were it to be reiterated if it were possible to be concealed from God and
Men, and if there were no Hell to avenge it, woulst thou not abhor to commit
it? All these are strong Convictions of the right grounds of thy Repentance,
and of the injury which thou do thy Soul, in the unjust Scruples which thou
raisest against it.

8. IF the grounds (thou say) of my Repentance be regular, yet the measure
is Insufficient. I am sorrowful for Sin, but not enough: An effectual grief for
sin, should be serious, deep, hearty, intensive; mine is slight and
superficial. I Sigh, but my Sighs proceed not from an humble Heart: I can
sometimes Weep, but cannot pour out my self in Tears: I mourn, but don't
continue my Sorrow. To this I Answer, Thou have to do with a God, which in all
the dispositions of thy Soul, regards Validity, and not Quantity: If he find
thy Remorse, he exacts not the solid Measure: He does not meet up our
Repentance by Inches or Hours, but where he finds sincerity of Penitence, is
Indulgent. Look upon David, and acknowledge his Sin formidably detestable, no
less than Adultery, Inebriation and Murder: Yet no sooner did he in a true
Compunction of Heart, cry out, I have sinned against the Lord; then he hears
from that Mouth which accused him; The Lord also has put away thy Sin, thou
shall not die, 2 Samuel 12, 13. Here is a penitent Confession, which was
efficacious in the Expiation of those grievous Crimes. Thou art deceived if
thou imaginest God delights in the Affliction of his Creatures: So far only is
the grief of his Servants pleasing to him, that it may conduce to the health of
their Souls, in the sensibleness of their Sin, and meet capacity of Mercy.

9. I do not, with some Casuists, flatter thee with an Opinion of the
sufficiency of any slight Attrition and empty wishes, that thou have not
Sinned; doubt^ess a true Contrition of Spirit, and Compunction of Heart, are
necessarily required to a saving Repentance: And these, were thou but an
indifferent Censurer of thine own ways, thou would'd find within thy self. Why
is thy Countenance so dejected, thy Cheeks pale, and watered so often with Tears,
thy want of Rest, and loss of Appetite? Wherefore do thou pour out those
doleful Complaints and vehement Deprecations? But after all this, art thou such
as thou accusest thy self, defective in thy Repentance? Do thou rest
contented in this condition, and not complain of it as the greatest Misery? Art
thou not heartily sorry that thou can be no more grieved for thy Sin? Comfort
thy self, even this is an acceptable Repentance, and God accepts it. What is
Repentance but a change from Evil to Good? And how sensible is this Change,
that thou who formerly delightedst in thy Sin, now detests it and thy self for
it; and art yet ambitious of more Grief, for being transported into it? Let not
thy Souls Enemy, who desires nothing more than to make thee perfectly
Miserable, so allure thee, as to render thee unsatisfied with the Measure of
that Penitency which is accepted of God: Rather turn thine Eyes from thy Sins,
and look to Heaven and fix 'em upon thine All-sufficient Mediator, and behold
his Face smiling upon thy humbled Soul, and perfectly reconciling thee to his
Eternal Father, as being fully assured, That being justified by Faith, we have
Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access by
Faith into this Grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the Glory of
God, Romans 5.1, 2.

10. THERE thou say is the very root of my Complaint: I want that Faith that
should give me an interest in my Savior, and afford true Comfort to my Soul,
and Boldness and Access with Confidence, to the Throne of Grace, Ephesians. 3.12. I
can be sorry, but cannot believe; my Grief is not so great as my Infidelity: I
see others full of Joy and Peace in believing, Romans 15.13. But my stubborn
Heart cannot soar up to a conformable apprehension of my Savior: So as indeed
I dwell in obdurate Darkness, and a sad ponderosity of Incredulity, wanting
that Assurance which others profess to find in themselves. Take heed, lest
whilst thou art too querulous, thou prove unthankful; and whilst thy Humbleness
disparages thee, thou make God a Loser. A Man may have a rich Mine in his
Ground which he knows not of, and there are Shells furnished with Pearls, whose
Worth many are not sensible of. This is thy State: Thou have that Grace thou
complainest to want; and there is no measuring of thy self by Sense, especially
in the time of Temptation. Thou coulst not so sensibly lament the want of
Faith, if thou had it not. Thou can not deny an Assent to the verity of all
God's Promises: Thou acknowledgst he could not be what he is, if he were not
even Verity it self. Thou can not doubt but he has made those promises of
Grace and Mercy to all Penitent Sinners, which tend to their Salvation; and
thou can not but grant, thou art sinful enough to need Mercy, and sorrowful
enough to desire and Embrace it.

11. CAN thou but love thy self so well, that when thou see a Pardon held
forth to stretch forth thy Hand, and take it? This Hand is thy Faith, which
takes hold of thy Redeemer. As for that Assurance thou mentions, they are happy
that can feel and maintain it; and it must be our holy Ambition to be diligent
in the Aspiraration: But such a height of Perfection, every Traveller in this
wretched Pilgrimage, cannot whilst he is in this perplexed and heavy Road, hope
to attain to. It is an unsafe and dangerous Path, which those Men have walked
in, who have used to define all Faith by Assurance. Should I conduct thee that
way, it might be prejudicial. So sure a Certainty of our constant and reflected
apprehension of Eternal Life, is both hard to acquire, and not easy to hold
unmovably, considering the many strong Temptations that we are subject to in
this Vale of Misery and Death. Should Faith be reduced to this Trial, it would
be more rare than our Savior has foretold it: For as many boasts of such an
Assurance, who is yet failing of a true Faith, embracing a vain Presumption
instead of it: So many also has true Faith in the Lord Jesus, who yet
complains to want that Assurance. Can thou in a sense of thine own Misery
close with thy Savior? Can thou throw thy self into the Arms of his Mercy?
Can thou trust him with thy Soul, and rely upon him for Forgiveness and
Salvation? Can thou prostrate thy self before him, as a miserable Object of
his Grace and Mercy? And when it is offered thee, can lay some (tho weak)
hold upon it? Labor for further degrees of Strength daily. Set not up thy Rest
in this pitch of Grace, but cheer up thy self, and thus much Faith shall save
thy Soul. Thou believe, and he has said it, that is Verity it self, He that
believes on the Son, has Everlasting Life, Joh. 3.36.

12. I know, thou averrest that Jesus Christ came into the World to save
Sinners; and that Whoever believes on him, shall not Perish, but have eternal
Life, Joh. 3.15. Neither can I deny, but in a sense of my sinful Condition, I
cast my self in some measure upon my Savior, and lay hold upon his
All-sufficient Redemption: But, Alas! My apprehensions of him are so weak, that
they can afford no Comfort to my Soul. Were it not that thou expectest to be
Justified, and saved by the power and act of thy Faith, thou have reason to be
disheartened with the imbecility of it: But now, that the Virtue and Efficacy
of this happy Operation is in the Object apprehended by thee, which is the
infinite Merits and Mercy of thy Savior, that cannot be abated by thine
Infirmities, thou have reason cheerfully to expect thy Salvation. Understand
thy case aright: Here Is a double Hand that helps thee toward Heaven; thy hand
of Faith lays hold on thy Savior: Thy Savior's hand of Mercy and plentious
Redemption, lays on thee; thy hold of him is feeble and easily loosed; his hold
of thee is strong and irresistible. Comfort thy self therefore with the blessed
Apostle; when thou art Weak, then thou art Strong; when weak in thy self, then
strong in thy Redeemer: Should thou boast and say, Tush, I shall never be
moved; I should suspect the Verity and Safety of thy Condition. Now thou
deplorest thy Weakness, I cannot but Congratulate the happy Estate of thy Soul.
If a greater Work were expedient, strength of Hand were necessary: But now only
receiving of a precious Gift is required, why may not a weak Hand perform that
as well as a strong, tho not so forcibly? Be not dejected with Impotency, but
comfort thy self in the Mercies of thy Redeemer.

13. THOU expressest; Sometimes, I find my heart at ease, in a comfortable
Reliance on my Savior; and being well resolved of the safety of my State,
promise good days to my self; and after the banishment of my former Fears, dare
bid defiance to Temptations: But, Alas! how soon is this serenity over? How
suddenly is this clear Sky clouded, spread over with obscurity, and I return
to my former Despondency? Did thou conceive, that Grace would put thee into
a constant and perpetual invariable Condition of Soul, whilst thou art on this
side Heaven? Did thou ever hear or read of any of God's Saints upon Earth,
that were unchangeable in their holy Dispositions, whilst they continued in
this Region of Mutability? Behold the Man after God's own heart, thou shall
find him sometimes so courageous, as if the Spirits of all his Worthies were
met in his own Bosom, how resolutely does he blow off all dangers, trample on
his Enemies, and triumph over all cross Events? Another while thou shall find
him so dejected, and transformed from what he was: When cheerful; The Lord is
my Shepherd, I shall lack nothing, Psalm, 23.1. In Affliction; Why art thou so
sad, my Soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? Psalm. 42.14. In
Fortitude; I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that have set
themselves against me round about, Psalm. 3.6. In Trouble; Hide me under the
shadow of thy Wings, from the Wicked that oppress me; from my deadly Enemies,
who compass me about, Psalm. 17.84. In his Integrity; Thy Loving Kindness is
before mine Eyes, and I have walked in thy Truth, Psalm. 26.3. In contrary
Events; Lord, where are thy loving Kindnesses? Psalm. 89.49. And do thou not
hear him in one Breath professing his Confidence, and lamenting his Dissertion;
Lord, by thy Favor thou have made my Mountain to stand strong: Thou did hide
thy Face and I was troubled, Psalm. 30.7. Look upon St. Paul; Sometimes thou
shall see him erecting Trophies of Victo^y to his God: In all these things we
are more than Conquerors, through him that loved us, Romans 8.37. On the
contrary, thou shall find him lamenting his own sinful Condition; Oh, wretched
Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death! Romans 7.24. In
a holy Rapture, thou shall find him caught up into the Third Heaven, and by
Permission of the Almighty, buffetted by the Messengers of Satan, and uttering
Complaints to God of the Violence of that Assault. Here the Spouse of Christ
bemoaning her self; I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn
himself, and was gone: My Soul failed, when he spoke, I sought him: but I could
not find him; I called him but he made me no answer, Cant. 5.6. Thus is it with
thee, whilst thou art in this Carnality: The Temper of thy Soul will be,
subject to Vicissitudes. Should thou continue always in the same State, I
should suspect thee. This difference betwixt Nature and Grace; the One is still
uniform; the Other varies ^^cording to the pleasure of the Giver: The Spirit
^eaths when, and where it lists, Joh. 3.8 When therefore thou find'st the
gracious Inspirations of the Holy Ghost within thee, be thankful to the
Infinite Munificence of that Blessed Spirit: And still pray; Arise, O North,
and come thou South Wind, that the Spices thereof may flow out, Cant. 4.16. But
when thou finds thy Soul becalmed, and not a Leaf stirring in its Garden, be
not too much dejected with an ungrounded Opinion of being destituted of thy
God; neither repine at the Seasons, or Measures of his Bounty: That most free
and beneficent Agent, will not be tied to our Terms; but will give us what he
sees necessary: Therefore humbly wait upon his Goodness: and be confident, that
he who has begun his good Work in thee, will perform it until the Day of Jesus
Christ, Phil. 1.6.

14. IT is true, (thou say) if God had began the Operation, He would at
last, for his own Glory finish it: But for me, I am a Man dead in Trespasses
and Sins; and never had any true Contrition in me: Some show, indeed, I have
made of a Christian Profession; but I have only deceived the World with a
fallacious Pretense, and have not found in my self the Verity, and Solidity of
those Heavenly Virtues, whereof I have made an Ostentation. It were pity thou
should be so bad as thou representest thy self: I have no tender Compassion
in store for Hypocrisy; nor no Disposition is more odious to the Almighty;
insomuch, as when he expresses Vengeance against Sinners, he uses those terms
of Terror, I will appoint him his portion with the Hypocrites, Mat. 24.51. Were
it thus with thee, it were high time to work thy Repentance in Dust and Ashes;
and resign thy self into the hands of his Almighty Protection, to be created
anew by his Powerful Spirit; and never to give thy self Peace, till thou
find thy self Renewed in the Spirit of thy Mind, Ephesians. 4.23. But, in the mean
while, take heed of being guilty of mis-judging thine own Soul; and misprising
the Operation of God's Spirit: God has been better to thee, than thou will
acknowledge: Thou have a true Sense of Grace, and perceiv'st it not. There is
no Cognizance to be taken of the Sentence thou passest upon thy self, in the
hour of Temptation: When thy heart was free, thou were in another Mind; and
shall, upon better advice, reasume thy former Thoughts.

15. IT is with thee, as with Eutychus, that fell down from the third Story,
and was taken up for Dead, when his Life remained in him. We have known those
in Trances, without any perception of Life; yea, some (as that subtle Johannes
Duns Scotus) laid in their Graves before their Souls had taken leave of their
Bodies, though unable to exert those Faculties, which might Evince her hidden
Presence. Such perhaps art thou at the worst; and were thou in Charity with thy
self, thou would be found in a better Condition. There is the same reason of
the Natural Life and the Spiritual: Where it is discerned by Breathings, Sense
and Motions; where there is a breathing Motion, there must be a Life that sends
it forth: If then the Soul breaths Holy Desires, doubtless there is a Life
whence they proceed. Now deny, if thou can, that thou have not these
Spiritual Breathings of Holy Desires Internally? Do thou not many times sigh
for thine own Insanity? Is not thine heart perplexed with the Thoughts of thy
Spiritual wants? Do thou not truly desire, that God would Renew a right
Spirit within thee? Be cheerful: This is the Operation of God's Spirit: As well
may a Man breath without Life, as thou could be thus affected without
Repentance. Sense is a quick Discrier of Life: Wound a dead Man, he is not
sensible; but the Living perceives the easiest Touch. When thou have heard the
Judgments of God, denounced against Sinners, and laid to thy Conscience; has
thy heart been pierced with them? Have thou not secretly thought, how shall I
decline this dreadful Damnation? When thou have heard the Mercies of God to
Penitent Sinners, has not thy heart said, Oh that I had my share in 'em! When
thou have heard God blasphemed, have thou not felt a horror in thy Bosom? All
these are Symptoms of a Spiritual Life.

16. MOTION is the perfectest Discoverer of Life: He that stirs his Limbs is
not dead. The Feet of the Soul are the Affections: Have thou not found an hate
and detestation of that Sin, wherein thou have been allured: And discovered
Grief of heart for thy Indisposition to all good things? Have thou not found a
Love to, and Complacency in those who are truly Religious and Conscionable?
Without a Life of Repentance, Penitence had vanished. Are not thine Eyes and
Hands often lift up to implore mercy? Can thou deny, thou have a real, though
weak Appetite to the means, and degrees of it? This is that Hunger and Thirst
after Righteousness, to which Christ has pronounced Blessedness? Matthew. 5.6.
Discomfort not thy self with the disappearance of God's Spirit: In the hour of
Temptation, it is with thee, as with a Tree in Winter, whose Sap is run to the
Root; where there is no Appearance of Vegetation, by any Buds or Blossoms, but
appears, motionless: Yet when the Sun returns his comfortable Beams, it sprouts
forth afresh, and bewrays that Vital Juice, which lay in the Earth: So thou
must with Patience wait, till the Sun of Righteousness shall arise with Healing
in his Wings, and Summon thy Humidity into thy Branches; that that Grace may
spring in thee, which is able to save thy Soul: Then thou will say of thine
heart, as Jacob of his hard Lodging; Surely, the Lord is in this place, and I
knew it not, Genesis 28.16. Only use the means, and wait patiently God's Leisure;
stay upon the Bank of this Bethesda, till the Angel descend and move the Water.

16. I could gladly, thou reply, attend with Patience upon God, in this
happy Work of the Excitation of Grace, were I but sure I had it; or could be
persuaded of the Verity of my Conversion: But it is my unhappiness, that here I
am at an uncomfortable loss; for I am informed, that every Convert can design
the Time, Place, means and manner of his Conversion; and demonstrate how near
he was to the Gates of Death, nay, to the Verge of Hell; when God, by a mighty
Arm, has snatched him away, from the Pit of Perdition, and rescued him from
everlasting Damnation; placing him in a State of Eternal Salvation; Which I
cannot attain to; not finding any such vehement Concussion, hearty Contrition,
or such forcible and irresistible Operation of God's Spirit in me, nor can I
practice the Sermon designed for my Conversion, or those Approaches my Soul
made toward an hardly-recovered Desperation.

To which I answer: It is not safe for any Man to set Limits to the Almighty;
or to prescribe Rules to that Infinite Wisdom: That most free, and All-wise
Agent, will not be tied to walk always in one Path; but varies his Courses
according to his Divine Will. One he calls suddenly, as St. Paul; another by
sweet Solicitations, as Philip, Nathanael, Andrew, Peter, Matthew, and other
Apostles. One he draws to Heaven with gracious Invitations; another with a
strong hand. We have known those, who having misspent their Juvenile Years, in
notorious debauched Courses, living as without God, and have been
heart-stricken with some Denunciation of Judgment; which has so wrought upon
'em, that it has brought them within sight of Hell: But after deep
Humiliation, have been raised through God's mercy, to a Comfortable Sense of
the Divine Favor, and have proceeded to a high degree of Regeneration, and
lived and died good Christians.

18. BUT this is not every ones Case; those who have from their Infancy been
brought up in The Nurture and Fear of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. and from their Youth
been Trained up under a Godly and Conscionable Ministry; where they have been
plied with the effectual means of Grace: Precept upon Precept, Line upon Line;
here a little, and there a little, Isa. 28.10. and by an insensible Conveyance,
received the Gracious Inoperations of the Spirit of God, though not without
many inward Debates, Temptations, and deep Humiliation, for their particular
Failings; these cannot expect to find so sensible Alterations in themselves: As
well a Child knows when he was born, as these know the instant of their
Spiritual Regeneration; and as well may they see the Grass grow, as perceive
their insensible Increase of Grace: It is sufficient that a Child, attaining to
Reason, knows he was born; as when we see the Grass higher than we left it,
know that it is grown. Let it then suffice thee, that the thing is finished,
though thou can not define the time, and manner of doing it: Be not over
curious in matters of particular Preceptions, whilst thou art assured of what
is wrought in thee. The skilful Chyrurgion, makes a Fontinel in the Body of his
Patient, either by a sudden Incision, or by a leisurely Corrosive; both equally
tend toward Health. Trust God with thy self, and with his own Work; without
making inquiry, which way he designs thy Salvation?

19. ALL were safe, thou say, if I could be ascertained of my Election to
Life Eternal: I could be Patient, so I might be sure: But, wretched that I am,
here I am plunged: I see others walk comfortably, as if in Heaven; whereas I
droop under a continual Diffidence; raising my self new Arguments of Distrust.
Could my heart be settled in this Assurance, nothing could make me unhappy.

It is true, as all other mercies flow from our Election; so the securing of
this one, involves all other Favors that concern the welfare of our Souls. It
is no less true, our Election may be assured; else the Holy Ghost had not laid
so deep a Charge upon us, to use our utmost Endeavor to ascertain it: And we
are much wanting to our selves, if hearing so excellent a Blessing may be
attained by diligence, if we pull not our hand out of our Bosom, to reach that
Crown so offered to us: But withal, it is true, if there were not a difficulty
in this work, the Apostle had not so earnestly called for the utmost of our
Endeavor to effect it; 2. Pet. 1.10.

20. THE Truth is, in Christianity there is no Path, wherein there is more need
of treading warily, than in this: On each side is Danger and Death; Security on
one hand, and Presumption on the other: And the Miscarriage either way, is
deadly. Behold the miserable Examples on both kinds: Some walk carelessly, as if
there were no Heaven; or if such a Place, yet of no Concernment: Their hearts
are fond of the Pleasure of this Life; and they neither care, nor wish to be
happier, than this World can make 'em: The God of this World has blinded their
Eyes, that they believe not, 2 Cor. 4.4. Others walk proudly, being vainly
puff't up with their own ungrounded Imaginations, as if they were invested with
Immortal Glory; fancying themselves rapt up with St. Paul into the Third
Heaven, and have seen their Names recorded in the Book of Life: Whereas this is
nothing but an Illusion of that Lying Spirit; who knows the the way to keep 'em
out of Heaven, is to make 'em believe they are in a State of happiness.

21. IT must be thy main Care to walk, in a just Equidistance from both these
Extremes; that thou may be resolute without Presumption, and careful without
Diffidence. And, First, I advise thee to abandon those false Teachers, who
improve their Wits for the Ruin of Souls, in broaching the sad Doctrines of
Uncertainty and Distrust. Be sure our Savior had not bid his Disciples
rejoice, that their Names are written in Heaven, Luke 10.20. Had there not been
a particular Enrollment; nor the Disciples could never have attained to the
notice of such Inscription. Neither is this a Mercy peculiar to his Domestic
Followers; but universal to all that believe what they testify; and by
believing we may be assured our Names are Registered in those Eternal Records.

22. NOT that we should take an Acesius his Ladder, and climb up to Heaven, and
turn over the Book of God's Councils, and read our selves designed to Glory.
But as we by Experience imagine we can by Reflections read those Letters, which
directly we cannot: So we may do here in spiritual Objects. The same Apostle
that gives us our Charge, gives us withal our Directions, Wherefore the rather,
Brethren, give all diligence to make your Callings and Election sure; for if ye
do those things, ye shall never fall; for so an Entrance shall be ministered
unto you abundantly, into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. Here is first our Calling, then our Election: Not that
we should begin with Heaven, and thence descend to Earth; but that we should
from Earth ascend to Heaven, from our Calling, to our Election: As knowing,
that God shows what he has done for us above, by that which he has wrought in
us here below.

23. OUR Calling not outward and formal, but inward and effectual. The Spirit
of God has a Voice, and our Soul an Ear; that Voice of the Spirit speaks
inwardly and effectually to the Ear of the Soul, calling us out of the State of
Corrupt Nature, into the State of Grace; out of Darkness, into his mavelous
Light. By thy Calling, thou may judge of thine Election: God never works in
vain, neither does he cast away his saving Graces: But whom he did
Predestinate, them also he Called; and whom he Called, them he Justified; and
whom he Justified, them also he Glorified, Romans 8.30. This doubtless, thou
say, is sure in it self, but how assured to me? I answer: That which the
Apostle adds, By good Works, if we comprehend the Acts of Believing and
Repenting, is a special Evidence of our Election. But not to urge that Clause
of Good Works, which (tho read in the Vulgar) is found wanting in our Editions;
The clear words of the Text evince no less: For if ye do these things, ye shall
nev^r fall: Here is our Negative Certainty: And for our Positive; So an
Entrance shall be Ministered unto you abundantly, into the Everlasting Kingdom
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. If we shall never fall, but shall
undoubtedly enter the Kingdom of Christ; what possible scruple can be of the
accomplishment of our Election? What then are these things that must be
performed by us? Fix your Eyes upon that Collection of Graces, following: If
you add to your Faith, Virtue, and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge,
Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience; and to Patience, Godliness; and to
Godliness, Brotherly Kindness, Charity, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6.

23. IF Thou would be informed what God has written concerning thee in
Heaven, look into thy own Bosom, and see what Graces he has wrought in thee.
Truth of Grace, says the Divine Apostle, will make good the certainty of your
Election. Not to instance the rest of that Heavenly Combination; do but single
the first and the last, Faith and Charity: For Faith, how clear is that of our
Savior; He that believes in him that sent me, has Everlasting Life, and
shall not come into Condemnation; but has passed from Death to Life, Joh.
5.24. What danger can befall us in our acquiring Heaven? All the Peril is in
the way. Now the Believer is already passed into Life: This is the Grace, by
which Christ dwells in our Hearts, Ephesians. 3.17. and whereby we have Communion
with him, and an assured Testimony of and from him: For he that believes in
the Son of God, has the Witness in himself: And what Witness is that? This is
the Record, that God has given us Eternal Life: And this Life is in his Son;
he that has the Son, has Life, 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. Oh happy Connection!
Eternal Life first: This Life Eternal, is in and by Christ Jesus; he is ours by
Faith, and this Faith testifies to our Souls assurance of Life Eternal:
Charity is the last, which comprehends our love to God and Man: For, from the
reflection of God's Love to us, arises a Love from us to him again. The
beloved Disciple can say, We love him, because he loved us first, 1 John 4.19.
And from these resulteth our Love to our Brethren: And such an Evidence we
have, that the Apostle tells us expressly, That we know we are passed from Death
to Life, because we love the Brethren, 1 John 3.14.: For the love of the Father
is inseparable from the love of the Son: He that loves him that Begets, loves
him that is Begotten of him, 1 John 5.1.

25. NOW deal impartially with thine own Heart, and enquire seriously, as in
the Presence of the Searcher of all Hearts, Whether thou do not find in thy
self these Evidences of thine Election? Art thou not effectually, tho not
perfectly called out of the World, and corrupt Nature? Do thou not inwardly
abhor sinful ways, and think of what thou were with Detestation? Do thou not
endeavor to be in all things approved to God, and confirmed to thy Savior?
Do thou not cast thy self upon the Lord Jesus, and depend upon his free All
sufficiency for Pardon and Salvation? Do thou not love that infinite
Goodness, who has been so rich in Mercies to thee; and bless those Beams of
Goodness which he has cast upon his Saints on Earth? Lastly, Do thou not
love a good Man, because he is so? Comfort thy self in the Lord, and let no
Fear and Distrust possess thy Soul: Faithful is he that has Called thee, 1
These. 5.24. who will also Preserve thy whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body
blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5.23.

A Prayer for an Afflicted Conscience.
O GOD, the Father of all Mercies and Heavenly Consolation, suffer me not at
any time to fall from thee, or to be swallowed up in the depth of Affliction;
but when ever it shall please thee to try me in that Furnace, let my sure Hope
and Confidence be fixed on thee; that when multitude of Sorrows shall encompass
my Soul, my only trust may be in thy Mercies. Give me the Oil of Joy for
Mourning, and the Garment of Gladness for the Spirit of Heaviness, that thy
great Name may be Glorified by me, in a thankful acknowledgement of thy
Goodness toward me.

2. LORD, thou beholdest afar off; the manifold Perils and Dangers I am exposed
to in this World, which is a sea of Miseries and numerous Calamities; The Winds
blow, the deep Waters lift up their proud swelling Waves, and the stormy
Tempests threaten me with Shipwreck, to the Ruin and Destruction both of Soul
and Body. But O thou, who art the God of Unity, speak Peace unto this inward
Voice, and say unto it, I am thy Salvation, so shall I be refreshed with thy
loving Kindness, and Praise thee ever more. Amen.

SECT. IV. Remedies against Temptations.
1. THOU art assaulted with Temptations: And what the Enemy cannot do by Force
or Fraud, he seeks by Importunity. Can this seem averse to thee, when the Son
of God was in the Wilderness forty Days, and forty Nights, under the Tempter?
He that durst set upon the Captain of our Salvation, Heb. 2.10. How shall he
spare frail Flesh and Blood? Why should Christ suffer himself to be Tempted,
but to support thee in all thy Temptations? The Keys of the Bottomless Pit are
at his disposal: He could have confined that Presumptuous Spirit to Chains of
Darkness, and admitted him no nearer to him than Hell; but he would let him
loose, and permit him to act his worst, purposely that we might not dislike to
be Tempted, and that he might foyl our greatest Enemy.

2. CAN thou think that he, who sits at the right Hand of Majesty, commanding
the Powers of Heaven, Earth and Hell, could not keep off that malignant Spirit
from assailing thee? Can thou think him less Merciful, than mighty? Would he
die to save thee? And will he turn that Miscreant of Hell loose to worry thee?
Do thou not Pray daily to thy Father in Heaven, to Lead thee not into
Temptation? Thou have to do with a God that hears Prayers; Oh thou of little
Faith, why fear thou? He that was led by his Divine Spirit into the
Wilderness, to be Tempted of that Evil Spirit, bids thee pray to the Father
that he would not Lead thee into Temptation; implying, that thou could not go
into Temptation, unless he lead thee; and whilst he that is thy Father, leads
thee, how can thou miscarry? Let no Man when he is Tempted, say, I am tempted
of God; for God cannot be tempted with Evil, neither tempts he any Man, Jam.
1.13. God Tempts thee not; yet being his, thou could not be Tempted without
him, both permitting and ordering that Temptation to his own Glory, and thy
eternal Welfare.

3. THAT Grace which God has given thee, he will have thus manifested. How had
we known the admirable Continency of Joseph, if he had not been strongly
solicited by a Wanton Mistress? Or David's Valor, if the Philistines had not
had a Giantly Challenger to encounter him? How had we known the invincible
Piety of the Three Children, had there been no Furnace to try 'em? Or of
Daniel, if no Lions to accompany him? Be assured, thy Glory shall be
Proportionable to thy Trial: Neither could thou ever be so happy, had tho^
not been beholding to Temptations. How often say thou, have I beaten off
these base Suggestions; yet still they retort upon me, as if Denials invited
'em; as though they meant to tire me with their Solicitations; as if I must
yield, and be overpow'rd, though not with their Force, yet with their Frequence?

4. KNOW* thou have to do with Spiritual Wickedness, Ephesians. 6.12. whose Nature
is as unweariable, as their Malice unsatisfiable: Thou have a Spirit of thine
own; and God has inspired thee with his: So as he expects thou should,
through the Power of his Gracious Assistance, match the Importunity of that
Evil Spirit, with an indesatigable Resistance. Be strong therefore in the Lord,
and in the Power of his Might; and put on the whole Armor of God, that thou
may be able to stand in the Evil Day; and having done all, to stand, Ephesians
6.10, 11, 13. Look upon a stronger Champion than thy self, the blessed Apostle;
thou shall find him in thy own Condition; See the Messenger of Satan sent to
buffet him, 2. Cor. 12.7. and he did it to purpose: With what extreme Rigor
was he buffeted on both sides, and how often? Thrice he besought the Lord, that
it might depart from him, Verse 8. but the Temptation holds; only a Comfort
countervails it: My Grace is sufficient for thee, for my Grace is made perfect
in Weakness, Verse 9.

5. IT is not to be considered, how hard thou art aimed at, as how strongly
thou art upheld: How many with the Blessed Martyr Theodorus, have upon Racks
and Gibbets found their Courage stronger than their Pains? Whil^st therefore
the Goodness of God supplies thee with abundance of Spiritual Vigor, and
Refreshment answerable to the worst of Assaults, what do thou complain of
suffering? The Advice is Sublime, which St. James gives his Compatiots; My
Brethren, count it all Joy, when ye fall into diverse Temptations. Let
Temptations be rather Trials by Afflictions, than Suggestions of Sin; yet even
those overcome, yield no small cause of Triumph: For by them is our Faith
tried; and the trying of our Faith works Patience; and the perfect work of
Patience, is a blessed Entireness. The number of Enemies adds to the Praise of
Victory: To overcome a single Temptation, is commendable; but to subdue
Multitudes is glorious.

6. ALAS, thou reply, I am oppressed, not with Multiplicity, but with Power:
In Duelling respect is had to the Equality both of the Combatants and Weapons:
But alas, how am I overmatch'd! I am a weak Wretch; and We wrestle not against
Flesh and Blood; but against Principalities and Powers: against the Rulers of
the Darkness of this World, against Spiritual Wickedness in Heavenly Places,
Ephesians. 6.12. Behold the Amorite, whose height is like the height of Cedars, and
their Strength as the Strength of Oaks, Amos 2.9. We are but poor Pismirs in
the Valley, to these Men of Measures? Who can stand before these Sons of Anak?
I did not advise thee to be strong in thy self; we are all Compounds of
weakness: One of those Powers of Darkness were able to subdue all Mortality:
But to be Strong in the Lord; whose inferior Angel is able to vanquish a Hell
of Devils: And in the Power of his Might, commands the most furious of those
Infernal Spirits to their Chains. What a Condition should we be in, if left to
our selves; there were no way for us, but Circumvention and Death: But, Our
Help is in the Name of the Lord, who has made Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 124.8.
The Lord is our Strength, and our Shield, Psalm. 28.7. He is our Rock and our
Salvation; He is our Defense, so as we shall not be moved, Psalm. 62.2, 6. It is
he that has girded us with Strength unto Battle, and that subdueth those that
rise up against us, Psalm. 18.39.

7. ASSUME Courage therefore to thy self; there cannot be so much difference
betwixt thee, and those Hellish Powers, as there is betwixt them, and the
Almighty: There Force is finite, and limited by Omnipotence. How glad do
thou think, Jannes and Jambres, the great Magicians of Egypt, would have made
but an Insect in affront to Moses? but could not. How earnest was that Legion
of Devils fain to beg leave to prevail over a few Gaderene-Swine? How strong
soever they seem to thee, yet to him they are so weak, that they cannot move
without him. Who fears a Bear, or a Lion, when chained to a Stake? Children
then can be Spectators, when they are so Restrained. Look not on thy self
therefore, nor them; but look up to the Almighty, who ordinates all Motions to
his own holy Purposes; and even out of their Malice, raises Glory to himself,
and Advantage to his Servants.

8. IT is a sad Advantage, (thou say) I have made of Temptations: For, Alas!
I have been soiled by 'em, what by their Subtilty and Violence, have been
seduced into a grievous Sin against God, and lie down in a just Confusion of
Face, to have been so miserably vanquished. Had thou wanted Tears for thine
Offenses, I should willingly have lent thee some. But it is indeed a deplorable
Case, that thou have given thy deadly Enemy this occasion to Triumph over thee;
and have thus provoked God: Nevertheless be thou thoroughly humbled under the
Guilt of thy Sin, and be not too hasty in snatching a Pardon out of the hand
thou have offended: Be humbled, and after a serious Repentance, be not
dis-heartned with thy Failings: Neither do I dread to tell thee of an Advantage
to be made, not of thy Temptations only, but of thy Sin.

9. ART not thou a Gainer, if after this thy Assault, thou do in a Holy
Indignation, rise up, and fight the more valiantly? A Wound received, whets the
Edge of Fortitude: Many a one had not been Victorious, if he had not bled
first. Look where thou will, upon all the Saints of God; observe if thou can
see any of them without his Scars: Many fearful Gashes we have beheld of the
Noblest of God's Champions whose Courage had not been raised to so high a
Pitch, had it not been out of the sense of some former Discomfortures! As some
well-spirited Wrestler, be not troubled with thy Fall, as zealous to repay it
with a successful Encounter. We know, says the blessed Apostle, that all
things works together for good to them that love God, Romans 8.28. Yea, even
their very Sins. The Corinthians offended in their silent Connivance at the
Incestuous Person: The Apostles Reproof produced their Sorrow: What was the
Issue? For behold, this selfsame thing that ye sorrowed after a Godly sort,
what Carefulness is wrought in you? Yea, what clearing of your selves; yea,
what Indignation; yea, what Fear; yea, what vehement Desire; yea, what Zeal;
yea, what Revenge? 2 Cor. 7.11. What a mavelous Advantage is here made of one
Offense? And what has Satan gained by this Encounter? One poor Corinthian is
misled to an incestuous Copulation: The Evil Spirit rejoiceth at such a Prey;
but how long shall he enjoy it? Soon after the offending Soul, upon the
Apostles Censure, is reclaimed; he is delivered to Satan, that he should never
possess him.

10. THE Corinthians are raised to a greater height of Godly Zeal, than ever.
Corinth had never been so rich in Grace, if not defiled with so foul a Crime.
Confess now, if this be not in effect thy Case? Should thou ever have
detested thy Sin, if thou had not been drawn in, to commit it? Should thou
have had so fervent a Love to God, had it not been out of a sense of his great
Mercy, in remitting it? Would thou have been so weary in thy Stops, as thou
art, if thou had not slipped? Give Glory to God, but shame to thy self, and
Bless him for the benefit that he has been pleased to make of thine Offending
him.

11. BUT Alas! thou say my Case is far worse than it is conceived; I have
been more than once miscarried into the same Sin: For after I have made
profession of my Repentance, I have been transported into my former Wickedness:
Having washed off my Sin, (as I thought) with many Tears, yet I have suffered my
Soul to be defiled again. I must not flatter thee, this Condition is Dangerous:
Those Diseases, which upon their first Seizure have received Cure, after a
Relapse, have threatened Death. Look upon the Saints of God, thou shall find
they have kept a distance from that Fire wherewith they have been formerly
Burned: Thou shall not find Noah again Uncovered through Drunkenness, Nor Judah
climbing to Tamer's Bed: Thou shall not take Peter again in the High-Priest's
Hall, denying his Master; or after St. Paul's Reproof, Halting in his
Dissimulation, Gall. 2.11, 12, 13.

12. BUT tell me, notwithstanding, Art thou truly serious with thy God? Have
thou doubled thy Humiliation, for the Reduplication of thine Offense, and
sought God more instantly with an unfeigned Contrition? Have thou found thy
Soul has a greater detestation of Sin, than thine acquaintance with it has
indulged thee? Have thou taken this occasion to lay hold on thy Savior, and to
reinforce the Vows of strict Obedience? If so, this unpurpos'd Reiteration of
thy Sin, shall be no Prejudice to thy Salvation. It is one thing for a Man to
walk on willingly in a beaten Path of Sin, another thing for him to be led out
of the way of Righteousness, by the violence of a Temptation, which he soon
recovers by a sincere Repentance.

13. THE Best cannot but he overtaken with Sin: But, He that is Born of God,
does not commit Sin, 1 John 3.9. He may be transported, but makes not a Custom
of doing ill: His Heart is against that, his Hand is drawn to: And if in this
inward Strife he is overpowered, he lies not down with a willing Mind, but
struggles, and with a reassumed Courage, tramples on that which formerly
supplanted him. Did thou give thy self to a resolved course of Sinning, and
betwixt whiles smite thy Breast with a formal God forgive me, I should have no
Comfort for thee, but rather send thee to an afflictious Remedy of the
Almighty, for Correction, if possibly those Stripes may prevent thine
Everlasting Torments.

14. BUT now, since What thou hate, that thou do; and thou do that which
thou would not; and it is no more thou that do it, but Sin that dwells in
thee, Romans 7.19, 20. Exclaim as much as thou will on the sinfulness of thy Sin,
bewail thy Weakness with a better Man than thy self: O wretched Man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death, Romans 7.24. But know, that
thou have found Mercy with God: Thy repeated Sin may grieve, but cannot
prejudice thy Soul. Had we to do with a Finite Compassion, it might be abated,
by wasting it self on a frequent Remission, as a great River may be drawn dry
by many small Out-lets: But now that we deal with a God, whose Mercy is
Infinite; it is not the greatness, or number of our Offenses, that makes a
difference in his free Remission: That God, who has charged our weak Charity.
Not to be overcome of Evil, but to overcome Evil with Good, Romans 12.21. justly
scorneth that we should imagine his Infinite and Incomprehensible Goodness, can
be checked with our Evil.

15. IT was not without a singular Providence, that St. Peter came to our
Savior with that Question in his Mouth; Lord, How often shall my Brother sin
against me, and I forgive him, till seven times? That it might produce this
Gracious Answer, for our perpetual Comfort: I say not unto thee, until seven
times, but until seventy times seven, Matthew. 18.21, 22. Lord, if thou will have
us sinful Creatures, indulgent to one another, in our Mutual Offenses; what
Limits can be set to thy Mercies in our Sins against Thee? Be we Penitent, for
thou art Gracious.

A Prayer against Temptations.
O Lord, thou art the God of my Strength, and to thee alone, I fly for refuge;
the Tempter is now busy, and labors to undermine me, and more especially when
I least suspect him: But, O let me be always ready to meet him in the Gate,
before he advances too far upon me: Let not a Supine carelessness seize upon my
Spirits, but excite me to Vigilance, that I may stand upon my Guard ever
prepared to resist him, even in the beginning of his first Assaults; Lord,
grant I may be fortified with Faith, Courage and Resolution, so that with the
Assistance of thy Grace, I may gain the Conquest.

2. FURNISH me with thy complete Armor, the Helmet of Salvation, the Sword of
the Spirit, and the Shield of Faith whereby Satan may be vanquished; do thou
Arm and so Strengthen me with thy Grace, that through the Power of thy Might, I
may prevail against him, and put him to flight, when he is intending the
greatest mischief, and most advantage against me; so shall I sing Praises unto
thy Name, both now and ever; and teach others to resort unto thee in their
greatest dangers, and hardst Conflicts, even then when the powers of darkness
shall most obstruct them. Amen.

SECT. V. Imbecility of Grace.
1. THOU complainest of the Imbecility of Grace: Some little motions thou art
sensible of God's Spirit; but so insignificant, that thou can not find any
solid Comfort. Thou see others (thou say) whose Breasts are full of Milk,
and their Bones moistened with Marrow, Job 21.24. whilst thou languishest under
a Spiritual Leanness and Imbecility. Thou want that vigorous Heat of holy
Affections, and that Alacrity in the Performance of Holy Duties, which thou
observest in other Christians. I like this Complaint, and tell thee, That
without this, thou could not be in the way to happiness.

2. THINK thou, that those whom thou esteem'st eminent in Grace, make not
the same moan that thou do? Certainly, they never had any, if they did not
complain of too little. Every Man is sensible of his own wants, and ready to
pass secret Censures upon himself for being applauded by others. Even the Man
after God's own heart, can say, But I am Poor and Sorrowful, Psalm. 69.29. He
was a great King when he said so; it was not Meaness in Estate, that troubled
him; but a Spiritual Necessity: For he had before, in the same Heavenly Anthem
professed; O God, thou know my Foolishness, and my Guiltiness is not hid
from thee, Psalm. 69.5. It was an old Observation of Wise Solomon; There is that
makes himself Rich* and has nothing; there is that makes himself Poor, yet
has great Riches, Prove. 13.7. In this latter Rank are many Pious Souls, and
thine (I hope) for one; who certainly had never been so Rich in Grace, if they
had been conceited of greater Store: Even in this Sense many a Saint may say
with St. Paul, When I am weak, then I am strong; since the Complaint of
Weakness, argues Strength: And, on the contrary, an Opinion of sufficient
Grace, is an Evident Conviction of mere Emptiness.

3. BUT suppose thy self so poor as thou pretendest; it is not so much what we
have, as how we improve it. How many have we known, that have grown Rich out of
a little; and others, out of a great Stock, have run to Beggary? Had that
Servant in the Gospel, with One Talent, employed it to the Gain of a Second, he
had been proportionably as well rewarded, as he that with Five gained Ten. In
our Temporal Estate, we are warned by the Wisest Man, to Take heed of making
haste to be Rich, Prove. 28.20. And the Apostle tells us, That he that would be
Rich, falls into many Temptations, 1 Timothy 6.9. Surely, there is no small danger
also, in affecting to be too suddenly Rich in the Endowments of the Soul: This
cannot but be accompanied with the Temptation of an unthankful distrust: For he
that believes makes not haste; and we cannot be sufficiently thankful for what
we have, whilst we do over eagerly reach after what we have not.

4. TELL me, thou Querulous Soul, do thou not acknowledge what thou receivest
to be God^s Gift? And will thou not allow the Benefactor of Heaven, to Dispense
his Favors as he pleases? If he think fit to fill thy Vessel with drops of
Grace, art thou discontented, because he pours not out his Spirit in full
Vials? If thou enjoys any, it is his bounty, and more than thou can repay
him: Take what thou have, as an Earnest of more; and wait thankfully upon his
Bounty for the rest: Is it not convenient in a free Gift, to attend the leisure
of the Donor? What sturdy Beggars are we, not to stay at the Door till we be
served; and grudge at our Alms, when it comes? Look upon Abraham, thou shall
find him fourscore and six Years Childless; and after he had got Ishmael, he
waited fourteen Years for the Promised Seed; and when he had enjoyed him not
longer than he expected him, he must Sacrifice him to the Giver. Thus must our
Faith be exercised for Time and Measure of Mercy.

5. THY Graces are weak; yet discomfort not thy self: How many frail Bodies
have we known, which with careful Tendance, have been Healthier than those of
grosser Constitutions. Neither is it otherwise in the Soul: Soundness of heart,
is Health; Increased Degrees of Grace, make up the Strength of that Spiritual
Part: If thou have this Health tenderly observed, thou may be happy in thy
Maker, although more happy in a Comfortable Sense of a stronger Fruition. We
have to do with a God that minds not Quantity, as Truth of Repentance. He knows
we have nothing, but what he gives us, and enables us to improve: And where he
sees our Wills and Endeavors not wanting, he is ready to accept and crown his
own Gifts in us. He will not break the Bruised Reed, nor quench the Smoking
Flax, Matthew. 12.20.

6. THOU art weak in Grace: Be not dismayed; there are all Ages, all Statures
in Christ. Shall the Child repine, that he is not grown a Man? Shall the Dwarf
quarrel that he is not a Giant? Were there a Standard of Graces, less than is
required and would not be accepted, thou had reason to be troubled: But it is
so far from that, as that our Savior has encharged; Suffer little Children to
come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
19.14. In some Legal Oblations, it pleased God to regard Time and Age: The Lamb
for the Passover, and for the Peace Offering, Lev. 3.7. The Bullock for the
Sin-Offering of Israel, Lev. 4.14. have their Date assigned: And in diverse
Cases, he has called for Two Turtle Doves, or two Young Pigeons, Lev. 1.14.
Lev. 5.7, 11. Lev. 12.8. Lev. 15.14. Young Turtles, and Old Doves, (according
to our Jewish Doctors) were unlawful to be offered: But in Spiritual
Sacrifices; he that is Eternal regards not Time, nor Statures: For the Eleventh
Hour, carried the Penny as well as the First: And let the weak say, I am strong,
Joel 3.10.

7. IT perplexes thee, thou have made so slow a Progress in Graces: Thy desire
is Heav'n-ward, and thou checkest thy self for want to Celerity: It is an happy
Ambition, that wings thee to Blessedness. Quicken thy self, with Gracious
Incitations; but observe, we must not go a full Career: For that Passage admits
not of haste: How many have we known, by much forwardness, have been rejected
in their Journey, whether by mistaking their Way, or misplacing their Steps?
But I am glad it is the desire of thy Soul, to Run the way of God's
Commandments, Psalm 119.32. and do encourage thy Zeal, in pursuing that Holy
Race; ever praying thou may so run, as that thou may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24.
But withal, I tell thee, that, Blessed is the Man, that does but walk in the
Law of the Lord, Psalm. 119.1. Whilst thou passest on, though but a Foot-pace,
thou art every step nearer to Glory: And if thou gain'st ground, thou art
secure. Blessed is the Man, whose Strength is in Thee, O God; in whose heart
are thy Ways; who passing through the Vale of Misery, goes on from Strength to
Strength, till he appear before Thee his God in Zion, Psalm. 84.5, 6, 7.

8. THY Grace is diminutive; but thou labourest for more: This is a good
Beginning of Heavenly Treasure: For he is in a way to Riches, that desires to
thrive; and never any Holy Soul lost her Longing. If thy Wishes be hearty, thou
have thy desire, or shall be assured of it. If any Man lack Wisdom, let him ask
it of God; who gives to all Men liberally, and upbraideth no Man; and it shall
be given him, Jam. 1.5. Were this Condition offered for Temporal Riches, who
would be Poor? And if we embrace it not in Spirituals, we distrust the
Promises, or neglect Mercies. In Temporal things, how many have so eagerly
Chased the World, that they have overrun it; and whilst they greedily
swallowed Gain, have been choked? But in better Blessings, earnestness of
Desire, and fervor of Prosecution, was always answered with a Gracious
Impetration.

9. THOU art poor in Spirit; but in an humble Dejection, long'st for more:
Know, that an humble Poverty, is better than a proud Fullness: Were thou Poor
and Proud, there were no hope of thy Proficiency: Thy false Conception lies in
the way of thy Improvement; and many a one had been Gracious, had they not
esteemed themselves: But now thou art Meaner in thine Opinion, than in thine
Estate, who can more justly claim our Saviors Blessing; Blessed are the poor
in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven? Mat. 5.3.

10. THOU art weak in heart: It is thine own Fault, if thou acquir'st not more
Strength. Wherefore is that Heavenly Food of the Word and Sacraments, but to
nourish thy Soul to Eternal Life? Do but Eat and Digest, and thou will grow
stronger God will not be wanting to thee in an Increase of Grace, if thou art
not wanting to thy self: He offers his Holy Spirit, with the Means; and it is
thy neglect if thou separate 'em. Thou know in whose hands is the Staff of
Bread, pray, That he who gives thee Food, and Mouth, would also give thee
Appetite, Digestion, and Nourishment.

11. THY Spirit is weak: It concerns thee highly to be cautious, in avoiding
occasions of Temptation. He that carries brittle Glasses, is careful lest they
should break; whereas strong Metal fears no danger: So he that has a small
Rush-Light, walks gently, and keeps off every Air. Thou art weak, thy God is
strong. Do thou not see the Infant that cannot go alone, how fast he clings
to the hand of his Mother; more trusting to her help, than his own Strength? Do
thou so to thy God; and say with the Blessed Psalmist; Hold up my goings in thy
Paths, that my Footsteps slip not, Psalm. 17.5. Hold thou me up, and I shall be
safe, Psalm. 119.117, Uphold me according to thy Word, that I may live, and let
me not be ashamed of my Hope, Psalm. 119.116.

12. St. Peter was presumptuous, in attempting to tread on the Waters: But he
that ventured to walk there, upon the Strength of his Faith, when he felt the
stiff Wind, and saw the great Billow, began to sink in his Weakness: But no
sooner had Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, but he takes
Courage, and goes now with the same assurance upon the Sea, as he on the Land:
And with a Check, receives more Supportation from Christ than his own Limbs
could afford him, Mat. 14.29, 30, 31. Fear no Miscarriage, through thine own
weakness, whilst thou art supported by that Strong Helper.

A Prayer for Grace.
O LORD, who art the Author of all Goodness, and from whom comes every good
and perfect Gift, make me to discern aright what Grace thou have vouchsafed
unto me, and learn me to be truly thankful for the same, and to Glorify thee,
the only giver of it; so likewise to use my utmost diligence in the performance
of those Duties which thou requirest of me: That when thou shall Summon me to a
Reckoning for the use of that Talent committed to me, I may give in my
Accounts, and be plentifully Rewarded, by entering into that Joy, which thou
have prepared for all thy Servants.

2. GRANT that I may ever use that measure of Grace thou have allotted to me,
and restrain me from turning of it into Wantonness: Let me be content with that
Portion which thou in thy Wisdom and Goodness have endowed me withal, and not
plead Ignorance and contemn its Insufficiency; neither let me Envy those that
haeve received more, lest I repine against thee; nor despise those which have
attained less, lest I incur thy Displeasure, and cause thee in Justice, to
withdraw that Grace from me, which in Mercy thou have freely given me, and
bestow it upon those who would make better use of it: But Lord, Sanctify unto
me all thy Gifts and Graces to my Life's end. Amen.

SECT. VI. Loss of Reputation.
1. NEXT to our Body and Soul. is the Care of our Reputation; which lost, we
are dead to the World. Thou suffer under a Public Infamy; I do not ask how
justly: He was wise that said, It was fit for every Good Man to fear a false
Reproach: A good Name is no less wounded for the time with that, than with a
just Crimination. This is a sore Evil; against which there is no Preservative,
nor hardly can be prescribed any Remedy: Innocence it self, is no Antidote
against Malicious Tongues: Neither Grandeur nor Sanctity, can secure any from
unjust Calumny.

2. MIGHT that be any Ease to thee, I could tell thee of Kings and Saints, that
have complained of this Misfortune, and yet were not able to resist it. Thou
have the Company of the best, if that mitigates thy Misery. But what do I speak
of Mortals, whose greatest Purity might be blurred with some Imperfections?
Look upon the Lord of Life, the Eternal Son of the ever living God, God
clothed in Flesh; and see whether any other were his Lot, in this Region of
Mortality: Do thou not hear for his Gracious Sociableness, branded as
Gluttonous, a Wine-bibber, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners? Mat. 11.19. For
his Powerful and Merciful Cure of Demoniacks, blazoned for a Fellow that Casts
out Devils through Beelzebub the Prince of Devils? Mat. 12.24. Was not he
slandred to death for Treason against Caesar, and Blasphemy against God? John
19.12. Mat. 26.65. Did not the Multitude say, He is mad and has a Devil? John
10.20. Was he not after his Death counted an Impostor? Mat. 27.63. And can
there be worse Names, than Glutton, Drunkard, Conjurer, and Traitor,
Blasphemer, Madman, Demoniack, and Impostor? Who then can think much to be
slandered with meaner Crimes, when he hears the Son of God in whom The Prince
of this World could find nothing, laden with so heinous Calumniations? John
14.30.

3. THOU art smitten with a sordid Tongue; which penetrates into thy Soul. That
Person gave a high praise to his Sword, that affirmed, It was sharper than
Slander: And if a Razor proves sharper, yet short of the Edomites Tongue, Psalm.
52.2. And if these Weapons reach not far enough, he found both Spears and
Arrows in the Mouths of his Traducers, Psalm. 57.4. Thou art in the same
Circumstance with David: What should thou do, but for his Complaint, use his
Remedy? I will cry unto God most high, unto God that performs all things for
me: He shall send from Heaven, and save me from the Reproach of him that would
swallow me up: God shall send forth his Mercy, and his Truth, Psalm. 57.2, 3. Do
by thy Reproaches, as Hezekiah did by the Railing Lines of Rabshakeh, spread
them before the Lord, and leave thy Cause in the just hands of the Almighty;
who will in his good time, revenge thy Wrong, and clear thine Innocence: and
requite thee Good for their Malice and Envy.

4. IN the mean time, thou complain'st of being blemished with an odious
Aspersion, and thy Name repeated by many censorious Mouths. Thou hear what
others say; but do thou make a particular Search in thine own Bosom? If thy
Conscience acquit thee, obdure thy Face against all Spite of Malice. What is
ill Fame, but an unsavory Breath? Do but turn thine Ear from the Reception, and
what art thou the worse? It is thy Weakness to suffer thy self to be blown over
by the Air of some putrified Lungs; which if thou do but decline, by not
valuing it, will soon vanish.

5. THOU art under ill Tongues: This is an Evil proper only to Man: Other
Creatures are subject to Diseases, Death, or outward Violence; but they cannot
be obnoxious to Detraction, since they are not capable of Speech; whereby a
Slander can be formed: They have their several Sounds and Notes of Expression,
whereby they signify their Dislike and Anger: But only Man can cloth his
angry Thoughts with Words of Offense; so that Faculty, which was given him for
an Advantage, is depraved to a further Mischief. But the Liberal Hand of his
Creator, has also endued him with a Property of Reason; which as it directs
his Tongue to others, so it instructs him to make use of other Speeches to him:
And where he finds it unjust, either to convince it by a just Apology, or to
contemn it. If therefore thou understandest thy self to lie under an unjust
Obloquy, have so much of the Man as to confute, or despise it.

6. THOU art shamefully traduced: But give me leave to enquire not what thou
suffe^est, but for what: If for a good Cause, I shall turn my Pity to Envy:
Truth it self has told thee, Thou art in the way to Blessedness, who can pity
thee for that, wherein thou have cause to rejoice? Blessed are ye when Men
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of Evil against you
falsely, for my sake; rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward
in Heaven, Mat. 5.11. Rather pluck up thy Spirits, and take up the Resolution
of holy Job, that Man of Patience: If mine Adversary had written a Book against
me, surely I would take it upon my Shoulders, and bind it as a Crown to me, Job
31.35, 36. And say, with that gracious King of Israel; I will be yet more vile
for the Lord, 2 Samuel 6.22.

7. THOU art reproached by lewd Men: Thank thy Virtue, that thou art envyed.
Were thou so bad as thy Detractors, thou would sit quiet enough. If we were
of the World, (says our Savior) the World would love his own: But because ye
are not of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World; therefore the
World hates you, John 15.19. Whilst the Moon sets, no Dogs bark at her; it is
her Shining that opens their Mouths: Were thou Obscure or Wicked, thou might
be safe; but if thou will be eminently Good, look for the Lashes of ill
Tongues. They think it strange, that you run not with them into the same Excess
of Riot, speaking Evil of you, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.4.

8. IT was not without Reason, that a great Musician struck his Scholar,
because the Multitude applauded his Skill; knowing, that had he been true to
his Art, those mis^judging Ears could not have approved him. What more
excellent Instruments had God in his Church, than the Blessed Apostles? And
what Acceptance found they on the Earth? Being defamed, we entreat: We are
made as the Filth of the World, and are the Off scouring of all things unto
this Day: We are made a Spectacle to the World, to Angels, and to Men, 1 Cor.
4.9, 13. Complain, if thou can, of a worse Condition than these Ambassadors
of God; otherwise, resolve with the Holy Apostle, to pass cheerfully through
Honor and Dishonor, through evil Report, and good Report, towords the Goal of
Immortality.

9. THOU art disgraced through sland'rous Reports: It is not Air we live by.
How many have thou known, that have blown over a just Infamy, with a careless
Neglect? Pleasing themselves to think, they are thriven under Curses: And shall
their Guiltiness be entertained with more Courage than thine Innocence? Let
those whose heart is as foul as their Names, be troubled with deserved
Censures: Do not thou give way to Malice, as to yield any Regard to her
mis-raised Suggestions. Thou can not devise more to vex a Detractor, than by
Contempt. Thus thou shall force Spite, as that wise Heathen truly said, to
drink of the greatest Part of her own Poison.

10. THOU art disgraced with an ill Fame: What a poor matter is this? How far
do thou think that Sound reaches? Perhaps to the next Village; or Shire
wherein thou dwell: It is like, the next County never heard of thy Name: And
if thou look yet further off; as soon may thou be discoursed amongst the
Antipodes, as in the Neighboring Region. And what a small Spot of Earth is
this, to which thy Shame is confined? Did thou know the vast Extent of this
great World, thou would easily see into how narrow a Corner either our
Glory, or Dishonor, can be shut up: And should confess how little Reason we
have to affect the One, or be disheartened with the Other.

11. THOU art wronged with an unjust disgrace: Have Patience; Slanders are not
long-lived: Truth is the Child of Time; ere long she will appear and vindicate
thee. Wait upon the God of Truth, who shall cause Thy Light to break forth as
the Morning; and thine Health to spring forth speedily, Isa. 58.8. There is a
Shame, worthy of thy Fear; which is both Universal, before the Face of all the
World, of Angels and Men; and beyond the reach of Time, Eternal: Fear This, and
contemn the Other.

12. ON the contrary; If Fame should be-friend thee so much, as to strain her
Cheeks in sounding thy Praises; and should cry thee up for Virtuous, and
Eminent every way: Alas! how few shall hear her, and how soon is that Noise
stilled, and forgotten? Eccles. 9.16. Shortly, Then let it be thy main Care, to
demean thy self holily and conscionably before God and Men; leave the rest upon
God, who shall be sure to make his Word good, in spite of Men and Devils: The
Memory of the Just shall be blessed, but the Name of the Wicked shall rot,
Prove. 10.7.

A Prayer upon loss of Reputation.
O Lord, withdraw my heart I beseech thee daily, more and more from the love of
the World, and the things thereof, seeing they are Vain, Transitory and full of
Grief and Vexation, not yielding that delight and Contentment which they
promise by their fawning Allurements: But on the Contrary much anguish and
unquietness of Mind: Witness the cause of such unexpected bitterness; suffer me
not to affect them as formerly, nor let them seem so sweet and pleasant to me,
as they do to others, who have not tasted of better things, and therefore find
such relish in these; but grant that all the affections of my heart may be
fixed upon thee alone.

2. REPROACH and Shame, O Lord, has now Encompassed me, and it has been thy
Justice to make others behold the Weakness of thy Servant, and to cause my
wants, Imperfections, and Infirmities to be known and discerned of many; Lord,
thou know how ready I am to fail, if thy Grace does not continually sustain
me: O let me not be overwhelmed with grief, that others may behold that in me
which creates this disrespect, but make me every day careful to walk
Circumspectly, and to Redeem that Time I have so vainly lost, that at last I
may by hearty Repentance, and the Merits of a blessed Jesus, be received into
thy Favor. Amen.

SECT. VII. Of Public Calamities.
1. THOU art afflicted with the Public Calamities; So it becomes thee as a
good Man, a good Christian, and a good Patriot. We are not entir^ Pieces but
Limbs of a Community of Church and Kin^dom: Wh^e the whole Body suffers, how
can ^e b^ free? This should be no News to us: Wha^ Ea^thly Kingdom or State
has ever enjoyed a const^nt Felicity? These Public Bodies, like single
Persons, have their Birth, Infancy, Youth, Vigor, and Declinations: Even the
White Marble of that famous Emblem, and Type of God's Church, after not many
Centuries of Years, felt the Dine of Time, and Mould'red to nothing.

2. IT is as much as Heavenly Bodies can do, to avoid Mutation: And well might
be distracted with these Troubles, if we did not know from whence they come;
even from a most Wise, Powerful, and just Providence: He that sits in Heaven,
orde^s these Earthly Affairs according to the Counsel of his Will: It is that
Almighty Hand, that holds the Stern of this Vessel, and steers it in that
Course he knows best: It is not for us Passengers, to meddle with Card or
Compass: Let that All-skillful Pilot alone with his Work: He knows every Rock
and Shelf, that may endanger it; and can cut the proudest Billow, that
threatens it; It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.18.

3. WERE there no other respects than Personal, I cannot blame thee, if thy
Fears strive with thy Grief for the Public Evils: Every Man's Interest is
involved in the Common; and if the Ship Sink, what will become of the
Passengers? But withal, there is a kind of inbred Sympathy in every good heart,
which gives a Share in all Miseries, and affects us more for them, than our
own. Old indulgent Eli loved his Sons well, and was no doubt, very sensible of
their Death; yet that part of the News passed over with some Passion: But when
he heard the Ark of God was taken, his Neck and Heart were broke together: And
his Religious Daughter-in-Law, though she were Delivered of a Son; yet she died
in Travel of that heavy News, and could live only to say, Ichabod; the Glory is
departed from Israel; for the Ark of God is taken, 1 Samuel 4.17, 18, 21, 22.
disregarding her new Son, when she heard of the Loss of he^ People, and her God.

4. HOW many Pagans have we read of, that have died resolutely for their
Country, cheerfully sacrificing themselves to the Public? How many that died
with their Country, hating to outlive the common Ruin? How many have Scorned
to be beholden for their Lives to their Peoples Murderers? We shall as soon
extinguish Grace and Nature, as quit this Compassionate Sense of the Common
Calamities.

5. THOU grievest for the Public Distempers: Mourn not as one without Faith:
Be sure, He that keeps Israel,. will neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm. 121.4.
Wherefore was The Holy Tabernacle over spread with Skins, but to figure to us
God's Church, shelt'red under a sure Protection? Exodus 26.7. He that was so
curious of the Custody of his Material Temple, by Night as well as by Day, that
a sleeping Levite might not escape beating, and burning of Garments; how
careful do we think, he will be of his Spiritual, and Living House? How unmeet
Judges are we of his Holy Proceedings? We are ready to measure his Love by an
outward Prosperity, than which nothing can be more uncertain?

6. THE Almighty goes by other Rules; such as are most Conson^nt to his
Infinite Justice and Mercy. I am abashed to hear a Pagan, though no Vulgar one,
say; Whatsoever is brought to pass* Senec. E^ist. 107.
a wise Man thinks, ought to be so done; neither goes about to rebuke Nature:
But finds it best to suffer what he cannot alter: And shall we Christians
repine at those seemingly harsh Events, which we see fall out in God's Church,
whilst we are ignorant of his Designs? and be ready to bless a thriving
Profaneness? Behold the ancient Lot of God's Inheritance, and thou shall see
the Father of Esau Flourishing, yielding eight Kings of his Line; whilst poor
Israel was toyling and sweating in the Egyptian Furnaces: Yet we know the
World to stand inviolable; The Elder shall serve the Younger; and, Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated.

7. WHAT if that Wise God, (who brings Light out of Darkness) have purposed to
dispense Honor and Happiness to his Church out of this sad Affliction? Metals
are never so bright, as when polished: Perfumes and Spices never so Redolent,
as when they have endured the Fire, and Pestle. Will thou not give the
Physician leave to make use of Mithridate, because there are Vipers in the
Composition? How unworthy art thou of Health, if thou will not trust the Skill
of the Artist, in mixing so wholesome a Cordial?

8. THOU art troubled with the Public Miseries: Take heed that thy Grief be
clear of all Impiety. Would thou not have God to be Just; and allow it an
Act of his Justice to punish Sins* Can thou deny, that our Sins have reached
to Heaven, and called for Judgment? Wherefore does a Living Man complain? a Man
for the punishment of his Sin? Lam. 3.39. I read of a Devout Man, that was
instant with God in his Prayers, for a Nation not far off: And was answered;
Suffer the Proud to be humbled. Whether we suffer it or no, the just God will
humble the Proud, and punish the Sinful. The wonderful Patience, and infinite
Justice of the Almighty, has set Limits to the Wickedness of every People. The
Iniquities of the Amorites is not yet at the full, says God to Abraham, Genesis
15.16. When the Measures is made up, it is time for God to strick: Then we
complain, when perhaps it is too late.

9. WOULD thou know what Remedy is to be used, for preventing of a
Destructive Vengeance? There is no way under Heaven, but to break off our Sins
by a seasonable, serious Repentance: By the united Forces of Holy Resolutions,
and Endeavors to make an Head against our Wickednesses, and not to suffer it
to fill up to the Brim of that fatal Epah; till which time the Long-suffering
God only threatens, and corrects a People: But then he plagues them; and
insists upon the necessity of his inviolable Justice. Shall I not visit for
these things, says the Lord? And shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation
as this? Jer. 5.9.

10. THOU mournest for the common Sufferings: And indeed our Fears can never be
better bestowed But have not thy Sins helped to make up this irritating Heap,
and thou cast in thy Symbol into the common Shot? Cannot the Time^ justly
challenge thee as accessory to their Misery? Begin at Home, if thou wish well
to the Public and make thine own Peace with God, for thy particular Offenses:
Renew the Covenant with God, of a holy and strict Obedience; and then pour out
thy Prayers and Tears for an universal Mercy: Then thou will not only pull away
one Brand from this Consuming Fire, but assist to quench the common
Conslagration.

11. THY Heart bleeds to see the woeful Vastation of Civil Discord, and the
deadly fury of domestic Enemies: Certainly there is nothing under Heaven more
dreadful than the Face of an Intestine War; nothing that so nearly resembles
Hell: Killing, Dying, Torturing, Burning, Shrieks, Cries, and Ejaculations.
fearful Sounds, and furious Violences, and whatsoever may increase Horror: The
present Calamity oppre^^es one, another Fear: One is quivering in Death,
another trembles to expect it: One begs for Life, another will sell it dearer:
He^e one would rescue one Life, and loses two; another would hide himself
where he finds a Merciless Death. Here lies one bleeding, groaning and
grasping, parting with his Soul inextremity of Anguish; and another of a
Vigorous Spirit kills and dies at once: Here one wrings her Hands, tea^s her
Hair, and seeks for some Instrument of a self-inflicted Death, rather than
yield her Chastity to a bloody Ravisher; another clings to her Husband, and
takes part of the Murderers Sword, rather than let go her Embraces: One is
tortured for the Discovery of hid Treasure; another dying upon the Rack, out of
Jealousy.

12. IT is pity that Christians should be so bloodily Cruel to one another!
That he who bears the Image of God, should thus turn Fiend to his own Flesh and
Blood! These are worthy of our bitterest Lamentations! I love the Speculation
of Seneca's Resolutely-Wise Man, Senec. Epist. 76.
that could look upon the glittering Sword of an Executioner, with undazled
Eyes, and makes it indifferent whether his Soul pass out of his Mouth or
Throat: But I should more admire the Practice. Whilst we carry this Clay about
us, Nature in the best of us, must shrink in at the sight of Death: Yet these
are the due Revenges of the Almighty's Punitive Justice, so provoked by our
Sins, that we cannot claim an easier Judgment.

13. DO thou not see Physicians when the Body is highly Distempered and the
Blood Inflamed, to order the opening of a Vein, and extracting out so many
ounces as may leave the rest sit for Correction? Why art thou over-troubled to
see the great Physician of the World take this Course with sinful Mankind?
Certainly, had not this great Body, by wilful Disorder, contracted these
Spiritual Diseases, and defiled the Blood that runs in these Vulgar Veins, with
Riots and Surfeits, we had never been so Miserable, as to see these Torrents of
Christian Blood running down our Channels: But could we bewail and abandon our
former Wickednesses, we might live in hope, that at last this deadly Issue
might stop, and dry up, and leave a Possibility of a Blessed Recovery.

14. THOU art amazed with Grief, to see the Pestilence raging in our Streets,
in so frequent a Mortality, as breeds a question concerning the number of the
Living and the Dead: That which is wont to abate other Miseries, heightens
this; the Company of Participants: It was certainly a hard and sad Option, that
God gave to David, after his numbering the People: Choose thee whether Seven
Years Famine shall come unto thee in thy Land, or three Months Flight before
thine Enemies, or two days Pestilence, 2 Samuel 24.13. We may believe him when we
hear him say, I am in a great Strait; but his wise Resolutions soon brought him
out: Let us fall now into the hands of the Lord, (for his Mercies are great)
And let me not fall into the hands of Man, 2 Samuel 24.14. He that sent these
Evils, know their Value, and the difference of their Malignity.

15. YET he opposes three days Pestilence, to seven Years Famine, and three
Months Vanquishment: He knew there was advantage betwixt the dull Activity of
Man, and the quick Dispatch of an Angel! It was a favor that the Angel, who in
One Night destroyed an Hundred fourscore and five thousand Assyrians, 2 King.
19.35. should in three days cut off but Seventy thousand Israelites: But the
Almighty in his Judgments remembers Mercy. We read of Grand Cairo, wherein
Eighteen hundred thousand were swept away in one Years Pestilence; enough one
would imagine, to have De-Populated the whole Earth: And in our Chronicles of
so general a Mortality, that the Living were hardly sufficient to Bury the
Dead. In the Year, 1624, died of the Plague in one Week, Four thousand four
hundred sixty three; and in our last Visitation, 1665, was a larger Number: In
one Week, Seven thousand one hundred sixty and five; and in the whole Year,
Sixty eight thousand five hundred ninety six. It was his tender Mercy, that he
spared any Alive: But he Wounds, that he may Heal; and in wounding, heals us;
for his Compassions fails not to us Sinners.

16. THESE are dreadful demonstrations of God's Displeasure; but there is this
alleviation of our Misery, that we suffer more immediately from a Holy, Just
and Merciful God. The Kingly Prophet had never made that distinction in his
Choice, if he had not known a difference betwixt the Sword of an Angel, and an
Enemy; betwixt God's more direct and immediate Infliction, and the Malice of
Men. It was but a poor Consolation given by a Victorious Enemy to dying Lausus;
Comfort thy self in thy Death with this, that thou fallest by the Hand of
Aeneas. But surely, we have just Reason to Comfort our Souls, when a
Pestilential Death compasses us about, from the Thought and Intuition of that
Gracious Hand, under which we suffer: So as we can say with good Eli, It is the
Lord.

17. IT is not amiss to nominate those Ma^ks of Infection, God's Tokens; such
they are, and ought to Summon up our Eyes and Hearts to that Almighty Power
that sends them, with the Resolution of Holy Job; Tho thou kill me, yet will I
trust in thee. It is none of the least Miseries of Contagious Sickness, for it
bars us from the Comfortable Society and Attendance of Friends; or else repays
their Love, and kind Visitation with Death. Be not dismayed with this Solitude;
thou have Company with thee, whom no Infection can endanger or exclude: There
is an invisible Friend, that will be sure to adhere to thee, though thou art
avoided by Neighbors; and will make all thy Bed in thy Sickness, and supply
thee with those Cordials, which thou in vain expect'st from earthly Visitants.

18. INDEED, justly do we style this Sickness; for the Mortalness, and
Generality of the Dispersion: Yet there is a Remedy, that can cure and confine
it: Let but every one inspect the Plague of his own heart, and the Land is
healed. Can we, with David, see the Angel that smites us, and erect an Altar;
and offer God the Sacrifices of our Prayers, Penitence and Obedience, we shall
hear him say, It is enough, 2 Samuel 24.16. His Mercies are everlasting, and
Remedies certain: Be we but Penitent, we cannot be Miserable.

19. WE soon forgot this Visitation; loss of Friends, and God's Judgments, (and
thought, with foolish Agag, that Surely the Bitterness of Death is past, 1 Samuel
15.32.) and provoked him still to Wrath against us; we must have after our
Contagion, a Purgation by Fire; which the best Naturalists say, is a proper
Remedy against Infection; the Almighty seeing it necessary to use this
Prescription, prepared it into a Medicine: That great Conflagration, which
consumed most part of our City to Ashes: It was dreadful to behold, and made
most tremble; yet what signs of Remorse do we show? What Vanity (I fear I may
ask, what Vice) have we subtracted, upon the Sense of God's Anger? What nicety
in Clothes or Diet have we cut off, in sympathy with the Nakedness and Hunger
of our afflicted Brethren? Nay, do not the unreasonable Jollities among us look
as if we triumphed in their Miseries, found Music in the Discordant Sound of
their Groans, and our own Laughter; and emulated that infamous Barbarity of
Nero, who played while Rome burned? It Is mentioned by the Prophet, as a most
prepost'rous thing, a kind of impious Solecism, to revel under the Menace of
Judgments: Amos 4.11. I have over-thrown some of you, as God over-threw Sodom
and Gomorrah, and ye were as a Firebrand plucked out of the Burning: yet have
ye not returned to me, says the Lord.

20. FIRE is the Eagle in Nature; nothing in the Elementary World mounts so
high to its Place, and stoops so low to its Prey: The two Properties God
himself ascribes to that Bird, Job 39.27, 30. And if we still refuse
obstinately to be gathered like Chickins under our Lord's Wings, he can again
let loose this Bird of Prey, this Eagle of Heaven, upon us: and from the East,
where it began before, fly it home like Lightning even to the utmost West, to
seize and to devour wherever there is the least Quarry remaining.

21. NEXT, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, and the rest that Hell, and Rome, and
their Partisans, our Enemies on all hands, both Foreign and Domestic, have
been so long Confederate against us, saying; Come, and let us root them out,
that they be no more a People; that the Name of that Reformed Church of
England, may be no more in remembrance: They have often attempted to bring
about their malicious Designs; and yet have not been able to seize us: To what
can we justly ascribe all this, but to the gracious Protection of the Almighty,
to whom we must fly for Defense and Aid.

22. AND now, when restless and unquiet Men, (the true Spawn of him, whose Tail
drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and cast them to the Earth) would
fain by their Hellish Plots and Contrivances, bring us down again from thence,
even down to the Ground, and lay our Honor in the Dust: When by their secret
Machinations they are at work on all sides to hurry us back into the old
Confusions; in hope, that out of that disordered Mass, they may at length rear
up a new World of their own; but what a World? A World made up of a new Heaven
of Superstitions and Idolatries: A new Earth too of Anarchy first and pretended
Liberty; but of Tyranny insufferable, at the next Remove.

23. IN such a dangerous State of Affairs as this, whether should we, (nay,
whether else can we) seek for Help and Deliverance, but under his Protections;
the stretching out of whose Arms of Providence, fills the Breadth of thy Land,
O England! He can make these Cockatrice Eggs; on which this Generation of
Vipers (that eat out the the Bowels of their Mother) have sat so long abrood,
windy and addle: So that out of the Serpents Root, shall never proceed an Adder
to bite us, or a fiery flying Serpent to Devour us. He can confound these Babel
Builders, with their City, Tower and Temple; their Foreign Policy, and strange
Worship; their Novel Modes, and Models of Governmnet in Church and State, and
scatter them abroad from hence upon the Face of the Earth, like as a Dream when
one awaketh: So shall he despise their Images and their Imaginations too, and
make their whole Contrivance consume away like a Snail, and Become like the
untimely Fruit of a Woman, which shall never see the Sun.

24. AND And now let us cry mightily unto God, and say, Remember not, Lord, our
Offenses, nor the Offenses of our Forefathers, neither take thou Vengeance of
our Sins: Spare us good Lord, spare thy People, whom thou have Redeemed with
thy most Precious Blood; and be not angry with us for ever. And good Lord,
deliver us from Lightning and Tempest; from Plague, Pestilence, F^mine and
Fire; from Battle and Murder, and from sudden Death: From all Sedition and
Faction, Privy Conspiracy and Rebellion; from all false Doctrine, Heresy and
Schism; from hardness of Heart, and Contempt of the World and Commandment,
Libera nos Domine.

A Prayer in time of Public Calamity.
O THOU God of Justice, I humbly beseech thee, in this thy Wrath, to remember
Mercy: We confess O Lord, our Guilt flasheth in our Faces, and Woe unto us, for
we have Sinned: We have not kept the way of the Lord, but perfidiously departed
from thee our God; the Wise has trusted in his Wisdom, the Strong in his
Strength, and the Rich in his Riches: Thus have we brought our selves under the
Curse, by trusting in the Arm of Flesh, and the Balances of Deceit are in our
Hands, and throughout the whole course of our Lives, we have wrought a
deceitful Work.

2. BUT, O God, bow down thy Ear unto our Prayers; attend unto the voice of our
Supplications; create in us new Hearts, O God, and renew right Spirits within
us: We have all been Examples of Sin; O make us all Examples of Reformation,
that old things may pass away, and all things may become new. Deliver us, O
Lord, from these Public Calamities which we so Righteously have deserved, and
let not thy Displeasure arise any more against us; and grant that we may serve
thee for the future, in Holiness and Righteousness, all the days of our Lives.
Amen.

SECT. VIII. Loss of Friends.
1. THOU have lost thy Friend: Thy Sorrow is just; the Earth has nothing more
precious, than what thou have parted with: For what is a Friend, but a Man's
self? A Soul divided in two Bodies, and animated by the same Spirit. It is
somewhat worse with thee than a Palsied Man, whose half is stricken with
Numbness; he has lost but the use of one side of his Body, thou the half of
thy Soul: Or may I not with assurance say, that a true Friend has two Souls in
one Body; his Own and his Friend's; It was so with Jonathan and David; The Soul
of Jonathan was knit with the Soul of David; and Jonathan loved him as his own
Soul, 1 Samuel 18.1.

2. STILL the more Goodness, the stronger Union; Nature can never so fast
Cement Souls as Grace: For here the Union is wrought by a better Spirit than
our own; even that blessed Spirit who sti^es himself Love, 1 John 4.18. The
greater thine Affection, the heavier thy Loss: But let me t^^l the, I fear thou
art accessory to thine own Affl^ction: Did thou expect this Loss? Did thy
Heart say, What if we should part? Did thou not ov^^ enjoy this Blessing? If
so, these are no small Disadvantages.

3. AS every Evil, so this especially is aggravated by our Unexpectation:
Neither had thou been so oppressed with Sorrow: if thou had foreseen it: It
is our weak inconsideration if we welcome these Earthly Comforts not as Guests,
but Inmates, some are importunately Hospitable, to entertain their Friends,
that they have no power to let 'em Depart: Whereas, we ought according to the
Advice of Seneca, to possess 'em, as those that make account to fore-go 'em,
and fore-go 'em as if we possessed 'em. And the Apostle St. Paul gives us this
Advice, to Use this World as if we used it not; for the fashion of this world
passes away, 1 Cor. 7.30, 31.

4. THOU art grieved for the loss of a Dear Friend: Take heed, lest thy Love
had too much of Humanity, and too little of the Deity. All Blessings as they
flow from the Father of Mercies, should be enjoyed in him: But if we enjoy 'em
as in themselves, our Love degenerates into Carnal. It is a sure Rule, that Love
depends upon the thing affected; but when that cease, Love is Extinguished:
As he that loves a Face for Beauty, when Deformity appears, it cools his
Affection: He that respects a Man for Bounty, disregards him when he is
Impoverished.

5. DID thou value thy Friend for Wit, Complaisance and kind Offices? All
these are lost, and thy Love with them: But if thou did affect him for
Eminency in Goodness, for the sake of God that dwelt in him, thy Love cannot be
lost; because thou enjoy'st God, in whom thou loved'st him. Comfort thy self
therefore in God, in whom he was thine, and yielded him cheerfully into those
Hands, from whom thou receiv'st him.

6. THOU have lost a true Friend: That Jewel was to be prized for the rarity of
it. The World affords Friends enough, such as they are: Friends of the Purple,
as Tertullian calls them; Friends of the Basket, as the Poet nominates them;
such as love thy Loaves and Fishes, and thee for them. Wealth makes many
Friends, says the Wise Man, Prove. 14.20. and Chap. 19.4. But where is the Man,
that loves thee for thy self, for being Virtuous, divested of all By-respects?
Whilst there is Honey in thy Pot, the Wasps and Flies will be buzzing about
it; but the Honey being gone, the Vessel remains quiet.

7. WAS he so much thine, as not to leave thee in Adversity? Did he honor
thee, when the World despised thee? Did he follow with Applause, whilst thou
were hooted at by the Multitude? Would he have owned thee, if he had found thee
stripped and wounded in the Wilderness? Such a Friend is worthy of thy Tears:
But take heed, thy Love prove not envious. If God has thought him fitter for
Society of Saints and Angels, do thou repine at his happiness? Thou have lost
his Presence; he is advanced to the Beatifical Presence of the King of Glory:
Now Whether is thy Loss, or his Gain the greater.

8. THOU have lost thy Friend: Say rather, Thou have parted with him. That is
properly lost, which is past Recovery, and past hopes to see any more: It is
not so with this Friend thou mourn'st for: He is but gone Home before thee; and
thou art following him: You will both meet in your Father's House, and enjoy
each other more happily, than you could have done here below. How just is that
Charge of the Blessed Apostle; That we should not mourn as Men without Hope,
for those that do but sleep in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13, 14. Did we think their
Souls vanished into Air, (as that Heathen Poet profanely expresses it) and
their Bodies resolved into Dust, without all Possibility of Reparation, we
might weep out our Eyes for the utter Extinction of those we loved: But if They
do but sleep, they shall do well, John 11.12. Why are we Impatient for their
Reposal in the Bed of Earth, when assured of their waking to Glory?

9. THOU have lost a Dear Wife, the Wife of thy Youth, the desire of thine
Eyes, Prove. 5.18. Isa. 54.6. Ezekiel. 24.16. Did you not take each other upon
Terms of Re-delivery, when called for? Were you not, in Uniting, put in mind of
Dissolution? Till Death us do part. Was she Virtuous? Know thou not, there
was a Pre-Contract betwixt Christ and her Soul, ere thou could Claim her
Body? And can thou grudge his Challenge of his own? Will thou not allow him
to call for a Consummation of that happy Match? Did thou so affect her, that
thou would not have her Soul Glorious? If thou loved'st her not as a Man,
but a Christian, envy her not that better Husband, who for her Dowry, gives
Immortality.

10. THY Son is dead: What marvel is it, that a Mortal Father has begot a
Mortal Son? Marvel rather, that thou have lived to enjoy, and lose a Son. We
lie open to so many Casualties, that our Subsistence is almost Miraculous. Thou
have lost a piece of thy self: For what are Children* bu^ Colonies deduced from
our Flesh; yea, rather, our selves in other Models. This loss cannot but go
near thee: But what was the Disposi^ion of the Son thou mournest for? If
graceless and debauched, as thy Shame, so thy sorrow should die with him. Place
the hopes thou might have had if his Reclaiming, against the Fears of his
increasing in Wickedness, and thou could have made no other Account, but of
Dishonor and Discomfort.

11. IF it be sad, that he is taken away in his Wildness; it had been more
heavy, had he added to the heap of Sin, to augment his Torments. If he were
Gracious, he has a better Father than thy self, whose Interest was more in
him, than thine: And if that Heavenly Father have thought good to prefer him to
a Crown of Immortal Glory, why should thou be afflicted with his
Advancement? Why should thou not rather rejoice, that thy Loins have
assisted to furnish Heaven with a Saint? Were it put to thy Choice, that thy
Son might be called from his Blessed Rest, and return to his Earthly Relations;
Could thou be so injurious, as to wish the Misery of so disadvantagious a
Change to to that Soul; which, as it was never of thy Production, so it were
pity it should be at thy disposing? Rather labor to have thine own Soul so
disposed, that it may be ready to follow him into those Blessed Mansions, and
that it may love and long for Heaven so much more to dwell among the Spirits of
the Just made perfect.

A Prayer against Immoderate Grief for the Loss of Friends
O GOD, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, thou killest and make alive,
thou bring to the Grave, and bring back again: And forasmuch as it has
pleased thee to take from us out of this Sinful World the Soul of this thy
Servant, Here name the Particular Person.
grant that our grief for this affliction may not be immoderate whereby we may
displease thee, or so overwhelm us, that we make our selves unfit for thy
service; but sanctify, we beseech thee, unto us this thy Fatherly Correction,
that we may endeavor to live every day, as if it were to be our last, that
when we are Summoned and Arrested by the hand of Death, We may not be
afrighted, by that King of Terrors.

2. LORD, we are here in a state of banishment, and absent from thee, O take us
where we shall for ever behold thy Face, and follow the Lamb whether soever he
goes; and that at the last hour we may pronounce with a good Conscsence, we
have fought a good fight, we have finished our Ceurse, we have kept the Faith,
henceforth, there is laid up for us a Crown of Righteousness, which God the
Righteous Judge will freely give to those that Love and Fear him, and trust in
his Mercy, Amen.

SECT. IX. Of Poverty.
1. THOU art driven to Indigency, and which is worse, out of abundance: Those
Evils we have been inured to from our Cradle, are grown so familiar, that we
are little moved with their Presence: But those into which we fall suddenly,
out of an external Felicity of Estate, overwhelm us. Let thy Care be, not to
want those Riches, which shall make thy Soul happy; and thou shall not be
troubled with the loss of these mean and perishing Trifles. Had these been true
Riches, they could not have been lost: For that Good that is least capable of
Loss, and unsatisfying in an imperfect Fruition, so in the losing it turns Evil.

2. DID thou not know, That Riches have Wings to fly away? Prove. 23.5. And
of what use is Wings, if not to fly? If any Man's Violence shall clip those
Wings, they take their flight. Set thy heart upon that Supreme Wealth, which
cannot be taken from thee, which shall never leave thee, nor forsake thee; then
thou may easily slight these poor Losses. As these were not Goods, so they
were not thine: Here thou foundest them, and here leave them: For the Apostle
Timothy informs us, 1 Timothy 6, 7. We brought nothing into this World; and it is
certain, we can carry nothing out. What had thou but their use? Neither can
they be otherwise thine Heirs, whom thou leavest behind thee I am ashamed, to
hear the Philosopher say, All I possess I carry about me; when many Christians
hug those things which are so Transitory.

3. IT was an unanswerable Question, God moved to the Rich Man in the Parable,
upon parting with his Soul: Then whose shall those things be, which thou have
provided? Luke 12.20. Perhaps a Strangers, or (as ^n the Case of undisposed
Lands) the Occupants, false Executors, or an Enemies. Call that thine own thou
art sure to carry with thee; that may accompany thy Soul, or follow it: Such as
thy Holy Graces, Charitable Works, Virtuous Actions, and Heavenly Dispositions:
These are Treasures, which thou shall Lay up for thy self in Heaven, where
neither Moth nor Rust does Corrupt; and where Thieves do not break through, nor
steal, Mat. 6.20.

4. THOU have lost thy Goods: May I not rather say, Thou have restored 'em? He
parted with more, that said; The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, Job
1.21. Whether by Patrimony, or Providence, or Industry, the Lord gave it; and
whether by the Chaldeans or Sabeans, the Lord has taken it; and he did but
give, and takes his own. What Reason have thou then to complain? It was not
given, but lent thee for a while, till it were called for? And do thou
grudge to restore what thou borrowest? Nay, (that thou may have less Claim to
this Talent) was it not left in thy hand, by the Owner, to employ it for his
Use, till he should redemand it, with the Increase? Thou were only entrusted to
improve, and account for it. If others have taken off thy Charge, by thy
impoverishment, they have eased thee.

5. THY Wealth is gone: But if thou have Necessaries left? Be thankful for what
thou have, and forget what thou did possess. Had thou had plenty, thou
could have used no more than Nature calls for; the rest could have but lain
by thee, for readiness of Employment: Do but forbear the Thought of
Superfluities, and what art thou the worse? Perhaps thy Fare is courser, Dishes
fewer, Utensils meaner, Apparel homelier, and thy Train shorter; But how is thy
Mind affected? Contentment consists not in Quantities, nor Qualities, but in
the inward Disposition of the Heart; that multiplies Numbers, and raises
Prizes; turns course Freezes into rich Velvets, Pulse into Delicates, and makes
one Attendant many Officers.

6. WISE Seneca tells thee, the true Mould of Wealth is our Body, as the Last
is of the Shoe; if the Shoe be too big for the Foot, it is troublesome and
useless: It is Fitness, that is regarded here, not Magnitude: And this is the
Charge of the Blessed Apostle; Having Food and Raiment, let us there with be
content, 1 Timothy 6.8. And if we have no more, we shall be but as we were, and as
we shall be: For we brought nothing into the World, neither shall we carry any
thing out, 1 Timothy 6.7.

7. THOU have parted with thy Wealth; perhaps for thine Advantage: How many
have been swelled with Plenty, resembling the Ostrich or Bustard with the Bulk
of Body, unweldly to raise their Thoughts to Spiritual Things; who when their
Weight have been taken off, have mounted nimbly toward Heaven? How many had
lost their Lives, if (with the Philosopher) they had not parted with their God?
and, how many through Covetousness, may loss their Souls? The Vessel had sunk
in this boisterous Sea, if the Earthly Freight had not been cast overboard?
and why art thou troubled to lose that, which might have undone thee in keeping?

8. THOU had Wealth: Have thou not parted with that, for which many has
been worse both in Body and Soul; and for which never any Soul was better? Have
not Cornfieldsd been spoiled with Rankness, and a Branch spilt with too much
Fruit? Whereas had they been thinner sown, or seasonably eaten down, had
yielded a fair Crop; and those Boughs moderately laden, had outlived many
Autumns. Do thou not hear thy Savior say, How hardly shall they that have
Riches enter into the Kingdom of God? Mat. 10.23. Art thou troubled that a
Stumbling block is removed out of thy way to Happiness? That the Bunch of the
Camel is taken off, if yet thou will pass through the Eye of the Needle?

9. THOU had Riches? But had thou not Cares attended 'em? Else thou have
fared better than thy Neighbors. None but thy self could handle these Roses
without pricking their Fingers. He was famous amongst the Jewish Doctors, whose
Maxim was; He that multiplies Riches, multiplies Cares: And our Savior has
annexed, The Cares of the World, and the Deceitfulness of Riches, Mark 4.19. He
was envied at Rome, which could experimently say, The poor Man laughs oftener
and freer than the Rich; and that external Felicity is a perplexity, never
ceasing to vex it self. Thy sides are now freed from Thorns, why do thou
repine at thine Ease?

10. THOU lately possessed'st great Riches: But rather say, Thou were possessed
by them? A wise Roman truly observed, That many a one has Wealth, which clogs
him, as many aptly say, Such a one has an Ague, when indeed the Ague has him,
and holds him with severity. Indeed, many a Man's Wealth is his Master, and
keeps under rigid Articles, not allowing sufficient Diet, Competent Rest, nor
any Recreation: If thou were thus a Slave to thine Estate, thou art not thine
own Man; enjoy thy Liberty, and with thy Patience, be thankful.

THOU art very poor: Who made thee so? If thy Negligence, Laziness,
Improvidence, Prodigality and rash Engagements; thou have reason to bear that
Burden, which thou have pulled upon thy Shoulders: And if forced to groan
under thy Load, which thy own Will has procured in this Necess^ty; let the
same Necessity move thy Will to run as lightly as thou can with that pressing
Weight: If the Occasion comes by others, God will enable thee cheerfully to
fly with this Cross, because thy Hand was not Guilty of imposing it.

12. HOW easy is it for thee to see God's Hand chastising thee by another
Man's Sin? And to be grieved as the Sin of others Injuriousness, than at thine
own Correction. How dismal it is for Christians to see Brethren a Prey to each
other? That Neighbors should be like the Reed and Brake, set near together,
the one to Starve the other? That we should have daily occasion to renew that
woeful Comparison of Bromiard, betwixt the Friends and Enemies of Christ; That
Jews don't suffer Beggars, but Christians make them?

13. NOW, if God thinks fit to send Poverty to thy Door, by the Message of Men,
bid it Welcome for his sake that sent it, and entertain it, not repiningly, for
its own sake; for if well used, 'twill repay thee with many Blessings; as quiet
Rest, safe Security, humble Patience, contented Humility, and a contemptuous
Valuation of Earthly Things! All which absented thy House in a Prosperous
Condition.

14. THOU art deprived of thy former Conveniences, as Diet, Lodging, and
Attendance. How many have affected that which is befallen thee upon Necessity?
Some out of the Grounds of Philosophy, others of Religion. Attalus the
Philosopher, might have lain Soft; yet he Praises the Bed and Pillow that will
not yield to his Body: And Nero's great and rich Master, brags of his usual
dining without a Table. What should I tell then of the Pharisees uneasy
Couches and penal Garments; the Mats of the Elect Manichees, and the austere
Usages of the ancient Eremitical Christians, their rigorous Abstinences,
affamishing Meals, nightly Watchings, cold Ground-lyings, and sharp
Disciplines? Thou art in Ease and Splendour, in comparison of these, who
voluntarily imposed upon 'em these Severeties, which thou would be loath to
undergo from others Cruelty. It was a strange word of Epicurus, not savouring
of Contentment, but Presumption; Give me but Water with Barley-Meal, and I
shall vie with Jupiter for Happiness. And if this Ethnic, who had an ill Name
for Affectation of Pleasure, could rest so well contented with a poor Mess of
this Composition, what a shame it is for Christians not to think themselves
satisfied with a larger (tho homely Provision?

A Prayer in time of Poverty.
O MOST Great and Glorious Lord God, the Earth is thine, and thy Providence
divides it among the Sons of Men; thou make Poor, and thou make Rich; thou
bring low, and liftest up the Needy out of the Dust, that he may Glorify
thee: Thou art the Savior and Deliverer of the Fatherless, and him that has
no helper: Lord, behold my Necessities, who despisest not the Needy; tho thou
have Afflicted me, yet Strengthen me so, that my Wants may never cast me down
to despair of thy Favor, nor endeavor their supply by any thing which
offends thee; and whatever I want, let me never want the comfortable
assurance of thy Love and Mercy, neither take thy holy Spirit from me.

2. BE my Strength in Distress, a Refuge from the Storm, and a Shadow from the
Heat. O thou who art the God of all Consolation, supply I beseech thee, my
Necessities, hear me, and make speed to relieve me; forsake me not, O my God;
open the high Places, and the Fountains in the midst of the Valleys for the
Thirsty Soul: Let thy hand relieve me, until thou shall be pleased to bring me
into thy blessed Presence, where is fullness of Joy, without want, measure, or
end: Lord, sanctify those Wants unto me, make me rich in Faith, and those
Spiritual Treasures, which once had, shall never be lost again. Grant me these
things O merciful God, and whatever else thou know necessary for me, for the
sake of thy dear Son, my ever Blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

SECT. X. Of Confinement.
1. THOU art restrained of thy Liberty: I cannot blame thee to be sensible of
the Affliction. Liberty uses to hold competition with Life it self: And how
many have lost their Lives to purchase Liberty? But take care that thou art not
guilty of thine own Complaint, for certainly thou can not be deprived of
Liberty, except thou will: Liberty is a privilege of the Will: Will is a
Sovereign Power, not subject to Restraint, or Constraint.

2. HAVE thou freedom to thine own Thoughts? It is not the Enclosing of these
external Parts that can make thee a Prisoner: Thou art not worthy the name of a
Man, if thou imagin'st this Body thy self, which Human Power can reach to. Art
thou a Christian? Then thou have learned to submit thy Will to God's; and his
Divine Will is declared in his Actions: And if his will be to have thee
Restrained, why should it not be thine? And if thou desire to be Confined, why
do thou complain for want of Liberty?

3. THGU art Restrained: And is it such Injustice thou art deprived from
ranging Abroad? How ill have thou improved thy Time, if thou have not laid up
enough both of Employment and Contentment in thy Bosom? What pleasure can
thou enjoy abroad to behold those Contentions and horrid Actions thine Eye
shall meet withal; which thy Confinement frees thee from being a Spectator. The
Thought is enough to make a Man Miserable: And instead of them, thou art
presented only with the Face of thy Keeper, which Custom and Necessity has
made Familiar.

4. THOU art immured within Stone-Walls, and all Company secluded from thee;
but content thy self: God and his Angels cannot be kept out: Thou have better
Company in Solitude, than Liberty afforded thee: The Jollity of Freedom robbed
thee of the Conversation of Spiritual Comforts, which only can render thee
Happy: They which were Strangers to thee, are thy Guests and Inmates, to
Sojourn with thee in this Retiredness. What if the Light be excluded from thee?
It cannot hinder thee from seeing the Invisible. The Darkness hides not from
thee (says the Psalmist) but the Night shines as the Day; the Darkness and
the Light are both alike to thee, Psalm. 139.12.

5. I may say without dubiousness, God has never been so evidently seen, as in
darkest Dungeons; for the external Light of Prosperity directs our Visive
Beams, which are strongly contracted in a deep Obscurity: He must descend low
and be in Darkness, that would see the glorious Lights of Heaven by day. They
ever shine, but not seen except in the Night: If thine Eyes be blessed with
this invisible Prospect, thou art exempt from envying those Persons, tho they
could see all that the Tempter represented to the view of our Savior upon the
highest Mountain; All the Kingdoms of the World and the Glory of them.

6. THOU art forced to Retiredness, but with what Disposition of Mind and Body?
If thou had a burdened Soul, the open and free Air could not refresh thee;
and if thou have a sincere Heart, a strict Closeness cannot dismay thee; thy
Thoughts can keep thee Company, and cheer thy Solitariness. If thou had an
unsound Body, afflicted with the Gout, Rupture, or Luxation of some Limb, thou
would not complain of thy Retiredness; thy Pain would make thee insensible of
thy Confinement: But if God have blessed thee with Health, how easily may
thou digest an harmless Limitation.

7. A Wise Man (as Laurentius observed) does much in Solitude: So may thou
employ the Hours of thy close Retiredness, and bless God for so happy an
Opportunity. How memorable an Instance has our Age afforded us, of an Eminent
Person, to whose Learning we are all obliged for that noble History of the
World. Sir Walter Rawleigh.
The Court had his Youthful Years* and the Tower his latter Age: The Tower
Reformed the Court in him, and produced these worthy Monuments of Art and
Industry, which we should in vain expected from his Freedom and Jollitry. It is
observed, that shining Wood, within doors loses its Light: It is otherwise
with this, and many active Wits, which had never shined if not for Confinement.

8. THOU art close shut up: Anchorets have sued for this as a Favor, which
thou esteemest a Punishment; and having obtained it, have placed Merit in that
thou apprehend'st Misery. Our History relates of one, who when the Church,
Where his Cell was annexed, was on Fire, would not come out, but Die, and lie
Buried under the Ashes of that Roof where his Vow had fixed him.

9. THOU art Imprisoned: Wise Men are apt in all Events, to enquire into the
Causes: Wherefore do thou suffer? Is it for thy Guiltiness? Make thy Goal
God's Correction-House, for the reforming of thy Wickedness. Remember and
imitate Manasses, the evil Son of a good Father; who upon Humiliation by his
just Imprisonment, found an happy Expiation of his horrible Idolatries, Muders
and Witchcrafts; whose Bonds brought him home to God, and himself. Is it for
Debt? Think not to pay thy Creditors with a lingering Durance, if power be in
thine hands for a Discharge. If there is Fraud and Injustice in this
Confinement: Fear thou a worse Prison, if thou will wilfully live and die
Indebted when thou may be Free and Honest.

10. STRETCH thine ability to the utmost, to satisfy others, tho thou art
Impoverished: But if the hand of God have disabled thee, labor what thou can
to agree with thy Creditors: If they are Cruel, look up with Patience to the
Almighty, who thinks fit to afflict thee with their Unreasonableness; and make
the same good use of thy Sufferings, as if from the immediate Hand of thy
Creator. If it be for a good Cause, rejoice in this Tribulation, and be
exhilerated with the Blessed Apostles, that thou art Counted worthy to suffer
shame and bonds for the Name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 5.41. For every just Cause
he owns: Neither is he less a Martyr, that suf^ers for his Conscience in any of
God's Commandments, than he who suffers for matter of Faith and Religion.

11. REMEMBER that Cordial Word of thy Savior: Blessed are they that are
persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
5.10. In such a Prison thou shall be sure to find good Company; as Joseph,
Micaiah, Jeremiah, John Baptist, Peter, Paul and Silas; and all the Holy
Martyrs and Confessors of Christ, from the first Plantation of the Gospel to
this present. Repent, if thou can, to be thus accompanied; and choose not
rather to violate a good Conscience for freedom, than to be kept under a
Momentary Restraint.

12. THOU art a Prisoner: Make the best of thy Condition: close Air is warmer
than open; and how frequently do we hear Birds sing sweeter Notes in Cages than
in Woods? It is thy defect, if thou art not amended by thy Retir'dness. Thou
art a Prisoner: So is thy Soul in thy Body; there not restrained only, but
fettered; yet complains not of the straitness of these Clay-Walls, or weight of
those Bonds; but patiently waits for a happy Go^l-delivery: So do thou attend
with all Long-suffering the good hour of the Pleasure of God: Thy period is
set, not without regard to thy Advantage: He, in whose hand are all Times, has
determined a sit time to free thy Body from these Prison-Walls, and thy Soul
from this Prison of thy Body: and to restore Body and Soul from the Bondage of
Corruption, to the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21.

A Prayer in Confinement:
O Holy, Lord God, who would not the death of a Sinner, but rather that he
should turn from his Wickedness and live: Lord, Convert my Soul, remove my
Sins, and frame my Heart, Affections and Life, according to thy blessed Will:
Thou who hear the Poor, and despisest not the Wretched Captive, visit all
that are bound: Lord, hear them in an acceptable time, and help them in the day
of Salvation: Preserve the Oppressed and Despised of Men: Say unto the
Prisoners, go forth, and to them that are in Darkness show your Selves: Bind up
the Broken Hearted, proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and open the Prison to
them that are shut up: Comfort them that Mourn, let their deep Sighing come
before thee: And according to the greatness of thy Power, preserve thou them
that are appointed to dye.

2. LORD, lift thou up my head, enlarge my feet, and bring me out of all
bondage, that I may live to serve and praise thee, in the Assembly of thy
Servants: However thou please to dispose of me, Let all my Sufferings redound
to thy Glory, and my own Salvation: Give me Patience to endure, and a constancy
to depend on thee, a firm Faith to apprehend thy Promises, and a hope to expect
thy Saving Health: Consider my Weakness, and lay no more upon me, then thou will Enable me to bear cheerfully: Sanctify my Afflictions, and make them good
to me in the Fruits of Righteousness, which thou have laid up for all those who
rest on thee. Hear me, O Lord, and let my Cry come unto thee, and have Mercy
upon me. Amen.

SECT. XI. In Exile.
1. THOU art banished thy Country: Beware lest in Complaining, thou censure thy
self. A wise Man's Country is every where. What relation has the Place of thy
Nativity, to thy present Station; any more than the Time of thy Residing? What
Reason have thou to be more affected to the Region where thou drewest thy first
Breath, than to the day of Week, or the Hour of the Day in which thou salutest
the Light? What are Times and Places of our Birth, but unconcerning
Circumstances? Wherever thou enjoy'st thy self, thou may make that thy
Country.

2. BUT thou say; There is a secret Property in our Native Soil, that
attracts our Affection, and weds our Hearts to it, not without a pleasing kind
of Delight; now no Reason can be granted, why we affect the Place, it is not
because better than others, but being our own we esteem it: Ulysses does no
less value the Rocky Soil of his barren Ithaca, than Agamemnon the noble Walls
of his rich and pleasant Mycenae. I grant this Relation has so powerful an
Influence upon our hearts naturally, as is pretended; yet such a one as is
easily checked with a small unkindness: How many upon an actual Affront have
diverted their Respects from their Native Country, and out of a strong
Alenation of Mind have turned their Love into Hostility.

3. WE shall not seek far for Histories, our Times and Memories will furnish us
sufficiently: Some who have sucked the Breasts of our common Mother, upon a
little dislike, have spit in her Face? Others of our Domestic Compatriots,
have upon the disgust of some displeasing Laws fled their Country, suborned
Treasons, and incited Foreign Princes to our Invasion? That have endeavored
to subvert the Government, extirpate that Religion Established amongst us; and
to set up a piece of Pageantry of their own? So this Natural Affection is not
so ardent in many, but may be quenched with a mean Coffeehouse. If there
were no other ground of thine Affliction, thy Sorrow is not so deep-rooted but
it may easily be plucked up.

4. PERHAPS it is not the Air or Earth, thou insists upon; but the Company,
from whom it is Death to part: Thou arguest, I shall leave all Acquaintance and
Conversation; and be cast upon strange Faces, and Languages I understand not:
My best Entertainment will be Solitude, and my Ordinary, Inhospitality. What
do thou perplex thy self with these superfluous Terrors? He is not worthy
the Name of a Philosopher, much less of a Christian, that has not attained to
be absolute in himself; and which way soever he is cast, to stand upon his own
Bottom; that if there were no other Men left in the World, was ignorant how to
enjoy himself: It is that within us, whereby we must live and be happy: Some
Additions of Complacency may come from without: Sociable Natures find Pleasure
in Conversation; but if that be denied, Sanctified Spirits know how to converse
comfortably with God and themselves.

5. HOW many holy Ones of old have purposely withdrawn themselves from Worldly
Company, that they might be blessed with an invisible Society; that have
exchanged Cities for Deserts, Houses for Caves, the Sight of Men for Beasts;
that their Spiritual Eyes might be fixed upon those Objects, which the World
held from them? And necessity puts thee into that Estate, which their Piety
affected. But to be driven to forsake Parents, Kinsfolk, Friends, how sad a
Case must it needs be? What is this, but a perfect Distraction? What are we,
but Offsprings of our Parents? What are Friends, but dear to us? And what is
the World without these Comforts?

6. WHEN thou have said all; what is befa^n thee more, than it pleased God to
enjoin the Father of the Faithful? Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy
Kindred, and from thy Fathers House, into a Land that I will show thee, Genesis
13.1. The same God, by the Command of Authority, calls thee to this Separation:
If thou will show thy self worthy the Son of such a Father, do that in an
humble Obedience to God, which thou art urged to do by Compulsion of Men.

7. BUT is this so vexatious a Case? Do thou think to find God where thou
go? Or do thou believe his Company will attend thee to the End of thy
Journey? Has he not said, who cannot fail; I will not leave thee, nor forsake
thee? Certainly, he is not worthy to lay Claim to God, that cannot find
Parents, Kindred and Friends in him alone: Besides, he that of Stones could
raise up Children unto Abraham; how easily can he of Inhospitable Men, raise up
Friends to the Sons of Abraham? Only labor to inherit that Faith wherein he
walked; that alone shall free Denizen thee in the best of Foreign States, and
shall entertain thee in the wildest Deserts.

8. THOU art cast upon a Foreign Nation: Be of good Cheer: Flowers removed grow
greater; and some Plants, which were unthriving and unwholsom in their own
Soil, have grown safe and flourishing in other Climates. Had Joseph been great,
if not transplanted into Egypt? Had Daniel, and his three Companions of the
Captivity ever attained honor in their Native Land? Many have found that
health, in a Change of Air, which they could not meet at home? In Africa, the
South Wind clears up; and the North is Rainy. Look still to that hand, which
translated thee; wait his good Pleasure: Be thou no Stranger to God; it matters
not who are Strangers to thee.

9. THOU art banished: How can thou be so, when upon thy Fathers Ground? The
Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; the World, and they that dwell
therein, Psalm. 24.1 In his Right, wherever thou art, thou may challenge a
Spiritual Interest: All things, says the Apostle, are yours; and you are
Christ's, and Christ is God's, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 22. No Man can challenge thee
for a Stranger, that is not thy Father's Child.

9. THINE Exile separates thee from Friends: This were no small Affliction, if
it might not be remedied. That was a true Word of Laurentius, That where Two
Faithful Friends are met, God makes up a Third: But is it no less true, that
where one Faithful Spirit is, God makes up a Second: One God can more than
supply a thousand Friends.

11. THY Banishment deprives thee of the Comfort of thy Companions: Would not a
voluntary Travel do as much? Do not thousands, willingly for many Years, change
their Country for Foreign Regions; taking long Farewels of their dearest
Friends and Acquaintance; some out of Curiosity, and a thirst after knowledge,
and some out of a covetous desire after a Gain? What Difference is there
betwixt thee and them, but that their Travel is voluntary, thy Exile
constrained? But who are there thou art so sorry to part with? Remember what
Crates the Philosopher said to a Young Man, that was beset with Parasitical
Friends: Young Man, said he, I pity thy Solitude: Perhaps, thou may be more
alone in such Society, than in the Wilderness: Such Conversation is better
lost, than continued. If thou can but be well acquainted with thy self, thou
shall be sorry thou were no sooner solitary.

12. THOU art from thy Country: Who is not so? We are all Pilgrims together
with thee, 1 Pet. 2.11. Heb. 11.13. Whilst we are at home in the Body, we are
absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. Miserable are we, if our true home be not
Above: That is the Better Country which we seek, even an Heavenly, Heb. 11.16.
And thither thou may equally direct thy Course in whatsoever Region. This
Center of Earth is equidistant from the Glorious Circumference of Heaven: If we
may once meet there, what need we make such Difference in the way?

A Prayer in Exile.
O LORD GOD, Lord of the Mountains and Valleys, Land and Sea, and the God of
the Exiled, and Out-crst; thou do with much Patience behold Oppression and
Wrong, until the measures of Iniquity be filled up: O Lord, behold the
pressures of me thy poor, despised, and dejected Servant: Thy Mercy and
Gracious Audience of the Afflicted is neither limited to Jerusalem, nor this
Mountain, every place is equally near Heaven, and where ever Men lift up pure
Hands and Hearts, Worshipping of thee in Spirit and Truth, thou art there
present to hear, and help them: Lord, thou see good to permit me to the power
of Men to Exercise me, yet can they not shut thy Merciful Ear against me: O let
my Complaint therefore come before thee: Let thy word be as the Cloudy-Pillar
to lead me in thy Way, and let thy good Spirit direct me.

2. LORD, leave me not destitute and comfortless in my Afflictions: Be my Guide
and Helper in this Earthly Pilgrimage, and Valley of Tears, unto, and in the
Hour which thou have appointed to take me hence, into the incorruptible, and
undefiled Inheritance, which thou by ^hy Power have reserved in Heaven for all
Believers: There no hand of the Oppressor can reach, and where shall be no
Curse, no Sin, nor fear of Forfeiture: Into which no Enemy shall be admitted,
and from which no Inhabitant shall ever be cast out: Lord Hear and Help me:
Lord have Mercy on me, and grant me that which I ask according ^o thy will, and
that which I should ask, which thou know best for me, through the Infinite
Merits of of the Son of thy Love; the Author and Finisher of our Salvation,
Christ the Righteous. Amen.

SECT. XII. Of Blindness and Deafness.
1. THOU have lost thine Eyes; a Loss which all the World is incapable to
repair; and thou art condemned to perpetual Darkness: For, the Light of the
Body is the Eye; and if the Light that is in thee be Darkness, how great is
that Darkness? Mat. 6.22.23. Could thou have foreseen this Evil, thou had
anticipated this Loss, by weeping out those Eyes for Grief, which now thou art
destitute of, There are but two Senses, by which any external Comfort can have
free access to thy Soul; Seeing and Hearing. One of 'em is now extinguish't for
ever: Yet thou have two internal Eyes, that can supply the want of thy
external; the Eye of Reason and the Eye of Faith: The One as a Man, the Other
as a Christian. Answerable to which there is a double Light apprehended by 'em;
Rational and Divine.

2. SOLOMON tells thee of the one; Prove. 20.23. The Spirit of a Man is the
Candle of the Lord, searching all the Inward Parts of the Belly. St. John tells
thee of the other; 1 John 1.5, 7. God is Light, and in Him is no Darkness; and
we walk in the Lgiht, as he is in the Light. Now the two Lights so far exceed
that external and visible, of which thou art deprived, as Light Darkness: If
then by the Eye of Reason thou attainst to intelligible Things; and by the Eye
of Faith, to things Supernatural and Divine; the Improvement of these Eyes,
will make amends for the want of thy Natural ones.

3. THY Sight is lost: Let me tell thee what Antony the Hermit (whom Ruffinus
is not doubious of stilling Blessed) said to Learned Didymus of Alexandria,
that was Blind; Let it not trouble thee, O Didymus, that thou art bereft of thy
Carnal Eyes; for thou lackest only those Eyes, which Mice and Flies, and
Lyzards have: But rejoice that thou have those Eyes, which the Angels have,
whereby they see God, and by which thou art enlightened with a great measure of
Knowledge. Endeavor to perfect this, and thou shall not be much discomforted
with the absence of them.

4. THINE Eyes are lost, and the chief Comfort of thy Life gone with them: The
Light is sweet, says Solomon; and a pleasant thing it is for the Eyes to
behold the Sun, Eccles. 11.7. Has not God done this purposely, that he might
take thee off from all Earthly Objects, that thou might fix thy self upon
him, and seek those Spiritual Comforts which are to be found in a better Light?
The Sun is the most glorious Planet the Eyes can possibly see; but thy
Spiritual ones may behold him that Created that glorious Luminary, who is
infinitely more glorious than what he Created. If thou have now an Inspection
into him more than thou had, that which thou countedst thy Lo^s, has proved
thy Gain.

5. THOU art Blind? and certainly it is a sore Affliction. The Men of Jabesh
Gilead offered the Tyrant of the Amm^nites to serve him, 1 Samuel 11.1. But when
he required the loss of their K^^ht Eyes, as a Condition of Peace, they will
rather hazard their Lives in an unequal War; as if Servitude and Death were a
less Mischief than one Eye's loss: How much more of Both? For tho one Eye be
but Testis Singularis, yet the evidence of that is as true as of both, and in
some Causes more: For when ye take a perfect Aim, we shut one Eye, as being
conducive to an accurate Perspective: Yet for ordinary use, we value equally
these Lights, that there is no wise Man, but would rather lose a Limb, than one
of them.

6. A Person not less Religious than Witty, when his Friends bewailed the loss
of one of his Eyes, asked them, whether they wept for the Eye which he had
lost, or the Eye which remained? Weep rather said he, for the Enemy that stays
behind, than for the Enemy that is gone. He looked upon his Sight with Eyes
different from others; he looked upon 'em as Enemies, which others beheld as
Officious Servants, good Friends, and dear Favorites.

7. INDEED, they are all of these, as they are used: Good Servants, if they go
faithfully on their Errands, and return true Intelligence: Good Friends, if
they advise and invite us to Holy Thoughts: But Enemies, if they suggest Evil.
If thine Eyes have been employed in evil Offices to thy Soul; God has done
that for thee which he has in a Figurative Sense, enjoined thee to do thy
self: Matt. 5.29. If thy Right Eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee: For it is better for thee that one of thy Members should Perish, and not
that thy whole Body should be cast into Hell.

8. THOU have lost thine Eyes, and with 'em Earthly Contentment: But thou art
hereby freed of many Temptations; for those were the Inlets of Sin; and the
very Panders of Lust, for Debauching of the Soul. How many thousands on their
Deathbeds, upon the sad recalling of their guilty Thoughts, have wished they
had been Born Blind? So as thy Joy is less, thy Sin is less; neither shall any
vain Objects take away thy Thoughts from the serious Meditation of Spiritual
things.

9. BEFORE it was no otherwise with thee, than the Prophet Jeremiah reports of
the Jews; That Death is come up by the Windows, Jer. 9.21. And our great
Grandmother Eve; She saw the Tree was pleasant to the Eyes, and took of the
Fruit, Genesis 3.6. And it has been so ever since, with the Fruit of her Womb,
both in the old and latter World: The Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men that
they were Fair, and they took them Wives of all which they chose, Genesis 6.2.
Insomuch as not filthy Lusts, but Adulteries take up their Lodgings: The
blessed Apostle mentions it, 2 Pet. 2 14. Having Eyes (says he) full of
Adultry, and cannot cease from Sin. Whilst thine Heart walked after thine Eyes,
as Job speaks, Job 31.7. It could do no less, but Carry thee down to the
Chambers of Death, Prove. 2.27. Thou art now delivered from that danger of so
deadly a Misguidance.

10. HAS not the loss of thine Eyes freed thee of a World of Sorrows? Had
thou but seen what others are forced to behold, those fearful Conflagrations,
savage Violences, and Sacrilegious Outrages, thine Heart would bleed within
thee: Now thou art affected at a distance, receiving 'em by the imperfect
Intelligence of thine Ear from the unfeeling Relation of others.

11. THINE Eyes are lost; What need thy Heart to go with 'em? Old Isaac was
Dark-sighted when he gave the Blessing (contrary to his own Intentions) to his
Son Jacob; yet he lived forty Years after, and could be pleased to have good
Provision made him with Wine and Venison, Genesis 27.25. Our Life does not lie in
our Eyes: The Spirit of a Man is that which upholds his Infirmities, Prove.
18.14. Labor to raise thy self to a cheerful Disposition; and in thy Bodily
Darkness, There shall be Light and Joy to thy Soul, Est. 8.16.

12. HAS God taken away thy Sight? But has he not given thee a supply in
other Faculties? Are not thy internal Senses more quick, thy Memory stronger,
thy Fancy more active, and thy Understanding more apprehensive? The Wonders we
have heard of Blind Men's Memories, were if to be credited, not obvious to
conceive, that the removal of Distractions, gives them opportunity of a careful
reposition of desired Objects, and a sure Fixedness of 'em where they are laid.
Hence has it come to pass, that some Blind Men have attained to those
Perfections which their Eyes could never have endu'd 'em with.

13. OUR Ecclesiastical Story reports of Didymus of Alexandria, being Blind
from his Infancy, through his Prayers and diligent Endeavors, reached unto
such knowledge in Logic, Arithmetic and Astronomy, as was admired by the
Leard Masters of those Arts; and for his rare insight in Divinity, was by St.
Athanasius approved to be Doctor of the Chair in that Church. What need we
doubt the Verity of it, when our late Times have so clearly seconded it? having
yielded diverse worthy Divines, which have been deprived of Sight.

14. THERE was one very Eminent in the University of Cambridge, Mr. Fisher of
Trinity College
of great skill in Tongues and Arts, and of singular acuteness of Judgment.
Suidas reports of Neoclides, that being Blind, he could steal more cunningly
than any that had use of Eyes: I may as boldly say of Mr. Fisher, That he was
more dextrous in picking the Locks of difficult Authors, and extracting their
Treasures of hidden Secrets, than those that had the sharpest Eyes about 'em;
insomuch as it was noted, those were singular Proficients which employed
themselves in reading to him: If they read Books to him, he dictates Lectures
the while to them, and taught 'em more than he learned himself.

15. AS for the other external Senses, they are vulgarly more exquisite in the
Blind: We read of some who have been of so accurate a Touch, that by their
feeling they could distinguish betwixt Black and White: Lord Bacon 's Natural
History.
And for the Ear, as our Philosophers observe, Sounds are sweeter to the Blind
than to the Sighted, being more curiously judged by 'em: But the most perfect
recompense of these Natural Eyes, is in the Exaltation of our Spiritual Ones.
We are more Illuminated toward the Beautifical Vision of God, as they
apprehend more Obscurity in all Terrestial Objects: Thou will not miss the loss
of thy Sight, if thou findst thy Soul thus happily Illuminated.

16. THINE Eyes are lost: It is a Blessing that once thou had 'em: Had thou
been Born Blind, what a Stranger would thou have been to God and the World?
Had thou never seen the Face of the Elements, what Expressions could have
made thee apprehensive of the wonderful Works of thy Creator? Not any Discourse
could have made thee understand what Light is? The Sun the Fountain of it, the
Heavens the Glorious Region of it, and the Moon and Stars Illuminated by it?
How could thou have had thy Thoughts raised so high, as to give Glory to
that Great God, whose infinite Power has wrought all these mavelous things.

17. NO doubt, God has his ways of Mercy for those that are Born Blind; not
requiring what he has not given, supplying by his Spirit in the internal
Vessels, what is wanting in the External: So as even those that never see the
Face of the World, shall behold the Face of God that made it: But in an
ordinary Course of proceeding, those which have been Blind from their Birth,
must needs want those helps of knowing and glorifying God in his mighty Works,
which lie open to Sight: These once satisfied thine Eyes, and remain with thee
in their absence.

18. THEREFORE walk on in the strength of those fixed thoughts; always adoring
the Majesty of that God whom thy Sight has represented to thee so Glorious;
and in an humble Submission to his Pleasure, strive against all the discomforts
of thy Sufferings. It is reported of a valiant Soldier, Polyzelus, who after
his Eyes were shot out in Battle, covering his Face with his Target, fought and
laid about him vehemently, as if he had received no hurt. Strive to imitate
this Courage, and let not the loss of thine Eyes hinder thee from a cheerful
Resistance of those Spiritural Enemies, which labor to draw thee into an
impatient Murmuring against God: But wait humbly upon him who has better Eyes
for thee than thou have lost.

19. THOU have lost thy Hearing: It is not easily determined which loss is
greatest, the Eye, or Ear; both are afflictive. Now all the World is to thee
Dumb, since thou art Deaf to it: And how small a Matter has made thee a Cipher
amonst Men? These are the Senses of Instruction; and there is no other way for
Intelligence to be conveyed to the Soul, either in Secular or Spiritual
Affairs. The Eye is the Window, the Ear is the Door, by which all Knowledge
enters: In matter of Observation by the Eye; and of Faith, by the Ear, Romans
10.17.

20. HAD it pleased God to have excluded these Senses from thy Birth, thy State
had been utterly Disconsolate, and there had been no possible access for
Comfort to thy Soul. Had this Affliction happened in thy riper Age, there had
been no way but to be content with thy former Store: But now he has vouchsafed
to leave thee one Passage open, it behooves thee to supply one Sense by the
other, and to let in those helps by the Window, which are denied Entrance at
the Door. But now Omnipotency has been pleased to lend thee an Ear so long,
till thou have laid the sure Foundation of Faith in thy Heart, thou may work
upon 'em in this silent Opportunity, with Celestial Meditations, and raise 'em
up to no less height than thou could have done by thy quickest Hearing.

21. IT is a great Blessing, that in the plentitude of thy Senses, thou were
sollicitous to improve thy Bosom, as a Magazine of Heavenly Thoughts, providing
with the Wise Patriarch, for the seven Years of Dearth: Now that the Passages
are blocked up, thou might have been in danger of Famishing. Thou have now
leisure to recall and ruminate upon those Counsels, which thy Improvement has
laid up in thy Heart, and to thy happy Advantage, find'st the difference
betwixt a wise Providence, and a careless Neglect.

22. THINE external Hearing is lost: But thou have an internal Ear, whereby
thou hear'st the secret motions of God's Spirit, which shall never be lost. How
many thousands whom thou enviest, are in a worse Condition? They have an
external Ear, whereby they hear the voice of Men; but they want that Spiritual
Ear, which perceives the least Whisperings of the Holy Ghost: Ears they have,
but not hearing ones; for Fashion more than Use. Wise Solomon makes and
observes the Distinction, Prove. 20.12. The hearing Ear, and the seeing Eye, the
Lord has made even both of them. And a Greater than Solomon can say of his
formal Auditors, Hearing, they hear not, Matt. 13.13. If thou have an Ear for
God, tho Deaf to Men* How much happier art thou than those Millions of Men,
that have an Ear for Men, and are Deaf to God.

23. THOU have lost thy Hearing; and therewith no small Sorrow: How would it
grieve thy Soul to hear those woeful Ejaculations, pitiful Complaints, hideous
Blasphemies, atheistical Notions, mad Paradoxes, and hellish Heresies,
wherewith thine Ear would have been Wounded, had it not been barred against
their Entrance? It is thy just Grief thou missest hearing of many good Words;
and it is thy happiness thou art freed from hearing of many Evil. It is an even
Lay betwixt the benefit of hearing Good, and the torment of hearing Evil.

A Prayer Consolatory to the Blind and Deaf.
O MOST Powerful Lord God, who have in thy good pleasure been pleased to
deprive me of Seeing and Hearing; I know O Lord, I have deserved thy wrath in a
greater measure, even Death and Hell it self, but I know thou art a God full of
Compassion, Long suffering, and abounding in Goodness and Truth, and shows
Mercy unto Thousands. Lord, as thou have inflicted this on me, even the loss of
my Sight; illuminate my Understanding by thy holy Spirit: Thou have taken away
my Sight that I might not behold Vanity. O Enlighten my Mind that I may behold
inwardly the wonders of thy Law: Lord, I a^ poor in Spirit, but let thy blessed
Spirit help my In^^^mities, that in thy Light I may see Light.

2. AND, O thou bright Morning Star, guide me in the way of thy Commandments,
that at last I may safely arrive where all Tears and Obstructions of Sight
shall be taken away from my Bodily Eyes: And though my outward hearing is fled
away, yet let me hear the voice of the Comforter speak peace to my Soul, and
quietness to my Conscience, that when ever thou shall be pleased to call me
hence, I may be ready prepared to resign my self up into thy hands, as into the
hands of a Faithful Creator: In the mean time, Lord, Sanctify these thy
Fatherly Visitations to me, and ever remember, that what thou have in thy good
Pleasure inflicted on my Body, may be for the good of my Soul, in the day of
the Lord Jesus. Amen.

SECT. XIII. Of Sterility.
1. THOU complainest of dry Loins, and a Barren Womb; as Abraham did before
thee: What will thou give me, seeing I go Childless? Genesis 15.2. And the Wise of
Israel made the same Complaints; Genesis 30.1. Give me Children, or else I die. So
desirous has Nature been to propagate, and so impatient of a Denial: Lo,
Children and the Fruit of the Womb, are an Heritage, and Gift that comes from
the Lord: Happy is he that has his Quiver full of such Shafts, Psalm. 127.4, 6.
It is a Blessing, David grudged to Wicked Ones, Psalm. 17.4. They have Children
at their Desire.

2. IT was the Curse God inflicted on the Family of Abimelech, in Closing up
all the Wombs in his House, for Sarah 's sake, Genesis 20.17, 18. The Judgment
threatened to Ephraim, is a miscarrying Womb, and dry Breasts, Hos. 9.14. And
Jeconiah's Doom is, Jer. 22.30. Write this Man, Childless. It is a special
Favor of God, That the Barren has born seven, 1 Samuel 2.5. And observed by the
Psalmist, as a wonder of God's Mercy, Psalm. 113.8. that He makes the Barren
Woman to keep House, and to be a joyful Mother of Children.

3. IT is pity he was born, that esteems not Children a Blessing. She has a
double Favor from God, that is a Joyful Mother of Children: Many, breeds
Sorrow, and Death: And there is scarce any other Blessing, seasoned with so
much Acrimony of Misery and Danger. Do but compare one Pain with another, and
consider the Anxious Cares that attend 'em; and tell me, whether thy bemoaned
Sterility enjoys not more ease, and less sorrow?

4. IT is thy Sorrow thou art not Fruitful: Consider thou art freed from a
greater affliction. In Sorrow shall thou bring forth Children, Genesis 3.16. Think
on the Shricks in the Painful Travels of thy Neighbors; wearying Days and
Nights in restless Pangs, and calling for Death in despair of Delivery: And
after the unprofitable Labors of the Midwives, have made use of another Sex;
so have been delivered of Life and Birth together. All these Sorrows thou have
escaped: And many whom thou enviest, have thought thee happier than themselves?

5. THOU art afflicted thou art not a Mother: And many a one wishes they had
been Barren. If Children prove deformed, unnatural and wicked; what a Corrosive
is this to the Parents? Rebecca thought it long to be twenty Years Childless;
her Husband at Sixty, prays for Issue, Genesis 25.20, 21. his Devotion carried him
to Moriah the place where his Life was miraculously preserved from the Knife of
his Father, hoping it might, by the like Miracle, be renewed in his Posterity.

6. GOD hears him; Rebecca Conceives: But when she felt that early Combat of
her struggling Twins, she can say, If it be so, why am I thus? Genesis 25.22. And
when she saw a Child, Red all over like a hairy Garment, Genesis 25.25. and saw
his Conditions no less rough than his Hide, Genesis 27.41. do we not think she
wished that part of her Burden unborn? Certainly, Children are Blessings, or
Crosses. Have thou a Child well disposed, well governed? A wise Son makes a
glad Father, Prove. 10.1. Prove. 19.13. Have thou a Child disorderly and
debauched? A foolish Son is the Heaviness of his Mother, and the Calamity of
his Father, Prove. 10.1. Chap. 19.13. Have thou a Son stubborn, and unnatural?
Then Solomon tells us; He that wastes his Father, and chaseth away his Mother,
is a Son that causes Shame, and brings Reproach, Prove. 19.26. And if such a
Son live and die impenitent, what can answer the Discomfort of that Parent?

7. THOU have no Children: As thou have less Joy, thou have less Trouble. It is
a continual Care that belongs to these Possessions. Artimedorus observes,
Artimedor de insomniis, Lib. 1. Cap. 6.
that to dream of Children, imports Cares. As they are our greatest Cares, many
lesser ensues. For thou have many Mouths to feed, and it is thy Duty to provide
for 'em: For, If any provide not for his own, especially for those of his own
House, he has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.

8. DOES not many Rivulets from the main Channel, leave the Stream shallow? So
is it with thee; But this Expense is not more necessary, than comfortable. A
Great Man visited a Gentleman in the Country, and seeing his Children placed
according to their Age and Stature, said, These make Rich Men Poor: But
immediately he received this Answer; Nay, my Lord, these make a Poor Man Rich:
For there is not one of these, I would part with for all your Wealth.

9. INDEED, we receive to distribute, and are but Farmers of those we leave
behind. If we freely lay out of our Substance beforehand, so much of our Rent
is happily cleared. It is observable none are so Covetous as the Childless: For
those who for maintenance of large Families, are inured to frequent
Disbursements, find such Experience of Divine Providence in Prudent Managing of
Affairs, that they lay out with more Cheerfulness, then they receive: So that
their Care must be abated, when God takes it to himself.

10. AND if not wanting to themselves, Faith gives them Ease, in casting their
Burden upon him, who has more Power and Right to it, since Children are more
his, than our own. He that feeds the Young Ravens, Psalm. 147.9. can he fail
the best of his Creatures? A worthy Divine tells us of a Gentlewoman, coming to
the Cottage of a poor Neighbor, furnished with Children, could say; Here are
the Mouths, but where is the Meat? But not long after was answered to that
Question; for the poor Woman after the Burial of her last Child, inverted the
Qustion upon her; Here is the Meat, but where is the Mouths?

11. SURELY, the Great Governor of the World, will never leave any of his
without the Bread of Sufficiency; and who so fit to be his Purveyors, as
Parents for their Children? Nature has taught Birds, to pick out the best of
Grains for their Young: Nature sends Moister out of the Root, which gives Life
to Branches and Blossoms: Sometimes, indeed, it meets with a kind Retaliation;
some Stork-like Disposition repairs the loving Offices done by the Parents, in
a dutiful Retribution to their Age or Necessity.

12. BUT how frequently proved often the contrary? By an unsatiable Importunity
of extracting from the Parents that Maintenance, which is extravagant:
Sometimes an undutiful neglect, in not owning the Meanness of their Parents, or
supporting their decayed Estate by due Maintenance. Ingratitude is odious in
Man; but in a Child monstrous.

13. IT is thy Grief thou never had a Child: There is not so much Comfort in
having of Children, as Sorrow in parting with 'em; especially when their parts,
and Disposition have raised our Hopes, and doubled our Affections toward 'em:
And according to the French Proverb; He that has not, cannot lose; so, on the
contrary, he that has, must lose. Our Meeting is not more certain, than our
Parting: Either we must leave them, and so their Grief doubles ours; or they
leave us, and so our Grief will be no less than our Love was extended.

14. IF thou will be truly wise, set thy heart upon that only Good, which is
not capable of losing: Divided Affections abate their Force; and since no
Objects of Dearness, distracts thy Love, place it wholly upon that Infinite
Goodness, which entertains it with Mercy, and rewards it with Blessedness. If
Elkanah therefore could say to his Barren Wife Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.8. Why weepest
thou? and why is thy Heart heavy? Am not I better to thee than ten Sons? How
much more comfortably may thou hear the Father of Mercies say to thy Soul,
Why is thy Heart heavy? Am not I better to thee than ten Thousand?

A Prayer of Comfort in Sterility:
O GOD, the Great Creator, and Redeemer of all the World, who did Command our
first Parents to Increase and Multiply: Yet those Blessings thou think not
fit to dispense, where thy Wisdom and Providence knows it not requisite: O
LORD, thou have been pleased to give me dry Breasts, and shut up my Womb, and
have kept me from that great pain and peril of Childbirth, which many have
undergone, which has put a period to their Lives: O let me Bless and Praise
thy Holy Name, that I am at this day a living Monument of thy Mercy: And that
thy Servant whom thou have been pleased to ordain for my Husband, is not yet
Summoned by Death from me.

2. LORD, thy Omnipotency knows what is most necessary for me, and the less
Encumbrances and Cares I meet with in the World, grant that I may the more
attentively serve thee; let me in every State, O Lord, submit to thy Holy Will,
and not murmr and repine at what thy good pleasure has allotted me: Comfort
me, O Lord, I beseech thee, and increase my Love and Affection toward my
Husband, that I may say as Elkanah did to Hannah, that he is more worth to me
then ten Sons: But, O Lord, grant, that when thou shall be pleased to call me
out of this dark World into thy mavelous Light, that I may be ready to leave
all and follow thee, who art my God, and all things. Amen.

SECT. XIV. Want of Repose.
1. THOU are afflicted with that which is incident to distempered Bodies, and
Minds: How wearisom it is to spend the long Night, tossing in a restless Bed,
in chase of Sleep, which eagerly pursued, flies farther from us? Could thou
forbear the Desire of it, perhaps it would come unexpected: Now thou Sollicites
it, like some froward Piece, it is coy and pievish, and punishes thee for thy
Eagerness after it.

2. HE that commanded an Hundred twenty seven Provinces, could not command
Rest; On that Night his Sleep departed from him, Esth. 6.1. neither could he be
forced, or entreated to his Bed. And the Great Babylonian Monarch, though he
possessed some Sleep, yet could not keep it; for His Sleep brake from him, Dan.
2.1. And for Solomon, it would not appear within his view; Neither Night nor
Day sees he Sleep with his Eyes, Eccles. 8.16.

3. SURELY, as there is no Earthly thing more comfortable to Nature, than
Bodily rest, as Jeremiah says, Jer. 31.26. And my Sleep was sweet unto me: So
there is nothing more grievous and disheartning: If the Senses be not sometimes
locked up, they must wast, if the Body be not refreshed with a moderate Repose?
And commonly the Soul follows the Temper of the Body, it cannot but find a
Discomposure in her Faculties and Operations.

4. DO we not find Ravings and Frenzies the Attendants of over Watchfulness?
Therefore thy Tongue has just Cause to complain of thy Eyes. For Remedy,
instead of Closing thy Lids for Sleep; lift up thy Eyes to him that Gives his
Beloved rest, Psalm. 127.2. For he holds thine Eyes waking, Psalm. 77.4. He
keeps Sleep from thy Body, for the good of thy Soul. Let not thine Eyes wake
without thy Heart. Christ's Spouse can say, I sleep, but my heart waketh, Cant.
5.4. But how much more would she say, Mine Eyes wake, and my Heart also?

5. WHEN thou can not Sleep, labor to see him that is Invisible: One Glimpse
of that Sight, is worth more than all the Sleep thine Eyes is capable of.
Resign thy self into his hands, to be at his Disposal. What is this sweet
Acquiescence, but the Rest of the Soul? Which if thou find'st in thy self, thou
shall quietly digest the Want of Bodily Repose.

6. THOU want Sleep: Take heed of aggravating thine Affliction: It is only a
Loss, but not of Sense; a want of what thou wishest, not a pain of what thou
feel. Alas! How many which want Rest, are tortured with intolerable Torments
in all Parts of their Body; who would think themselves happy in thy Condition,
Might they purchase Ease? how gladly would they forbear Rest? Be not therefore
troubled for want of Rest; but be thankful that no worse Evil attends thee.

7. THOU lack'st Sleep; a thing we desire not so much for its own sake, as for
Health. What if God be pleased to give thee Health without it? It is reported
of a Woman in Padua, that continued fifteen Days and Nights without Sleep: And
Seneca tells us of great Mecaenas, that in three Years he slept not the space
of an Hour: Which Lipsius thinks good to mitigate with a favorable
Construction, conceiving an Impossibility of an absolute Vigilance.

8. YET compared with other Instances, we have no reason to scruple that
Relation; for the Learned Heurnius tells us, upon good Assurance, when he was
Student in Padua; Nizolius the famous Ciceronian, lived ten Years without Sleep.

9. BUT that exceeds all Example, which Monsieur Goulart reports, of a
Gentlewoman, Goul. Histoires Memorables.
who for Thirty five Years remained without Sleep, and found Inconvenience, or
Distemper, as was attested by her Husband and Servants. The Hand of God is not
shortened: He who miraculously preserved the Maid of Meures so many Years
without Meat; has sustained the Lives of these forementioned Persons thus
long without Sleep; that it might appear, Man lives not by Meat, or Sleep only,
but by every word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God, Mat. 4.4. Luke 4.4.
Deuteronomy. 8.3. If he pleases to bless thee with a watchful Health, the Blessing is
far greater, than if he allowed thee to sleep out thy time in a dull
unprofitable Rest.

10. THOU want Sleep: Behold, he that keeps Israel, does neither slumber
nor sleep, Psalm. 121 4. Those Blessed Spirits, that continually behold the Face
of God, never sleep: For Sleep is a Symptom of Mortality; and the less we
partake of it, we come the nearer to those Spiritual Natures, whose Perfection
requires no Rest. The retired Christians, in Primitive Times, affecting to come
near an Angelical Life, wilfully repelled Sleep; till it necessarily forced it
self upon them. Thou suffer'st no more out of the Distemper of Humors, or
unnatural Obstructions, than better Men have willingly attracted out of holy
Resolutions. It is but our Construction, that makes those things tedious, which
have proved easy to others.

11. THOU want Sleep: Have Patience a while; thou art going where there
shall be no need, nor use of it: And in the mean time, thy Better Part cannot
rest: Though the Gates be shut, that it cannot show it self, yet it ever will
be active. As for this Lump of Earth, it shall ere long sleep its full; where
no Noise can wake it, till The Voice of the Arch Angel, and the Trumpet of God
shall call it up in the Morning of the Resurrection, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.

A Prayer when Repose is Obstructed.
O GOD, the keeper of Israel, who neither slumbrest nor sleep, yet thy
Omnipotency knows without it, poor Dust and Ashes cannot subsist; it was by thy
Almighty Power, that King Ahasuerus one Night was deprived of his Repose in his
Royal Bed, and yet through thy Gracious Providence, thy Holy Apostle St. Peter
Slept quietly, though strongly Guarded by Soldiers, and Chained fast in a Dark
Prison: But, O thou, that give thy Beloved rest, Behold, I beseech thee, with
thine All-seeing Eye, how my Sleep is departed from me, insomuch that I am
become infirm in Body, for want of that natural rest, which many through thy
tender Mercy Enjoyes.

2. LORD, but of the Rich Treasure of thy Transcendent Goodness, have
Compassion upon my Weak and Frail Constitution, which yet requires further
nutriment. Lord, suffer not any Cares or Fears to perplex my Thoughts any
longer at this Season, but so Compose all my Senses in this Dark and Silent
Night, that I may lay me down in Peace, and take my rest in Safety: O hear me,
and answer me in thy own due time, that when my Body shall receive its due
Refreshment, my Mind may be perpetually Vigilant to serve thee, unto my Lives
end: Grant this, O Father, for thy dear Sons sake, my only Lord and Savior.
Amen,

SECT. XV. Of Gray-Hairs.
1. GRAY-HAIRS is that we desire to aspire to; and when attained, are ready to
complain our greatest Misery; verifying in part that old Observation, That
Wedlock and Age are things which we desire, and repent of. Is this our
Ingratitude or Inconstancy, that we are weary of what we wished for? Perhaps
this Accusation may not be Universal: There is difference in Constitutions, and
latitude in Old Age. Infancy and Youth have their limits, age admits of no
certain Determination.

2. AT Seventy, King David was old and stricken in Years; and they covered him
with Clothes, but he got no heat, 1 King. 1.1. Whereas Caleb can profess, Now
lo I am fourscore and five Years old, and yet I am as strong this day, as I
was in the day that Moses sent me to spy out the Land: As my Strength was then,
even so is my Strength now, for war, both to go out, and come in, Josh. 14.10,
11. And beyond him, Moses was an hundred and twenty Years old; when he died,
his Eye was not dim, nor his Natural Force abated, Deuteronomy. 34.7. Methuselah was
but Old, when he was Nine hundred sixty and nine, Gen 5.27.

3. BUT for the generality of Mankind, the same Moses, who lived to see an
hundred and twenty, has set Man's ordinary Period at half his own: Psalm.
90.10. The days of our Age, are threescore Years and ten. And tho Men be so
strong, that they come to fourscore Years, yet is their Strength but Labor and
Sorrow: So passes it away, and we are gone. Fourscore Years, are load enough
for the Strength, much more for the weakness of Age. But when Labor and Sorrow
are added to the Weight, how can we but sink under the Burden?

4. HE was old and wise, that said by Experience; That our last Days are the
Dregs of our Life: The clearer part is gone, and all drawn out, the Lees sink
down to the buttom. Who can express the miserable Inconveniences that attenst
the Aged? For Cares must needs be multiplied according to the manifold
occasions of Affairs: For the World is a Net, wherein the more we stir, we are
Entangled.

5. AND for Bodily Grievances, What Varieties do we meet withal? What Aches in
the Bones, Pains in the Joints, Convulsions of Sinews, and Torments in the
Bowels; the Stone, Colic, Stranguary, and Distillation of Rheums? What Hollow
Coughs, weaknesses of Retention, Expulsion, Digestion, and Decay of Senses? So
that Age is the common Sewer, into which all Diseases of our Life are
Evacuated. Well therefore might Sarah say, After I am waxed Old, shall I have
Pleasure? Genesis 18.12. And good Barzillai justly excuses himself for not
accepting the gracious Invitation of David, 2 Samuel 19.35. I am this day
fourscore Years old, and can I discern between Good and Evil? Can thy Servant
taste what I eat, or what I drink? Can I hear any more the voice of
Singing-Men, and Singing-Women? Wherefore then should thy Servant be yet a
Burden unto my Lord the King?

6. THESE are they the Preacher calls the Evil Days, and the Years, wherein a
Man shall say, I have no Pleasure in them: Wherein the Sun, or the Light, or
the Moon, or the Stars are darkened, and the Clouds return after the Rain: When
the Keepers of the House shall tremble, and the Strong Men shall bow
themselves, and the Grinders cease, because they are few, and those that look
out of the Windows, be darkened: Eccles. 12.1, 2, 3. In short, what is Old Age
but the Winter of Life? And how can we expect any other but gloomy Weather,
chilling Frosts, Storms, and Tempests?

7. BUT whilst we thus querulously aggravate the incommodiousness of Age, we
must beware lest we derogate from the Bounty of our Maker, and disparage those
Blessings which he accounts Precious; amongst which, Old Age is none of the
meanest. Had he not put that value upon it, he would not have honored it with
his own Style; calling himself, The Ancient of Days? Dan. 7.9.13.22. Or would
he else have set out this Mercy, as a Reward and Obedience to himself, (I will
fulfill the number of thy days, Exodus 23.26.) and of Obedience to our Parents,
To live long in the Land, Exodus 20.12.

8. WOULD he have promised it as a mavelous Favor to restored Jerusalem,
(now become a City of Truth) That there shall yet Old Men and Old Women dwell
in the Streets of Jerusalem, and every Man with his Staff in his Hand for every
Age? Zach. 8.4. Would he else have denounced it as a Judgment to over-indulgent
Eli, 1 Samuel 2.32. There shall not be an Old Man in thy House for ever? Far be
it from us, to despise that which God Honors, and turn his Blessings into a
Curse. For the same God, who best knows the Price of his own Favors, as he
makes no small estimation of Age himself, so he has thought fit to call for a
high Respect to be given it by Men, out of an Holy Awe to himself. Lev. 19.32.
Thou shall rise up before the hoary Head, and Honor the Face of the Old Man,
and fear thy God. I am the Lord.

9. HENCE it is, that he has pleased to put together the Ancient, and the
Honorable, Isa. 9.15. and has told us that an Hoary Head is a Crown of Glory,
if it be found in the way of Righteousness, Prove. 16.31. Chap. 20.29. And
lastly, makes it an Argument of the deplorable State of Jerusalem, Lam. 4.16.
That They favored not the Elders. Therefore as we too sensibly feel what to
complain of, so we know what Privileges we may challenge due to Age; even such
as Nature has taught those Heathens, which are in the next degree to Savage.
If Pride and Skill have made the Athenians Uncivil, yet a Young Lacedemonian
will rise, and yield his Place in the Theater to neglected Age.

10. IT is not a little Injurious to fasten our Eyes upon the disadvantages of
any Condition, as not to take in the Advantages that belong to it; which
carefully laid together, may perhaps sway the Balance to an equal Poise.
Suppose Old Age is oppressed with Bodily Griefs; yet it may yield other
Immunities to keep the Scales even: And it is not the least, that it gives us
firm Resolutions and bold Securities against Dangers, and Death it self: For
the Old Man knows how little of his Thread is left in the Winding; and therefore
when just Occasion is offered, insists not much upon so inconsiderable a
Remainder.

OLD AGE and Orbity, as Ceselius professed, were those things that emboldened
him. And when Castritius refused to deliver the Hostages of Placentia to Carbo
the Consul, and was threatened with many Swords, he answered those Menaces with
his many Years. What young Man would have been so easily induced to part with
his Life, and having been so ready to give entertainment to an unexpected
Death? Surely the hope and love of Life, commonly softens the Spirits of
vigorous Youth, and disswades them from those Enterprises, which are attended
with manifest Perils: Whereas, extreme Age teaches us to contemn Dangers.

12. YET a greater privilege of Age, is a Freedom from those impetuous
Passions wherewith Youth is commonly over-sway'd; for with our Natural Heat,
the Fire of our inordinate Lusts is abated, so as our weaker Appetite may be
subdued to Reason. The Temperate old Man in the Story, when one showed him a
Beautiful Face, could answer; I have long since left to be Eye-sick: And could
say of Pleasure; I have gladly withdrawn my self from that Imperious Mistress.

13. WHAT an unreasonable Vassalage our Youthful Lusts subject us to, we need
no other Instance than in Sampson, who was effeminated by his impotent Passion,
and weakened to betray his Life to a mercinary Harlot, and to endure to hear her
say; Tell me wherewith thou may be Bound, to do thee hurt, Judge. 16.6. How
easily might he have answered her; O Delilah, even with these Cords of Brutish
Sensuality. How was Solomon Besotted with his Strange Wives, and drawn away to
Worship strange Gods, 1 King, 11.5.

14. AND how may Fir-trees howl, when Cedars fall? Who can hope to be free from
being transported with irregular Affections, when we see such great precedents
of Frailties? From the danger of these sad Miscarriages, our Age happily
secures us; disposing us into quiet Harbor, whence we may see Youth tossed
with Tempests of unruly Passions, from which Seniority has freed us.

15. ANNEX Experimental Knowledge, which Age enriches us; every Dram is worth
Pounds of Junior Contentments: In comparison the Speculative Knowledge is weak
and imperfect. This may come at an easy rate, perhaps cost us nothing: That,
commonly we pay dear for, and is esteemed valuable. If Experience be the
Mistress of Fools, I Am sure it is the Mother of Wisdom: For the long Observation
of variety of Actions and Events in the whole course of our Life, must needs
leave such sure Rules of Judgment, as may be unfailable Directions for our
selves and others.

16. IN vain shall this be expected from our Minority, which the Wise
Philosopher excludes from being Judges of true Morality: And well might the Old
Man say; Ye Young Men, think us Old Men Fools; but we Old Men know you Young
Men to be Fools. And indeed what value Ignorance may put upon it, this Fruit of
Age the Earth has nothing equally so precious. It was Profane, but fit for
the Mouth of an Heathen Poet, That Prudence is above Destiny. But surely a
Christian may justly say, That next to Providence, Humane Prudence may
challenge the supreme Place in Earthly Affairs, and Age claim the greatest
Interest in that virtue.

17. YOUNG Elihu could say, Job 32.7. Multitude of years should teach Wisdom.
And the Wise Man, Ecclus. 25.4, 5. Oh, how comely a thing is Judgment for
Gray-Hairs, and for Ancient Men to know Counsel! Oh, how comely is the Wisdom
of Old Men, and Understanding and Counsel to Men of Honor. And the Grecians
could say, That young Men are for Action, and old Men for Advice: And among the
Romans, Senators take their Name from Age. That which causes weakness of Aged
Eyes, is, they better discern things further off, and by the strength of their
Mental Eyes, they perceive Judgments or Advantages at a distance, and
accordingly frame their Determinations.

18. IT is observed, that Old Lutes sound better than New. It was Rehoboam's
Folly and Undoing, 1 King. 12.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. to follow the Advice of
Green Heads, and abandon those Grave Senators of his Fathers Counsel. Not that
Age of it self is Rich in Wisdom and Knowledge: But well cultured, and
improved, is valuable. There are Old Men, that live, and have a Being upon
Earth, who can give no Proof of their many Years, but only Gray-Hairs and
Infirmities. There are those, who, like to Hermogenes, are Old, whilst Young;
and Children, when Old: These the Elder they grow, are more stupid.

19. TIME is an ill Measure of Age, which should rather be meted by
Proficiency, Ripeness of Judgment, and Monuments of commendable and useful
Labors. If we have thus employed our selves, our Autumn will show what our
Spring was; and our Gray-Hairs will give us more Cause to fear Pride; than
Dejection. We accuse Age of many Weaknesses and Indispositions: But these
Imputations are not Universal: Many of these are Faults of the Person, not of
the Age. All Wine does not sour with Age, neither does every Nature.

20. OLD Oil is clearer, and hotter in Medicinal Uses than New. Some are
pettish, and morose in Youth; and others are mild, gentle and sociable, in
their decayed Years. Some are crazy in their Prime; and others in their Wain
are Vigorous: And many before the fullness of their Age, have lost their Memory;
as Hermogenes, Corvinus, Antonius Carracalla, Georgius Trapezuntius, and
Nizolius.

21. SOME, whose intellectuals have so happily held out, that they have been
best at the last. Plato at fourscore and one, died with his Pen in his hand:
and Demosthenes, when Death Summoned him at an 100 Years, he bemoaned himself,
that he must now die, when he began to gain knowledge. And as for Spiritual
Graces and Improvements, the Psalmist satisfies us, Psalm. 92.12, 13. Such as be
planted in the House of the Lord, shall flowrish in the Courts of our God: They
shall also bring forth more fruit in their Age; and shall be fat and well
liking.

22. BUT the chief Benefit of Age is, our approach to our Journeys end: For the
end of motion is rest; and once attained, their remains nothing but fruition:
Now Age brings us after a weary Race within some breathings of our Journeys
end: For if Young Men may die, Old Men must; a condition which a carnal heart
bewails and abhors, complaining of nature as Niggardly in Dispensations of the
shortest time to her noblest Creatures; and envying the Oaks, which many
generations must leave standing and growing.

23. NO marvel, the Worlding thinks himself at home, and looks upon Death as a
banishment: He has placed his heaven here below, and can see nothing in his
remove, but Annihilation, or Torment: But for Christians, who know, that whilst
we are present in the body, we are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. and do
justly account our selves Foreigners, our Life a Pilgrimage, Heaven our Home;
how can we but rejoice, that after a tedious and painful Travel, we do now draw
near the threshold of our Father's house; wherein we know there are many
Mansions, and all Glorious, John 14.2.

24. I could blush to hear a Heathen say, if God would offer me the choice of
renewing my Age, and returning to my Childhood, I should heartily refuse it;
for I should be loath, after I have passed so much of my Race to be recalled
back from the Goal, to the Bars of my first setting out; and to hear a
Christian sighing and sobbing at the thought of his Dissolution. Where is our
Faith of a Heaven, (...) after long Sea-beaten, we are loath to think of
putting into the safe Harbor of Immortality?

A Prayer for the Aged.
O LORD GOD, of my Salvation, I humbly render thee all hearty thanks for thy
abundant Mercies and Favors, Spiritual and Temporal, for thy Gracious
Preservation of me from my Youth, until this present Moment: That thou have
spared me in thy Fatherly Mercy, when in thy Justice thou might have
destroyed me: Lord, as thou have given me space for Repentance, and reserved me
to these Years, who might justly have cut off the days of a misspent Youth,
so now accomplish thine own Work; give me an Heart faithfully to adhere unto
thee, that I may constantly Endeavor to Redeem the many Errors of my life
past, by becoming a Pattern of Faith, and Obedience, in all those with whom I
Converse with for the Future: Lord, fill me with thy Holy Spirit, that I may
bear more fruit in my Age: Forsake me not now, I am Old and Gray Headed:
Neither Remember the Sins and Follies of my Youth.

2. O let thy Power appear in my Weakness, and the Operation of thy Spirit in
the Decays and Ruins of this Earthly Tabernacle, by the evident repair of thine
own Image in me, Mortifying the remainds of Sin, and assuring me of my Election
and Calling in Christ Jesus: And now, O Lord, that the time of my departure
draws nigh, give me a vigilant Spirit, that I may be ready when thou
Summonest me: Lord, there are but few steps between me and this Worlds period;
O strengthen me with thy Grace, give me a lively Faith, an Invincible and
Constant perseverance in this Race, of the few and evil days of this Earthly
Pilgrimage; that by thy merciful Assistance I may so run that I may obtain:
That when thou please to give me rest from my Labors, and gather me to my
Fathers, I may against all the pains and Sorrows of Death, willingly and
cheerfully, yield up my Soul, into thy Gracious Hands, in full assurance of my
Redeemption and Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

SECT. XVI. Of Mortality.
1. THOU fear Death: The Holiest, Wisest, and Strongest have done no less:
He is King of Terrors, and must command. Thou may hear the Man after God's
own heart say, Psalm. 116.3. The sorrows of Death compassed me: And Psalm. 88.3,
4, 5. My Soul is full of troubles, my life draws nigh to the Grave: I am
counted with them that go down to the Pit, as a Man that has no strength; free
among the Dead. And Good Hezekiah, upon the message of Death, Chattered like a
Crane or a Swallow, and went mourning as a Dove, Isa. 38.14.

2. THOU fear as a Man; but must strive too vercome as a Christian: which
thou may perform, if from the terrible aspect of the Messenger, thou cast
thine eyes upon the Amiable Face of God that sends him. Holy David shows the
way, Psalm. 18.5, 6. The snares of Death prevented me: In my distress I called
upon the Lord, and cried unto my God; and he heard my voice out of his Temple,
and my cry came before him, even into his ears: He that is our God, is the God
of Salvation; and unto God the Lord belong the issues of death, Psalm. 68.20.

3. MAKE God thy Friend, and Death shall be an advantage, Phil. 1.21. It is
true what the Wise Man said, Wisd. 1.13. Chap. 2.24. that God made not death;
but through envy of the Devil death came into the World: But though God made
him not, he is pleased to employ him as his Messenger to Summon some to
Judgment, and Invite others to Glory; and those the Psalmist makes mention of,
are these latter; Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the Death
of his Saints: And what reason have thou to abom^nate that which God accounts
precious?

4. THOU art afraid of Death: Acquaint thy self with him more, and thou will
fear him less. Bears and Lions, at the first sight affright us, but upon
frequent viewing lose their Terror: Inure thine eyes to the sight of Death, and
that Face shall not displease thee. Thou must shortly dwell with him for a long
time, for the days of darkness are many, Eccl. 11.8. but in the mean time
entertain him, as the blessed Apostle does, 1 Cor. 15.31. I protest by your
rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I dye daily.

5. INVITE him to thy Board, lodge him in thy Bed, discourse him in thy Closet,
and walk with him in thy Garden, as Joseph of Arimathea did; and by no means
suffer him to be a stranger to thy thoughts: This familiarity shall bring thee
to delight in his company whom thou did formerly dread, then thou may with
the blessed Apostle say, Phil. 1.23. I have a desire to be with Christ, which
is far better.

6. THOU art gievously afraid of Death: Fears are apt to imagine, and aggravate
evils: Even Christ himself walking upon the waters, and the Disciples trembled,
as at some dreadful Apparition; perhaps thou lookst at Death as some utter
abolition, or extinction of thy being; and nature must needs shrink at the
thought of not being at all: This is an ill and dangerous misprision: For it is
but departing, which thou call'st Death.

7. SEE how God styles it to Abraham; Thou shall go to thy Fathers in peace,
thou shall be buried in a good old Age, Genesis 15.15. And Jacob, Genesis 49.33. When
Jacob had ended commanding his Sons; he gathered up his feet into the bed, and
yielded up the Ghost, and was gathered unto his People. So that dying is going
to our Fathers, and gathering to our People, with whom we shall live in a
better World, and re-appear Glo^ious, Let but thy Faith represent Death to thee
in this shape, and he will not appear terrible.

8. DO but observe in what familiar terms God Conferred with Moses concerning
his Death, Deuteronomy. 32.49. Get thee up into this Mountain Abarim unto Mount Nebo,
which is in the Land of Moab, and behold the Land of Canaan, which I gave unto
the Children of Israel for a Possession, and dye in the Mount whither thou
go up, and be gathered to thy People, as Aaron thy Brother died in Mount
Hor, and was gathered to his People: So it is no more, go up there and dye;
should it have been go a days Journey in the Wilderness to Sacrifice, it could
have been no otherwise expressed; or as if it were all one to go up to Sinai to
meet with God, and go up to Nebo and dye. Neither is it otherwise with us; only
the difference is, that Moses must first view the Land of Promise, and then
dye; whereas we must first dye, and then see the Promised Land.

9. THOU art troubled with the fear of Death: What reason have thou to be
Afflicted with that which is common to Mankind? Remember the words of Joshua,
Josh. 23.14. Behold this day (says he) I am going the way of all the Earth. If
all the Earth go this way, could thou think there is a by-path left thee to
tread in, were it so that Monarchs, Princes, Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles
were allowed any easier passage out of the World, thou might perhaps repine
at a painful dissolution, but now since all go one way, there can be no ground
for a discontented murmur.

10. GRUDGE if thou will, that thou art a man, but grudge not that being a man
thou must dye: It is true, those whom the last day shall find alive, shall not
dye, but they shall be changed; 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. but this change shall be an
Annalogical Death a speedy Consumption of all our corrupt and drossy Parts; so
as the pain must be the more intense, by its shortness, than in the ordinary
course of death. Briefly, that change is death, and our death is a change, as
Job styles it, Job 14.14. The difference is not in the pain, but in the speed
of the T^ansaction: Fear not then the sentence of Death; remember them that
have been before thee, and that come after, for this is the sentence of the
Lord over all flesh, Ecclus. 41.3.

11 THOU fear Death: So do not Infants, Children, or Distracted Persons, as
the Philosopher observes: Why should reason render us more Cowardly, than
defect of reason does them? Thou fear that which others wish for: O Death,
how acceptable is thy sentence to the needy, and to him whose shrength fails,
that is now in the last age, and is vexed with all things, and to him that
despaireth, and has lost patience: Ecclus. 41.2. Wherefore is light given
(says Job) to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter in Soul? Which
long for hid Treasures; which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can
find the grave? Job 3.20, 21, 22.

12. HOW many invite the violence of Death, and if refused, do, as Ignatius
threatened he would do to the Lions, force his Assault? Death is the same to
all: The Difference is in the Disposition of the Entertainers; could thou
loost upon Death with their eyes, he would be as welcome to thee as to them: At
least, why should thou not labor to have thy heart so wrought upon, that
this Face of Death which seems lovely and desirable to some, may not appear
over-terrible to thee?

13. THOU art afraid to die: Could thou have been capable in the Womb, of
the use of reason, thou would have been more afraid of coming into the World,
than thou art of going out: For why should we be more afraid of the better,
than of the worse? Better is the day of death, than the day of ones birth,
says the Preacher: Eccles. 7.2. better every way; our birth begins our
miseries, our death ends them: The one enters the best into a wretched World,
but the other enters the good into a World of Glory: Certainly, were it not for
our infidelity, as we came crying into the World, so we should go rejoicing
out: And as some have solemnized their Birthday with feasting and triumph, the
Primitive Church has enjoined rejoicing upon the Dying day of her Martyrs and
Saints.

14. THOU abhorrest Death, and fleest from it as from a Serpent: but do thou
know his sting is gone? what harm is there in a sting-less Snake? Have thou not
heard of some delicate Dames that have carried 'em in their Bosom for coolness,
and pleasure of their smoothness? The sting of Death is Sin; 1 Cor. 15.56. He
may hiss and wind about us, but cannot prejudice us when that Sting is out:
Look up, O thou believing Soul, to thy blessed Savior, who has plucked out
this sting of Death, and happily triumphs over it; O Death where is thy sting?
O Grave where is thy Victory? 1 Cor. 15.55.

15. THY Soul and Body, old Companions are loath to part: It is but forbearing
their Society a while; they but take leave of other till they meet at the
Resurr^^^^on in the mean time they are safe, and the better (...): It is
commendable in the Jews (otherwis^ (...) Men) that they call their Grave (...)
the House of the Living; and when they (...) ^urial of their Neigbours, they
(...) and cast it into the Air, with those words of the Psalmist, 72.16. They
shall flourish and put forth as Grass upon the Earth.

16. DID we not believe a Resurrection of the one part, and a re-uniting of the
other, we had reason to be daunted with thoughts of a Dissolution: But now we
have no cause to be dismayed with a little Intermission. It was the saying of a
Wise Heathen, That Death which we so fear and flee from, does but respite Life
for a while, not take it away: The day will come which shall restore us to
Light again: Settle thy Soul in this assurance, and thou can not be
discomfited with a necessary Parting.

17. THOU art afraid of Death; when thou art weary of thy days labor, art thou
afraid of rest? Hear what thy Savior, who is the Lord of Life, esteems of
Death, Joh. 11.11. Our Friend Lazarus sleeps; and of Jarius his Daughter,
Matt. 9.24. The Maid is not Dead, but Sleeps: Neither uses the Spirit of God
any other Language, concerning his Servants under the Old Testament: Now shall
I sleep in the Dust, says holy Job, Job 7.21. and of David, 2. Sam. 7.12. When
thy days be fulfilled, thou shall sleep with thy Fathers; nor yet under the
New: For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep, says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.30.

18. THE Philosophers were wont to call Sleep the Brother of Death; but God
says, Death is no other than Sleep it self; a Sleep sure and sweet: When thou
lie down at Night to thy Repose, thou can not be certain to awake in the
Morning, as when thou layest thy self down in Death, thou art sure to wake in
the Morning of the Resurection. Out of this Bodily Sleep, thou may be
startled with some noise of Horror, fearful Dreams, Tumults, or allarms of War;
but here thou shall rest quietly in the place of Silence, free from all
internal and external Disturbances, and in the mean time thy Soul shall see
none but Visions of Joy and Blessedness.

19. BUT, oh the sweet and hearty expression of our last rest, and the Issue of
our happy resuscitation, which our holy Apostle has laid forth, for the
consolation of his mournful Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. For if we believe,
that Jesus died and rose again; Even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will
God bring with him. So that our belief is Antidote enough against the worst of
Death: And why are we troubled, when we believe Jesus dyed, and what a Triumph
is this over Death, that the same Jesus who dyed, rose again? And what a
comfort is it, that the same Jesus who arose, shall come again and bring all
his with him in Glory? And lastly, what a strong Cordial is this to all good
Hearts, that all which die well, sleep in Jesus? Thou thoughtest, perhaps, of
sleeping in the Bed of the Grave; and there indeed is Rest: But he tells thee
of sleeping in the Bosom of Jesus; and there is Immortality and Blessedness. O
blessed Jesu, in thy presence is the fullness of Joy, and at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.12. Who would desire to walk in the World,
when he may sleep in Christ.

20. THOU fear Death: But on what terms, does Death present himself to thee:
If as an Enemy, (as the Apostle styles him) 1 Cor. 15.26. The last Enemy that
shall be destroyed is Death, thy unpreparedness will make him dreadful; but thy
readiness and fortitude takes off his terror: If as a Messenger of God he is
sent to convey thee to happiness, what reason have thou to be afraid of thine
own bliss? It is one thing what Death is in himself, a privation of Life; such
as nature cannot choose but abhor: Another what he is by Christ made unto us;
and introduction to Life, and a harbinger to Glory.

21. WHY, would the Lord of Life yield unto Death, and by yielding vanquished
him; but to alter and sweeten him to us; and of a fierce Tyrant, make him a
Friend and Benefactor? And if we look upon him thus changed, and reconciled.
how can we choose but bid him welcome?

22. THOU art afraid of the pangs of Death: Some have dyed without any great
sense of pain: Some have yielded up their Souls without a groan: And how
know thou, what measure God has allotted thee? Our Death is a Sea-Voyage,
(The holy Apostle, desired to lanch forth, Phil. 1.) wherein some find a rough
and tempestuous passage; others calm and smooth: Such thine may prove; and so
thy dissolution may be easier than a fit of sickness.

23. BUT if God had determined otherwise, look unto Jesus the Author and
Finisher of our Faith; (Heb. 12.2.) the Son of God, the Lord of Glory; see with
what Agonies he conflicted, what torments he endured for thee: Look upon his
Bloody Sweat, Bleeding Temples, Furrowed Back, Nailed Hands and Feet, Racked
Joints, and Pierced Side: Hear his strong Cries, consider the Shame, Pain and
Curse of the Cross which he underwent for thy sake: Say whether thy sufferings
can be comparable to his. He is a Cowardly and Unworthy Soldier that follows
his General sighing. Behold, these are the steps wherein thy God and Savior
has trod before thee: Walk on courageously in this deep and bloody way; and
after a few paces thou shall overtake him in Glory: For if we suffer with him,
we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12.

24. THOU shrink'st at the thoughts of Death: Is it not for over-valuing Life,
and making Earth thy home? Rich Persons that live at ease are loath to stir
abroad, especially upon hard and stormy Voyages: Perhaps it is so with thee;
wherein I cannot but much pity thy weakness, in placing thy contentment, where
a wiser Man could find nothing but vanity and vexation.

25. ALAS, what is our Exile, if this be our home? What entertainment to be
enamored on? Distempered humors, hard usages, violent passions, and bodily
sicknesses; sad complaints, disappointed hopes, and frequent miscarriages,
Momentany Pleasures mixed with sorrows, and lastly, umbrages, of joy, and real
miseries: Does these so bewitch thee, that when Death calls, thou art ready to
reply, as the Devil to our Savior, Mat. 8.29. Art thou come to torment me
before the time?

26. ARE these such contentments, as allures thee to the World, as St. Peter
was to Mount Tabor, Mat. 17.4. Master, It is good for us to be here, if thou
have any Faith in thee, look up to the other World, where thou art going and
see whether that true Life, pure Joy, perfect Felicity, and Eternity, may not
be worthy to draw thy heart to a longing desire of Fruition, and a Contempt of
what the Earth can promise, in comparison of infinite blessedness.

27. IT was one of the defects which Sir Francis Bacon found in Physicians that
do not study Remedies to procure the easy passage of their Patients,
Advancement of Learning.
through the Gates of Death: Such helps I leave to the care of the skilful
Sages of Nature; the use I supose must be with caution, lest whilst they
endeavor to sweeten Death, they shorten Life.

28. BUT let me prescibe this spiritual means of thine happy Euthanasia; which
is a faithful disposition of the laboring Soul, that can truly say with
Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have believed: and Chap. 4.7, 8. I have
fought a good fight; I have finished my course; I have kept the Faith:
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
Righteous Judge shall give me at that day.

29. THOU startest ar the mention of Death: How can thou but blush to read of
Socrates, Plato Phoedone
when the Message of Death was brought him; applauded the News with much joy:
Or, of a Cardinal of Rome, that received the Intimation of his approaching
Death, Cried out, the news is good and welcome! Is not their Confidence thy
Shame; who believing that when our Earthly house of this Tabernacle shall be
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. yet shrinks at the motion of taking possession of it?

30. CAN thou with dying Mithridates be unwilling to forsake this light! when
thou art going to a light more Glorious than the Sun: It is our infidelity,
that makes us unwilling to die: Did we think the Soul sleeps as well as the
Body, from the moment of the dissolution, till the day of Resurrection, death
might be unwelcome.

31. OR, did we think we should wander to unknown places to uncertain
entertainment; or fear a scorching Trial upon the Emig^ation, in flames little
inferior to those of Hell, there were some cause to tremble at the approach of
Death: But we can boldly say, with the Wise Man, Wisd. 3.1, 2, 3. The Souls of
the Righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment touch them:
In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their departure is taken for
misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction; but they are in peace.

32. OH thou of little Faith, why fearst thou? ^hide thy self, as that dying
Saint of old, and say, my Soul, go boldly forth, what art thou afraid of? Lo,
the Angels are ready to receive thee, and carry thee to Glory; leave there this
wretched Body, and be possessed of Heaven: After a momentary darkness upon
Nature, thou shall enjoy the Beatifical Vision of God: Be not afraid to be
happy, but say in Faith what Jonah said in Anger; Jonah 4.3. It is better for
me to dye than to live.

33. I am afraid to dye: This is Natures voice: But will thou hear what Faith
says? To me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. If therefore Nature reigns
in thee, thou must be affrighted with Death: But if true Grace be prevalent in
thy Soul, that Guest shall not be unwelcome: Was ever any Man afraid of Profit
and Advantage? Such is Death to the Faithful: Whosoever finds Christ his Life,
shall be sure to find Death his gain, for he is thereby brought to a near
Communion with him: Whereas before he enjoyed him by the dim apprehension of
Faith, now he clearly and immediately enjoys that Glorious Presence, which only
makes blessedness.

34. THIS is it that causes Death to change his Copy; and renders him who is
formidable, pleasing, and beneficial; I desire to depart, and to be with
Christ, says the Man who was rapt up in the third Heaven; had it been only
departing, he had not been in such an ecstasy, but to depart, and to be with
Christ, is that which raises his Soul.

35. WHEN Socrates was to dye for his Religion, he comforted himself with this,
that he should go to Orpheus, Homer, Musaeus, and the other Worthies of former
Ages; Poor Man! Could he have known God manifested in the flesh, and received
up into Glory, 1 Timothy 3.16. and in that glorified state sitting at the right
hand of Majesty; could he have known the Blessed Order of the Cherubim and
Seraphim, Angels, Arch Angels, Principalities and Powers, and the rest of the
most Glorious Hierarchy of Heaven; Could he have been acquainted with that
Celestial Choir of the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect: Heb. 12.23. Could he
have known the God and Father of Spirits, the Infinite and Incomprehensible
Glorious Diety, whose Presence transfuses Everlasting Blessedness into all
those Citizens of Glory, And could he have known that, he should have an
undoubted interest in that infinite Bliss; how gladly would he have taken of
his hemlock, and how joyfully would he have passed to that happy World?

36. ALL this we know, and no less assured then of our present being; with what
comfort should we think of changing our present Condition with a Blessed
Immortality? How sweet a Song was that of old Simeon? Luke 2.29. Lord, now
let thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy word, for mine eyes
have seen thy Salvation: That which he saw by the Eye of Sense, thou see by
the Eye of Faith; even the Lords Christ; verse 16. he saw him in Weakness, thou
see him in Glory; why should thou not depart, not in peace only, but in
joy and comfort?

37. HOW did the Proto-Martyr Stephen triumph over the rage of his Enemies, and
the fury of Death, when he had once seen the Heavens opened, and the Son of Man
standing at the right hand of God? Acts 7.56. God offers the same blessed
prospect to the Eye of thy Soul: Faith is the Key that opens the Heaven of
Heavens, fix thy eyes upon that Glorious and Saving Object: Thou can not but
lay down thy Body in peace, and send thy Soul into the hands of him that bought
it, with the cheerful and sweet Recommendation, of Lord Jesus receive my
Spirit, Acts 7.39.

A Prayer at the Hour of Death.
O LORD GOD, Almighty, I humbly acknowledge my own vileness, through the whole
course of my Life* And seeing thou have thus long spared me, now accomplish thy
Mercy in me: Be thou my God forever, and my Guide unto the end; O Comfort me,
now my Heart trembles in me, and the terrors of Death are fallen upon me, give
me the long expected fruits of my hopes proposed to me in thy Word: O Blessed
Jesu, who art the Death of death, now show thy self my Savior: Take from my
afflicted Soul the sting of Death, and assure me of Victory: Loose the Pains,
allay the Fears and Sorrows, and Sweeten the bitterness of Death, until in my
enjoying thy Presence it be swallowed up in Victory: O Holy Savior, who have
had Experience of all our miseries for Sin, without Sin, and have admitted us
to be Baptized into the Similitude of thy Death and Resurrection: Let me now
feel in my Languishing Soul the Power and Efficacy thereof.

2. O Christ, whose Human Soul, in thy Passion for my Redeemption, was heavy
unto Death, now mercifully Consider my Frailty who am now at the point of
Dissolution: O now give me an Invincible Faith in thee, against which the Gates
of Hell shall never prevail, now speak Peace and Comfort to my poor Soul: Thou
who pouredst out thy Soul to Death for me, receive my wearied Spirit to Eternal
Life: Let not this fearful passage be too bitter to me, but be thou ever
present with me in all my sufferings: O Holy Ghost the Comforter of all the
Elect, leave me not Comfortless, let me be gathered to my Fathers in Peace:
Bring me to that Life wherein thou have promised to wipe away all Tears from
our Eyes: Where shall be no more Death, Sorrow, Pain, nor any bitter Effects of
Sin: Lord hear me, O thou, who despisest not a broken (...) contrite Heart,
have mercy upon me: Lord receive my Petitions; and in thy appointed hour, come
Lord Jesus, my Savior and Redeemer, deliver me from this bondage of
Corruption, even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

SECT. XVII. Of Judgment
1. THOU apprehendest true; Death is terrible, but Judgment more; both succeed
upon the same decree; It is appointed unto Men once to dye; but after this the
judgment: Heb. 9.27. It is not more terrible, than thought on: Death, because
he strikes, and lays before us examples of Mortality, cannot but sometimes take
up our hearts; but the last Judgment, having no visible proofs upon our
thoughts, too seldom fright us:

2. YET who conceives the Terror of that day? When the Sun shall be turned into
darkness, and the Moon into blood, Acts 2.20. That day, which shall burn as an
Oven, when all the proud, and all that do wickedly shall be as the stubble;
Mal. 4.1. That day, in which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise;
and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat; the Earth also, and the works
that are therein shall be burnt up: 2 Pet. 3.10. That day, wherein the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels; in flaming fire
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. That day, wherein the Lord will come with
fire, and with his Chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury,
and his rebuke with flames of fire, for by fire and by his sword will the Lord
plead with all flesh, Isa. 66.15, 16. That day, wherein the Son of Man shall
come in his Glory, and all the Holy Angels with him; and shall sit upon the
Throne of his Glory; and all Nations shall be gathered before him; and he shall
separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the
Goats, Mat. 25.31, 32. And that day, wherein all the kindreds of the Earth
shall wail because of him, Rev. 1.7.

3. THAT great and terrible day of the Lord, Joel 2.31. wherein if the powers
of Heaven be shaken, how can the heart remain removed? And if the World be
dissolved, who can abide it? Alas, we are ready to tremble at Thunder in a
Cloud; and at Lightning that glances our Eyes; what shall we do when the
Heavens shall break in pieces, and be on flame about our Ears? Oh who may abide
the day of his coming, and who shall stand when he appears? Mal. 3.2.

4. YET be of good cheer, amidst all this horror there is comfort; whether thou
be one whom it shall please God to reserve upon the Earth to the sight of this
dreadful day, he knows in whose hands our times are; but this we are sure of,
that we are upon the last days: And we may spit in the Faces of St. Peter's
Scoffers, that say where is the promise of his coming? Knowing that the Lord is
not slack, but he that shall come, will come, and not tarry, 2 Pet. 3.4, 9.
Heb. 10.17. And some may live to see the Son of Man come in the Clouds of
Heaven, in this last Scene of the World:

5. IF so, let not thy heart be dismayed with these fearful things: Thy change
shall be sudden, one Moment shall put off Mortality, and clothe thee with
Incorruption, not capable of fear and pain: The Majesty of this appearance
shall add to thy Joy and Glory* Thou shall then see the Lord himself descend
from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel and with the trump
of God: Thou shall see thy self, and those other which are alive and remain to
be caught up into the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air; and so shall thou be
ever with the Lord. On this Assurance, the Apostle subjoyns, Wherefore comfort
one another with these words, 1 These. 4.16, 17, 18. And if ever there were
comfort in words, not of Men or Angels, but of the God of Truth, these will
afford it to our trembling Souls.

6. BUT if thou be one whom God has determined to Summon before the great day
of his appearance; here is a joy unspeakable and full of Glory: For those that
sleep in Jesus shall God bring with him; 1 These. 4.15. They shall be of that
Glorious Train, which shall attend the Great Judge of the World: Yea they shall
be Co-assessors to the Lord of Heaven and Earth, in this Judicature; sitting
upon the Bench, when guilty Men and Angels shall be at the Bar: To him that
overcomes, says Christ, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I
also overcame, and am set down with my Father upon his Throne, Rev. 3.21. What
place is here for any terror, since such heavenly Magnificence, fullness of Joy
and Eternal Glory?

7. THOU art afraid think of Judgment; I had rather thou were awful, than
timorous, when St. Paul, Acts 24.25. discoursed of the judgment to come, it is
no marvel that Felix trembled; But the same Apostle, when he pressed to his
Corinthians* the certainty and generality of our appearance before the
Judgment-Seal of Christ, that every one may receive the things, done in his
body whether good or evil; adding, knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we
persuade men; but we are made manifest to God, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11.

8. THE holiest Man is not exempted from the dread, but slavish fear of the
great Judge: We know his infinite Justice; and are Conscious of our manifold
failings: And how can we acknowledge these, and not fear? But this fear works
not in us a Malignant repining at the severe Tribunal of the Almighty, but a
careful endeavor to approve our selves that we may be acquitted by him, and
appear blameless in his presence. How justly may we tremble, when we look upon
our Actions and Deserts? But confidently appear at the Bar, where we are
assured of a discharge? Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5.1. When we think of a Conflagration of
the World, how can we but fear? But when we think of a happy restitution of all
things; how can we but rejoice in trembling? Acts 3.21.

9. THOU quakest at the expectation of Judgment: Surely the Majesty of that
great Assize must needs be formidable: And if the delivery of the Law on Mount
Sinai, (Exodus 19.16, 18.) were with so dreadful a Pomp of Thunder and
Lightning, Fire, Smoke and Earthquakes, that the Israelites were half dead with
fear in receiving it; with what terrible Magnificence shall God come to require
an account of that Law at the hands of the whole sinful generation of Mankind?

10. REPRESENT unto thy thoughts, that which was showed to the Prophet Daniel,
Dan. 7.9, 10. Imagine thou sawst, the Ancient of days sitting upon a Throne
like a fiery flame; a fiery stream issuing and coming forth from before him;
thousand thousands ministering unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
standing before him; the judgment set and the Books opened: Or as John, the
Daniel of the New Testament, saw Rev. 20.11, 12. A great white throne, and him
that sat on it, from whose Face the Earth and the Heavens fled away, and the
dead both small and great standing before God; and the Books opened and the
Dead judged out of those things which were written in those Books, according to
their works.

11. LET the eyes of thy mind foresee that which these bodily eyes shall once
see, and tell me how thou feel thy self affected with the sight of such a
Judge, such an appearance, and such a process: And if thou art in a trembling
Condition, cheer thy self with this, that thy Judge is thine Advocate; that
upon that Throne sits not greater Majesty than Mercy: It is thy Savior that
shall sentence thee; how safe art thou then under such hands? Can thou fear
he will doom thee to death, who dyed to give thee life? Can thou fear he will
condemn thee for those sins which he has given his blood to expiate? Can
thou fear the rigor of that Justice which he has so fully satisfied? Or can
thou misdoubt the miscarriage of that Soul he has so dearly bought?

12. NO, all this Divine State and Magnificence makes for thee. Let those
guilty and impenitent Souls, Romans 2.5. who have heaped unto themselves Wrath
against the day of wrath, quake at the Glorious Majesty of the Son of God; for
whom nothing remains, but a fearful expectation of judgment, and fiery
indignation, which shall devour the adversaries, Heb. 10.27. But for thee who
art reconciled unto God by the Mediation of the Son of his love, and
incorporated into Christ, and made a Member of his Mystical Body; thou art
Commanded with all the Faithful, to look up, and lift up thy head; for now the
day of Redemption is come, Luke 21.28. Ephesians. 4.30.

13. AND indeed it is thy privilege, since by virtue of a blessed Union with
thy Savior, this Glory is thine; every Member has an interest in the Honor
of the Head. Rejoice therefore in the day of the Lord Jesus, Phil. 2.16. And
when the Tribes of the Earth shall wail. Rev. 1.7. Do thou Sing and call to the
Heavens and Earth to bear thee Company: Let the Heavens rejoice, and let the
Earth be glad: Let the Sea make a noise, and all that is therein: Let the
Fields be joyful, and all that is in it. Then shall all the trees of the wood
rejoice before the Lord: for he comes, for he comes to judge the Earth, and
with righteousness to judge the World, and the People with his Truth, Psalm.
96.11, 12, 13.

14 THOU art aff^ighted with the thought of the Great Day: Think oftener, and
thou shall less fear it; it will come surely, and suddenly; let thy frequent
thoughts prevent it, it will come as a Thief in the Night, without warning or
noise: Let thy careful vigilance expect it; and thy Soul shall not be
surprised, nor confounded. Thine Audit is sure and uncertain: Sure that it will
be, but uncertain the time. If thou will approve thy self a good Steward, have
thine Account ready; and set thy reckoning even betwix^. God and thy Soul:
Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing, Mat.
24.46.

15. LOOK upon the Heavens, and Earth as Dissolving; and think with St. Jerome,
that thou hear the last Trump, and voice of the Archangel shrilling in
thine Ears, Arise ye dead and come to judgment. Let it be thy main care, to
live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World, looking for that
Blessed Hope, and the Glorious Appearing of the Great God, and our Savior
Jesus Chirst, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity; Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like to his
Glorious body; according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things
to himself, Phil. 3.21.

A preparatory Prayer of the Judgment to come.
O Omnipotent Lord God, who have appointed a day wherein thou will bring all
the world to judgment, with every secret thing whether it be good, or whether
it be evil: O make me try my Soul daily and hourly at the Bar of my own
Conscience, that accusing and judging my self for my sins and transgressions,
thou may not condemn me at thy dreadful Tribunal: Lord* let that remarkable
day be often in my thoughts, that the fear of it and thee, may be ever before
my eyes: And my Conscience may be kept more pure by the power of that dread and
fear; give me an earnest desire and a careful endeavor to direct all my ways
and to order the whole Course of my Life, according to the Rule and Precepts of
thy Holy Word; let it be my utmost care and diligence to have a good
Conscience in all things, and to live so that my Life being approved of thee,
my Death may be happy, and my appearance before thee in the day of thy coming
surrounded with joy and comfort.

2. GRANT that the Merit of thy Death, and Virtue of thy Resurrection, may both
Mortify all my Sinful and Corrupt Affections, and raise me to the Life of
Righteousness, that dying to Sin, and governed here by thy ^ower, and hereafter
Acquitted by thy final Sentence, I may at last arrive to a perfect Union with
thee, with a full view and eternal enjoyment of thee, and thy Blessed Presence:
Grant this through thy Mercies, O Heavenly Father, thy Merits, O Gracious Jesu,
and thy Assistance, O Holy Spirit, Three Persons, One only Wise, Omnipotent
and Immortal God, to whom belongs all Honor, Praise, Might, Majesty and
Dominion, in Heaven and Earth, from this time forth and to all eternity. Amen.

SECT. XVIII. Spiritual Conflicts.
1. THOU art affrighted at the thought of Spi^itual Enemies: Earth nor Hell
has any thing so formidable, Power, Malice and Subtilty, are m^t in them:
Neither is it easy to say in which of these they are most eminent. Certainly,
were we to match with him on even hands, their was just cause not of Fear, but
Despair.

2. I could tremble, thou say, to think what Satan has done, and what he can
do: With what Contestation he enabled the Egyptian Sorcerers to stand with
Moses; how they turned their Rods into Serpents; and seemed to have the
advantage of many Serpents crawling and hissing in Pharaoh's Pavement, Exodus
7.12. How they turned waters into blood, verse. 22. and brought Frogs upon the
Land of Egypt, Exodus 8.7. as if thus far the power of Hell would presume to
hold Competition with Heaven: What furious Tempests he raises in the Air, as
that from the Wilderness beat upon the four corners of the House of Job's
eldest Son, and overthrew it, Job 1.19. Now Job was the greatest Man in the
East, Job 1.3. His Heir dwelt not in a Cottage, but a strong Fabric, which
could not stand against this Hurricane of Satan.

3. WHAT fearful Apparitions he makes in upper Regions: What great wonders,
causing Fire to come down from Heaven on the Earth, in the sight of Men, Rev.
13.13. Lastly, what grievous Tyranny he exercises upon the Children of
Disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6. Could thou expect any less, from those the Spirit of
God himself styles Principalities and Powers, and Rulers of the Darkness of
this World, and spiritual wickednesses in high Places, (Ephesians. 6.12.) and the
Prince of the Power of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2.

4. SURELY it were no Victory to be a Christian, if we had not powerful
Opposites; but do thou not consider that this Power is by Concession, and the
Exercise but with Permission, and Limitation? What Power is their in any
Creature, which is not derived from the Almighty? This Measure the Infinite
Creator was pleased to communicate to them, as Angels, which they retain and
Exercise as Devils; their damnation has stripped them of Glory; but we know not
how much their strength is abated.

5. AND we may perceive how their Power is bounded? Those that turned their
Rods into Serpents, could not keep 'em from being devoured of that one Serpent
of Moses: Those that brought Frogs upon Egypt, cannot bring Lice; those that
were suffered to bring Frogs, lose that power to take 'em away: Restrained
Powers must know their Limits, and we knowing them, must set limits to our
Fears; a Lion chained can do less harm than a Cur loose: Why art thou concerned
at the powerfulness of Spirits, whilst they by an overruling Power are tied to
their Stake that they cannot hurt thee?

6. THY Fears are increased with their number, which are as many as Powerful:
one Demoniack was possessed with a Legion; how many Legions then tempt those
Millions of Men upon the face of the Earth, whereof none is free from their
Solicitations to evil? That holy Man whom our counterfeit Hermits pretend to
imitate, in the Vision of his retiredness, saw the Air full of them, and their
snares for Mankind; and were our Eyes as clear as His, we might perhaps meet
with the same Prospect: But be not dismayed. Could thou borrow the eyes of the
Servant of an Holier Master, thou should see, that there are more with us,
than against us, ^ Kin. 6.16. Thou should see the blessed Angels of God,
pitching their Tents about thee, as the Powerful, Vigilant and Constant
Guardians of thy Soul: These are those Valiant ones about thy Bed; They all
hold Swords, being expert in War; every one his Sword upon his Thigh, because
of fear in the night, Cant. 3.7, 8.

7. FEAR not therefore but make the Lord, Even the Most High, thy Habitation;
then there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwelling: For he shall give his Angels charge over thee in all thy ways, they
shall bear thee up in their hands lest thou dash thy foot against a stone; and
besides this indemnity. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder; the young
Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under thy feet, Psalm. 91.9, 10, 11, 12,
13. In secular Enmity, true Valor may be oppressed, but not easily daunted
with Multitude; I will not be afraid of ten thousand, (says David) Psalm. 3.6.
and Psalm. 118.12. They came about me like Bees, but in the Name of the Lord
will I destroy them.

8. IT was a brave Resolution in that General, when a Soldier told him, the
Persian Arrows darkened the Sun; be of good cheer, said he, then we shall sight
in the shade: Answerable to which, was that Heroical Determination of Luther,
who against all Threats and Disswasions, would go into the City of Worms,
though as many Devils were in it, as Tiles upon the Houses; and why should we
not imitate this Confidence? What if there were as many Devils in the Air, as
are Spires of Grass upon the Earth? God is our refuge and strength, as a very
present h^lp in trouble; therefore will we not fear, though the Earth be
removed; though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, Psalm.
46.12. Behold, God is our Salvation, we will trust, and not be afraid; for the
Lord Jehovah, is our strength and our song, he also is become our Salvation,
^^a. 12.2. Let God arise, and let his Enemies be scattered; let them also that
hate him flee before him; like as the smoke v^nisheth, so shall thou drive
them away, Psalm. ^8.1, 2.

9. BUT on the malice of those infernal Spirits, is implacable and deadly,
whose Artifice is Temptation, and Accusation; whose delight Torment, Shrieks,
Howlings, Groans and Gnashing; whose main Drift is the Eternal Damnation of
miserable Mankind! Why should we expect otherwise from him, who is a Manslayer
from the beginning? That carries Destruction in his Name and Nature? That goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour?

10. SURELY, this Malignanty is restless; on this side Hell. But comfort thy
self in spite of Hells malice, thou art safe. Do thou not know by thee
stands the Victorious Lion of the Tribe of Judah, whom that infernal Fiend dare
not look in the Face? Do thou not remember, when sentence was pronounced of
Eternal Enmity, between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, it
was with this Doom, It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel,
Genesis 3.15.

11. A bruise of a Heel is far from the Heart; but a bruise of the Serpents
Head is Mortal; where his Sting is, there his Life lies: Neither did the Seed
of the Woman (Christ Jesus) this for himself (who was infinitely above all the
Power and Malice of the Devil) but for us the impotent and sinful Seed of Man:
The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your Feet, says the blessed Apostle,
Romans 16.20. not under his own only: Of whom God the Father had long before
said, Sit thou on my Right Hand, till I make thine Enemies thy Footstool,
Psalm. 110.1. But what do I speak of the Future? Already is this great work
achieved: For the Lord of Life, having spoiled Principalities and Powers, has
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them on his Cross, Col. 2.15.

12. ALL the Powers of Hell were dragged after this Conqueror, when he
advanced upon that Triumphant Chariot. Look therefore on these Hellish Forces,
as vanquished; and know that in all things we are more than Conquerors through
him that loved us, Romans 8.37. Only do thou by the power of thy Faith, apply to
thy self this great work that thy Victorious Savior has done for Salvation of
all Believers.

13. POWER without Malice were Harmless; and Malice without Power Impotent: But
when both combine together, they are Dreadful. But, Malice to execute Mischief,
has Force, or Fraud; now the Malice of Satan prevails more by the latter; and
the Subtilty of these Malignant Spirits is perniciouser than their Power: In
his Power, he is a Lion, Psalm. 7.2. in his Subtilby, he is a Serpent, Genesis 3.1.
He is that Old Serpent, Rev. 20.2. Whose craft is marvellously increased by the
Experience of so many thousand Years.

14. THEN the more careful ought we to be, lest, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor.
2.11. Satan should get an advantage of us: This he seeks; and if our Spiritual
Wisdom and Circumspection be not vigilant, will be sure to find. It is a Word,
too sublime for us, which the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 2.11. For we are not
ignorant of Satan's devices. Alas, he has a thousand that weak Simplicity is
not able to reach: The Wisest knows not the Deceitfulness of his own heart,
much less can we dive into the Plots of Hell that are against us.

15. WE hear, and are forwarned of the wiles of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.11. But what
his Machinations are, how can we know, or prevent? Even the Children of this
world, says our Savior, Luke 16.8. are in their Generation wiser than the
Children of Light: How Craftier is their Father from whom their cunning is
derived? Be as humble then as thou will; and say with Agur the Son of Jakeh,
Prove. 30.2, 3. Surely I am more brutish then any man, and have not the
understanding of a man: I neither learned Wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the
Holy.

16. BUT what ever thou art in thy self, know what thou art in Gods esteem:
Consider what the Psalmist impartially professes, Psalm. 119.98. Thou through
thy Commandments, have made me wiser than mine Enemies; for they are ever with
me: The Spirit of Wisdom is ours as well as Righteousness, Deuteronomy. 34.9. Ephesians.
1.17. 1 Cor. 1.30. And he who overrules Hell, has said, Mat. 16.18. The Gates
of Hell shall not prevail against his Church:

17. WHAT are Hell Gates, but the deep Plots of those Infernal Powers? The
Serpent is the Emblem of Subtilty: The Serpents of the Egyptian Sorcerers, were
devoured by Moses his Serpent. Wherefore, but to show that all crafty Counsels
and Machinations of hellish Projectors, are easily destroyed by the Power and
Wisdom of the Almighty: It was the Rod of God that swallowed 'em all, and was
still it self, when they were vanquished: And when Satan thought to have won
most honor to himself, attended him shame and loss.

18. WHAT an advantage did the Powers of Darkness think to acquire, in drawing
our first Parents, by their subtle Suggestions into sin, and perdition,
imagining either Mankind shall not, or shall be ours? But the Incomprehensible
Wisdom, and Mercy of God disappointed their hopes; and took occasion by Man's
fall, to raise him to a greater Glory; and so order it, that the Serpents
nibling at the heel, lost him the breaking of his head. What Trophies did that
wicked Spirit think to erect upon the Ruins of miserable Job, and how was that
Saint doubled in his Estate and Honor, by his conquering Patience?

19. HOW confidently did the Subtilty of Hell say, concerning the Son of God
exhibited in the flesh; This is the Heir, come let us kill him, and the
Inheritance shall be ours? Mat. 21.38. Mar. 12.7. Luke 20.14. How sure work did
they think they had m^de, when they saw him, through their subtle procurement,
nailed to the cross, and dying upon that tree of shame and curse; when they saw
him laid under a Sealed and Guarded Gravestone? And now begins their Confusion
and his Triumph; Now does the Lord of Life trample upon Death and Hell; and to
perfect his own Glory, and Man's Redemption, by his most Glorious Resurrection.

20. AND as it was with the Head, so with the Members: When Satan had done his
worst, they are zealouser upon their sins, and happier upon their miscarriages;
God finds out a way to improve their evils to advantage, and teaches them of
Vipers to make Sovereign Treacles, and safe and powerful Trochises. The
Temptations of Satan, sent from his Power, Malice, and Subtilty, are but fiery
darts, for their Suddenness, Impetuosity, and Penetration: If we can hold the
Shield of Faith before us, Ephesians. 6.16. They shall not be quenched, but retorted
in the Face of him that sends them; and we shall with the holy Apostle find and
profess, that, In all things we are more then Conquerors, through him that
loved us; Romans 8.37. And in a bold defiance of all the Powers of Darkness, say,
( ver. 38, 39) I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, shall be
able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

A Prayer in Spiritual Conflicts.
O Blessed Jesu! the Lord of Life, Prince of Glory, and Captain of our
Salvation! the perplexing trouble of my destracting thoughts, do by their sly
insinuations and secret importunities disturb the quiet of my mind, and make my
holy duties become a weariness to my Soul: They cool the heat, they damp the
Vigor, and dead the Comfort of all my Devotions: Yea, even when I beseech God
to forgive my sins, I then sin whilst I am praying for forgiveness; whether it
be in the Church or the Closet, so Frequently and so Violently do these vain
thoughts withdraw my heart from thy service, that I cannot have confidence,
thou hear my Suit, because I know by Experience my own deafness; and
therefore, sure, needs must thou, O God, be far off from my Prayers, whilst my
heart is so far out of thy presence, and hurried away with a Crowd of vain
Imaginations.

2. But Lord, keep my Faith fixed upon thy Mediation, let me behold thy Incense
when I offer my Sacrifice, and though distractions have withdrawn me from my
self, yet let not distrust drive me from my Jesus. O give me an increase of
Saving Knowledge, which will prove a sure means of Sanctifying my thoughts;
Mortify in me all vile Affections and Inordinate Passions, and suppress all
evil thoughts and vain Imaginations, and by thy Special Grace, Excite and
Cherish in me Holy and Speritual Affections: Thou who have vanquished Satan and
all the powers of Darkness; O give Victory to me, and all languishing Souls in
our Spiritual Conflicts; guide us with thy Counsels, sustain us with thy Grace,
refresh us with thy Comforts, preserve us in thy Love, and crown us with thy
Glory. Amen. Amen. Hallelujah!

SECT. XIX. The Character of Patience.
1. PATIENCE is a peaceable disposition of the whole Man, not troubled, nor
troublesome; but abstaining from whatsoever may disturb himself or others. In
its Definition, we may observe these five heads, first the nature of Patienc^;
it is peaceable, and quiet; not subject to sudden Passion, light Motions, or
short Affections toward it; but an habitual Disposition and due Composure of a
Man's self, which may bear the impression of David's Motto, Psalm. 120.7. I am
for Peace.

2. SECONDLY, the subject of Patience: The whole Man, not the external, but the
internal the heart and head; the mind and manners, must be disposed, and
composed toward it: Principally indeed the Heart, For out of it are the issues
of Life, Prove. 4.23. and unless there be a Meek and Quiet Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.4.
It is impossible to acquire it, but withal there must be a quiet Hand, Psalm.
24.4. A quiet Eye, Job 31.1. A quiet Ear, Prove. 2.2. And a quiet Tongue, Psalm.
39.1. And all parts and faculties of the Soul disposed to Patience.

3. THIRDLY, the parts of Patience, is not in being troubled, or being
troublesome, neither actively impatient in displeasing others, nor passively
impatient in being disquieted by others. Fourthly, the practice of Patience, is
an abstinence from whatsoever may disturb, for so the word Patience (commonly
Translated) does import: And St. James does thus describe it, Jam. 1.21. A
laying aside of all filthiness and superfluity of maliciousness.

4. FIFTHLY, The Object of Patience, or Impatience, either in our selves, or
others. Men disquiet themselves either by Causeless conceit of offense offered,
when it is not: By being too suspicious, and Inventers of evil things, Romans
1.30. or by too much taking to heart, an offense when it is offered; by being
too Furious, 2 Timothy 3.3. Men disturb others, either in offering occasion of
offense by being Injurious and Disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. or by bitter seeking
Revenge, being full of Maliciousness, Romans 1.29. So Men likewise disturb
themselves and others; when they continue in their sins, and never think of
Repentance: As Elijah told Ahab, 1 King. 18.18 It is thou and thy Fathers house
that trouble and disquiet Israel.

5. BY this short view we have taken of Patience, we may behold the true
Character of a Patient Man: He is one of a Mild Nature, and true Christian
Temper, swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to wrath, 1 Pet. 3.4. Phil. 2.5.
Jam. 1.19. His head is not over-laden with Cares of this Life, nor his heart
with Fears, his eyes are not itching after Vanities, nor his Ears after
Novelties, Luke 21.34. Prove. 29.25. Jer. 22.17. Act. 17.21.

6. His Hands are not intermeddling with impertinent business, nor his Feet
swift to run into Evil: His Mouth is far from Cursing and Bitterness, kept in
as a Bridle, that it should not Offend, 1 These. 4.11. Prove. 4.26. Romans 3.14,
Psalm. 39.1. Psalm. 17.3. His whole body is fit for a Load of Injuries, which he
bears not out of baseness, and cowardice, because he dares not Revenge, but out
of Christian Fortitude, because he will not, Romans 12.13.

7. HIS Arms are strengthened by the Mighty God of Jacob, his hands are washed in
Innocence, and his breast is the breast plate of Righteousness, Genesis 49.24.
Psalm. 26.6. Ephesians. 6.4. The hid-man of his heart, consists of A me^k and a
quiet Spirit, and his Bowels are Bowels of Mercy, Meekness and Compassion, 1
Pet. 3.4. Col. 3.12. His Loins are girt about with Truth, his Knees are pliable
to Bow, his Legs to bear, and his Foot stands in an even place, Ephesians. 6.14.
Psalm. 26.12.

8. HE is one can moderate himself in Prosperity, and content himself in
Adversity. His hopes are so strong they can insult over the greatest
discouragements; and his apprehensions so deep, that when he has once fastened,
he sooner leaves his life then his hold. Contrariety of Events, Exercise, not
dismay him; and when Crosses Afflict him, he sees a Divine Hand, invisibly
striking with those sensible scourges, against which he dares not Murmur nor
Rebel.

9. HE troubles not himself, with Exciting Thoughts nor others, with needless
Suits: He intermeddles not in others business, nor adventures upon rash
Attempts, he offends none with provoking Terms, not takes offense at others
Actions, He lends not his Ear to idle Tales, nor sows discord, or seeks
Revenge: But has a meek heart, a contented mind, and a charitable eye; his
Tongue is Affable, hand Peaceable, and his gesture sociable. His Deportment is
Neighbourly, his Judgment charitable, a loving Speaker, and a friendly
Converser: He puts up all wrongs patiently, and wrongs none willingly. And such
manner of Men ought we to be in all holy Conversation. And I shall end with the
words of the holy Apostle, and desire of God, that he would direct your hearts
into his love, and into the patient waiting for him, 2 These. 3.5.

I shall not think it improper to insert here a Relation of Sir Thomas Moore,
that excellent Pattern of Patience, who wholly resigned himself to the will of
the Divine Providence.

Sir Thomas returning from beyond Sea after his Embasy, and being remote from
his House with the King, in the Month of August, part of his dwelling House,
and all his Barns laden with Corn, were by a sudden Fire consumed, his Lady by
a Letter certified him of this sad mischance, to which he returned her this
Answer,

Madam, All Health wished to you; I do understand that all our Barns and Corn,
with some of our Neighbors likewise are wasted by a fire, an heavy and
lamentable loss, (but only that it was Gods will) of such abundance of Wealth;
but because it so seemed good to God we must not only patiently, but also
willingly, bear and submit to the hand of God so stretched out upon us. God
gave whatsoever we have lost; and seeing it has pleased him to take away what
he gave, his Divine Will be done: Never let us repine at this, but let us take
it in good part, we are bound to be thank-ful as well in Adversity as in
Prosperity; and if we cast up our Accounts well; this which we esteem so great
a loss, is rather a great gain: For what is necessary and conducing to our
Salvation, is better known to God than us, I entreat you therefore to have a
good heart, and to take all your Family with you to the Church, and there give
thanks to God for all these things which he has pleased to take away, as well
as for his blessings which he has bestowed on us; and to praise him for that
which is left; It is an easy matter with God if he please, to Augment what is
yet left, but if he shall see good to take away more, even as it shall please
him so let it be.

And let Enquiry be made, what my Neighbors have lost, and wish them not to be
sorry: For I will not that my Neighbors shall suffer any thing by my loss,
though I leave not my self any thing; and though all should be taken away, I
pray thee, O Alice, be joyful in the Lord with my Children and all our Family;
all these things, and we; are in the hands of the Lord. Let us therefore wholly
depend upon his good will; and so no losses shall ever hurt us: Farewell.

From the Court at Woodstock. September 13th. 1529.
What a sincere Devotion was here to the Divine Will of God! What a Letter from
a heart truly settled upon Heaven? This Master of the Family had learned his
Lesson well, and was grown a proficient in the Art of Patience. This was a Man
that by supporting himself upon God's Providence, was able to bear all losses
sweetly. Behold an Ostrich, able to digest Iron! His Barns were burnt, but his
Mind was cool, Patience kept him in his uprightness. In a short space after,
God requited his Losses; in September he received this heavy news: In October
he was promoted Lord Chancellor of England; so that not only Honor, but his
Means also were mightily enlarged, that now he needs not repair his Barns, but
may build new ones.

Certainly there is not in the World such a holy sort of Artifice, so Divine a
charm to unite God to us, as this of resigning our selves to him. We find the
Gibeonites by yielding themselves Vassals to the Israelites, had their whole
Army at their back to rescue them in their danger, Jos. 10.6. and can we think
God is less considerate of his Homagers and Dependents? No, certainly, his
Honor, as well as his Compassion is concerned in the relief of those who have
Surrendered themselves to him.

A Prayer for Patience.
O Most gracious God, let not the Spirit of Impatience possess me, whereby I
may in any measure incur thy displeasure, thou art my Maker, O let me not
strive with thee, I am the Work of thy Hands, and therefore with thee there is
no contending; if I provoke thee by struggling under the Yoke of Affliction, the
end thereof will be Gaul to my Neck, and Bitterness to my Conscience: But, O
Lord, it is not my Punishment thou pursuest after, but my Repentance and
Amendment of Life; and what thou art pleased to inflict upon me is but to chase
me to my Duty; which when I have perfectly learnt, I know thou will fully
Reward and Recompense my Patience, that I may possess my own Soul in the day of
the Lord Jesus.

2. O thou that art the wise disposer of all Things, both in Heaven and Earth,
let me look up to thee, from whence comes Affliction, and then inspect into my
own Heart, where I shall find out the efficient Cause: O let nothing then seem
to perplex me, which thou in thy good pleasure knows to be advantageous; but
let me ever be content to drink of the bitterest Cup of Affliction, which thou
have allotted me; O let thy good Spirit still strive with me, and draw me unto
thee with the Cords of thy Love; it is of thy tender Mercies that I am not
consumed, but I know thy Compassion fails not toward poor and wretched
Sinners: Lord give me Grace to perform this Duty, and say of my Affliction, as
thou, O Jesu, did of thy bitter Cup and Passion; Father! if it be thy will
let this Cup pass from me! if not; not my Will, but thy Will be done. Amen.

The CLOSE. Consisting of Scriptural Ejaculations, referring to the several
Sections of the before-going Treatise.
1. HAVING gone through this short Tract of the Art of Patience, I shall now
lay down these following Ejaculations, as being most necessary, and we have St.
James 's Testimony for it, Is any among you afflicted, let him pray, James
5.13. This is the Great and Sovereign Catholicon of the distressed Soul, which
is able to give relief to all the forementioned Complaints.

2. FOR Meekness, Humility and Patience; hearken unto thy Savior's Lesson,
Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find
rest unto your Souls: And St. Paul, earnestly beseeches us, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3.
To walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith we are called, with all lowliness and
meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love. And David gives
us this Comfort, Psalm. 25.8. Them that are meek shall he guide in judgment: and
such as are gentle, them shall he learn his way. And Psalm. 9.18. For the poor
shall not always be forgotten: The patient abiding of the meek shall not perish
for ever. Psalm. 37.9. Wicked doers shall be rooted out, but they that patiently
abide the Lord, those shall inherit the land. And then lastly thou may say,
to thy great joy and comfort, I waited patiently for the Lord; and he inclined
unto me, and heard my calling, Psalm. 40.1.

3. WHEN thou art cast down on thy Bed of Sickness, Call for the Elders of the
Church, and let them pray, James 5.14. This was Hezekiah's Recipe, when he was
sick unto Death; then he turned his Face to the Wall, and prayed, 2 King. 20.1,
2. Pray with David, Psalm. 6.2. Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am weak; O Lord
heal me, for my bones are vexed. And take the Counsel of the wise Man: Ecclus.
38.9. My Son, in thy Sickness be not negligent, but pray unto the Lord, and he
will make thee whole.

4 IF thou art afflicted in Conscience, pray with David, Psalm. 8.5, 6. The
sorrows of Hell compassed me about, and the snares of Death prevented me: In my
distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God.

5. ART thou infested with importunate Temptations, pray earnestly with St.
Paul, when the Messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him: 2 Cor. 12.8. Thrice I
besought the Lord that it might depart from me: And Holy David he complains,
while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted; thy fierce wrath goes over me:
But unto thee have I cried, O Lord, and in the morning shall my prayer prevent
thee, Psalm. 88.15, 16, 17.

6. IF thou art disheartened with imbecility of Grace, use David's Prayer, I am
feeble and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my
heart: Lord, all my desire is before thee, Psalm. 38.8, 9.

7. WHEN thou a^t afflicted with loss of Reputation, and Slander of Evil
Tongues, say with the Psalmist, The mou^h of the wicked, and the mouth of the
deceitful are opened against me; they have spoken against me with a lying
Tongue: Hold not thy peace, O God, of my praise, Psalm. 109.1, 2.

8. IN time of public Calamities, of War, Famine, or Pestilence, pray with
good Jehosaphat, who importuned God with his Gracious Promise made to Solomon:
If when evil comes upon us, as the Sword, Judgment or Pestilence, or Famine,
we stand before this house, and in thy presence, and cry unto thee in our
affliction, then thou will hear and help: And shuts up his zealous Supplication
with, neither know we what to do, but our Eyes are upon thee, 2 Chronicles. 9.12.

9. AT loss of Friends, in thy affliction, pray and have recourse to God, as
Ezekiel, when Peletiah, the Son of Benajah died: Ezekiel. 11, 13. Then fell! down
upon my face, and cried with a loud voice, and said, ah, Lord God! Will thou
make a full end of the remnant of Israel?

10. IN time of Poverty, pray with David, Psalm. 109.24, 25, 26. I am poor and
needy, and my heart is wounded within me: I became also a reproach to them,
when they that looked upon me, shaked their heads: Help me, O Lord my God; Oh
save me according to thy mercy!

11. IN Confinement, pray with Jonah when he was shut up within the
Living-Wa^ls of the Whale; Jonah 2.1, 2. I cried by reason of my affliction
unto the Lord; and join with Asaph in prayer, Psalm. 79.11. Oh let the sorrowful
sighing of the Prisoners come before thee, and according to the greatness of
thy power, preserve thou those that are appointed to die.

12. IN Exile, use Solomon's Prescription; 2 Chr. 6.36, 37, 38, 39. If thy
people be carried away into a Land far off, or near: Yet if they bethink
themselves in the Land whether they are carried, and turn, and pray to thee, in
the Land of their Captivity. If they return to thee with all their hearts, and
pray toward the Land thou gave to their forefathers, etc. then hear thou
from Heaven, even thy dwelling place, their Prayer and their Supplication.

13. HAVE thou lost thy Seeing and Hearing, make thy address to him that said,
Who has made man's mouth, or who makes the Dumb, and the Deaf, or the Seeing,
or the Blind? Have not I the Lord? Exodus 4.11. Cry aloud to him with Bartimeus,
Mark 10.47, 51. Lord that I may receive my sight: And if thou be hopeless of
thine outward sight, yet pray with the Psalmist, O Lord; open thou mine Eyes,
that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law, Psalm. 119.18.

14. ART thou afflicted with Sterility, pray with Isaac, who entreated the Lord
for his Wife, because she was barren: And the Lord was entreated of him, and
Rebekah his Wife conceived, Gen 25.21. And Hannah, she prayed, in bitterness of
Soul unto the Lord, and wept sore, and received a Gracious Answer, 1 Samuel 1.10.

15. ART thou troubled and weakened for want of repose, pray with Asaph, Psalm.
77.3, 4, 1. I complained, and my Spirit was overwhelmed, thou hold mine
eyes, waking, I am sore troubled that I cannot speak; I cried to God with my
voice; even unto God with my voice, and he gave ear unto me.

16. DO thou droop under Old Age? Pray with David; Oh cast me not off in the
time of Old Age, forsake me not when my strength fails. O God thou have
taught me from my Youth: Now also when I am Old and Gray Headed, O God forsake
me not, Psalm. 71.9, 17, 18.

17. ART thou troubled and dismayed with fears of Death? Pray with David, Psalm.
18.3, 4, 5, 6, 13. My Soul is full of troubles, and my Life draws nigh unto
the Grave; I am counted with them that down into the pit, I am as a man that
has no strength, free among the dead, thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in
darkness, in the deep: But unto thee have I cried, O Lord, and in the morning
shall my prayer prevent thee.

18. DO thou tremble at the thoughts of Judgment? So did the man after Gods
own heart, Psalm. 119.120. My flesh trembled for fear of thee, and I am afraid
of thy judgments; look up with Jeremiah, and say to thy Savior, O Lord, thou
have pleaded the causes of my Soul, thou have redeemed my Life: O Lord, judge
thou my cause, Lam. 3.58, 59.

19. ART thou afraid of the Power, Malice and Subtility of thy Spiritual
Enemies? Use Psalm. 59.1. Deliver me from mine Enemies, O my God, defend me,
from them that rise up against me, O hide me from the secret Counsel of the
wicked; and Psalm. 25.19, 20. Consider mine Enemies for they are many, and they
hate me with cruel hatred: O keep my Soul, and deliver me: St. Paul prayed
earnestly that he might be freed from the Messenger of Satan, whose buffets he
felt, and was answered with, My Grace is sufficient for thee; so he sues for
all Gods Saints, May the God of peace tread down Satan under your feet shortly,
2 Cor. 12.9. Romans 16.19

20. WHAT ever evil it be that presses thy Soul, have speedy recourse to the
Throne of Grace; pour out thy heart into the Ears of the Father of all Mercies,
and God of all Comfort, and be sure, if not of redress, yet of ease: We have
his word for it that cannot fail us, Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50.15. Fashionable Supplicants
may talk to God; but be assured, he that can truly pray, can never be truly
miserable: Of our selves we lie open to evils; our rescue is from above; and
what intercourse have we with Heaven but by Prayer? Prayer can deliver us from
Dangers, avert Judgments, prevent Mischiefs, and procure Blessings, it is an
Antidote against Temptation, and a Sovereign Balsom for afflicted Consciences.
It is the Instrument of fetching down all good things to us, whether Spiritual
or Temporal; no Prayer that is qualified as it ought to be, but is sure to
bring down a Blessing according to that of the Wise Man, Ecclus. 35.17. The
prayer of the humble pierces the Cloulds, and will not turn away till the
highest regard it: It sanctifies all good things to us, and sweetens the
bitterness of our afflictions, it opens the Windows of Heaven, shuts up the
Bars of Death, and vanquishes the powers of Hell; therefore let us not cease in
making our addresses to him, who is the Fountain of all Goodness; and at whose
right hand there is pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. And let us with all
lowliness as well of Body as of Mind, according to that of the Psalmist, say, O
come let us Worship, let us fall down and kneel before the Lord our Maker,
Psalm. 95.6. For he is our hope and strength, and a very present help in
trouble. Ps. 46.1.

A Conclusive Prayer.
BLESSED Lord, who have caused all Holy Scripture and good Literature to be
written for my Learning; grant that I may in such wise hear, read, mark, learn,
and inwardly digest them, that by Patience and Comfort of thy Holy Word, I may
embrace, and even hold fast the blessed hope of Everlasting Life, which thou
have given me in my Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

2. Prevent me, O Lord, in all my doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further me with thy continual help, that in all my Works begun, continued and
ended in thee, I may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy Mercy obtain
Everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

3. Almighty God who have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in
thy Son's Name, I beseech thee mercifully to incline thine Ears unto me, who
have now made my Prayers and Supplications unto thee: And grant that those
things I have faithfully asked according to thy will may effectually be
obtained, to the relief of my Necessities, and to the setting forth of thy
Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Blessing.
THE Peace of God which passes all Understanding, keep my Heart and Mind in
the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and the
Blessing of God Almighty. the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: The Virtue
of Christ's blessed Cross and Passion, his Glorious Resurrection and Ascension,
and the Coming of the Holy Ghost; be with me now, and at the Hour of Death.
Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Published, The Government of the Thoughts. A Prefatory
Discourse to the Government of the Tongue, by the Author of the Whole Duty of
Man. Printed for Richard Cumberland, at the Angel in St. Pauls-Church-Yard,
1694.


