OF PERJURY. A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES HELD AT CHESTER, April the 4th.
1682.

By John Allen, M. A. Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, and Chaplain to
the Lord Bishop of Chester.

Totius injustitiae nulla capitalior est, quam eorum, qui tum, cum maxim
fallunt, id agunt, ut viri boni esse videantur. Tully de Offic. Lib. 1. LONDON,
Printed for Benj. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, and George
Atkinson, Bookseller in Chester. 1682.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir Robert Leycester Baronet, Foreman; AND The rest of
the Worthy and Loyal Gentlemen of the Grand Jury, for the Assizes lately held
at Chester.
Gentlemen,
THe Preaching of this Sermon was undertaken at the request of the High
Sheriff, an Honest, True-hearted and Loyal Gentleman, an Ancient and Faithful
Servant to His Majesty: But the Printing of it was extorted by Your
importunity; You have thrust me into the World perfectly against my humor and
inclination; and You have thereby exposed me to the exceptions and censures of
this captious Age, of peevish, ill-natured, and ill-affected Persons: To You
therefore I flee for shelter; Your Protection I claim, on Your judgments I
have relied: You are bound in Honor and Justice to excuse the Faults of this
Discourse; to vindicate the Truths, to justify the Doctrine, and to abhor the
Perjuries herein mentioned.

I have some encouragement to hope, that the Sermon will please the honest, the
Faithful and the Loyal, because it pleases you, who are eminently such; that it
may be in some degree useful and seasonable for these Times, because You think
so: And if it chance to be carp't and cavell'd at by the Factious and the
Seditious; by false Witnesses, and corrupt Jurors, by the Old Covenanters, or
New Associators, as being peculiarly levelled against their Designs and
Practices; Yet however we need not fear, we have this advantage upon them, that
whoever rail, or even mutter against us, do thereby confess their own guilt;
and so their Credit is cracked, and their Testimony becomes invalid; Their
Tongues are no Slander, their ill-words are no Disparagement; no more, than
their good ones can be a Commendation.

My Design in Preaching, and Yours in Publishing this Discourse, I dare
confidently say, were both the same; To Convince the Guilty, and make them
truly sensible of their Sin and Danger, in order to their Repentance: And to
fix and 'stablish the slippery and wavering Tempers of those, who are apt to be
drawn in by great Examples, or specious Pretenses, or the Prospect of temporal
Advantages.

That our joint Endeavors may prove, by God's blessing, useful and
instrumental to these great and good Ends, shall be the hearty Prayer of,

Gentlemen, Your most Obedient, and most Humble Servant John Allen.

Of Perjury, A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES HELD AT CHESTER. April the 4th.
1682.
Leviticus XIX. 12. And ye shall not swear by my Name falsely. --
I Have made choice of these words, as a subject both suitable to this solemn
Occasion and seasonable for the Times: The times are notoriously pestered,
disturbed and endangered by the variety and frequency of Perjury; and upon this
account the Occasion may seem to require a serious and plain Discourse, that,
by God's blessing, may prove serviceable, and useful, to advise and admonish
All that are concerned, so to discharge their duty to God, to their King and
Country, that not the least blemish or tincture of this sin may defile their
Consciences, or disparage their proceedings.

I had intended to have given an account (by way of Preface) of the Nature,
Kinds, End or Usefulness, Lawfulness and Obligation of Oaths, together with the
most usual Forms and Ceremonies of solemn Swearing, Ancient and Modern; but am
forced to wave all that, by reason of the largeness and copiousness of my
subject. My design is to discourse of the sin of Perjury, and to give you a
full account of it in this method.

1. I shall show what Perjury is, and how many ways it is committed.

2. The heinousness and aggravations of it.

3. What are the usual occasions of, inducements and temptations to this sin.

4, And lastly. The punishments of it by the Laws of God and Man.

1. Perjury (as the Text tells us) is a Swearing by God's Name falsely: as Philo
describes it, (...), a calling God to witness for the Confirmation of a Lie:
And is committed these several ways.

1. When Men do assert and testify upon Oath, a thing to be true, which they
know to be false; when they swear, That they saw, or heard such or such things
done or spoken, which their own Consciences tell 'em, they did not.

2. When Men do assert and testify upon Oath, a thing to be true, of the truth
of which they are not fully assured: Nay though the thing should be true; yet
being it is more then they knew, they are however guilty of Perjury; because
they call God to witness, and appeal to him for the attestation of that as
certainly true, which, for ought they know, may be utterly false.

To these we may add, that when Men declare upon Oath, this or that to be their
judgment, and the sense of their minds, which really is not so; or which is
grounded on bare suspicions or fond wishes; or which proceeds not from full
conviction, but from partial and by-respects, This is also Perjury.

So then, if Witnesses sworn to testify the Truth, the whole Truth, and
nothing but the Truth, do depose falsities, do conceal, and suppress, the most
material Evidence; do improve and enlarge their testimony with the additions of
their own fancies, and inventions, They are plainly perjured.

So likewise, when Men sworn to enquire, and inform the Courts of Justice, do
not find Bills according to fair, full and legal Evidence, against some sorts
of persons, out of love, fear, favor and affection, or hope of reward: Or do
find 'em against others, out of envy, hatred, malice, etc. If Men, from the
forenamed motives, do acquit the Guilty, or condemn the Innocent: This is
Perjury in the Jurors, in God's account, in his sight, according to his Laws,
though possibly the Laws of the Realm may take no Cognizance, or hold of them.

These things I mention, and desire All, that are, or may be concerned, to
consider seriously, and to be sensible of their danger; and that, because such
miscarriages do happen sometimes to the scandal of Religion, to the reproach of
our Nation, to the obstruction of Justice, and the perversion of our good Laws:
And because Men's passions, and prejudices, and interests do so frequently
tincture their judgments, and biass their wills, that it is a very hard thing
for some Men to be Witnesses, and not be Parties too; they are insensibly, and
yet powerfully suborned, to give in their Evidence, with more or less weight,
according to their inclination or aversion to a person, to a Party, or a Cause:
And it is not to be denied, that Jurors also may be in danger to abuse their
trust and assume a liberty to admit or reject what they please of the Evidence;
to believe whatever is deposed in some cases, and in others just nothing at
all: Nay to interpret the Laws in favor of the offenders, and declare it
against Law, to put the Laws in execution.

3. They that promise upon Oath, what they intend not to perform; or are
unresolved and indifferent, whether they shall perform it, or not; These are
ipso facto guilty of Perjury: because they swear by God's Name falsely; they
call God to witness, and to vouch for the truth, and sincerity of their
promise, when the intention of their minds does not concur with the words of
their mouths: Now although it be the Prerogative of the searcher of hearts, to
know Men's thoughts; yet, in some cases, it is not impossible, no nor difficult
for us, to pass a right judgment upon some Men's very intentions; we may know
them by their fruits, their words, and their actions, do abundantly expose and
discover the treachery of their minds: It is not so easily forgotten, as it was
forgiven, that a Rebellion was begun by Men, who at the same time promised, and
swore, and Covenanted to preserve and defend the King's person, and Authority:
And if we observe now (as who can choose?) the Behavior, the Discourses, the
Practices of those yet remaining, and Surviving Politicians, and of their too
forward Pupils also; we shall find it an hard task to judge favorably of them,
and to reconcile their suspicious carriage, with their Loyal Oaths. And we
cannot but take notice, that several Men for their advantage, or in order to
conceal, as yet, their Traiterous, and Unripe designs, will not refuse any
Test, or Oath required by the Law, to express, and make a show of their
Loyalty; though God and their own Souls can witness, and their actions declare,
that they had much rather let them alone, and don't intend to be obliged by
them: Men that will come to the Sacrament once or twice in their life's, in a
Civil way, that is, upon entering on some Office, some gainful or honorable
employment, but scarce ever come near the Church, either before or after: And
will take the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy, rather than forgo any
temporal advantage, or be disabled for service; but make no Conscience to break
'em, when it is more for their interest.

4. They also are guilty of Perjury, that having promised upon Oath sincerely,
and with an honest intention, do yet afterward fall off, and renounce the
obligation, do not faithfully, and resolvedly endeavor, and take care to
fulfill their word, do act contrary to their Oath, when a just occasion
requires, and calls for the performance of their promise, or sworn duty. I use
all these expressions, that I may reach to most or All cases of this nature:
And this is called properly (...) (says Chrysippus the Philosopher) that is, to
swear falsely, Ap. Stob. c. 28.
so as that our actions do not answer to our words, as the former was (...),
when our words do not agree with our hearts and minds: And accordingly he tells
us, that at the instant of taking (or rather giving) a promissory Oath, a Man
cannot be said properly, either (...) or (...), because, as it respects the
future, a Man cannot be known to have sworn truly, or falsely, till the time of
fullfilling his promise does discover his faithfulness, or falsehood: But this
Critical nicety will not hold: for if a Man having confirmed his promise by an
Oath, and that sincerely, and with intention to keep it (for instance, to pay a
sum of Money upon a set day) shall in the intermediate time contrive to evade
the obligation, and to break his word, you cannot but think, that he is really
guilty of Perjury; and that too, though he should not be able effectually to
shirk, and avoid the payment at the appointed time. But however there can be no
dispute, no use of this distinction, as to the breach of those promissory
Oaths, that are taken to reinforce a known, and antecedent duty; or those,
whose obligation does take place, and lay hold upon our Consciences, at, and
from the very moment of swearing: For they that do not continue in that honest,
and faithful intention, in which they took their Oaths; they that have no mind
to be obliged any longer by them, are contriving how to break them to the best
advantage, are seeking excuses, and evasions to palliate their perfidiousness:
These Men are guilty of Perjury, nay though (for want of opportunity and power)
they proceed no further; because having bound their Souls with a bond, Numb.
30.2.
having sworn by the help of God, and by the Contents of the Gospel, to perform
their promise, having called in God to be Surety for them, and (as it were)
bound with them; They do yet, as much, as in them lies, as far as they dare for
fear of the Laws, and Civil punishments, without any respect, or regard to
Conscience, and the fear of God, disengage themselves from the obligation of
their Oaths.

5. They are involved in the guilt of Perjury, who against, or without the
consent of the Supreme Power, do frame, and impose upon others, or take
themselves new Oaths, contrary to, and destructive of their former obligations.
This is a ticklish point, as the times go, and therefore I shall explain and
confirm it the more largely and carefully. I must tell you then, that an Oath
can reinforce a former; or induce a new obligation, where there was none
before; but cannot destroy an antecedent one; or super-induce another repugnant
to it; and one main reason hereof is this, because by every such obligation, a
right does accrue to another; to Him, to whom the promise is made; and we
become thereby indebted to Him, and bound in Conscience; and He has a Right
and Lawful power to challenge, and demand of us, as a duty, the just
performance of it: and therefore it is most unreasonable, and unequal, most
injurious and unjust, that his right should be infringed by any act of ours,
without his leave and release first obtained.

I must further tell you, that we are bound in Conscience to be subject to all
our Superiors according to the nature, quality and extent of their dominion
over us: And consequently to the Supreme or Sovereign in all things, not
counter-manded by His only Superior the King of Heaven; which duty and
obligation of ours, a subsequent Oath taken against or without his consent, can
by no means disannul and cancel. All which is proved from Numb. 30. at the
beginning of the Chapter, where the Rule is thus given: If a Daughter still
remaining in her Fathers House; or if a Wife do vow a vow unto the Lord; if the
Father or Husband respectively do hear of it, and hold his peace, and express
no dislike of it, the Vow shall stand; but if Father or Husband do upon notice
thereof disallow it, then the Vow of either of them shall not stand, shall be
of none effect: God will forgive and excuse them, but the obligation shall not
take place: And if this be so, then certainly by parity of reason, we may
conclude, That no Subject has a right or power to oblige himself by Oath, to
the Prejudice, and against the Consent of the Sovereign: And if any Man has
been drawn in, and entangled in such snares, He must forthwith disengage
himself, and come off, begging God's and the King's pardon for his folly and
rashness; He must remember that he is pre-engag'd; He may, and ought to
renounce the treacherous Oath, as being illegal, and unable to lay hold on his
Conscience.

But this is not all; if the Matter of these Oaths be unlawful, if against our
plain duty, and our former Oaths and Obligations; then do they certainly
involve us in Perjury; and cannot be justified, neither by the goodness of the
intention, nor the greatness of some Men's fears, nor the piety of their
pretenses, nor their Zeal for Religion and the public good: Such are the
Solemn Leagues and Covenants, Engagements and Associations, contrived by
perfidious Politicians, and greedily swallowed by the Seditious and the
Schismatic, by the Lovers of Change, the Malcontents, the blind and furious
Zelots, and the deluded and ill-taught party of the Nation.

6, And lastly, They are guilty of Perjury, who make use of Tricks and Cheats,
and subtle Artifices, to evade and elude the obligation of their Oaths; who
will not understand the words of an Oath, in their Assertions, or Promises,
according to the plain, genuin, and common acception of them, but by fastening a
secret Sense of their own, upon some Ambiguous terms, or by some Reserves, or
Exceptions, or Additions within their minds, do quite alter the meaning of the
words, and thereby intend neither to be obliged to speak truth, nor perform
their promises.

The Romish Casuists are notoriously faulty in this point, they are not ashamed
to prescribe Rules of Aequivocation, Mental Evasion, and Reservation; they set
down Forms, and propose several Modells, and Examples of them, for the help of
Novices: they teach their Disciples, when and where, and upon what occasions
they may be used; and undertake to prove, that they are lawful and expedient,
and in some cases necessary: And their forward Scholars do easily learn, and
are very expert and ready to practice according to their instructions.

But perhaps They are not the only Aequivocators in the World; they don't
engross the whole Trade to themselves: There are some True Protestants towardly
enough to imitate the subtleties of the Jesuit; who, when they find they are
cramp't and fettered by an Oath, that does pinch and fret 'em, then have
recourse to Jesuitical distinctions, to their shifts, Reserves and Evasions;
they swear first, and then after vows they make enquiry: they will find or make
some creeping hole to escape at; they will skrew and wrest and wind and turn
and torture the words, till they have made 'em pliant, and yielding to their
Sense, and consistent with their Designs: They take no care to perform, what
they have sworn, but only to for-swear themselves Ingeniously, and according to
Art.

But none of these tricks will exempt either sort of 'em from the guilt of this
sin; and that, because an Oath ought to be taken, and kept too, in the most
plain, free, open-hearted and ingenuous way that can be, with all simplicity
and sincerity of mind; and in that Sense of the words, that they usually bear,
and are commonly taken in; and particularly in that Sense, that the Parties to
whom we swear, they for whose satisfaction or information we give our promise
or testimony, do, or must be supposed to understand 'em in.

I will dispatch this particular with this necessary Observation; That there
may be Aequivocation in the very frame of an Oath, as well as in the minds of
deceitful Swearers: Some Oaths both of former and later date, are so neatly
contrived, so cunningly worded, and so doubtfully expressed; are adorned and
set forth in such specious colors; are composed and recommended by such Zealous
Reformers; are gilded over with such glorious pretenses, that many easy, and
well-meaning people are drawn in, 2 Samuel 15.11.
in their simplicity, and know not any thing of the main Design, and the
Rebellion intended. But when they are once caught, then shall they be taught,
that theirs is a Sacred Oath; that they must make a Conscience of this, more
then all their former obligations; then shall they be taught to understand the
words in a larger, or quite different Sense; and so by degrees shall at last
come to think, that they are bound in Conscience, and by virtue of their Oath,
to destroy the Prince, whom they promised to preserve; to ruin the Religion,
which, to the best of their thinking, they swore to maintain; and to commit
those outrages, that Murder, and Sacrilege, and Rapine, which they never
dreamed of, or could perceive in their Religious Covenant; but would possibly
have abhorred the very remote apprehensions of such horrid villainies. That Is
the First.

2. The Second is the Heinousness of this sin of Perjury; and that will appear
in general: First, if we consider that there is no sin almost whatever so
odious, and infamous in the judgment of All Mankind, that have any sense of
Religion and common honesty, as This: For the Reverence of an Oath is Natural
to us, and implanted in us; this Sacred, and Solemn Appeal to God, has been
ever held in so great Veneration, both as a part of divine and immediate
worship, and as the main support of truth, and faithfulness; that, whoever did
presume to violate and profane it, was generally abhorred, as a most impious
and treacherous Villain: Methinks it makes ones stomach rise against him; a Man
cannot excuse or pity him, cannot find in his heart to pray for him, or wish him
well.

Give me leave, therefore, to expose this great Sin in its proper Colors, and
load it with its due aggravations; that so All those, that have seen, how many
ways it can be committed, may by a just sense of its horror and heinousness,
be admonished, and terrified from involving themselves in so great guilt.

First then, Perjury is an Affront to God, and to All those glorious
Attributes, that shine forth, and display themselves in the Government of the
World. He that forswears himself, does thereby profane the most Holy, and
Reverend Name of God, by making it the instrument of his deceit, and treachery:
He appeals to the Searcher of Hearts to conceal and countenance his Hypocrisy:
He calls upon the God of Truth to attest a Falsehood: He dares his Power, and
defies his Justice and Vengeance: He lays his unclean Hand upon the Holy
Gospels; He kisses the Book with his deceitful and lying Lips: He invokes the
help of God to protect and prosper his Perjury: He renounces All the Truths: He
disclaims all the Promises: He disregards all the Curses contained in that Holy
Volume.

Other sorts of Sinners are generally more modest, and shame-fac't; use more
respect and good manners to their Maker, even when They offend Him: They have
commonly an awe, and concern upon them, and strive (though in vain) to conceal
themselves from his Allseeing eye, and to cover their sins with secrecy, or
darkness; or at least to put off the thoughts of God's presence, and stifle the
fears of his Power and Justice: But the Perjurer is rude and insolent, is loud
and clamorous; -- Aspice quanta
Voce neget, quae sit ficti constantia vultus. Juvenal. Sat. 13.

He has cased his countenance with Impudence and Hypocrisy: He fears neither
God nor Man: He swears with courage, and a loud Voice: He stares God in the
Face: He calls upon Him to look on, to hearken and be a Witness, how cunningly
and securely He can abuse and profane His Name for the Confirmation of a lie;
He challenges God to come forth and engage, and be bound with him, for what He
never intends, or will take no care to perform.

Can there be a sin more impudent and heinous than This? Is it possible to
reconcile this with so much as the show, and pretense of Religion? Can those
Men that affront their God, and profane his Name at this rate, persuade
themselves, or any Body else, that they have any the lowest degree of Love, or
Fear, or Trust in God, or any of the Christian graces? Is it possible for those
Men, Epist. 154. sine ulla dubitatione, minus malum est per Deum falsum jurare
veraciter, quam per Doum verum fallaciter.
for All their pretenses, and noise, to be heartily Zealous against Popery and
Idolatry, who make no scruple of Perjury? It is not, if S. Austin tells us
true; That without all doubt, it is a less sin to swear truly by a false God,
than to swear falsely by the True One. And so makes Perjury a more heinous
Crime, than Idolatry it self.

And is it not a madness in us to cry up, and magnify, and take Those for our
Examples and Leaders, and the Guides of our Consciences, and Practices, that
have forsworn themselves over and over; that were never true to any Government;
that never were, or never will be faithful to This. Oh my Soul! come not thou
into their secrets; Have thou nothing to do with those wicked Men, that will
never be obliged to speak truth, or perform their promises.

2. Perjury is not only an impious and impudent affront to God; but is also
most injurious and mischievous to 1. Man, to our Neighbor: And that first in
his private capacity, in All his concerns of what kind soever, though never so
dear unto him: His Life, his Liberty, his Reputation, his Estate are All at the
mercy of the Perjurers: Psalm. 35.11.
and though They lay to his charge things, that He knows not, as David speaks;
though They invent and forge groundless accusations, against the most perfect
Innocence; yet if they prove and attest 'em upon Oath, if they call on God to
confirm their lying Evidence, There is usually no sense, no shelter against
their malice and treachery. (...). Themist. Orat. 1.
We can guard our selves, in most cases, against open violence: We can preserve
our Goods from Thieves and Robbers: We may find, generally, some guard and
shelter against other injuries; but Perjury is an Arrow that flies in
darkness; it is a Surprise, a Stabb: It destroys us by Mining or Ambuscade; it
takes away all our Armor, the Armor of Innocence, in which we trusted: It
cuts off our retreat, it leaves us naked, and unable to stand, and defend our
selves against its secret violence.

2. Perjury is injurious to Conversation, and Commerce: All our Dealings, and
Trade, and Contracts, and Friendships are grounded upon, and managed by the
Faith and Assurance, that we give and take of the sincerity of our minds, and
purposes, expressed by our words, and in great concerns, confirmed by our
Oaths: This ties and compacts us together, makes us useful, and helpful, and
serviceable to each other: This creates, and preserves Love and Kindness, and
Mutual Affection, and Endearments, and the Intercourse, and Circulation of good
turns and benefits. But if after all this, Men shall assume a liberty to
deceive and impose upon their correspondents, to deny their own words, and to
break their promises: What must This come to? How shall any Man know, whom to
trust, whom to employ, or whom to speak to? If this should prevail, all Society
must be dissolved; every Man must set up for himself, and fall into Mr. Hobbs's
state of Nature, and proclaim War against all Mankind beside.

3. But then further: As to Government, and the Consequents of it, Peace, and
Order, and just Liberty: There is nothing but Perjury can destroy it, and
deprive us of them: Nothing but Perjury can carry on Faction, and begin a
Rebellion: Nothing but the highest Profanation of God's Name, can ruin the
Monarchy. All that are entrusted in any Office or Employment, either Civil,
Military, or Sacred, have given the best assurance to the Prince, that a
Promise can make, and an Oath can bind; that They will bear Faith, and true
Allegiance to His Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors, and Him and Them will
defend, to the uttermost of their power, against All conspiracies and attempts
whatsoever, that shall be made against His, or Their Persons, their Crown and
Dignity, etc. But if These Sacred Bonds must be broken in sunder upon every
Sham, and hold us no longer, than some Men please; then certainly do we incur
the guilt of a most heinous and grievous sin, or rather a mass and heap of
horrid Crimes: We not only violate the Laws of God and Man, but also become
most treacherous and ungrateful to the Prince, that relies and depends upon our
fidelity, that has obliged us All by the general influences of his most
gracious and benign Government; and many of the most Factious and dangerous
tempers among us, with particular, signal and undeserved favors.

If we break our Faith, and renounce our Oaths, then we know, what must be the
Consequence and Effects of the Perjury: We shall have new Oaths, Iron shackles,
clap't upon our Consciences: Wars and Confusions, Sedition and Rebellion; and
(if these prosper) then the Ruin of the Monarchy, and of the Church, the
Slavery of our Country; Tyranny and Arbitrary power exercised upon us by the
worst of our fellow Subjects; This shall be our Portion, and the due reward of
our Perfidiousness.

4. And Lastly, Perjury is injurious to public justice: For since an Oath is
the main ground of All proceedings, in order to decide Controversies, is the
(...), The greatest assurance, that a Man can give of the truth of his
Testimony; the last result, the highest and utmost appeal that we can make; and
is the end of all strife, Heb. 6.16.
as the Apostle speaks: Since Oaths are of constant use in Judiciary Causes,
whether Criminal or Civil, and the best means to find out the truth of Matter
of Fact, to determine of Right and Wrong, to give every Man his due, to clear
the Innocent, and discover the Guilty: It is plain then, that Perjury utterly
defeats all these great and useful ends, and makes the Law it self, the
instrument of injustice. Perjury in the Witnesses misguides, and mis-leads the
Court, destroys Men's rights, countenance and confirms the wrongful claims, and
pretensions of Knaves and Forgers, and lays on groundless accusations on the
most honest, and innocent: And Perjury in the Jury can fetch off, and rescue
the most dangerous Criminals from fair and legal Trials; or acquit the guilty
in spite of Evidence. So that if this impudent and mischievous sin, should
obtain still for the future, as it has done for some late years; should gain
ground universally, as it has in some particular places; our Laws would be
clearly insignificant, or rather basely perverted: the justice of the Nation
obstructed; the innocent destroyed; and the worst of Men protected, and
encouraged: Our Terms, and our Courts might be adjourned to the great Day of
Judgment; and the Lawyers become as useless and contemptible as the Clergy.
That Is the Second

3. I proceeed to the Third, to enquire, what are the occasions of, or
temptations to this sin: And this point is set properly in this place; that if
we look back to the last general, and consider what a great and heinous sin
This is, and look forward to the fourth Head; and observe, what are the
punishments denounc't against it, by the Laws of God and Man; we may with just
reason be induc't, and persuaded to reject the temptations, and cut off the
occasions of it. And indeed it is sadly strange, and a matter of wonder, and
horror, that Men professing Religion with so much Zeal and noise, that so many
Scrupulous, Precise, and True Protestants, falsely so called, should make so
light, so little or nothing of this great and heavy sin, should swallow
Perjuries without strain or chewing; should have recourse to 'em, frequently,
and upon all occasions, as to their Guard and Castle, as to their Artillery and
Arms offensive and defensive. It is not presumable, that Men of any honesty or
Religion, would make so bold with God, and be so mischievous to Mankind, and
human Society, as I have shown these false-swearers are: And I am confident,
that Perjury to a Conscience truly tender, would appear ghastly and frightful;
it is not for a Novice to pretend to this Hellish accomplishment: A Man must be
molded and modeled by previous qualification, and dispositions, or perverted
and debauched with erroneous and corrupt Principles; or at least driven and
hurried on by powerful examples, or violent passions, or importunate lusts,
before he can arrive to this height of impudence and villainy.

It need not cost us much trouble or time, to enquire how, and whence it comes
to pass, that so many do venture upon this dreadful sin; for if you consider
how many several ways Perjury is committed, and take notice also of those, that
are scandalously guilty of it; I dare assure; that you will clearly perceive it
to proceed from some one or more of these following particulars.

1. Atheism: A denying of God and Providence: This indeed were a plausible and
rational account of, a good plea, and excuse for Perjury, if Atheism it self
were rational: An Atheist, should he swear falsely every hour, upon every
occasion, would do like an Atheist, and act consistently to his Principles: For
what should hinder him from complying with our Forms, and Customs of calling
God to witness, when it is for his advantage? He knows of no God to come at his
call, to look on, and be a Witness of his words, and the searcher of his heart:
He believes no Judgment to come, no future state: The unquenchable Fire, the
never-dying Worm are Dreams and Fables, and the inventions of Priests and
Politicians to keep the People in awe, according to His wise opinion: And
therefore he is ever ready to swear, and lie, and promise forward and backward:
He makes no scruple to take or break any Oath, because he has no Conscience, no
fear of a Deity, and consequently, can securely throw off any obligation: And
the truth is, if a Man were to set up the Trade of Perjury, and make his
fortunes by it; The readiest way were to begin with Atheism; if he could once
conquer that, the other would be an easy and profitable employment, and
require no stock, but that of impudence and invention. And in that other sort
of Perjury, the Trade of Treachery, and Unfaithfulness, and by the help of
That, setting up for Faction, and cutting out work for Rebellion: It is easy
to observe, That the most Atheistical persons are commonly the chief
contrivers, and the nimblest Crafts-men: These are the Men that maintain
Monarchy to be no more jure divino, than Religion it self is; that know no such
thing as Paternal, or Patriarchal Monarchy; but seem to hold Commonwealths to
have been ab Aeterno, as well as the World; and produced from the fortuitous
concourse of Statesmen, as the other from that of Atoms: These are the Men
that wrangle loudest against the Prerogative of their Prince; and magnify the
power of the People, the great Leviathan. These dispute, and deny the right of
Succession, and make all concerns, all obligations, whether to God or the Laws,
submit and bow to their only God, and great Idol, Interest, or
Self-preservation.

2. Lying, and Treachery, and customary Swearing: These things do qualify, and
dispose a Man to forswear himself upon any convenience, or temptation: Because
hereby Men throw off that reverence and respect to Religion, that fear of Gods
Power and Justice, which would restrain them: They have made bold with God's
Name so often, and by degrees are grown so familiar with Him, by calling upon
Him in common Conversation; that it is no great strain to Conscience, if they
make some further use of Him in their serious affairs, and in matters of
greater moment. By the custom of Lying they have got the knack to deceive,
betray and abuse their Neighbor or Friend; and by the custom of vain and
wanton Swearing, they have learned to make nothing of an Oath: Put these
together, and that is soon done, upon any occasion; and then comes forth and
commences a complete and accomplished Perjurer.

To this I may add a readiness, and easiness to take new and contrary Oaths:
This does both argue and infer a slight esteem of the obligation of our former
promises and does certainly engage us in Perjury. For when Men find themselves
entangled, by different, and contradictory Oaths; we may presume by their
actions, that they thus argue with themselves; Since we have taken several, and
cross Oaths; it is at least in our liberty to be obliged by whether we please;
or rather, the last ought to take place and justle out the former, as being
more suitable to our second and best thoughts, and more useful to our present
designs. And so Peccant and jurando and juramentum servando, they add sin to
sin; they sin both by taking, and by keeping their Oath; whereas they ought in
these circumstances to observe the Rules of the Casuists: In malis promissis
rescinde fidem: in turpi voto, muta decretum; quod incaute vovisti, non facias:
impia est promissio, quae scelere adimpletur: In lib. de specialib. Legib.
Or as Philo directs them, To abstain from their unjust and mischievous
practices, notwithstanding their Oath, and to implore God's pardon for their
rash, and sinful swearing; to discard their false Oath, and adhere to their
known duty, and the commands of God; for to double your guilt, when you may
come off, and be eased of the half, is a piece of madness and frenzy almost
incurable, says He.

To these I might add the usual occasions, and common temptations to this sin:
Such are

Poverty and Necessity; Covetousness, and hope of Reward; as also Fear whether
of Shame or of Punishment, or of Both: In some Ambition and Popularity, a
desire, and thirst after honor and greatness. In others, or perhaps in the
same, Revenge and Malice; or else Favor, Affection and Partiality: Or lastly,
Faction, Sedition and Designs against the Government. As to All which, it may
be enough to remark, that when these furious passions, and violent desires are
able to over-Master, and run down the fear of God, and the reverence of an Oath
in the hearts of Men; then is Perjury the most easy and compendious, the most
secure, the most proper way to relieve their wants, or satisfy their covetous
desires, or to rid them of their fears, or to gratify their ambition, or to
pleasure their Friends, or dispatch their Enemies, or to compass and complete
their Seditious designs.

And this shall suffice to have spoken to the Third, because I hasten to the
Fourth, and Last Head of Discourse.

4. The Punishments of Perjury: and these are severe and dreadful in proportion
to the guilt of this great sin. It is a good Rule: Semper perpendendum est
damnum, quod ex perjurio resultat: Men ought to weigh well the damages and
mischievous consequences of their false-witnessing and perfidiousness (not to
others only, but) to themselves; that if Conscience, and the Sense of their
duty cannot prevail with them, they may be restrained by the fear of suffering.
Eccl'us. 7.36.
Remember the end (says a Wise Man) and Thou shall never do amiss. See what
will come on it; see whether Perjury will quit cost, and turn to account; and
then venture upon it; if you think it will prove for your advantage.

Severe Judgments are denounc't against this sin by the Laws of God and Man:
God declares, that He will not hold him guiltless, that takes His Name in
vain, or forswears himself, as our Savior expounds it. Matthew. 5.33.
He will not pardon him; He will not leave him unpunish't; Ainsworth on Exodus
20.7.
He will not hold him just or innocent in the great Day of Judgment. By the
Law of Moses a False-witness was to suffer the same thing as a punishment, Deuteronomy
19.19.
that he intended to have brought upon his Brother as a mischief. And God
declares the severity of his Judgments against this sin by the Prophet
Zechariah: The flying Roll was an Emblem of the Curse, Chap. 5.3, 4.
that goes forth over the face of the whole Earth, and shall enter into the
House of him, That swears falsely by my Name, and it shall remain in the midst
of his House, and shall consume it with the Timber thereof, and the Stones
thereof; it shall entail a Curse upon his Family, and Estate; as it is commonly
expounded.

As to the Punishments denounc't against this sin by the Laws of Men: I shall
not presume to recount what the Common Law does inflict upon Persons convict of
Perjury: But what some Canons of the Church and the Civil Laws define, I shall
declare briefly. A Perjurer shall be Ten years Excommunicate, says S. Basil.
They that Subborn others to forswear themselves, Can. 64.
shall not be received into Communion till the point of death; and those, that
are drawn in, shall for ever after be deprived of the privilege of giving in
their Testimony in any case, and according to Law, branded with infamy: says
the Council of Mascon, Tom. 5. p. 970. Can. 17.
Shall never be deemed worthy to take an Oath; nor to lie in hallowed ground:
That is, shall be denied Christian Burial, says another.

And a Council in England, here in the year One Thousand and Nine, called
Concilium Aenhamense, ranks 'em with Witches, Sorcerers, Necromancers,
egregious Strumpets, etc. And Decrees thus against 'em: Tanquam terra indignos,
e terra projicite, ut purior sit deinceps populus; as unworthy to enjoy the
privilege and benefit of their Native Country; Turn them out, and Banish 'em,
that the Land may be cleansed, and the rest preserved from the infection. If
this good English Cannon were now in force; if this course were taken with
those, that are notoriously guilty of this Crime; we might have a fair riddance
of the perfidious disturbers of our Peace and Government; we might have a just
hope to see the rest of our people (who are drawn in by examples, or abused by
pretenders) to return to their Wits and their Honesty again, to their former
settlement and quiet, to their Callings and proper business; who now spend
their time, and trouble their heads about News and Politics: We might hope to
see an end of those jealousies, those Murmurings and clamours, those Factious
and Seditious designs, and Practices, that have put our people into such a
fermentation, and Paroxysm, so high a fit of Frenzy, that they are grown
frantic, and delirous, do rave and talk idly, and look wildly, and act
extravagantly, do mischief to themselves and others, and threat'n to lay
violent hands on the Laws, and the Government. But to proceed.

Perjury by the Civil Law is punishable by Banishment or Scourging, and always
with Infamy beside. But if a Man lost his Life by the Perjury, as by
false-witness in Capital Cases, then it was punished by Death, Manum perdant
perjuri. Let them lose their hand, says Charles the Great: the right hand, the
same that was laid on the Gospels, at taking the Oath. But whatever the Laws of
Men define in this case, I am sure, nothing can be so severe, so dreadful, as
what we bring upon our selves, and call upon God to inflict upon us, when we
swear falsely: For every Oath does include an Execration, (...), Plutarch.
or Curse upon our selves in case of Perjury; and that, whether the Curse be
formally expressed, or only implied: For who ever appeals to God, as a Witness
of the sincerity of his heart, and the truth of his words, does thereby also
invoke Him, as the Judge, and Avenger of his Perjury, and Perfidiousness, in
case he do forswear himself. This would appear more clearly upon the view of
several Ancient Forms of Swearing, that have an express Curse annexed to them:
Examples whereof may be found in abundance, collected by Brissonius, Filesacus,
and others.

The usual Form among us that (as it were) binds the Oath, and makes the
Sanction is This: Lib. VIII. Select. lib. 3.
So help me God; in direct Invocation: Or So help you God, in Adjuration. Which
contains and implies a most dreadful Imprecation, a horrible Curse upon our own
Souls, if we Swear falsely; for we then call upon God, to withdraw his Help, his
Grace, his Mercy from us; we utterly forfeit his favor, and devote our selves
to his severest Vengeance. Every Man, that takes an Oath, does in effect
address himself to God, at this rate: As far forth, as I depose, or promise
truly or faithfully; so do Thou Help me (O God I beseech Thee) and bless me,
protect and prosper me: But if I Swear falsely, if I Testify a lie, if I
Promise deceitfully, if I prove Treacherous to my word; then O God, Thou
Righteous Judge, Thou God of Vengeance, I disclaim, and renounce all help, all
hopes of mercy from Thee: Let Thy Vengeance pursue, and haunt me; Let all the
Judgments of Thy wrath seize and fall upon me: May Thou never help me, nor
incline Thy mercy toward me, but cast me away in Thy displeasure, and suffer me
to perish both here and hereafter.

Oh! What a load must this be to the Perjurer's Conscience? What can the World
afford, that is able to relieve or support a Soul so desperately guilty, so
mortally wounded? To whom shall he flee for succor, when God has forsaken him,
and all good Men abhor him, and his own Conscience does gripe and tear him? And
what will it be in the end thereof? What shall be the fatal Doom of the
Perjured, but Eternal ruin, and damnation? His portion shall be with the
Hypocrite, and with the Traitor, with Achitophel and Judas: Don't think,
because God does not lay them sprawling with a Thunderbolt, or strike him over
the Face with a flash of Lightning, that therefore he is safe, and shall
escape the vengeance of the Almighty: No surely; (...). Phil. despecial. Leg.
though God does suspend the Execution, He will one day reckon with, and take
account of this wicked and unfaithful Servant: He will not be merciful to them,
that offend thus out of malicious wickedness, but leaves 'em often in an
incorrigible estate, and rarely vouchsafes 'em the grace of Repentance, and
indeed They deserve no better, says Philo.

If Their case then be so dangerous, and almost desperate, is it not sad to
observe so many Thousands involved in this great guilt, hugging themselves in
the possession, and enjoyment of the advantages of their Perjury, and never
expressing any resentment and remorse, for having taken their unlawful and
impious Oaths, and for having acted by virtue of them, the greatest Villainies.
What! though the Act of Oblivion has exempted 'em from the penalties of the
Law? but can it secure 'em from the judgments of God? That has saved their
lives; but can it purge their Consciences, and save their Souls too? What,
though they have (some of them) renounced the obligation, that was for their
advantage? That alone cannot demonstrate their hearty sorrow and Repentance.
Have they mourned, and bewailed, and confessed their sin? Have they begged
God's, and the King's pardon? Have they given satisfaction to the Church for
the scandal? Have they made restitution of the Spoil, the Plunder, and the
Rapine, the Murder, and the Sacrilege? Have they given Security for their
peaceable and good Behavior for the future? I have so much Charity to wish it
were so, with all my Soul; but I have not Faith to believe it: For do they not
retain many of them, their old Principles? Do they not train up their Pupils in
their own way, in their old Discipline? Are they not practicing over again
their former Methods? Are they not ready for a new Oath, as bad, or worse than
the former? Is not the fatal Composition prepared? And are they not Dieted and
fitly disposed to take it? How is it possible to reconcile these things with
any show of Repentance, or pretense of Loyalty? What milder, and more gentle
thought soever, others may have, I know not; but I declare that I could not
administer one drop of comfort from the promises of the Gospel to a Perjured
Soul; though he should seem never so sensible of his sin and danger, unless I
could prevail with him to disgorge the envenomed Morsel, to make satisfaction
to the injured party, if possible, and testify the sincerity of his Repentance
by Restitution. There is mercy with God for the truly Penitent; but the case of
the Perjurer is dangerous and difficult; His Repentance must be severe, and
very particular; it will cost him abundance of Tears to wash off so foul a
stain; his Contrition must be sharp and violent, in proportion to the guilt and
aggravations of this sin.

I have done with the parts of the Text: And now if any Factious, and
ill-minded Persons shall take upon them to quarrel and clamor at this honest
and well-intended Discourse; I will assure 'em, that I shall be so far from
being troubled, or discouraged by their Censure, that I shall take it for a
kindness, and great commendation; I shall look upon it as an argument of their
Conviction, and the sense of their Guilt; which may prove, by God's grace, the
first step toward their late Repentance. Beside, if they are not guilty of
Perjury themselves, or favorers of them that are, Why are they concerned? Who
has meddled with 'em, or touched 'em? But if they are, it is fit they be told
of it, to some purpose; that they may be sensible of their guilt and danger,
that they may Repent of their sin, and continue no longer in it; Deuteronomy. 17.13.
that They may hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously.

I Conclude with a twofold Exhortation: The one to those, that may be
concerned either as Witnesses, or Jurors: The other in general to All that are
faithful and truly Loyal to their Prince.

As to the first, I do most earnestly exhort and beseech Them to consider the
nature and several kinds, the heinousness, the occasions and the punishments of
this sin; and to take especial care so to discharge and behave themselves, as
that they may not in any kind, upon any account incur the guilt of it: To this
end I would beg of them, and advise them two things.

1. When they are called to take their Oaths, to do it with all reverence: And

2. To observe, and act according to them, with a good Conscience. They are to
consider, that an Oath is a Sacred and Solemn Act of Religion, and Divine
Worship; and ought to be performed with as much Devotion, fixedness of
Intention, and Fervency, with as much Faith and Humility as any other part of
God's Worship. And therefore it were to be wished, that the Oaths in our Courts
were administered with more Leisure and Gravity, with more State and Solemnity,
with more Emphatical Rites and Ceremonies, than are commonly used; to strike an
awe, and terror into the minds of our People, and make them more serious and
attentive; or at least, that They were constantly admonish't to compose
themselves into a Religious temper of mind, when they come to Swear; and also
were frequently advised to remember the Tenor or Purport of their Oaths. For
(I fear) our People, especially the meaner sort, are apt to be amused and
abash't, when they are called into the Court, and appear in that Reverend
Assembly: They cannot easily recollect themselves, and take off their thoughts
from the variety of amazing objects; or they are framing their Evidence into
method; or dressing up their testimony in fine words, and handsome phrases; or
thinking of any thing sooner, than what they should do.

2. I do advise, and exhort them to observe their Oaths, carefully to speak and
act, according to the tenor and obligation of them: To set God before their
Eyes, and a Watch before the door of their Lips, and to place his Fear in their
hearts; To give in their Testimony, or their Verdict, not out of Love or
Malice, Fear or Favor, or hope of Reward, etc. but out of Conscience and full
Conviction, and with a sincere respect to truth and justice.

2. To All, that are Faithful and Loyal to their Prince, I apply the advice of
Solomon: Ecclesiast. 8.2.
I counsel you to keep the King's Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath
of God. Numb. 30.2.
By this your Souls are bound with a Bond, as God speaks: your hearts are knit
to your Sovereign in Faith and Allegiance: No power on Earth can dispense with
your Oath; No pretense can justify the breach of your promise, and sworn duty;
You cannot, you must not go from your word, upon any account whatever.

Let us therefore be as careful to keep our Oaths, as the Factious designers
are to break them. Let us be as zealous and courageous and industrious too, to
support, and preserve the Government both in Church and State, as they are
stubbornly bent, and furiously acted to demolish and destroy it: While we have
good Laws, for God's sake, let us live and act according to them; and let them
have their course upon All those, that do violate, affront, and defy them:
Those that pretend to complain of Arbitrary power, they, methinks, ought to
have Law enough, their belly full, that they may complain for something; if
they deserve it.

It is recorded of that stiff-neck't, Judges 11.7.10, 11.
and murmuring people of Israel, that They served the Lord all the days of
Joshua, and all the days of the Elders, that outlived Joshua, who had seen all
the great works of the Lord, that he had done for Israel; though the next
generation that knew not the Lord, nor the works, that He had done for their
Fathers, forso^k the Lord, and served Baal and Ashtaroth. Let us then, for
God's sake, be as ingenuous, and grateful, at least, as They were: Let us that
have seen all the great works of the Lord, in his wonderful deliverance from
our Egyptian bondage, in the miraculous Restoration of our Sovereign and
Religion: Let us serve the Lord and the King too, all the days of our lives,
and not be so foolishly mad, and so desperately wicked, as to relapse, and
return to our former frensy in this Age. Methinks one Rebellion were sufficient
for one Generation; and it were too much to be twice choused by the same-Men,
upon the same Pretenses, by the same Artifices, and Methods: We were not used
so kindly by our late Taskmasters, as to be sond and dote upon a second
Slavery: The Nobility, the Gentry, the Freeholders in general may remember how
much they suffered respectively, in their Honcurs or Estates, in their
Liberties and Properties, by Popular fury, and Military insolence; and
therefore ought to look forward too, and consider, what they must expect, if
the Faction should prevail, if the Menarchy be destroyed, if the worst of our
fellow Subjects should once more enslave us.

It highly concerns us All therefore, both in Duty and Interest, to continue
sirmly Loyal to the King, and true to the Monarchy; to keep our old, lawful
Oaths, and to abhor all illegal and new ones; to be honest and faithful, and
peaceable and obedient to the Government: It is ou^ Duty, to beg of God to
preserve us from Wicked and Deceitful Men, from the Perfidious, and the
Perjured, from bare Pretenders to Religion and Reformation, from false Friends,
and false Brethren; to beg of God to preserve our King in Peace and fafety, the
Monarchy in its full strength, and just rights, the Church in purity, and the
Laws in vigor and due execution.

And let All, that wish well to our Sion, say Amen.

FINIS.

