A Doubt Resolved, OR Satisfaction for the Seekers. Wherein the case touching
an Administrator of Gospel Ordinances, in these Times, is handled. Wherein also
some other Questions are occasionally and more Briefly touched. VIZ. I. Whether
Water Baptism was to continue in force after the Ministry of John the Baptist
ceased. II. Whether Gospel Ordinances are things Spiritual, or but Carnal?
III. Whether a power to Preach by immediate Revelation of the Spirit, be
necessary in every Gospel Minister? IIII. What it is to be Baptized with the
Spirit. Well worthy the consideration of many who in these times are unsettled
in their Judgments touching these points.

By WILLIAM ALLEN.

2 Thessalonians. 2.15. Therefore Brethren, stand fast, and hold the Ordinances which
ye have been taught, whether by word or our Epistle,

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for H. Cripps, and L. Lloyd, and are to be sold at
their shop in Pope's Head Alley. 1655.

A Doubt Resolved, OR Satisfaction for the Seekers.
SECTION. I.
THe great Enemy of Truth, the Devil, perceiving that in these Times of Light
and Reformation, he could no longer detain men in the erroneous and
superstitious use of Ordinances, as heretofore; now labors by all means to
persuade them, either that they have no need of Ordinances at all, or else that
there is now none to be found who are in a capacity to Administer them. It is
true, the Devil for the most part deals more subtly then at first dash to
persuade men that they are above, or have no need of Ordinances, but first he
labors to stumble them about an Administrator, by which means he prevails with
them, first to suspend the use of Ordinances, and so gains a great advantage
thereby, to persuade them after a while that there is no need for them now to
live any longer under Ordinances. A devise by which he has brought them into a
greater error, they having recovered themselves out of that which was less:
for by persuading men to cast off Ordinances, he has quickly drawn very many
to cast off all Religion; these times furnishing us with too many instances,
not only of such who having suspended the use of Ordinances so long upon the
scruple about an Administrator as till they are grown from persons of an
excellent savor in things of the Gospel, to be as dry as a chip, but also of
such who having first laid the foundation of their Apostasy in their scrupeling
an Administrator, have proceeded by degrees so far as to lose all Religion, and
to fall into all looseness and prophanness. Wherefore to check this growing
evil, and out of tender compassion to those who I apparently perceive to be in
this snare of the Devil, I shall in the ensuing Discourse offer that which I
hope, through the blessing of God, may be found sufficient to role this great
stumbling block out of the way of as many as shall impartialy weigh the same.

SECT. II.
And for a Groundwork whereon to proceed, I shall lay down that Prophecy of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.18. as applied by Peter unto the person of Christ, Acts 3.22.
Moses truly said unto the Fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up
unto you of your brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things
whatsoever he shall say unto you. Christ is said to be a Prophet like unto
Moses, in that he is the Prophet of the New Testament, as Moses was the Prophet
of the Old. Now Moses was so a Prophet of the Old Testament, as that by him the
children of Israel received from God, such standing Laws, as by which they were
to be steered both in matters of Worship, and of conversation otherwise,
throughout their Generations, until the coming of Christ in the flesh:
Therefore the Law is said to be a Schoolmaster until Christ, Gal. 3.24. Luke
16.16. In like manner, Christ as the Prophet of the New Testament, has
delivered and given forth such Doctrines, Rules, and Precepts, as by which all
men, especially those of his household, are to be ordered in point of Faith,
Worship, Ordinances, and all manner of conversation, from the time of his
leaving the world, unto the time of his return or visible appearance in the
clouds of heaven. In which respect Christ is said to be Faithful in his house,
as Moses was in his, Heb. 3.2. And now all Nations are to be taught to observe
all things whatsoever he has Commanded, unto the end of the world, Mat. 28.20.

SECT. III.
If then Christ be thus a Prophet like unto Moses, then it follows, That as
those who lived under the Ministration of Moses, were to hear him in all things
he delivered to them from God, so those that now live under the Ministration of
Christ, are to hear and obey him in all his sayings, Mat. 3.17. and 17.5. Act.
3.22. And if they escaped not who refused Moses that spoke on earth, how shall
they escape which shall refuse Christ which speaks from heaven? Heb. 12.25.
and 2.2, 3. Act. 3.23.

SECT. IIII.
Furthermore, if Christ be a Prophet of the New Testament like unto Moses the
Prophet of the Old, then it follows, That as no man under the Ministration of
Moses might add to or diminish from the Law, by omiting any of the Ordinances
thereof, or by inventing any other way of Worship then was by that appointed
without provoking God against them, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Levit. 10.1, 2. 1 Chro.
13.9.10. with 15.13. So in like manner, no man under the Ministration of Christ
in the Gospel, may presume to add to, or take from the Word of the Gospel, in
omiting any the Ordinances thereof, or teaching men so to do, or by inventing
any other way of Worship then what is by that established, without incuring a
curse from God, Gal. 1.8, 9. Rev. 22.18, 19. A Word which may well make both
the ears of them to tingle, who either cry down all Ordinances as fleshly, as
some; or Water Baptism as a thing out of use, as others; or else change the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ as they do, who only sprinkle in stead of burying in
Baptism, or else Baptize persons presently after their natural birth, in stead
of Baptizing them presently upon their new and Spiritual birth, according to
the way of the New Testament: I pray God open their eyes to see, and awaken
their consciences to consider their error, least he rise up to smite them with
a curse.

SECT. V.
Neither is that like to prove a shield and Buckler to defend them here from,
which yet some take hold on for that purpose, viz. That water Baptism (to touch
that a little) was Legal, and continued in force but only under the Ministry
of John the Baptist, and if used afterward, it was but arbitrarily as
circumcision was.

For the Ministry of John and so his Baptism, was not Legal but Evangelicall,
in which respect it is called The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the
Son of God, Mark 1, 2, 3, 4. And the date of the ministration of the law and
the Prophets, was until John's ministry began, not ended; for when Christ said,
the law and the Prophets were until John, and that since that time (speaking of
a time already past) the Kingdom of God is preached, and every man presses
into it, (as they did to the baptism of John) Luke 16.16. I say when Christ
spoke these words, referring unto a time past, John's ministry was not as yet
finished, he being then alive, as you may perceive plainly if you read, Mat.
11. from Verse. 2. to Verse. 13. and therefore those words UNTIL John, cannot
refer unto the ending, but unto the beginning of John's Ministry: Which is also
yet more manifest, in that Christ said, even while John and his Ministry were
yet in being, Mat. 11.12. From the days of John the Baptist UNTIL NOW, The
Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by fore: which
words from the days of John the Baptist until now, could not be spoken of the
ending of John's Ministry, because when this was said his Ministry was yet on
foot as appears V. 2. So that clearly, John's preaching the Baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins, was the preaching of the Kingdom of God,
to wit, the Gospel of the Kingdom, as that which is distinguished from the
Ministration of the Law and Prophets, and therefore not legal but Evangelical.

Besides, (to show yet further that water Baptism was not limited unto John's
Ministry) John's Ministry was confined within the Territories of Canaan (or
rather Judea) as was also that of the Apostles, till after the Resurrection of
Christ, Mat. 10.5. whereas, after the Resurrection of the Lord, and immediately
before his Ascension, Christ gave commission to his Apostles to teach and
baptize all Nations, in the doing of which as of other his commands; he
promises his presence with them to the end of the world, Mat. 28.19.20. which
clearly shows that Baptism was not confined to John's Ministry.

SECT. VI.
But if they say, that's not water Baptism, but the Baptism of the spirit, of
which Christ speaks, Mat. 28.19.20. (which yet is too unreasonable to affirm)
yet the practice of the Apostles acting upon this commission, will evince that
they understood it otherwise. For surely when Peter exhorted the Jews to repent
and be baptized, for the remission of sins, Act. 2.38. he did not persuade them
to be baptized with the spirit for the remission of sins, because the Baptism
of which he there speaks, he persuades them to use in order to their receiving
the spirit, as it there follows: Repent and be baptized, etc. and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. And those that will construe the baptism
here spoken of, of the Baptism of the Spirit, take course to render the Apostle
to speak as little sense, as they do truth, as will appear if you read the
words according to their interpretation, thus, Repent and be baptized with the
Holy Ghost, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

And whereas the Eunuch desired Philip to baptize him in water, Act. 8.36. will
not every man conclude that Philip, in preaching the Gospel to him, had
convinced him of it as a Christian duty? how, or why else should he desire
Baptism up on Philips preaching? Besides, when Philips answer to his desire of
being Baptized runs thus; If thou beleevest withal thine heart, thou may,
does it not clearly imply, that water baptism is a privilege peculiar to
Believers? for if it had been then to be used only as a thing indifferent, as
they suppose circumcission was, it might have been lawful for him to have been
baptized, whether he had believed or no, unless we will suppose that his not
believing would have made an indifferent and lawful thing to become unlawful to
him.

Nor can it reasonably be thought that the men and women of Samaria, deluded
till then by Simon the Sorcerer, would have been baptized by Philip; but that
they were by his preaching convinced that it was their duty so to be, Act.
8.11.12. Nor will any I hope be so unreasonable, as to say this was the Baptism
of the Spirit, since in the 15.16. verse, this Baptism is clearly distinguished
from that of the Spirit: For the Spirit (says he) was fallen upon none of
them, only they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus. So that this
Baptism went before their receiving the Spirit, and therefore could not be
their being baptized with the Spirit. And when Peter said concerning Cornelius
and his company, Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized
who have received the Holy Ghost as well as we, Acts 10.47. and withal,
commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, Verse 48. Will any
imagine that Peter's commanding them to be baptized, was beside the business for
which he was sent thither of God, and not in direct pursuance of his
commission? or that men's having the Spirit, though in an excellent degree, as
they had, is any excuse from water Baptism? or that it was a thing indifferent
to be baptized or not baptized? especially considering that the Angel had told
Cornelius, that Peter should tell him what he GVGHT to do, Act. 10.6. and
declare to him words, by which he and all his should be saved, Acts 11.14. And
Cornelius his expectation accordingly, was not to hear from him things which
might be done, or let alone; but such things as were commanded him of God, Act.
10.33. And doubtless when Peter commanded Cornelius to be baptized in the Name
of the Lord, Cornelius had reason to conclude, that this, as well as any thing
else, was that which he ought to do, and that those Words as well as others,
were Words by which he should be saved, according to the Item before given him
by the Angel. Or can it enter into the heart of any Christian to think, that
the holy Apostle would be so profane as to command and cause a thing to be
acted and done in the Name of the Lord, which the Lord had not commanded? All
which considered, what is more plain, then that water Baptism was no
indifferent thing; but the express Will of God, even after such time as the
ministry of John Baptist was at an end?

SECT. VII.
And whereas when we allege the use and practice of Water Baptism after the
ministry of John ceased, they to counter balance this, aleadge the use of
circumcision at the same time, though circumcision was at that time de jure
abolished, as they say: To this I answer likewise.

1. If Circumcision was used as an indifferent thing; yet it was not commanded
and enjoined by the Apostles, to be used in the Name of the Lord, as Baptism
was, Act. 10.48. nor for remission of sins, and in order to men's receiving the
Holy Ghost, as Baptism was, Acts. 2.38. nor as a privilege belonging only to
believers, as Baptism was, Acts 8.36. therefore water baptism was not practiced
upon the same terms as circumcision was in the Apostles times.

2. If Circumcision was allowed as lawful, and so practiced by any, with
consent of the Apostles, yet this was only among the Jews. And therefore
though Timothy was circumcised, yet it was in that his mother was a Iewesse,
Acts 16.1.4. Whereas when the same thing was desired in the behalf of Titus,
the Apostle would by no means consent unto it, for as much as he was a Greek;
the Apostle aleadging that as a reason of his refusal, Gal. 2.3. And further,
tells the Gentiles, that if they were circumcised, Christ should profit them
nothing, Gal. 5.2. And the decree of the Apostles, was express herein, (when
some would have had the believing Gentiles circumcised) that those among the
Gentiles that were turned to God, should not be troubled with any the Jews
customs, but only that they should abstain from things strangled and from
blood etc. Acts 15.19.20 with v. 28.29 But now water baptism was used among the
believing Gentiles, as well as the believing Jews, all along, as well after
this decree of the Apostles, as before, Act. 16.15.33. and 18.8. which clearly
evinceth the baptism we speak of, to be no Jewish rite as is pretended, nor yet
to be practiced upon like terms as circumcision was in the Apostles days.

SECT. VIII.
To those that lay aside not only baptism, but other ordnances also as things
fleshly, I shall in short say but this to convince them, that those notions
which lead them to this, proceed not from the holy spirit, but from the foul
spirit the Devil.

1. The Lord Jesus himself, whose measure of the spirit was greater then any
man's, and the Apostles and other Saints in their times, whose measure of the
spirit were greater then any in these times can reasonably pretend to, in that
they did such works then, as none now can do, yet they were guided by the holy
spirit to use, and to enjoin others to use water baptism, the word, breaking of
bread and prayer as the History of the new Testament does abundantly witness.
And therefore for those that have not so much of the spirit, yet to conceit
themselves to be elivated higher in the spirit, and to be carried above those
forms which those that had more of the spirit were directed to use, is such an
immagination, as may be sensibly felt to be a delusion of the Devil, and not
any inspiration of the Spirit of God. Those in the Apostles days who separated
themselves from the Churches of Christ, and communion with them in ordinances
of the Gospel, though probably upon the same pretenses with m^n of like
separation in our times, are charractorized by the Apostle, to be sensual, not
having the spirit, Jud. 19.

2. Therefore secondly, what ever is meant by men's knowing of Christ not after
the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16. or by other Scriptures of like import: most certain it
is that this is not the meaning of them, that men should not know Christ in
Ordinances, because the Apostles themselves knew Christ in these, and had
communion with him, and with his Saints in these, yea and it was their business
to persuade others hereunto: and I hope no man will think that the spirit
inspired them to speak contradictions: For as God is true (says the Apostle)
our word toward you was not yea and nay, 2. Cor. 1.18.

3. When the Appostle opposes the spirit unto the letter, in 2. Cor. 3.6. he
does no^ mean by letter, Gospel Ordinances but the Ministration of Moses; for
that which he calls the letter in this 6 Verse, he also calls the ministration
of death, written and engraven in stones* Verse 7. which can rightly be
understood of nothing else but the ministration of Moses. And therefore they
bewray much ignorance, who from this Scripture cry down Gospel Ordinances, as
being but the letter, when as indeed the Apostle does oppose the whole Gospel
ministration (which as to the external part, is made up of Ordinances) as being
spiritual, unto that of the law which was but litteral. And the reason why the
Ordinances of the Gospel are said to be spiritual, and those of the law but
litteral, You may understand by the sequel of the Apostles discourse, in this
Chapter, which is this, viz. because the end and spiritual meaning of the
Ordinances of the Law, was little understood or discerned; but was veiled and
hid under those shaddows, so that as he says, Verse 13. The children of Israel
could not steadfastly look to the end of those things, which now are abolished:
Whereas the end, scope, spirit, and meaning of Gospel Ordinances, is plainly
revealed, and may clearly be discerned; and therefore the Apostle by way of
magnifying the ministration of the Gospel above that of the Law, says, Verse
12.13. We use great plainness of speech, and not as Moses, who put a vail over
his face, etc. and again, verse. 18. We all with open face, behold as in a
glass, the glory of the Lord. And therefore it is doubtless in respect of this
difference, that the Gospel ministration (the outward part whereof consists in
Ordinances) is in other Scriptures, as spiritual, opposed to the ordinances of
the Law as things fleshly. Gal. 3.3 Are ye so foolish, having began in the
spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh? Their folly was this, for which
he chids them; In that they having first embraced the Doctrine and Ordinance of
the Gospel, by which Christ had before their eyes been evidently set forth, as
crucified among them, Verse 1. and by which they had received the spirit, verse.
2. yet were so weak as to think to better their condition at last, by taking up
the Ordinance of the Law, which in comparison of those of the Gospel which they
had already received, were but weak and beggarly elements, Chap. 4.9. Most
evident it is, that those Galatians began their Christianity in the believing
the Gospel, and putting on Christ in baptism Chap. 3.26.27. which here in Chap.
3. verse. 3. the Apostle calls their having began in the spirit. If so, then
certainly they are not of the Apostles mind, who deem* water Baptism to be but
fleshly.

If then the Ordinances of the Gospel, as a great part of the Gospel
Ministration, be spiritual, and in Scripture opposed to carnal ordinances, as
we see they are, then most manifest it is, that those poor souls, whom the
Devil has so far beguild, as to conceit themselves so spiritual and subline,
as to be above ordinances, are indeed, and in truth, so poor, low, as and
carnal, to be grossly ignorant of the mind of God, thus plainly laid down in
Scripture.

SECT. IX.
My next Coralary from my first position shall be this. If Christ be a Prophet
of the New Testament, as Moses was of the old, then it follows, that as the Law
first given by Moses, was a standing rule, according to which the Jews upon all
backslidings, were to reform themselves, in worship, and all other things;
until the coming of Christ in the flesh; so likewise the Gospel in all the
Doctrines, Precepts and Ordinances thereof, first delivered to the Saints,
either immediately by Christ, or immediately by his Apostles, is to remain
steadfastly as a standard, according to which all men are to reform, in point of
faith, worship, discipline, and conversation, otherwise, until Christ shall
come again at the end of the world.

SECT. X.
That the Prophets themselves, though men of extraordinary inspiration, when
they found the Jews to have corrupted themselves and the worship of God, did
still call upon them to reform, according to the written Law of Moses, and that
good men did reform accordingly, will appear by these and the like Scriptures,
Ier. 6.16. Isa. 8.20. 2 Kings 17.13. and 18.6. and 23.25. Neh. 10.29. And
indeed whether they had Prophets among them, or whether none, yet still the
written Law was their rule, Mal. 4.4. Psalm. 78.5.6.7.

In like manner (the Prophetical office of Christ, answering the Prophetical
office of Moses) the Doctrines, Ordinances and commands which Christ first gave
forth, do remain steadfast, as that standing rule according to which all
reformations in the Church of God, ought to be managed. This appears further by
Heb. 2.1.2.3. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things
which we have heard lest at any time we let them slip, etc. The things which
they had heard, and which they had first been taught, he lays down Chap. 6.1.2.
viz. Repentance from dead works, faith toward God, doctrine of Baptism, and
laying on of hands, etc. These and the like things which they had heard, are so
to be heeded, that they may not at ANYTIME be let slip. Again, 2 These. 2.15.
Therefore Brethren, stand fast, and hold the Ordinances which ye have been
taught, whether by word or our Epistle. Where note likewise, that the
Ordinances of the Gospel, whether taught by word or by writing, as we have
them, are to be held fast. And if it be demanded how long? Christ himself
resolves the case, Rev. 2.25 That which ye have already, hold fast till I come,
Which cannot be meant of his spiritual coming into the hearts of men (to which
sense some would pervert the words) because thus he was come to his Church of
Thyatira, and the rest of the seven Churches of Asia, before he gave them this
charge, for he walked in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks; to wit,
those seven Churches, Rev. 1.13.20. which notes his coming to them, and
abiding amongst them. Besides, can any be so weak as to think when Paul, 1 Cor.
11.26. directs the Church of Corinth, to show forth the Lords death till he
come, by the breaking of bread, that he means it of Christ's spiritual coming by
his Spirit into their hearts? since it is evident enough, that thus he was come
to them already, in as much as the Apostle styles them Sanctified ones in
Christ Jesus, and called to be Saints, and such as were by him enriched in
every thing, waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, Chap, 1.2.5.7,
Again, the same command or law, according to which Tymothy was to manage the
affairs of the Church then in his days, is to be kept without spot,
unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6.14. And
when there is any degenerating, backsliding or falling off from the first pure
ways of the Gospel, there men in repenting and reforming, are to do the FIRST
works, Rev. 2.5.

SECT. XI.
Many there are indeed, upon whom the spirit of Ranteterism has not yet so far
prevailed, but that they acknowledge water baptism in its proper subject, true
believers, and all other Gospel Ordinances to be still in force, and agreeable
enough to that spiritual worship required under the Gospel, were it so that
they had but oppertunity of enjoying them in a due way of administration: But
that now they make a considerable obsticle in their way of coming into
Church Communion, Gospel Ordinances, viz. the want of a right administrator:
For they suppose that since that general apostasy, from the purity of faith and
Gospel order, which befell the Churches, upon the entering of the Papacy into
the world, there has none appeared sufficiently Authorized by God, to rally
again what had been routed by hand of the enemy, or to gather Churches, or
administer Ordinances; all due Admistrators in this kind, being perished from
the earth: and that therefore we must be content to wait till God shall raise
up some such, whose authority in this behalf he shall attest with visible
signs of his presence, by gifts of the Holy Ghost; and diverse miracles, as at
the first erection of Gospel Churches and Ordinances. To the solving of which
doubt, I shall now apply my self, as unto that which I principally intended.

SECT. XII.
1. Therefore, suppose it were granted, that all right administration of Gospel
Ordinances, did totally cease during the time that Papal darkness over spread
the world; yet this upon such a supposition, would put men but in like
condition with the people of God the Jews, during the time of their captivity
in Babylon, in which the Temple lay waste, the daily sacrifice ceased, and all
use of public worship was cut off, and yet when God gave them the oppertunity
by bringing them out of Babylon, they presently fell to restore the use of
decayed Ordinances, though Prophets extraordinarily inspired by God to direct
them, were altogether wanting. And though the Temple at the first, might not be
built but according to Gods own direction, 1 Chronicles. 28.12.19. yet the Jews,
though now they had no such extraordinary directions ( Ezra 2.63.) nor in
conclusion did attain the perfection of the Temple as at first, ( Ezra 3.12.
Hag. 2.3.) yet they by the light of that written Law, set upon restoring of
Temple and worship, according to such opportunity as they then had. And that
they did well in so doing, appears in that after they had begun, and did again
desist from the work the Lord raised up two Prophets, Haggai and Zachary, to
reprove them, for that they had let their hands slick from the work, Hag. 1.1.
to 12. Ezekiel. 5.1. All which considered, together with this, that Christ is a
Prophet in his time, like unto Moses in his, may greatly encourage such who are
but lately come out of the bondage of mistical Babylon, to put to their hands
to the restoring of the decayed Ordinances of the Gospel, to the uttermost of
that opportunity they have, and according to that Gospel pattern we find in
the writings of the New Testament, do but parralel their case with ours, and
see if we have not as great reason to be doing this way, as they. 1. Have we no
men extraordinarily inspired, to lead the way herein, neither had they till
such were raised to reprove them for their negligence therein. 2. Suppose we
should in some things want opportunity of coming up to the utmost of the first
Gospel pattern: yet they were under the like disadvatage in their low
reformation. Hag. 2.3. 3. Was the written Law a sufficient ground for them to
proceed on in this case to restore decayed Ordinances though upon terms of some
disadvantage, in comparison of what they formerly enjoyed? Then why should not
the written Gospel in this case, as well be a rule and ground to us? 4. Were
they reproved for leaving off the work till they had Prophets sent to quicken
them? and shall they think to escape rebuke from God who now neglect the
restoration of Gospel Ordinances till God raise up men extraordinarily inspired
to put them in the way? 5. Did the Prophet assure them of the presence of God
with them, in the work of reformation and restitution of Temple and Ordinances,
as well as their forefathers enjoyed it, before any such decay fell out? as we
see he did, Hag. 2.5. Then why may not we expect that presence of Christ with
us, in the restitution of his Ordinances, which he promised to those that
should observe his commands, even to the end of the world? Mat. 28.19.20.

SECT. 13.
II. Whereas it is supposed by the persons whose scruple I am now laboring to
satisfy, that all right administrators, and administration of Gospel
Ordinances, perished from the earth, in times of Papal darkness, To this I
answer.

1. That so to say, is a mere presumption which cannot be made good. In that
great apostasy of Israel, Eliah that great Prophet thought indeed that he, even
he alone was left, whereas God had in secret seven thousand which had not bowed
the knee to Baal, 1 Kings 19.14.18. Romans 11.3.4. So that we see its no good
argument to conclude, that because in times of great and general apostasy,
there is no visible appearance of the faithful servants of God who have not
defiled their garments, that therefore there is none. And who knows but that
God might as well reserve unto himself in secrets, seven thousand in the time
of Papal Apostasy, as he did in the Baalish Apostasy.

SECT. XIV.
2. If that promise of Christ, Mat. 16.18. Upon this rock will I build my
Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail, against it, be to be
understood as commonly it has been (and I know no sufficient reason to depart
from that received interpretation) that maugre all the slight, policy and power
of Satan and his instruments; yet Christ will have a true Church on earth to
the end of the world, then we must conclude that Christ had a true Church in
being, even all the time of the greatest antichristian apostasy, and Popish
darkness, though the footsteps thereof could not be discovered in history. A
conclusion to which that of the Apostle seems to add much strength, Ephesians.
4.11.12.13. For in that he says, he gave some Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors and Teachers, for work of the Ministry, perfecting of Saints, and
edifying of the body of Christ, TELL we all come in the unity of the faith, and
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ; he cannot reasonably be understood to mean
less, then that some of these Officers should remain and continue unto the
coming of Christ at the end of the world, when, and not till when, this unity
of faith, and knowledge, and the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, shall be attained by all Saints. For the Apostle Paul himself, who was
a Saint of the largest growth, and I think we may say came the nearest to the
stature of the fullness of Christ of all other; yet he acknowledged, that
whilst he was here in the flesh, that he had not as yet attained, or was
already perfect, Phil. 3.13. and that he knew but in part, 1 Cor. 13.12. and if
not he much less the Saints that have lived since him in times of
degeneration. And if that estate be not yet attained for the completing of
which the Lord Jesus gave unto his Church the Officers aforesaid, then they
remain in being unto this day, or else Christ has not given them to remain
UNTIL WE ALL come, viz. Paul and all the rest of the Saints unto a perfect
man, which yet the Apostle affirms that he has. But those that will needs
suppose all Church Officers and Administrators to have been utterly extinct
when once the Popish Apostasy took place, go about to make the contrary to what
the Apostle affirms, to be true, and do say in effect, That Christ gave some
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, until the Churches and
Saints came to the measure of the stature of Antichrist, Note this.
and not to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

SECT. XV.
3. But then thirdly, there is much to be said from History, and that in great
part of the adversaries own penning, to prove that there has been a
continuance of a true Church and a right administration of Ordinances, even
from the Apostles days down to this very time in which we live.

There was a people in the darkest times of Popery, who opposed themselves
against the corruptions of the times, sometimes distinguished by the names of
Waldenses, and Albigenses, and Lionists. For their qualifications, a certain
Friar says thus of them: That men and woman little and great day and night
cease not to learn and to teach, and that diverse of them could perfectly
deliver all the New Testament: a man says he, would not hurt his enemy, if he
should meet him upon the way accompanied with one of these Heretics. They were
said to be modest, simple, meddling little with bargains, to avoid lying and
deceit, living upon their labor, being content with a little chaste, sober, and
inviting others by their example to every good thing.

For the time of their continuance, or being in the world, Du Plessit an
approved Author, in his History of the Papacy, page 330. brings in one
Rainerius a Friar, as writing about the year, 1250. speaking thus of them.
Among all the Sects that are (says he) or ever will be, none can be more
pernicious to the Church of God then that of Lions, for three causes. First
because it has continued a longer time then any, some say it has been ever
since the time of Sylvester, others say from the time of the Apostles. The
second because it is more general, Note this.
for there is not almost any country where into this Sect has not crept. The
third because all the other procure horror by their Blasphemies against God,
this of the Lyonists has a great appearance of piety, in as much as they live
uprightly before men, and put their trust in God in all things.

SECT. 16.
Though I will not say that all of this way, were such as were nicknamed
Anabaptists, for possibly it may be made out that some of them were tainted
with that error of the times of baptizing their children, yet there is good
reason to conceive that many of them did not. For first Bernard, who is
reported to have lived about the year 1002. which was 250. years before the
foresaid Friar wrote, this Bernard in his 65 Sermon on Cant. page 144. as Mr.
Blackwood in his storming of Antichrist page 31. but as quoted by Mr. Tombs, in
his 66 Sermon, has this complaint against this people. They laugh at us, says
he, because we baptize infants, because we pray for the dead, because we
require the prayers of Saints, etc. by which it appears they held the baptizing
of infants ridiculous.

SECT. 17.
Secondly, It may further appear that this people, or at least many among them,
were called Anabaptists, because when Luther and Calvin rise up in their times,
they bitterly inveigh against the Anabaptists, as well as the Papists, as their
writings do abundantly declare, by which it appears that they in their times
found such a people in being as well as Papists. And that these were of the
same sort of people, of which Bernard, and the Friar had formerly complained,
may well be conceived, inasmuch as the foresaid Author Du Plessis, says, they
were so spread abroad in Germany and France (where Luther and Calvin had to do)
as that their prints and footsteps are to be discerned throughout the course of
all Histories, page 403. and that we see their Churches out live so many
miseries, and even until these times consist and continue flourishing and
largely propagated, page 565. And History also relates, how the Anabaptists in
Germany spread themselves into the Netherlands, and as it seems from thence
into England. For as Mr. Fox relates in his Acts and Monuments, Vol. 2. fol.
95. in King Hen. 8. time, there were two and twenty Dutchmen Anabaptists
apprehended, and about ten of them put to death, in the year 1535. Since which
time there has remained in the Low Countries or England, or both, of the same
race unto this every day.

If then this kind of people by Adversaries own confession, did continue from
the Apostles days, and that their prints and footsteps are to be discerned
throughout all Histories till Luther's time, and so downwards, why should any
man be tender of being confident, (especially having those Scriptures of Mat.
16.18. Epk. 4.12, 13. to back him) that there has a successive line of true
Churches and true Gospel Administrators, run along throughout all ages, from
the Apostles times to this day?

SECT. 18.
Thirdly, Though it should be granted (which yet may not) that the line of
succession both of duly constituted Churches, and of all due administrators of
Gospel Ordinances, had been cut off by the prevailings of Apostasy in times of
Popery, yet it would not hence follow that there neither is nor can be now,
true Churches or right Administrators of Ordinances, because we have upon the
matter, and in substance and effect, the same apostolical power now amongst us,
to plant and settle churches, and to administer Ordinances, as was injoied in
the Apostles days.

The ground upon which I build this assertion is this, viz. Because we have the
same instructions and directions from the Apostles in their writings, about
things of this nature, as they had who lived in the Apostles times. For though
the Believers then, were sometimes taught the use of Ordinances by word of
mouth from the Apostles, yet other while they were taught the same, but in the
same way as we also now are, that is to say, by their writings, or however,
their writings were as authentic this ways as their preachings and
instructions were, when they were present*

This is plain from 2 These. 2.15. Therefore Brethren stand fast, and hold the
traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word or our Epistle. The word
here translated traditions, would surely be better translated Ordinances, as it
is 1 Cor. 11.2. as those that are well skild in Greek do inform, and so Mr.
Tindal has translated it in this place. In this Text there are two things
chiefly to be observed to our purpose.

1. That the Apostles instructed or taught men about the use of Ordinances, as
well by their Epistles, as by word of mouth. 2. That men were to use, practice
and keep those Ordinances they had been taught by the Apostles writings, as
well as when they had been taught the same by word of mouth: their writings did
as well authorize, yea oblige them to hold fast (to wit in use and practice)
the Ordinances they had been taught thereby, as any other way of teaching used
by the Apostles.

SECT. 19.
Neither did the Epistles of the Apostles (if any should make a doubt of this.
(So appropriately belong to those to whom first and immediately they were
directed, but that they also were intended for the good of all that call on the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for so the 1 Cor. 1.1.2. shows, being directed
as well to all those which in every place call on the name of Jesus Christ, as
unto them. For so the words run: Paul called to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ
through the will of God, and Softhenes our brother, unto the Church of God,
which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be
Saints, WITH ALL THAT IN EVERY PLACE call upon the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ both theirs and ours. So that if we or any others in any place of the
world, call upon the name of Jesus Christ, this Epistle as well belongs to us,
as it did unto the Corinthians in like cases. Besides many of the Epistles of
the Apostles are called general Epistles, as being intended indefinitely to all
whom they might concern: so the 1 and 2 Epistle of Peter, 1 Epist. John, and
the Epist. of Jude: and the 7 Epist. to the 7 Churches in Asia though
immediately directed to them, yet even every one that has an ear to hear is to
hearken what the spirit says unto the Churches, as you have it in the close of
every Epistle, Revel. 2.7.11.17.29. and 3.6.13.23. Seeing then that the
Apostles writings do as well concern us, as they did those to whose hands they
first came, what being written aforetime, being written for our learning as the
Apostle teaches, to reason, Romans 15.4. and since also these writings of theirs
do sufficiently direct men about, and authorize them in the use of Gospel
Ordinances, it thence follows, that we have in substance and effect the same
Apostolical power among us to direct and warrant us in the use of Ordinances in
Church communion, as those Believers had who lived in the Apostles days.

SECT. 20.
And because the knowledge and belief hereof is of sovereign use to cure that
infirmity which troubles many, and keeps them out of the way of Jesus Christ,
and to resolve the main doubt, therefore I shall yet make this further manifest
by what follows.

I. Then since Christ Jesus is the Prophet of the New Testament, as Moses was
of the old (as has been oft-minded) it will not be amiss to show, that Moses
by his writings was a Minister to the Jews, as well when he was dead, as while
he was alive, John 5.45. There is one that accuses you, even Moses in whom ye
trust, says Christ to the Jews, in that the Doctrine of Moses which they had
in writing did accuse them, Moses himself is said to accuse them. Again ver.
46, 47. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of
me, but if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words? Where we
see 1. That to believe Moses, and to believe the Doctrine of Moses in his
writings is the same thing. And 2. That Christ held it altogether unlikely,
that those that would not believe and obey those matters of Doctrine whilst
commended to them in the writings of Moses, should ever believe and obey Christ
himself teaching the same things. And by rule of proportion it holds well, that
if those that would not believe Moses writings, could not believe Christ's
words, he speaking and Moses writing the same thing, neither would they believe
and obey the Apostles themselves, or men of like qualifications, if they should
come again amongst us, who now will not obey those Doctrines rules and
precepts, which they have left us in writing. And hereto agrees that also Luke
16.31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead.

Again John 7.19.22. did not Moses give you the Laws, and yet none of you
keeps the Law, ver. 22. Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision, etc. How
did Moses give them the Law and circumcision, when as he was dead many hundreds
of years before they were born? Why in that they had the writings of Moses, and
were as well concerned in what they imported, as those were to whom Moses first
delivered the Law, in that respect Moses was said to give them the law, as well
as to their forefathers.

Acts 21.21. They are informed of thee, that thou teach all the Jews which
are among the Gentiles, to forsake Moses saying, that they ought not to
circumcise their children and to walk after the customs. Where likewise we
see, that to forsake the Doctrine of Moses, is to forsake Moses and Luke 16.13.
They are said to have Moses and the Prophets, when yet they had but their
writings; so that to forsake Moses and to forsake his Doctrine, and to have
Moses and the Prophets, and to have their Doctrine in writing, is in Scripture
language and account the same thing in effect and substance. And there is
altogether the same reason, why to have the Ministry of the Apostles, and to
have their Doctrine in writing, to forsake the one, and to forsake the other,
should be substantially the same thing. And let every man be sure of this, Note.
that if Christ Jesus at his first coming did interpret men's neglect of Moses
in his writings, to be an neglect of Moses in his Ministry, that he likewise at
his second coming, will account men's neglect to observe his Ordinances and
ways delivered us in the writings of his Apostles, to be an neglect of the
Apostles ministry, yea of Christ himself, whose Ambassadors they are to the
world, and to the Saints, as well by writing as speaking, as I shall show
further by and by.

SECT. 21.
2. The same thing is true also of the Doctrines and writings of the Prophets;
for they by their writings are as well Ministers to those under the New
Testament, as they were to those to whom they in their life time preached under
the old, so far as their Doctrine concerns men now* 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. Of
which salvation the Prophets have inquired and searched diligently, who
prophesied of the grace that should come unto you -- ver. 12. unto whom it was
revealed, that not unto themselve- but unto us they did minister the things
which are now reported to you, by them that have preached the Gospel unto you
Where note 1. That the Prophets are said to minister to us who now live under
the New Testament, the things of the Gospel, the same things which those have
reported who preached the Gospel, and to minister to us, and to be ministers to
us of the Grace of the Gospel, is in effect the same thing.

But then 2. How or by what means are the Prophets ministers to us of this
Grace, but by their writings? and if they by their writings are ministers unto
us, then much more are the Apostles Ministers to us upon the like account.
Again Ephesians. 2.20. and are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, etc. If then the Doctrine of the Prophets transmitted in writing, was
as well the Basis and foundation upon which the Churches in the Apostles times
were built, as the Doctrine of the Apostles themselves, as by this text it
clearly appears that it was then by the same rule, the Doctrinal writings both
of the Prophets and Apostles, are a sufficient foundation whereon to build
Churches now in these times. And therefore the Apostle says, Romans 16.25.26.
that by the Scriptures of the Prophets, as well as by the preaching of the
Apostles Christ Jesus is made known to all nations for the obedience of Faith.
If then the Scriptures of the Prophets, be a sufficient ground for men in all
Nations, in faith to act upon, for so much of the Gospel as is revealed in
them, as you see by our Apostle they are, then without doubt the Scriptures of
the Apostles also are a sufficient ground for men in all Nations, in faith to
act upon, as touching all those Doctrines, Ordinances, Rules, and Precepts of
the Gospel contained in them, John 20.31. But these are WRITTEN that ye might
BELIEVE, that Jesus is the Christ the son of God, and that believing ye might
have life through his name.

SECT. 22.
3. I shall yet further strengthen my principal assertion touching the presence
of an Apostolical power now amongst us, directing and authorizing men in the
gathering of Churches, and administration of Ordinances; I say I shall further
confirm this by several considerations, taken from the nature, manner, and
extant of the apostolical ministration.

SECT. 23.
1. The Apostles were and are Apostles to men as well by their writings being
absent from them, as by their preachings when present with them. For this,
consider first Romans 15.15.16. Nevertheless Brethren, I have written the more
boldly to you in some sort, as putting you in mind, because of the Grace that
is given me of God, that I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ unto the
Gentiles ministering the Gospel of God. Two things would be noted here touching
our business in hand. 1. The act of Paul, he wrote, and wrote boldly unto
these Romans. 2. The reason or ground why he did so write, and that was because
by the Grace of God he was made the minister of Christ to the Gentiles, such as
they were, to minister to them the Gospel of God. By which we gather, that in
that he wrote this Epistle to them, it was in direct pursuance of his Office,
as being the minister or Apostle of the Gentiles, and that he discharged his
office and trust toward them, and that they were made partakers of his
Ministry, even by that Epistle which he now wrote to them. Which is also
further manifest by Romans 11.13. For I speak to you Gentiles, in as much as I am
the Apostle of the Gentiles I MAGNIFY mine Office. How did he speak to them
but by his Epistle? and why, but because he being the Apostle of the Gentiles,
he hereby magnified his Office; that is, labored to make the most of it, or to
improve it to the utmost. And therefore when he wanted opportunity otherwise,
he discharged his Office of an Apostle by writing. If so what else is the
consequence, but that men by the Apostles writings, are partakers of the
Apostles ministry.

SECT. 24.
And it is worth observing, and that which makes this Scripture case the more
applicable to us, viz. in that when the Apostle wrote this Epistle to these
Romans, he had not as yet been personally with them at Rome, as may easily be
made out, by comparing Romans 15.23, 24, 25, 26. with Acts 19.21. together with
the precedent History of Paul's travels, in the book of the Acts. For if Paul
were an Apostle to those that had his mind and Doctrine in writing, who
otherwise never saw his face, then the Apostle is an Apostle to us also, who
have his writings as well as they then had.

To the former Scriptures you may add Col. 2.1. compared with chap. 1. ver.
25. It should seem that Paul had never seen the faces of those Colossians to
whom he writes. I would (says he) that ye knew what great conflict I have for
you, and for them of Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the
flesh. From which those that write upon this Epistle gather, that Paul had
never seen the face of these Colossians when he wrote this Epistle to them.
Which opinion is much confirmed by the 6, 7, 8, 9. ver. of chap. 1. where it
appears that they came to the knowledge of the Gospel by the ministry, not of
Paul, but of Epaphras, who having acquainted Paul with the success of his
Ministry, Paul thereupon takes occasion to write this Epistle to them. By the
writing of which Epistle he acted the part of a Minister, or an Apostle toward
them, as you may see chap. 1.25. Whereof I am made a Minister according to the
dispensation of God, which is given to me for you to fulfill the Word of God,
or fully to preach the word of God as the marginal reading has it. Where note,
that Paul had received from God, such a dispensation (or Stewardship as its
rendered by some from the Greek) to them ward, or on their behalf, according to
which he was made a Minister of the Church in general: and this Stewardship he
discharged toward them by writing, not having opportunity of discha^ging it
otherwise. So that still we see that the Apostles were Ministers and Apostles
to men by their writings, as well as otherwise.

And should the Apostles come again personally amongst us, yet doubtless they
would preach but the same thing for substance, which now we have in their
writings, 2 Cor. 10.11. Let such an one think this (says he) that such as we
are in word by letters, when we are absent, such will we be also indeed when we
are present. And it must needs be so, because the Gospel is but one simple and
unchangeable thing, whether preached or written, 2 Cor. 1.18. But as God is
true, our word toward you, was not yea and nay.

SECT. 25.
2. The Ministry of the Apostles reaches as far as their Doctrine reaches Romans
10.14.15. How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and
how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard, and how shall they
hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent? Here
the Apostle makes all men's believing the Gospel to depend upon the Apostles
preaching of it; I say, upon the Apostles preaching of it. For when he says,
how can they preach except they be sent, he speaks of those that were first
sent to preach the Gospel, to wit the Apostles, who indeed could never have
found out nor have preached such a Doctrine to the world, as the Gospel is, had
they not been sent on this errand, had they not been endued with power from on
high wherewith to do it: the Apostle denies any such sufficiency to be of
themselves, and ascribes it wholly unto God, 2 Cor. 3.5.

That the sending here spoken of Romans 10.15. is Christ's sending his Apostles to
preach the Gospel, will further appear, if you compare the effects with their
causes, as here set down in order by the Apostle. How can they (says he)
believe in him of whom they have not heard? That Is a principle in reason, that
a man cannot believe that, of which he has never heard. And how shall they
hear without a Preacher? Here Is another thing as manifest in reason, (for which
cause the Apostle makes themselves Judges in the case) a man cannot hear that
of which no report has been given, or of which no Declaration has been made.
And how shall they preach except they be sent? that is how should any man at
the first have divulged the Gospel and Doctrine of salvation; had he not first
been taught it of God, and empowered with knowledge and utterance from him,
wherewith to preach it? which was the Apostles case. And that the preaching and
sending here spoken of, is the preaching and sending of the Apostles, appears
yet further by the 18. verse of the same chap. where having continued his
discourse of the hearers and preachers, of which he had spoken three verses
before; ver. 14.15. he here says of the same Preachers, that their sound went
into all the earth and their words unto the ends of the world; which all
acknowledge to be spoken of the Apostles.

If then every man's believing depends upon his hearing the Gospel, and if his
hearing of i^ likewise depends upon their declaring or preaching it who first
received it from God, viz. the Apostles, (for if they had not declared it, we
had never heard it) then it is a thing out of doubt that every man's believing
the Gospel, does depend upon the preaching and ministry of the Apostles. And
if so, then the Apostles by their Doctrine are preachers to all those that in
all places and ages where the Gospel comes do believe.

SECT. 26.
Which thing viz, that the Apostles Ministry extends as far as their Doctrine,
may be further illustrated and confirmed thus. The Apostles Commission was to
preach the Gospel to every Creature in all the world. Mark. 16.15. and the
Apostle Paul whilst he was yet living, affirmed that accordingly it had been
preached to every creature under Heaven, Col. 1.23. But how did twelve Apostles
think we in their own persons carry the Gospel to every man and woman under
Heaven? Why surely no, that is not lightly imaginable. They indeed first set it
on broach in the Nations, but there were many others who were instrumental to
hand it up and down the world. Many of whom the Apostle upon that account calls
Fellow Laborers, Fellow-helpers, and Fellow-workers, together with them both
of men and women, 1 These. 3.2. Phil. 4.3. Romans 16.3.2. Cor. 8.23. Col. 4.11.
Philem. 1.24. It was indeed the Apostles sound that went into all the earth,
and they were their words that went to the ends of the world, Romans 10.18. they
made the whole world to ring with their Doctrine, but yet the Believers which
were also made such by their preaching, helped to carry this sound from one
place to another, till it had filled the world. In which work the Believers at
Rome had not the least share, they having a greater advantage and opportunity
this way then many others, inasmuch as the place of their abode was, in the
Metropolitan City of the world, where the Emperor thereof had his seat and
residence, whither and from whence upon that account men had recourse from, and
to all parts of the known world, whither the influence of the Imperial
Government did extend, and by that means the same of the faith of the Gospel
professed at Rome, went out into all the world, as the Apostle informs us, Romans
1.8. I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is spoken
of throughout the whole world.

But whoever were the immediate instruments, the Apostles themselves were the
original ministers, even to all that believed. In which respect all those that
have believed the Gospel, in what place or age of the world soever since the
Apostles, are all said to believe through their word, John 17.20. For when
Christ says (speaking of his Apostles) Neither pray I for these alone, but for
them also which shall believe on me through their word, he plainly implies,
that all that ever should thereafter believe, should believe through their
word, unless we will suppose that Christ did not pray for all Believers. In
which respect likewise I conceive Christ promises his Apostles to be present
with them, to wit in their ministry, unto the end of the world Mat. 28.20.
which also shows, that their Ministry in their Doctrine, should continue even
unto the end of the world.

If then the Ministry of the Apostles be of the same extent with their
Doctrine, and that the one is as broad and as long as the other, and that
whomsoever the one reaches, the other reaches (...), the affirmative whereof I
conceive has been abundantly proved, then the case is clear and out of doubt,
that the Ministry of the Apostles is now amongst us, to direct and authorize in
what is to be done in the Christian life, in matters of worship, Ordinances,
and otherwise, as well as it was among those Churches which were planted in
their days, because we have the same Doctrine with us in the Scriptures, by
authority whereof Churches were planted, and Ordinances administered in the
first times of the Gospels publication. And that the different terms, upon
which we now have, and the Believers then had, the same Doctrinal instructions
and directions, from the Apostles, the one by word of mouth, the other by
writing, does not alter the case so as to leave us out of that capacity of
enjoying Gospel Ordinances which they were in, I shall now come further to
clear in the next head of this discourse, Therefore

SECT. 27.
3. The weight, efficacy, authorizing and obliging virtue of the Apostles
Doctrinal instructions about matters of salvation, worship, administration of
Ordinances and the like, did not depend upon the Apostles themselves; as they
were such and such men, but upon the will, pleasure, and Grace of God which was
indeed made known by them. For which cause the Apostles frequently labor to
carry men's thoughts and expectations off from themselves, as touching the
import, energie, operation and virtue of the things ministered by them, and to
charge the same wholly upon God; that is upon his will and appointment, and the
influence of his power and grace, as concurrent with his own appointments, 1
Cor. 3.7. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither is he that
waters, but God that gives the increase. Though Paul plant and Apollo water,
yet the effects which the Gospel does produce in men, depend no more upon Paul
or Apollo, then the increase of the seed depends upon the hand of him that
plants or waters it, which by the blessing of God is wont to grow and increase
by what hand soever planted and watered.

Again 2 Cor. 4.7. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us. Where we see likewise,
that the excellency of the power of this treasure, did not depend upon the
vessels as such (to wit the persons of the Apostles) in which it was brought
but upon the Will, Grace, and Power of God, how weak, or earthen soever the
Vessels are, in which it is carried unto men, See further for this 1 Cor.
15.10. and 2 Cor. 3.5, Act. 3.12. This being so, it follows that we having the
same will of God now made known to us by the writings of the Apostles, by which
men were directed, authorized and warranted to believe be baptized, gather into
Churches, and to hold communion in all Ordinances in the Apostles days, that
therefore we also are every whit as well authorized and required to repent
believe, be baptized, unite in Church bodies, hold communion in all Ordinances
of the Gospel as they were, for the will of God which is the ground and
foundation of all, is the same, whether it be expressed by speaking or writing.
And I fear it will be found a slender excuse for men in the great day of
reckokoning, to say, that therefore they had not kept his Orninances, because
he did not deliver his mind about them upon the same terms to all as he had
done to some, when as notwithstanding he has sufficiently enough discovered
his mind and will herein. And why should any think either that God will more
excuse men in these days from obeying him in his Ordinances, then he did in the
Apostles times, or that men have less need now of the help and benefit of all
the Ordinances of the Gospel, then they then had?

SECT. 28.
What has been said already touching the presence of the apostolical ministry
among us, and the validity of their writings as being equivolent with their
personal speaking, to authorize men in the use and administration of
Ordinances, may I suppose abundantly satisfy any that are desirous of
satisfaction, touching an Administrator, and men's power of administering baptism
now in these days; yet because men might in this kind have good measure,
heaped up, pressed down, and running over into their bosoms, I shall speak yet
something further to that particular case.

The question is, what power any man has in these days to administer Baptism?

The answer is, even the very same that those men had, whom the Apostles in
their time did put upon this work. And the reason hereof is because the power
of appointing men then to administer baptism, was not Arbitrary, or in the
liberty of the Apostles own wills, for they were but instruments and ministers
of Jesus Christ to declare, who and what manner of persons he would have
employed therein; but it was the will of God (when known) whose work it is,
that did empower men to administer Baptism. This was proved above in Section
27. not only in relation to this particular administration, but all others
also. And the very truth is, the whole power of administration of any of the
things of the Gospel, not only by men of a lower rank and degree, but even by
the Apostles themselves, yea which is more, even by Christ himself is charged
upon the will of God, 1 Cor. 1.1. and 2 Cor. 1.1. Gal. 1.1, Ephesians. 1.1. Col, 1.1.
2 Timothy 1.1. John 6.38. and 12.49. Heb. 3.2.

Now look then what manner of persons stand declared in the Scriptures of the
New Testament, as allowed by God in the Apostles days, as meet for this work
of baptizing, the same manner or sort of men, are likewise in the same capacity
of doing it now; for the will of God herein, respects the qualifications of men
and not their person.

SECT. 29.
But now the Scripture is express, that this work of baptizing, was not
restrained or tied to the Apostles as such, but might be done, as usually it
was by the Disciples, 1 Cor. 1.17. For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the Gospel. The meaning is not that Christ did not in his Commission
appoint Paul to preach Baptism, to press and persuade men upon their
repentance to be baptized (as Peter did, whose Commission was the same, Acts
2.38.) for this being one of the beginning Doctrines of Christ, Heb. 6.1, 2.
could not be left out of the Commission, Mat. 28.18. Nor is this the meaning as
if Christ had not empowered him to baptize when occasion was, for he confesses
that he did baptize Crispus and Gaius, and the household of Stephanus among
these Corinthians, ver 14.16. But his meaning is, when he says Christ had not
sent him to baptize, that Christ had not imposed any such thing upon him, as
that he should himself, and with his own hands baptize all those that he
converted to the faith, but this was such a work as in which other common
Disciples might ease Paul. So that though Paul begot them all to the faith by
the Gospel, chap. 4.15. and though they were all of them baptized, as appears
chap. 1.13. and 12.13. yet as he declares he baptized but few of them himself,
chap. 1.14.16.

And it should seem by this of Paul and that of Peter, Acts 10.48. (who is said
to have commanded Cornelius, and his, to be baptized that it was an usual thing
with Apostles to leave the administration of Baptism to Disciples. Christ also
who was never backward in any thing that was necessary for him to do, left this
work of baptizing to his Disciples and followers, John 4 1, 2. Jesus made and
baptized more Disciples then John, though Jesus himself baptized not, but his
Disciples, [what a Disciple is, see Jon. 8.31.] By which it appears to be a
work rather belonging to followers then to leaders. And Philip at that time
when he baptized the Eunuch, Acts 8.38. was for ought appears but a Deacon.
Ananius also, who it seems baptized Paul, is described but as a Disciple Acts
9.10. And whereas three thousand were baptized, and added unto the Church in
one day, yea in less then a day since it was the third hour, when Peter began
his sermon, Acts 2.15. its no wise likely, but that many of the hundred and
twenty Disciples that till then had kept together, were employed thereabout,
otherwise its not like, so much work could be done in so little time, but by
many hands, Acts 2.41.

If then Believers or men-Disciples as such, are sufficient administrators of
water Baptism in Scripture account, as by what has been said may appear, then
for as much as that through the Grace of God, there are many such among us now
in these days, no man need to keep out of this Gospel way, for want of a fit
administrator.

SECT. 30.
If any shall here Object (as its like there will) that the Apostles did never
appoint those to baptize others, who were not first baptized themselves, as
those are suspected to have done who first began the practice of baptizing
among us, since reformation began.

Answ. 1. To this I answer, 1. I cannot say that the Apostles did set any to
baptize others, who were not first baptized themselves, neither is it likely
they did, there being no such need, seeing there were other enough in that
capacity to do it: yet this I may say, though we find Baptism pressed on men as
a duty, Acts 2.38. and 10.48. yet we do not find that they were injoined to be
baptized by men so and so qualified, but only indefinitely to be baptized, by
which, we may gather that the care of being baptized, is a matter of greater
consequence, then what manner of administrator should do it.

2 John the Baptist questionless did administer baptism, while he himself was
yet unbaptized, for if he were the first instrument of erecting that Ordinance,
then of necessity he must baptize somebody before he himself could be baptized,
which shows, that under some circumstances it is not unlawful for one to be
baptized, by one that is himself unbaptized, viz. where it appears to be the
Will of God that Baptism should be received, and yet none willing to administer
it, but he who is not baptized. And therefore should we suppose that the line
of such administrators of Baptism had been cut off, as had been duly baptized
themselves, yet in the restitution of this Ordinance unto its primitive use and
purity, there would be the same necessity for some one to renew this
administration who is not baptized, as was at the first to begin it.

SECT. 31.
Nor do I know any reason to make the weight and benefit of Baptism received,
to depend upon his personal Baptism that does administer it, seeing neither is
he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the
increase, 1 Cor. 3, 7. Besides, though we find men in Scripture injoined
Baptism, yet we do not find them injoined to receive it from such and such
hands, as namely from such as are baptized, or else not at all; but it rather
seems to be injoined in this respect as circumcision was, which was indeed
injoined to all the Males among the Jews, but not determinately appointing it
to be administered by such or such hands. So that if there be no positure law in
this case, there can be no transgression.

SECT, 32.
3. I might bring an argument ad hominem, from the practice of many of those
men themselves, who keep off from Baptism upon the scruple of an administrator;
for they themselves preach the Gospel, which is a greater thing then to
baptize, and therefore why should they scruple to baptize, or at least to
receive Baptism from one who is able to preach the Gospel, for he that may do
the greater, may do the less also.

Now that it is a greater matter to preach the Gospel, then to administer
Baptism, is most evident by that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me
not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel: Meaning that to preach the Gospel was
more apostolical, then to administer Baptism; the latter might better be done
by inferior hands then the former, as I showed before. The true tendency
therefore of this opinion, that none may receive Baptism, because there is none
duly qualified to administer it, is to eject and cast all preaching of the
Gospel out of the world, a^ well as baptism, for if there be none qualified to
administer Baptism which is the less, there is none qualified to minister the
word, which is the greater.

SECT. 33.
But because some also are gone so far out of the way, as to think that none
may preach the Gospel; except they were so endued with power from on high, as
were the Apostles, and could speak by immediate revelation of the spirit as
they did, I shall here insert one word from the Scriptures to prove the
contrary. It does sufficiently appear, that even in the Apostles days, whilst
yet extraordinary gifts were abroad, men might prophecy, who yet could not
speak by any such immediate and infallible revelation of the spirit as the
Apostles did.

Therefore the Apostle cautions those that prophesied in the Church at Rome, to
prophecy according to the proportion of faith, Romans 12 6. that is, either
according to the rule of faith, or according to that measure of faith and
knowledge, which they had attained in the Doctrine of the Gospel, which caution
were needless, if they had prophesied according to the immediate dictates of
the spirit, as they did who speak as the spirit gave them utterance; for then
they could not be in danger of erring in their prophesying, because prophecy
in this kind, came not at any time by, or according to the will of man, but
holy men of God, spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, as the Apostle
Peter has it, 2 Pet. 1.21. Yea if any had the spirit of prophecy in this
sense, they could not, though they had a desire to speak otherwise then the
spirit moved them, as appears in the case of Baalam, who said, if Balak would
give me his house full of Silver and Gold, I cannot go beyond the Commandment
of the Lord, to do either good or bad of mine own mind; but what the Lord
says, that will I speak, Number. 24 13. And it is not unlike but that the
extraordinary Prophets, sometimes spoke things by the guidance of the spirit,
which they themselves understood not; I heard, says Daniel, but I understood
not, Dan. 12.8. See 1 Pet. 1.10.11.12. But these who are directed to prophecy
according to the proportion of faith, are to keep within the bounds of their
own knowledge, and not undertake to teach others, what they do not well
understand themselves.

Besides the Apostle describing the subject matter of those prophecyings, which
were used in the Churches says, He that prophecieth speaks unto men to
edification, and exhortation and comfort, 1 Cor. 14.3. which to do, were things
not peculiar to extraordinary Prophets, but common duties among Christians, 1
These. 5.11. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify one another,
even as also ye do, and exhort one another daily, Heb. 3.13. and 10.25. As
every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as
good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. 1 Pet. 4.10. In which the Apostle
gives this caution, verse 11, if any man speak let him speak as the Oracles of
God, that is, according to, and as becomes the words of God; of which caution
there had been no use as I said before, if none had spoke in a way of
prophesying, that is, to edification, exhortation and comfort, but only such
as spoke by immediate revelation. And whatever the gift was which Timothy
received by the putting on of Paul's hands, 2 Timothy 1.6. or which afterward he
received by prophecy, and the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy,
4.14. I say what ever other gift it was, it seems it was not a gift of
preaching the Gospel by immediate revelation of the spirit, because in order to
his teaching he is exhorted, to give attendance to reading, 1 Timothy 4.13. and is
admonished also, to take heed unto his Doctrine, verse 16. and directed to hold
fast the form of sound words, which he had heard of Paul, 2 Timothy 1.13. for all
which there had been no place, if what he had taught, had been only by the
immediate dictates of the spirit: for he that speaks by immediate revelation
and infallible guidance of the spirit, needs not give attendanc^ to reading, in
order thereunto, nor is in danger (unless he take heed) of miscarrying in his
Doctrine, or of expressing himself in unsound words. Nor does the Apostle in
his directions about the choice of Elders, 1 Timothy 3. where he insists at large
on the qualifications requisite in such Officers, speak one word of those
extraordinary gifts. And as the Apostle would not have the prophesying then
used in the Church to be despised, so he would not have ought delivered
therein, to be received without examination and trial, 1 These. 5.20.21. despise
not prophesying, prove all things, etc. which shows, that those that did then
prophecy, might possibly deliver error as well as truth, which those who
spoke only as the spirit gave them utterance could not do; but of this only
by the way. I shall now return to add a word more toward their satisfaction
who lay so great a stress upon a baptized administrator of Baptism, as for the
supposed want whereof they are content, that both Baptism, and all those other
Ordinances in Church communion which depend thereon, should lie desolate and
wast.

SECT. 34.
4. That therefore which I shall say in the last place to such, is, that the
want of a baptized administratour, can be no just plea for any among us to keep
off from obeying Jesus Christ in submitting to the Ordinance of baptism,
because blessed be God, there are many amongst us meet to administer that
Ordinance, who have been themselves baptized by such as were baptized also.
Neither is it necessary, nor indeed reasonable, for any man to suspend his
submitting to Baptism, till he be able to make out by clear proof, not only
that he from whom he is about to receive baptism was baptized, but also that
that third person, from whom the second received it, and a fourth from whom the
third received it, and so on to John the Baptist or the Disciples of Christ,
who first administered the same; for there would have been no end of scrupling,
nor hardly a possibility of satisfaction in this case, no not in the Apostles
times, and that successive time in which this administration was not corrupted,
if such a thing had been necessary. Nor can it easily be imagined how the
Eunuch could have come at satisfaction in this point touching Philips meetnesse
to administer baptism to him, if such a lineal demonstration had been requisite
hereunto. Nor can it reasonably be thought that that man's baptism should be the
less available to him, who in uprightness of heart, submits himself thereto,
though he should be mistaken about the meetness of the administrator; for Paul
doubtless would never have rejoiced as he did, that Christ was preached,
though but in pretense by some, as in truth by others, but that he knew that a
benefit would redound even by their preaching of Christ to those that with
honest hearts received the word from them, their unmeetnesse to minister the
Gospel otherwise notwithstanding, Phil. 1.18.

A Postscript.
IN as much as there are too many in these times, who to render waterbaptism
unnecessary, do construe most of those Scriptures as meant of the Baptism of
the Spirit, which speak of Baptism, after the ministry of John the Baptist
ceased, and who also do interpret those words, 1 Cor. 12.13. By one spirit we
are all baptized into one body, to be meant of the baptism of the spirit; and
so do take themselves as having the spirit, to be duly incorporated visibly
into this one body of Christ which is his church, by virtue of their being
baptized with the spirit, whether they have ever received water baptism or no:
Therefore having this opportunity, I shall here add a word to convince such
from the Scripture, of their delusion and mistake herein.

In order hereunto, let such know, that for men to receive of the spirit of
God, only unto their own personal regeneration, and sanctification, is one
thing, and to be baptized with the spirit, is another. Those whom John
baptized, at least many of them had received of the spirit to their own
personal regeneration and sanctification, Mat. 21.32. Luke 7.29. and yet they
were not then baptized with the Holy Ghost, but were directed to expect that
from him that was to come after John, to wit Christ Jesus, Mat. 3.11. Those
eleven Apostles of Christ also, who being assembled together, and Christ with
them, a little before his ascension, had at that time certainly received, of
the spirit to their own regeneration and sanctification, yea and to a good
degree for the edification of others also; and yet at that time they were not
baptized with the holy spirit, but they then received a promise from Christ
that they should be baptized with the spirit not many days thence, Acts 1.5.

The baptism of the spirit then, properly, is such a being filled with the holy
spirit, as by which men are able to speak with other tongues, and to act and do
things of like high and extraordinary import. This is evident, First, from the
tenor of that saying of the Baptist, Mat. 3.11. I indeed baptize you with water
unto repentance, but he that comes after me, is mightier then I, whose shoes
I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with
fire. Which accordingly was fulfilled to as many of the Jews as were
professedly the Disciples of Christ at the day of Penticost following the
ascension of Christ. For speaking of the hundred and twenty Disciples which
were all with one accord in one place, its said that there appeared unto them
eleven tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon EACH of them, and they were
ALL filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues as the
spirit gave them utterance, Acts 2.1.3.4.

2. That such a being filled with the holy spirit, was meant by the promise of
being baptized with the spirit, appears by the words of Christ, Acts 1.5.
compared with Acts 2.1.2.3.4, and Acts 11.16. Christ commanded the Disciples
that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the
father, which said he, ye have heard of me: for John truly baptized with water,
but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, not many days hence, Acts 1.4.5.
which accordingly they were as we had it before, Acts 2.1.3.4. which yet is
more evident in Acts 11.15.16. where Peter rehearsing the effect of his
preaching the Gospel to Cornelius and his company, says, And as I began to
speak the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the beginning, then remembered I
the word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed baptized with water, but ye
shall be baptized with the holy Ghost. Where note, that the falling of the Holy
Ghost upon Cornelius and those with him, as on the Apostles and Disciples on
the day of Pentecost, causing them to speak with tongues as they did, Acts
10.46. this Peter deems, to be a like act of grace vouchsaled the Gentiles, as
was that which Christ promised his Disciples when he told them that they should
be baptized with the holy spirit not many days after.

The reason why such a rich measure of the spirit is expressed by this metaphor
of being baptized with it, is I conceive because of that analogy which is
between this metaphorical baptism, and that which is literal and proper: for as
no man is literally and properly baptized without abundance of water, John
3.23. so much as in which he is buried, Col. 2.12. so no man is metaphorically
baptized with the spirit, but he that receives* it in great abundance likewise.
Sufferings also which are another metaphorical baptism, a man is not said to be
baptized herewith whilst they be but ordinary and common, but then only when
they are very great and many, such as that he may say concerning them, I am
come into deep waters, where the floods overflow me, Psalm. 69.2. And therefore
Christ when he speaks of his being baptized in this kind, does appropriate it
to his suffering the sorrows of death, Luke 12.50. and not to those lesser
degrees of suffering which befell him in the former part of his life.

If then to be so filled with the spirit, as by means thereof to be able to
speak with other tongues, and the like, be in Scripture sense to be baptized
with the spirit, and not otherwise; then those that will needs make a being
baptized with the spirit, the condition of the enjoyment of Gospel privileges,
and the means of men's being made members of that one body of Christ which is
the Church (1 Cor. 12.13,) as many now a days do, on purpose to exclude
water baptism altogether herefrom, do not only thereby exclude themselves, but
also all others now living (so far as known to us) from all part and fellowship
in such Gospel privileges, in as much as neither they nor any other visible to
us, are in a Scripture account baptized with the spirit.

FINIS.

