The Desire of all Men.

A SERMON Preached at DAVENTRY IN Northamptonshire, March 5. 1694/5.

(Being the Day of the Interment of our Late Most Gracious QUEEN,)

Before the Bailiff and Burgesses of the said Corporation of Daventry, and
other Gentlemen of the County, and published at their Request.

By Charles Allestree, M. A. Minister at Daventry.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bernet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
London, and Obediah Smith Bookseller in Daventry. 1694/5.

To the Bailiff and Burgesses of the Corporation of DAVENTRY.
Gentlemen,
YOU having testified the inward Honor and Esteem, which you bore to the
Virtues of our Late QUEEN, by ordering the Desk and Pulpit to be hung in
Mourning; and desiring me to Preach upon the Solemnity of her Funeral: I
cheerfully obeyed your Request in Preaching, and now in Publishing the
Discourse. I knew my own inabilities too well, to think that I could be just to
my Subject, or be able to reach her Character; but I know, I have justly said
so much of her Moral and Intellectual Accomplishments, as must make us despair
of those Seize; and I have no other design in the Publication of this
Sermon, but only to propose Her, as a Pattern to the Imitation of all those
Good Women, that shall hereafter desire to excel in Virtue;

I am, Your Most Obliged Friend and Servant. C. ALLESTREE.
March 7th. 1694/5.
Numbers 23.10. Let me die the Death of the Righteous, and let my last End be
like his.


THis is the Comprehensive Desire of all Mankind in the World, both Good and
Bad; for though few Men are careful enough of imitating the Lives of the
Righteous, yet even the worst of People, by a natural impulse, are desirous of
following them in their Deaths. Now this Desire takes place to the height, and
occurrs irresistibly to the Mind, when we see a departing Soul upon the Wing,
just ready to take seizure of Heaven, and of all the Glories, that are the
promised Reward of Virtue and Innocence: And to urge us effectually to this
pious Ejaculation of praying to die the Death of the Righteous, we have the
brightest Example before us, that ever shined in our English Sphere (both for
the eminency of her Goodness, as well as Station) in the Interment of our
Glorious QUEEN, and in her happy Translation into another World: We commemorate
this Day an instance of the most exalted Virtue, and the most Heroic Piety,
that possibly either this Age, or any preceding Time was ever able to produce;
whose Death, by the benignity of Heaven, attracted the Desires of all Men: It
was suitable to the Integrity of her Life, and correspondent to the course of
her Living here: It was an Effect and Demonstration of the Holiness of her
Conversation, and will powerfully recommend the practice of Righteousness to
all Mankind, that shall advert to it, from the Patience and Resignation, that
was conspicuous in our Departed QUEEN, and from the assurance she enjoyed of an
everlasting Rest in Heaven. She had been initiated early into the Principles of
Religion, and remembered her Creator in the Days of her Youth; so that when
God, in Mercy, thought fit to take Her to himself, and to exchange her
Corruptible Crown for an Immarcessible one in Glory. He was pleased not to
leave himself without a Witness of his Government, but in the terrible day of
Trial to demonstrate to the World, that Goodness and Virtue are Substantial
Blessings, that they will bring a Man peace at the last, that they are able to
fortify the Mind with patience under the severest pressures, and by, opening a
view of Heaven above, to yield comfort to the most languishing Soul, under any
worldly Calamities or Afflictions. When therefore an instance of such Goodness,
and such a Glorious Departure is present to our Thoughts, how forcibly must
Mankind be excited to wish from the very bottom of their Souls to die the death
of the Righteous, and that their last end may be like his?

Now in prosecuting this matter, though I shall have no necessity to piece the
Text, either with the foregoing or following Verses; yet, I find my self
constrained to beg this supposition, that (as the most proper and suitable
season) the Words may be imagined to be uttered upon the view of a Righteous
Person's going off to Eternity; And then the Motives, that render his Death
desirable, may be reduced to these three Heads, which I shall severally apply,
at the end of this Discourse, to our Late QUEEN, and to the sad Occasion of
this Days Solemnity.

I. First, To the consideration of the innocence of the Righteous Man's Life,
in the whole course and tenor of his Actions. II. Secondly, To his peaceable
Carriage and Deportment in his Sickness, or upon his Deathbed. III. And
lastly, To the assurance he has of enjoying Heaven hereafter, and securing
himself of Happiness to all Eternity.
Now, though all these Qualifications are not always the ingredients of a
Righteous Man's Life, or do necessarily denominate or constitute him such; but
God is pleased sometimes, without any visible or previous course of Piety
before, to make use of his Prerogative, and pardon a Sinner at the last upon
Repentance; yet, as this is a Case (which very rarely happens) and no Man at
that Season can be morally secured of the Sincerity of his Intentions; so the
Person that dies in these Circumstances, wants the Comfort of a Good Reflection:
Whereas the Just Man that needs no Repentance, (as the Scripture styles him,
Luke 15.7.) has the advantage of seeing Heaven before him, and his Good Works
behind for his Consolation; he looks upon Heaven through the best end of the
Perspective, and upon his Good Works, through the Reverse, but both yield him a
delightful Prospect: Now all these Marks of a Righteous Person, were eminently
united and centered in the Character of our Late Gracious QUEEN: She was, from
her Infancy, from the dawn of Life to the setting thereof, a constant uniform
Pattern of all Virtue and Obedience, the most remarkable Creature for Patience
under the afflicting Hand of God in her Sickness, and (what endued her with
this composedness of Spirit) had a Plerophory, and inward hope, and a certain
assurance of her Reward in Heaven.

I. I begin with the first, That the Consideration of the innocence of the
Righteous Man's Life, is a main Motive and Inducement for us to covet to die
his Death.

It is observable in the Rise and Beginnings of Sickness, when Diseases make
their Approaches, and gradually seize upon the Vitals, (if they do not come in
such an astonishing manner, as to stupifie the Senses, and benumb the Faculties
of the Soul) there are but two things at that time, which generally the
thoughts of Men are conversant and employ themselves about, that is, in
reflecting either upon their Good or Bad Actions. For all those indifferent
Actions of our Lives (which neither carry any malignity or essential Goodness
in their Nature) are so far from being the Subject of our Contemplation at that
time, that there is not the least room left for a Cursory Reflection upon them:
And the reason, why the Mind of Man, in all the Operations it can exert, is
solely limited and applied to this Object, is, because it is wholly employed
with recollecting and preparing things for the Trial of the Great Day, for the
coming of the LORD; And (these indifferent Actions of Life, neither serving one
way nor the other, neither to justify nor condemn us in the other World) it is
unconceivable, and almost impossible, that any thing (which does not tend to
one of these Ends, either to acquit or condemn us at God's Tribunal) should
find any entertainment in our Thoughts.

I know sometimes the necessary management of our Domestic Affairs, does
interpose and hinder this intention of Mind, and a Man's Thoughts are
frequently called back from their application to the things of another World,
to a due regard to the settlement of the Affairs of this: But it ought to be
remembered, that Matters of this nature God commanded Hezekiah to do, 2 Kings
20.1. To set his House in order. And it is a Duty which he requires of all
Mankind; so that if this care is any interruption to us, and hinders us from
calling our Moral and Virtuous Actions to remembrance, it is only a little
exchange of our Office for the better, it only diverts us from meditating upon
that which was Good, to fasten and engage us to that Work, which we actually
know to be our Duty, and commanded to be done.

Now, though it is a great Comfort (even in the midst of Health, before there
are any Disturbances in Nature) to feed upon the Repast of a Good Conscience,
and to enjoy that serenity of Mind, which naturally flows from the Remembrance
of a well-spent Life; yet it is a more unspeakable pleasure to enjoy this
Conscience and Reflection of things at the last Hour and Article of Death;
because that time being the Conclusion of our Lives, the Horizon betwixt Us and
Eternity, we are removed from the danger of relapsing, and from the Fears of
forfeiting the Reward of our Innocence, by any actual Sin, or open
Transgression of the Laws of God: Whereas, he, that in the midst of his Days
looks back, and is able to comfort himself with the Virtuousness of his Former
Life, has (it is true) the satisfaction of a Good Reflection, but not so lasting
an impression of Joy upon his Spirits, because 1 C^p. (...) him then stand
having he fall, ^ (...). Phal. Epist. (...)
he may justly be afraid, lest through the deceitfulness of his Heart, and the
insinuation of Sin, he should hereafter, upon surprise, give way to
Temptations, and by one gross Sin cancel the memory of all his former Virtue:
But this is the security of a Dying Man (that has spent his Life in a constant
course of Piety before) that his Reflection shall be as lasting as Eternity,
and himself out of danger of committing any thing, that may embitter his
Remembrance.

It was Tully's Observation, that amongst other things (which recommended the
practice of Virtue to us) this was none of the least, That it was acconstant
Comforter to us in all the Distresses and Ex^gencies of Humane Life; that
nothing could solace a Man's Mind, or buoy it up in Affliction, but the
Reflection of a Virtuous Life, and the good Actions we have done here. All other
things may give some diversion or pleasure in the time of doing them, but when
they are past, they cannot be remembered with any Complacency, but (what is
worse) they commonly leave a sting behind them: Nay, he carries the supposition
higher, and though (says he) we are long in the contrivance of a Delight, have
the pleasure of seeing it at a distance, and anticipating it beforehand in our
Imagination; nay, when the Delight is at hand, and we are long in the enjoyment
of it, yet since there must be an end, this one Consideration is enough to
embitter it to us. Quid enim est illud ipsum Diu, quod cum venerit, omnis
voluptas praeterita pro nihilo est. And surely, if Cicero, from the Light of
Nature, and mere natural Reason was able to decide the Case, and determine so
Divine a Truth, we may give our Assent to it, whom the Light of the Gospel and
the Dayspring from on High has visited. All the little, insignificant
Pleasures, with which we busy and entertain our senses here, will be forgotten
upon the Deathbed, and nothing but the Remembrance of our Charity and
Well-doing, will be able to comfort or support us in that Condition and
Extremity.

Our Historians relate this sad and disconsolate saying of Cardinal Woolsey
(when he was fallen in Disgrace with his Prince, whom he had sincerely served
in most of the Great Offices of State) Had I served my God with half that Zeal
and Affection, as I have paid my King, He would not have left me in such
Distress. And we may observe, that (in pursuance of taking of our reliance upon
Earthly Creatures) the Scripture puts the Case, and supposes the utmost that
Men's Pride or Ambition can possibly arrive at, and declares, that the whole
World is not a valuable Consideration, nor a full Compensation for the loss of
a Soul. And yet Men frequently hazard this immortal Part for the gain of a
small parcel of it, to extend their Lands, or their Estates a little further.
Now let us compare this passage of Holy Writ, and this Instance together: This
Great Statesman (whom I mentioned) was grieved in Mind, for paying more
Observance and truer Service to his Temporal Prince, than to God; for robbing
God of his Honor, and transplanting it but a degree lower, even to his
Vicegerent here. Though he enjoyed all that the World calls Great, and was
advanced as high almost as a Subject could be promoted; yet his Favor with his
Earthly King could not recompense the dread of his Heavenly Monarch, nor his
Temporal Felicities make amends for his Fears of being deprived of Eternal
Happiness: And yet there is a vast disproportion and difference betwixt his
Case and Ours; for so egregious is our Folly, that it is not for the highest
Preferments and Dignities of State, that we sacrifice our Eternal Concerns to,
but for small, broken, and interrupted Pleasures: And we may justly be afraid,
lest it should be the Complaint of many of us in the last Hour, that had we
pursued the Works of Righteousness with half that eagerness and intention of
Mind, that we followed after Vanity, they would not have been so unkind, as to
have fled the Memory, but would have staid to comfort us at the last Gasp and
Article of Death: They would have made us bore our Sickness with Pleasure and
Resignation, have given us patience under our Afflictions, and even sanctified
the Disease it self; which is the second Consideration, that makes the Death of
the Righteous desirable.

II. Namely, His peaceable Carriage and Deportment in his Sickness, or upon his
Deathbed.

As the Temperament of the Body has a great influence upon the Operations of
the Soul, so it happens, that there is a kind of Sympathetick Motion betwixt
them, and when the Soul is in disorder, the Body suffers too. All the Passions
have had their Martyrs; and without any Affection or Pain to the Body, there
have been frequent Instances of Men, that have been sacrificed to the sudden
Transports and Eruptions of Joy, as well as overwhelmed with the oppression of
Sorrow: For the Spirits being not able to contain that excess of Joy or Grief,
which sometimes arises from the Contingencies of this World are suffocated and
depressed by the Weight, and the Soul seems rather to be extinct than the Body:
Now if the Operations of the Mind (when they are only fixed upon an Earthly
Object, and excited from a disappointment here) are so intense and violent, as
to change the Constitution, and alter the whole Mass of Blood, if they do not
only help forward a Disease, but are sufficient to begin and complete it with
success; surely (when our Grief is raised from the Fear of being disappointed
of Heaven) the Operations of the Mind will be more precipitate and swift, the
Agonies of the Soul will be more acute, Despair will then prey upon the Vitals,
and increase the Malady.

When we have the Scene of all, that is dear to us, rendered for ever miserable
in the most exquisite Torments; when we contemplate the Resurrection of the
Dead (where the Graves are open, and return their Trust, where all the
Particles of Man are reunited, and the scattered Limbs knit together into Shape
and Form, and all this to make the Soul and Body, that have been Companions in
Sin, to be so in Woe and Affliction, and to roll upon Flames to all Eternity)
when, I say, we have all these things in our apprehensions; we cannot think,
that the Soul being entertained with such dismal Objects, will be at leisure to
perform the common Functions or Offices of Life: So that this being the Case of
all wicked Men upon the prospect of their leaving the World, it must be agreed,
that there is generally such a horror of Mind upon them at the fearful
expectation of these things, as will aggravate their Distemper, and defeat all
the methods and application of Physic for their Remedy or Recovery: For the
Sins, which they have all their Lifetime, been Slaves to, will then turn
Vassals, and be Obsequious in their Attendance; they will then crowd the
memory, but it will be to no other purpose, but only to distract it.

Now though at all times (and more especially at the Hour of Death) a just
survey of the Actions of a Man's Life, and a particular Reflection upon all the
Sins, we have been guilty of here, is very necessary, as it tends to
Abhorrence, to beget Repentance, and procure atonement for them; yet so it
happens, that where there is no Provision made against them beforehand, and
they are not satisfied for by piecemeal, they come in a full Body (like Flocks
of Creditors upon the miscarriage of a Debtor) without any appearance of
receiving satisfaction there, but only to set the Sinner's shame and inability
of discharging all their claims before him. But the righteous Man (who brings
all the Actions of the Day (...), as Hierocles expresses it, who brings all the
Actions of the Day to the Tribunal of Conscience, and makes things even betwixt
his God and Him, as he cannot have such a multitude of Sins to account for,
when he comes on his Deathbed, so when he falls into any Sickness, he has no
distracting Thoughts to afflict him; neither is his Distemper aggravated by
Impatience, nor increased by Choler: He submits to Death, as it is the
condition he accepted Life with; as he is the Son of Adam, he knows he must
die, but as he is the Son of the Second Adam, he knows he must be made alive
again: And this consideration is the greatest inducement for us to wish to die
the Death of the Righteous.

III. Namely, The Certainty he has of a joyful Resurrection, and the full
assurance of enjoying Heaven, and securing himself of Happiness to all Eternity.

This is the Joy and Hope, the Crown and Ornament of a Christian; and the
Righteous Man, that has this Hope, is prepared and fortified against all
Events; He is inwardly assured that Heaven is his Portion and his Lot, and
designed for his Inheritance from the Foundation of the World; For as it is
said, that seldom any Man dies, but he has some intimations of his approaching
End within, some secret Presages and Bodings of his final Dissolution in his
Mind; so certainly there is no Person upon the Confines of Death, but either
from his own management of himself in this World, he can make a Judgment of his
Future State, or else from some Inspiration and Revelation within, he can take
a certain measure of it: The Holy Ghost will not be wanting (in gentle
Breathings and Whispers to the Conscience) to support the Just Man under all
the pressures of Sickness, (as he did our Glorious QUEEN) and to fortify his
well-grounded Expectation of Heaven: That Spirit will diligently wait and
attend to strengthen the Righteous Man's Hopes of a Resurrection to Glory;
there will in him be a Calm, and certainly, and an assurance of Heaven, a Glory
will incircle his Temples here, and the Rays of Divinity will be shining round
his Head.

But the Righteous Man's Death (though every one covets it) is not attainable
barely by a lazy wish, or an empty Desire; there must be something of action
on our parts, to go along with it, and our vigorous endeavors must be used, as
a necessary ingredient to attain it.

This the Saint of this Day knew and practiced, whose constant care it was to
work out Her Salvation with Fear and Trembling; who past through all the
Mortification and Discipline, and severity of Religion, and by those
Austerities which She inflicted upon her Body, made her Soul more susceptible
of good Impressions, and sensible of the Charms of Goodness, and by these Holy
Exercises, at last She arrived to the highest Perfection of Virtue, that her
Nature was capable of; for the Eminency of her Piety was such, as was
sufficient to entail a Happiness to a Nation, and leave a Blessing behind her;
and not all the Libellous Tongues (united in one common Mass of Poison) ever
had the Impudence to attack her Virtue, or blemish her Innocence: They had no
Fault to object against her Conduct, but only this, that She durst be so
generous, with her Royal Partner, to undertake the Protection of a Sinking
Nation, and to vindicate our common Rights, Religion, and Liberties, which were
all Invaded, and just ready to be swallowed up in Tyranny; for which Act her
Name will be for ever blessed amongst all Generations of Men, and After-Ages
will celebrate her Praises to the utmost Period and Extent of Time.

Let her Example therefore excite us to a Holy Imitation of her Virtues, and
let us consider with her the Greatness of our Nature, the end of our Creation,
and what we were made for; all Vice is below the Dignity of Man; it is Virtue
(or, in another word, Righteousness, which is the same thing, only Virtue
improved and sublimated by Grace) that is the proper and commensurate Object of
our Thoughts. If we steadfastly pursue this, and hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, we shall all be so happy, as to die the Death of the Righteous,
that is, to die like Her. We shall have her assurance, her sedate and composed
Temper in our Sickness; so that if we are consigned to another World, we shall
expect our Change with Joy, and never be dismayed at the Approaches of Death;
or if any paleness, any horror of Countenance does arise, the Alteration will
proceed from the Decay of Spirits, or the want of Vital Heat, and not from any
consternation or despondency within.

Thus have I enforced the Motives, in a speculative manner, that render the
Death of the Righteous desirable to all Men. I am sensible that these
Discourses in Theory make but a faint impression upon the Mind, and that a
Bright Example would illustrate and set it off better: I shall therefore make
the Application, in descanting upon the Holiness of the Life and Actions, and
Happiness of the Death of this most Religious Princess, whose Obsequies we
celebrate now.

And in this attempt, I shall not fear any misconstructions of Flattery: The
Subject is above it, and incapable of being perverted to that Abuse; the most
masterly strokes of Art cannot reach the height of those Eulogies, that justly
appertain to so much Goodness and Perfection; much less shall I be able to
celebrate her Great Worth in a becoming manner, who knew Her (as we ought to
approach Majesty) only at an awful Distance, and with an humble Reverence. This
therefore is a great disadvantage I labor under, but it is not sufficient to
discourage me from casting in my Mite into the Treasury of all those, that have
already set forth the Eminency of her Virtues, and parentated to her Memory;
for, I consider, that it will be an extraordinary Service done to Piety and
Religion, when the Friend to Learning, the Patroness of Religion, the Advocate
of Virtue, and the Pattern of Humility shall be recommended to our Imitation;
for whole Volumes of Sermons would not be so useful to promote the Ends of
Religion, and advance the Reputation of Virtue in the World, as an Example of
it drawn to the Life; especially, if it be so Great, so Illustrious, so
Honorable, and so Majestic a One, as this Incomparable Princess was.

She had the Happiness of being educated early, under the Care and Precepts of
the best Instructors in Religion; and her large and capacious Soul improved
those advantages, to that degree and proficiency both in Knowledge and Piety,
that She outstript her Age, and in the Prophet's Phrase (Isai. 65.20.) The
Child was an Hundred Years Old. She had then so little of the Vanity, or the
Pride, or the Indiscretions, that are usually incident to that time of Life,
and her High Birth, that She became an Example of Modesty and Humility to her
Sex in her Youth, and gave a sure and certain Omen of that Height and Progress
in Goodness, which afterward She arrived to; and by this means of setting out
early in a right Course, She acquired Habits of Virtue betimes, and enobled her
Mind with the brightest Images and Idea's of Truth; for having devoted her
Innocent Soul to the Service of God, and to the Power of Religion, and
continually begging the assistance of the Holy Spirit: She was by his Grace
preserved safely in the right way, and never deviated from the Paths of
Righteousness.

And as an instance, that She labored after the Power of Godliness, and not
the form of it, She led (even in the midst of those Temptations, that surround
Greatness, and attend a Court) a most Pure and Innocent, a most Holy and even
an Angelical Life. Her Great Endeavor was to know God, and to be assimulated
and made like him in the inward Qualities and Depositions of her Soul: And this
World and the Glories of it, could not gain the Ascendant over her Thoughts, or
make her overlook things that are Eternal: The Crown, She bore, was vile and
despicable in her Eyes, in respect of that Incorruptible One, which She
expected and was sure of in Glory; She knew that an humble Spirit, a sincere
Devotion, and an habitual Goodness were greater Accomplishments, and more
comely Ornaments to her Sex, than any outward Acquisition whatever; and
consequently her Devout Soul aspired after the attainment of these
Excellencies, which She was blessed with, and possessed to that degree, that in
her Primitive Christianity was revived afresh, and She lived as those first and
best of Christians did, and as we ought to do.

This was evident, as by many other Instances to, particularly by the frequency
of her private Devotions, and constant Attendance in the House of God at
Public Prayers, which she never omitted, but like holy Anna, served God with
Fastings and Prayers Night and Day. And to this devout Temper of Mind, she
always added a Munificence of Nature, and a Largeness of Heart to distribute
Alms to the Poor, and her Liberality in this kind was so great, that possibly
the Annual Incomb of the Richest Subject cannot come up to the height of her
Charity and Distributions.

But though she delighted inwardly in these Religious Duties of Prayers and
Alms, yet it is not to be omitted, that she reckoned the principal part of all
her Joys to consist in receiving the Holy Sacrament; and accordingly she
Communicated once every Month (besides Collar-Days, and other great
Solemnities) and her Pious Soul found most ravishing refreshments in the
Spiritual Feast of the most precious Body and Blood of her Savior: Neither did
she superficially or slightly examine her self for her Preparation, but she
exercised such a strict Devotion, and such a Religious Austerity, as if she was
to pass from the Table of her Lord to his Tribunal; neither did she contract
any moroseness or fourness of Temper, by thus exercising her self with
Religious Acts, and retiring into her own Bosom; She knew that Cheerfulness and
Religion are consistent, and that a good Christian has always the joyfullest
Heart; and accordingly she was always cheerful, but under the Government of
Reason, and none of all her Attendants ever saw her discomposed, or out of
Humor. Many Occasions she met with from the Angry Men of this Generation, and
from the Libellous Pens of Mercenary Scriblers, that put to trial her Patience
and Contentment; but in her they were not able to produce any sensible
alteration, she still preserved the Constancy and Greatness of her Mind under
all Provocations, neither was she insensible of Affronts, but she was content
and could forgive them.

In a word, so much of a Piece was she to her self in the Practice of all
Christian Virtue, and in all the great Lines of her Duty, that she gave a Grace
and Luster to every Relation wherein she stood: A Friend she was to the excess
of Bounty and Liberality, and her Retributions bore proportion to the Dignity
of her Station, rather than to the Exigencies of the Persons, upon whom they
were conferred; like Alexander she considered what was fit for a Princess to
give in kindness, more than what was decent for a Subject to expect and
receive: And (what may seem a Paradox to some Peoples Ears) She was a most
Dutiful Daughter to the highest Degree and Example of Obedience, and never gave
a just cause of Offense to her Father; For if People will be descanting upon
the exploded Topic of filling the Vacant Throne, and make this an exception,
let them consider (in answer to their Objections) the necessity of the thing,
and the call of God for it; and withal the Obligations She had of paying
Obedience to her Husband in the first place, sooner than to her Father: But to
go on, and consider her in the Relation She stood to her Royal Consort; a Wife,
She was precisely observant to oblige and hit the humor of her Royal Husband,
from the smallest to the greatest things, and never was a pair more sutably
matched, that more carefully sought their mutual satisfaction, or made more
equal Returns of Love and Affection: Provident and Careful She was in the
management of all his Great Concernments, and this appeared in her Wise
Administration of the Government, when the necessity of our Affairs, and the
Peace of Europe required the Annual Absence of the King to Head the
Confederacy, and to put Life and Soul, and Vigor into the Hearts of our
Allies. In short, She was such a Wife, in whom the Heart of her Husband did
safely trust.

But Death has now dissolved the Union of this Royal Pair; for so it pleased
God to order it, that whilst this Excellent Lady was preparing her self for the
Holy Communion upon Christmas Day, She was seized with that Disease, which She
was sensible would prove Mortal to her: She then dismissed all worldly Laws and
Thoughts, and every thing that might be the least hindrance to her in her
Preparation for another World; She then arraigned and judged all the Actions of
her Life, with the strictest Scrutiny, and could find nothing to affect her
Mind with Grief, but only this, that She was fearful She had set her Heart too
much upon the King: So scrupulous was She, lest a just natural Affection should
become immoderate and prove criminal, and her Love to God suffer any diminution
by her Fondness to the King: Happy Saint! that upon her Deathbed, had no other
matter to condemn her self for; who would not purchase such a Peace, at the
highest Price whatever? Her Hopes of Heaven were so ravishing and delightful,
that the Temptations of the World could not allure, nor Death frighten her; For
being Righteous She had Hope in Death. Prove. 14.32.

Thus Lived, and thus Died this Incomparable Princess (as ever Adorned the
Throne of England) in a Calm of Conscience, in steadfast Faith, in Peace with
God, in Communion with his Church, and in perfect Charity with all the World:
And though we justly mourn and lament a National Loss in her Death, yet let it
not be without this Consolation, that She certainly died the Death of the
Righteous, and her last End was like His.

FINIS.

