A NARRATIVE OF God's Gracious Dealings With that Choice Christian Mrs. HANNAH
ALLEN, (Afterward Married to Mr. Hatt,) RECITING The great Advantages the
Devil made of her deep Melancholy, and the Triumphant Victories, Rich and
Sovereign Graces, God gave her over all his Stratagems and Devices.

O Lord! I am oppressed, undertake for me. Esaias xxx. 14. We are not ignorant of
his Devices. 2 Cor. ii. 11. London, Printed by John Wallis. 1683.

TO THE READER.
THE Soul of Man has a singular affection for its own Body, rejoicing in its
Prosperity, and sympathizing with it in all its Maladies, Miseries, and
Necessities. Hence if the Body be out of frame and tune, the Soul cannot be
well at ease. As the most skilful Musician cannot make any pleasing melody upon
an unstringed or broken Instrument. The blood and humors are the Souls Organs,
by which it does exert its actions. If these be well tempered and kept in a
balance, Ordinarily there is an inward calm serenity upon the Spirit.
Ordinarily I say: For in some cases the most cheerful Temper may be broken down
and overwhelmed either by the immediate impressions of God's wrath upon the
Soul, or the letting loose of those Bandogs of Hell to affright and terrify
it. This is no strange News to any one acquainted with the Scriptures, or the
Records of the Church in its several Ages, or that has been conversant with
the most humble, serious and mortified Christians. Infinite Wisdom has seen it
fitting to keep his Saints from Hell for ever, by casting them as it were into
Hell for a time. It being too much for the choicest Saints to have two Heavens,
one in Earth, and another in Glory. Flesh is kept from Putrefaction by powdring
it in Salt and Brine: and Gold loses nothing of its Worth by being melted in
the Furnace. To wave the broken bones of David, the terrors and distractions of
Heman, the groans, chatterings, mournings and pressing oppressions of Hezekiah;
That Mirror of Patience, Job, will tell us how much he suffered and that
immediately too from God and his own God. He had as well as Father Abraham, an
horror of great darkness upon him. He was skared with Visions, terrified with
Dreams, the poisoned Arrows of the Almighty were shot into his very Soul, the
venom whereof drank up his spirits, and made him choose Strangling rather than
Life. Possibly he had his Temptations to Self-murder as well as some others
fearing God under horror. Hence you need not wonder at their impatiency, and
in their agonies at blasphemous expressions. When I have heard from the mouth
of an eminent and holy Minister of Christ, that once counted himself a
Reprobate, undone and to be damned for ever, and was no longer able to subsist
under the weight and burden of Everlasting and Almighty Wrath, (and who indeed
can, if God should let it out upon him?) That he hated God, yea hated him
perfectly, because he was his Judge and Adversary, though a most loving and
tenderhearted Father to his Saints; When I read of miserable Spira's wishing
himself above God; I do not in the least strange at such intemperate
expressions, considering that God, and their Enemy does blow the Coals, and it
may be dictate the very words to them.

Christian Reader, Peruse such Instances as these, and this of a Now-glorified
Soul presented to thee, with fear and trembling. How know thou but it may be
thine own Case? Let him that stands take heed lest he fall. The peace, the
comforts, the quiet, the joys natural and spiritual, they are all from Grace;
you have no longer a Lease of them, no longer term of enjoying them than the
good will and pleasure of him that dwelt in the burning Bush. If God revoke his
own gifts, hide his face, let loose the Tempter, awaken that sleeping Fury in
thy bosom, let down but the smallest drop of his Wrath into thy Conscience, thy
foundations will be shaken, and the mountain of thy peace will be hurled into a
gulf of dismal sorrows.

Learn then to hate Sin, all Sin bitterly and implacably, to avoid it
universally and continually. Be humble and vile in thine own eyes, and walk
humbly with thy God. Set upon a through Reformation. Because of Leviathan's
up-raising himself, the Mighty are afraid; by reason of breakings, the very
Sinners purify themselves. God cautions Saints, and alarms Sinners by such
flaming Beacons. If these things be done in the green Tree, what will not be
done in the dry? Keep no Idol, and beware of making inward comfort an Idol.
This provokes God to Jealousy. The Christian's Life is not a life of Sense but
of Faith. We walk by Faith, says the Apostle, and not by sight. Faith closing
with the precious Promises, feeding upon the All-sufficient Merits of an unseen
Jesus, brings in through the holy Ghost, peace, that peace of God, which
passes all understanding, into the Believer's Soul. But then too, this Faith
does purify the Heart, expels all inward filth, conniveth, indulgeth not
unto any the least sin; but puts the Soul upon skirmishing with it, and gets
through the power of Christ, victory over it. Otherwise the troubles will
return, as the Clouds after the Rain. The least briss in the Eye shall create
grief. The least core of bitterness in the Wound shall cause it wrankle afresh.
The smallest leak in the Ship, not seen, will sink it; and as multitudes have
been killed with Swords and Canons, so others with Stillettoes and Needles,
with what the injudicious Worldling calls a Peccadillo, lurking in the Soul.

Walk then, Christian Reader, in thine integrity. He that walks uprightly
walks safely. Live still in dependence upon thy Crucified Lord. All thy
springs are in him, all thy streams are from him. With joy shall you draw
waters of Consolations, reviving Cordials from the wounds of thy dear and dying
Savior. Hide thy self always in the clefts of that blessed Rock of Ages, and
thou will find there as all the Saints have done in all Ages, a glorious high
Throne of Sovereign Mercy for thy sanctuary. The secret of the Lord is with
them that fear him, and unto such will he reveal his Covenant: Love the Lord
Jesus entirely, supremely and transcendently; and remember that such as love
him shall be beloved and saved by him.

As to Scoffers and Mockers at such Relations, that Burlesque and Ridicule
these great Instances of Divine Providence, I shall say nothing but that it is
the Sin of our Age, foretold 1600 Years ago, accomplished in our Days, and an
Exercise for the present, and possibly for surviving Saints. Here is the Faith
and Patience of Saints, to keep the Testimony of Jesus, and walk Evenly in his
ways in the midst of thorns and precipices, and when they are reputed the
Worlds Monsters, and the Drunkards Song for so doing. Laugh he that laughs
last. The Saints are in heaviness through many Afflictions and Desertions for a
little time; but Sinners shall be at last overwhelmed by them for evermore.
Their joyful Comedy will have a most Tragic issue. Our blessed Lord has
informed his Disciples, that they should weep and lament, but the World should
rejoice; that they should be sorrowful, but their Sorrow should be turned into
Joy, and their Joy no man should take from them. But the wicked is driven away
in his wickedness: Before the Pots can feel the thorns, God shall take them
away as with a Whirlwind, both living and in his wrath.

Thy Soul-friend and Servant for Jesus sake.
London Feb. 3. 1681.
SATAN'S Methods and Malice BAFFLED, etc.
I Hannah Allen, the late Wife of Hannibal Allen Merchant, was born of
Religious Parents; my Father was Mr. John Archer of Snelston in Derby-shire,
who took to Wife, the Daughter of Mr. William Heart of Vttoxeter Woodland in
Staffordshire, who brought me up in the fear of God from my Childhood; and
about Twelve Years of Age, for my better Education, sent me up to London in the
Year 1650, to my Father's Sister Mrs. Ann Wilson, the Wife of Mr. Samuel
Wilson, Merchant, then Living in Aldermanbury, and after some time spent there,
and at School, I being not well in Health, had a desire to go down for a time
to my Mother, being a Widow, (my Father dying when I was very young) where I
staid almost two Years. In which time and a little before my going down, it
pleased God to work in me earnest breathings after the ways of God, but the
enemy of my Soul striving to crush such hopeful beginnings in the bud, cast in
horrible blasphemous thoughts and injections into my mind, insomuch that I was
seldom free day or night, unless when dead sleep was upon me. But I used to
argue with my self to this purpose, Whether if I had a Servant that I knew
loved me, and desired in all things to please me, and yet was so forced against
his will to do that which was contrary to my mind, whether I would think ever
the worse of him, seeing I knew what he did was to his grief. And by such
thoughts as these, it pleased God to give me some support wherein his goodness
did the more appear in casting such thoughts into my mind; I being young, and
also bearing this burden alone, not so much as acquainting my Mother with it,
but by degrees these Temptations grew to that height, that I was persuaded I
had sinned the Unpardonable Sin: With these dreadful Temptations I privately
conflicted for some Months, not revealing it (as I said) to any one, thinking
with my self that never any was like me, and therefore was loath to make my
Condition known: I would often in my thoughts wish I might change Conditions
with the vilest Persons I could think of, concluding there was hopes for them
though not for me: that Scripture in the 57. of Isa. the two last Verses, did
exceedingly terrify me, But the wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it
cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace to the
wicked, says my God. In this sad and perplexed state, upon a Sabbath day, my
Mother having been reading in the Family in one of blessed Mr. Bolton's Books,
and being ready to go with them to Church; I thought with my self, To what
purpose should I go to hear the Word, since, as I thought, all means whatsoever
for the good of my Soul were in vain, but the same time I carelessly turning
over Mr. Bolton's Book as it lay on the Table, lighted on a place that directly
treated on my Case; which it pleased God so to bless, that I was so much
comforted and strengthened, that I recovered for that time from my Despairing
condition, and so continued for several years with good hopes of the love of
God in Christ toward me, yet still continually assaulted with Temptations, but
with less violence than before. After my abode in the Country almost two years
with my Mother, I returned to London to my Uncle and Aunt Wilson; by whom about
a Year and four Months after, I was disposed of in Marriage to Mr. Hannibal
Allen, but still lived with my Uncle and Aunt Wilson till after my Uncle dyed;
and was about this time admitted to the Sacrament by Mr. Calamy, with good
approbation: And in the time of his Life, I was frequently exercised with
variety of Temptations, wherein the Devil had the more advantage I being much
inclined to Melancholy, occasioned by the often absence of my dear and
affectionate Husband, with whom I lived present and absent about eight Years;
and soon after he went his last Voyage, I went into the Country to live with
my Aunt Wilson, who was now a Widow, and returned to live at Snelston with my
aged Mother, she being Married again and living elsewhere; but in few Months
after I heard of the death of my Husband (for he dyed beyond Sea) I began to
fall into deep Melancholy, and no sooner did this black humor begin to darken
my Soul, but the Devil set on with his former Temptations, which at first were
with less violence and frequent intermissions, but yet with great struglings
and fightings within me; as I would express it (to my Aunt) I am just as if two
were fighting within me, but I trust, the Devil will never be able to overcome
me; then I would repeat several promises suitable to my condition, and read
over my former experiences that I had writ down, as is hereafter expressed, and
obligations that I had laid upon my self, in the presence of God, and would
say, Aunt, I hope I write not these things in Hypocrisy, I never intended any
Eye should see them; but the Devil suggesteth dreadful things to me against
God, and that I am an Hypocrite. At the first I began to complain that I found
not that comfort and refreshment in Prayer as I was wont to do, and that God
withdrew his comforting and quickening Presence from me.

When I had seen the Bible, I would say, oh that blessed Book that I so
delighted in once! the Devil was strongly assaulting my Faith, and I seemed
ready to be overcome, I answered the Tempter within my self in the bitterness
of my Spirit; Well, if I perish, God must deny himself.

See the difference betwixt the voice of Faith, and the Language of Despair. At
another time I cannot be saved because God cannot deny himself; The truth is,
it had been most of all worth the Publishing my Expressions in the time of my
Combating with Satan at the beginning of my Affliction, but those passages are
most of all forgotten. One hour my hope was firm, and the next hour ready to be
overwhelmed.

This began in Feb. 63. but it grew worse and worse upon me notwithstanding
such means was used both by Physic and Journeys to several Friends for
Diversion. The last Journey I took upon this account, was to a good Friend of
mine, a Minister, Mr. John Shorthose, who was related to me by Marriage, who
lived about Thirty Miles distance, where I still grew much worse, and my
continual course there, was to be asking him Questions whether the truth of
Grace could consist with such sins, for then I began to fear I was an
Hypocrite, and that place I thought upon with much dread, in Job viii. 13. The
Hypocrites hope shall perish; nor had I any ease longer than I was thus
discoursing with him, for though he often silenced my Objections, and I seemed
for the present to be much satisfied, yet he was no sooner gone from me, but my
troubles returned afresh, insomuch that his Wife would often send for him home
when he was but gone into the Fields. While I was there the Devil would suggest
something to this purpose to me, That when I was gone from him, he would
torment me. After some stay there, I returned home again, where quickly I began
to grow into deep Despair. It was my custom for several years before to write
in a Book I kept for that purpose in Shorthand, the Promises, together with my
Temptations and other afflictions, and my experiences how God delivered me out
of them, mixing therewith Prayer and Praises, which practice I continued till I
was overwhelmed with despair, some few passages whereof are here inserted as
they were written in my deep distress.

This Book in my Affliction I would often say, would rise up in Judgment against
me. As I was walking with my Cousin, Mrs. Shorthose, a Woman cursed and swear
sadly; Ah Cousin, said I, I have abhorred such Company all my Life, therefore I
hope they shall not be my Companions to Eternity.

This being the 20th. Feb. 63. is a time of great trouble and bitter
Melancholy, and one great cause is for want of the light of God's Countenance;
and for fear that if I should have any mercy showed me, I should abuse it; and
my wretchedly deceitful heart be drawn aside from God (for I am only fit for
the School of Affliction;) and on the other hand, if God should send some
further trials, I should sink under them; and my Life be made a burden to me.

But (Lord) sure this is the voice of my wretched unbelieving heart; The Lord
for Christ's sake, fit me for what ever thou will do with me, that I may have
power again Sin and Satan, and enjoy the light of thy Countenance, and then do
with me what thou will: Oh that I might prevail with my Lord, for Christ's
sake, for graces suitable to every condition, and that I may be able to improve
every mercy, and every affliction, to thy glory and the comfort of my poor
Soul, and that I may be useful in my Generation and not be burthensom; Lord
pity my state for Christ's sake, who has never left me in my trials.

The sixth of April 64. The truth is I know not well what to say, for as yet I
am under sad Melancholy, and sometimes dreadful Temptations, to have hard
thoughts of my dearest Lord (The least assenting to which by his grace I dread
more than Hell it self) Temptations to impatience and despair, and to give up
all for lost; and to close with the Devil and forsake my God, which the
Almighty for Christ's sake forbid: These Temptations were with dreadful
violence. Besides, my Melancholy has bad effects upon my body, greatly
impairing my Health: Truly there is sometimes such a woeful confusion and
combating in my Soul, that I know not what to do; And now my earnest Prayer to
my Lord is this, (which I trust for Christ's sake he will not deny me, though I
cannot beg it with such earnest affections as I should, yet I hope my heart is
sincere) that for my sweet Redeemer's sake he would preserve me from Sin and
give me strength of Faith; and Self-denial and patience to wait upon him, and
submit to him; and let him do with me what he pleases:

My God, I know thou have (for ever adored be thy Majesty) appeared for me in
many great and sore straits; for the Lord Jesus sake now appear in mercy for
me; that I may have exceeding cause to bless thee for this thy mercy also, and
give me an assurance that thou art mine, and that thou will never leave me,
till thou have brought me to thy Self in glory.

The 12th. of May, 64. Still my time of great distress and sore trials
continues, sometimes the Devil tempts me woefully to hard and strange thoughts
of my dear Lord; which (through his mercy) I dread and abhor the assenting to
more than Hell it self; in a word, every day at present seems a great burden
to me; My earnest Prayer is, For the Lords sake, that if it be thy holy will, I
might not perish in this great affliction which has been of so long
continuance, and is so great still notwithstanding means used, however for the
Lords sake, let it be Sanctified to my eternal good, and give me grace suitable
to my condition, and strength to bear my burden, and then do with me what thou will; I know not what to say; the Lord pity me in every respect and appear for
me, in these my great straits both of Soul and Body; I know not what to do, I
shall be undone; This I write to see what God will do with me, whether ever he
will deliver me out of such a distress as this; that I may have cause to praise
and adore his name in the Land of the Living; Lord, comfort me and support me
and revive me for Christ's sake.

May 26th. 64. I desire (which the Lord help me to do) exceedingly to bless and
praise thy Majesty that has yet in some measure supported me under these
dreadful trials and temptations, which do yet continue and have been woeful upon
me, for almost four Months together; For Christ's sake pity my case, or else I
know not what to do; and do not deny me strength to bear up under my burden;
and for the Lord's sake grant, whatever thou do with me, that one Sin may not
be in me, unrepented of or unmortified; Do with me what thou will as to the
Creature, so thou will subdue my sins, and chain up Satan, and smile upon my
Soul; Lord, I know not what to do, only mine Eyes are up to thee, the Devil
still keeps me under dreadful bondage, and in sad distress and woe, but blessed
be my God, that he does not lay upon me all afflictions at once; that my Child
is so well, and that I have so many other mercies, which the Lord open my Eyes
to see; especially that Christ is mine, for the Lord's sake, and then I have
enough.

After this I writ no more, but this and much more I writ before my last
Journey aforesaid, for by that time I came back, I soon after fell into deep
Despair, and my language and condition grew sadder than before. Now little to
be heard from me, but lamenting my woeful state, in very sad and dreadful
Expressions; As that I was undone for ever; that I was worse than Cain or
Judas; that now the Devil had overcome me irrecoverably; that this was what he
had been aiming at all along; Oh the Devil has so deceived me as never any one
was deceived; he made me believe my condition was good when I was a cursed
Hypocrite.

One night, I said there was a great clap of Thunder like the shot of a Piece
of Ordnance, came down directly over my Bed; and that the same night, a while
after, I heard like the voice of two Young Men singing in the Yard, over
against my Chamber; which I said were Devils in the likeness of Men, singing
for joy that they had overcome me; and in the morning as I was going to rise,
that Scripture in the 10th. of Heb. and the last words of the 26th. Verse, was
suggested to me from Heaven (as I thought) There remains no more Sacrifice for
sin; And this delusion remained with me as an Oracle all along; that by this
miracle of the Thunder, and the Voice and the Scripture, God revealed to me
that I was Damned: When my Aunt asked me, Do you think God would work a Miracle
to convince you that you are rejected? it is contrary to the manner of God's
proceedings; we do not read of such a thing in all the Scripture.

My Answer was, Therefore my condition is unparalleled, there was never such an
one since God made any Creature either Angels or Men, nor never will be to the
end of the world.

One night as I was sitting by the fire, all of a sudden I said I should dye
presently; whereupon my Aunt was called; to whom I said, Aunt, I am just dying,
I cannot live an hour if there were no more in the world; in this opinion I
continued a great while, every morning saying, I should dye before night, and
every night, before morning: when I was thus in my dying condition, I often
begged earnestly of my Aunt to bring up my Child strictly, that if it were
possible, he might be saved, though he had such a Mother.

Many places of Scripture I would repeat with much terror, applying them to my
self; as Jer. vi. 29, 30. The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed of the
fire; the Founder melts in vain; Reprobate silver shall men call them,
because the Lord has rejected them; Ezekiel. xxiv. 13. In thy filthiness is
lewdness, because I have purged thee and thou wast not purged; thou shall not
be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon
thee: Luke xiii. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many I say unto
you, will seek to enter in and shall not be able: This last Scripture I would
express with much passionate weeping, saying, This is a dreadful Scripture, I
sought, but not in a right way; for the Devil blinded mine eyes, I sought to
enter but was not able.

When both my inward and outward distempers grew to such a height, my Aunt
acquainted my Friends at London with my condition, for at London I had formerly
had four loving Uncles, my Father's brethren; two whereof were then living, and
a Brother of my own, that was set up in his Trade: These advised to send me up
to London; there being the best means both for Soul and Body; in order to which
Mrs. Wilson sent to entreat my Mother to accompany me to London; (for at that
time she could not leave her Family so long) who accordingly came, but she
found it a hard work to persuade me to this Journey; for I said I should not
live to get to the Coach, but I must go and dye by the way to please my
friends: I went up in the Tamworth Coach, so that it was Twenty two Miles
thither, Tuesday was the day we set forwards on; and on that day in particular,
the Devil had suggested to me (the Friday before) that I must dye and be with
him; and this the more confirmed me in my fear: My Aunt went with me that days
journey, which was first to Tamworth on Horseback, and from thence Nine Miles
farther in the Coach to Nun-Eton, which was a long journey, for one so weak and
ill as I was. My Aunt complaining of weariness; Ah, said I, but what must I do,
that must have no rest to all eternity: The next morning I would fain have
returned back with my Aunt, but there we parted, and I went forward with my
Mother, and a very sad Journey my Mother had with me, for every Morning she had
no small trouble to persuade me to rise to go on my Journey; I would earnestly
argue against it, and say, I shall surely dye by the way, and had I not better
dye in bed? Mother, do you think people will like to have a dead Corpse in the
Coach with them? but still at last my Mother with much patience and importunity
prevailed with me: As I passed along the way, if I saw a Church, as soon as I
cast mine eyes upon it, it was presently suggested to me, that is a Hell-house
with a kind of indignation; and this I thought was from my self, and therefore
never spoke of it till after my recovery, for I thought if it had been known
how vile I was, I must have been put to some horrible death: When I saw any
black Clouds gather, or the Wind rise (as we went along) I presently concluded
that some dreadful thing would fall out to show what an One I was.

When I came to London, I went to my Brother's House in Swithens-lane, where my
Mother staid with me about three Weeks or a Month, in which time I took much
Physic of one Mr. Cocket a Chemist that lived over the way, but still I was,
as I thought, always dying; and I yet wearying my Mother with such fancies and
stories; One Evening my Mother said to me, Well, if you will believe you shall
be saved if you dye not this night, I will believe all that you say to be true
if you do dye this night; to this she agreed, and in the night about one a
Clock (as we thought) the Maid being newly gone out of the Chamber to Bed, but
left a Watch-light burning, we both heard like the hand of a Giant, knock four
times together on the Chamber door, which made a great noise (the Door being
Wainscot;) then said I, You see, Mother, though I dyed not to night, the Devil
came to let you know that I am damned; my Mother answered, but you see he had
no power to come into the Chamber.

Soon after this my Mother returned home into the Country, and left me in my
Brother's house, who was a young Man unmarried, and had only a Man and a Maid,
and he much abroad himself about his occasions; and now my opinion of Dying
suddenly began to leave me, therefore I concluded that God would not suffer me
to dye a natural death; but that I should commit some fearful abomination, and
so be put to some horrible death: One day my Brother going along with me to
Doctor Pridgeon, as we came back, I saw a company of Men with Halberds, Look,
Brother, said I, you will see such as these (one of these days) carry me to
Newgate: to prevent which I studied several ways to make away my self, and I
being so much alone, and in a large solitary House, had the more liberty to
endeavor it; first I thought of taking Opium that I might dye in my Sleep, and
none know but that I dyed naturally, (which I desired that my Child might not
be disgraced by my untimely end,) and therefore sent the Maid to several
Apothecaries shops for it, some said they had none, others said it was
dangerous and would not sell it her: Once she had got some, and was coming away
with it; the Master of the Shop coming in, asked what she had, and when he
knew, took it from her; (this the Maid told me:) When I had sent her up and
down several days, and saw she could get none; then I got Spiders and took one
at a time in a Pipe with Tobacco, but never scarce took it out, for my heart
would fail me; but once I thought I had been poisoned; in the night awaking out
of my sleep, I thought I felt death upon me, (for I had taken a Spider when I
went to Bed) and called to my Brother and told him so, who presently arose and
went to his Friend an Apothecary, who came and gave me something to expel it;
the next day my Uncles and Brother (considering the inconveniency of that
lonesome House) removed me to Mr. Peter Walker's House, a Hosier at the Three
Crowns in Newgate-Market; (whose Wife was my Kinswoman) who received me very
courteously, though I was at that time but an uncomfortable Guest.

In the time I was at my Brother's, I had strange apprehensions that the Lights
that were in Neighboring houses were apparitions of Devils, and that those
Lights were of their making; and if I heard the voice of People talk or read in
other houses, I would not be persuaded but that it was Devils like Men, talking
of me, and mocking at my former reading, because I proved such an Hypocrite.

Madam,
As for the time I was at my Cousin Walker 's, I refer your Ladyship to them,
or any Friend else that may assist you; only I have here set down several
passages, as they came to my mind which passed there, which your Ladyship may
make use of as You please.


One time while I lay at my Cousin Walker's, having promised a Friend that was
very importunate with me to go to a Sermon with her; about two or three days
after, the Devil began to terrify me for making that promise, and suggested to
me, that I had much better break it than keep it, for I had enough Sermons to
answer for already; and sitting in great distress, contriving how I might put
off my going, the Devil found me out a place on the top of the House, a hole
where some boards were laid, and there I crowded in my self, and laid a long
black Scarf upon me, and put the boards as well as I could to hide me from
being found, and there intended to lie till I should starve to death; and all
the Family and others concluded I had stolen out at the Door unknown to them to
go lose my self in some Wood, which I much talked of; but when I had lain there
almost three days, I was so hungry and cold, it being a very sharp Season, that
I was forced to call as loud as I could, and so was heard and released from
that place.

While she was at Mr. Walker's house, a Minister being desired to come and
discourse with her, did come; and finding her in a more dejected state than any
he ever saw, did often visit her, and perceiving little visible good effect of
his conferences with her, proposed to Preach a Sermon to her, that might suit
her condition, hoping God might bless that Ordinance to her, that she might
hear the voice of Joy and Gladness, that so the bones that God had broken might
rejoice; she consented to hear his Sermon, and when upon the day appointed he
came to dispense the word, he found her writing the ensuing Lines to dissuade
him.

Sir,
This is to beseech you as you would detract a few scalding drops of the fury
of the Almighty from my poor miserable and ever to be abhorred Soul to all
Eternity, that you cease your study upon any subject on my account, and
likewise your Prayers, and instead of that pray to God to rid the World
immediately of such a Monster, who am not only guilty of all the sins of the
Devil, but likewise of such crimes as he is not capable of, which you will say
is incredible, but woe and alas it is true.


This is all she had written, the Minister coming in unexpectedly prevented
what she further intended to write.

Afterward the Minister invited her to his House, where she was above a Week,
but very loath to engage in any Duty: The Minister's Wife did sometimes
importune her to pray with her, but could not prevail, she always excusing
herself from her unfitness to take the holy and reverend Name of God within her
polluted lips; Dead Dog, Damned Wretch, she dare to speak to the great God; she
expressed so great an awe and dread of the glorious and fearful Name of God, as
discovered much grace in her most desponding state, to them that conversed with
her. Some years after her recovery, she returning to London, came to the
aforesaid Minister and his Wife, declaring to them God's great Goodness to her
in manifesting himself to her Soul, and returned hearty thanks to them for
their tenderness to her in her dejected state. From his Observation of the
ground of her Trouble, he advises all Christians to mortify inordinate
Affection to lawful things. Col. 3.5.

I would say that Pashurs doom belonged to me, Jerem. 20.3.
that I was Magor-Missabib, a Terror to my self and all my Friends; that I was
a Hell upon Earth, and a Devil incarnate; for that which I prayed against in
hypocrisy, God had brought upon me in reality: for I used to have frequently
in my Prayers such an expression as this (apprehending the vileness of my
Nature) if God should leave me to my self, I should be an Hell upon Earth, a
Terror to my self and all my Friends; and because this was in Hypocrisy,
therefore God had brought it on me in reality.

Sometimes when they had told me I had been Prayed for, I would say, they did
not pray for me, for I was not to be prayed for; for the Scripture said, That
they who had sinned the sin unto death, were not to be Prayed for: And when a
good Friend of mine Mr. Blake came daily and unweariedly to see me; I would Ask
him, Why he yet came, seeing I rejected his Counsel; And, Christ bid his
Messengers shake the dust of their Feet off against such. I would say Because I
have built my Fabric upon the Sand so high, therefore my fall is so dreadful:
When I was told of some that were possessed with the Devil and were by Prayer
dispossessed, I would reply, What tell you me of Possession, I cared not if I
were possessed with a Thousand Devils, so I were not a Devil to my self: When
some had told me that I had been Prayed for, I would Answer, I was the less
beholding to them, for it would but sink me the deeper into Hell. I would often
say, I was a thousand times worse than the Devil, for the Devil had never
committed such Sins as I had; for I had committed worse Sins than the Sin
against the Holy Ghost: some would answer, The Scripture speaks not of worse
sins, and can you be guilty of greater Sins than the Scripture mentions? Yes,
said I, My Sins are so great, that if all the Sins of all the Devils and Damned
in Hell, and all the Reprobates on Earth were comprehended in one man; mine are
greater; There is no word comes so near the comprehension of the dreadfulness
of my Condition; as that, I am the Monster of the Creation: in this word I much
delighted.

I would say, Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall: I once
thought my self to stand, but am miserably fallen.

When I was forced to be present at Duty, I would often stop my Ears, my
Carriage was very rugged and cross, contrary to my natural temper; Here I
practiced many devices to make away my self, sometimes by Spiders (as before)
sometimes endeavoring to let my self blood with a pair of sharp sizers, and so
bleed to death; once when the Surgeon had let me blood, I went up into a
Chamber and bolted the Door to me, and took off the Plaster and tied my Arm,
and set the Vein a bleeding again; which Mrs. Walker fearing, ran up stairs and
got into the Chamber to me, I seeing her come in, ran into the Leads, and there
my Arm bled upon the Wall; Now (said I) you may see there is the blood of a
Cursed Reprobate.

I pleased my self, often, with contriving how to get into a Wood and dye
there; and one morning I cunningly got out from my Cousins and went into
Smithfield, where I walked up and down a great while, and knew not what to do;
at last I tried to hire a Coach but liked not the men there; then I went into
Aldersgate Street, and asked a Coachman what he would take to carry me to
Barnet, (for then I meant to go into a Wood) but the man upon some small
occasion sadly Cursed and Swore, which struck some Terror into me, what
thought I, must such as this be my Companions for ever? and so went away from
him; and found one with a good honest look, and with him I agreed; and was to
give him Eight Shillings; who carried me a good way beyond High-Gate, and as I
went along, I thought, am I now going to Converse with Devils? with such like
Thoughts as these I was discouraged from going on; and called to the Coachman,
and prayed him to drive back again, and told him it was only a Melancholy
Fancy: By these and several other ways I thought to put an End to my Life; but
the watchful Eye of the Lord always graciously prevented me.

When I heard any dreadful thing cried about the Streets in Books; I would say,
Oh what fearful things will be put out of me ere long in Books! I would say, I
should be called Allen that Cursed Apostate. When I had tried many ways to make
away my self, and still saw God prevented my designs; I would say to my self;
Well, I see it cannot be, it must not be; God will have me come to some fearful
End; and its fit it should be so, that God may glorify himself upon such a
wretched Creature.

As I was going along the Streets, a Godly Minister passing by me; Oh, thought
I, with what horror shall I see that face at the great day! so would I think
by many others of Gods people that I knew, either Relations or otherwise; I
said, I exceedingly wondered that such a Pious man as I heard my Father was,
should have such a Child.

I used to say, I would change conditions with Julian, and that he was a Saint
in comparison of me; Nay, That the Devil himself was a Saint compared with me;
I would say, That the hottest place in Hell must be mine; nay, did you know me,
you would say it were too good for me; though I poor Creature cannot think so.

When I complained of those dreadful Sins I said I was guilty of; some would
Ask me, If I would be glad to be rid of 'em, and to be in another Condition?
Yes, said I, so had the Devils; who do you think would not be happy? but I
cannot desire it upon any other Account. I would say, I now saw that my Faith
was only a Fancy, and that according to an Expression of Mr. Baxters in a Book
of his; That the Love I formerly had to God, was Carnal and Diabolical.

I would say to my Cousin Walker, Though I am a damned Reprobate, yet from me
believe (for sometimes the Devil speaks Truth) that there is a God, and that
his Word is true, and that there is a Devil, and that there is an Hell; which I
must find by woeful Experience.

I would often Ask my Cousin Walker, What those that came to visit me, thought
of my Condition? he would Answer, Very well; I much wondered at it; and would do
what I could to discourage 'em from coming; yet if at any time I thought they
neglected me, I would be secretly troubled; as afterward I said.

I was wont earnestly to Enquire whether it was possible that the Child of such
a Mother as I could be saved; yet I would say I was without Natural Affection;
that I Loved neither God nor Man; and that I was given up to work all manner of
wickedness with greediness; We see no such thing by you, would some say; I
would Answer, I, but it is in my heart; Why does it not break out in Act? say
they, It will do ere long; said I.

The Devil would bring many places of Scripture to my mind, especially
Promises; as I said, to Jear me with them, because once I thought I delighted
in them; but was miserably mistaken; which did much terrify me.

I would with Dread think with my self, if the men of Beth-shemesh were so
destroyed, 1 Samuel vi. 19. but for looking into the Ark, what will be my
Condemnation that have so often meddled with the Holy Ordinances of God, as the
Word and Sacraments; and now proved to be only a Cursed Hypocrite, and nothing
to do with them; I thought with my self then, I would not partake of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper for a thousand worlds.

When any Friend desired me to go to hear the Word of God; I would earnestly
beg of them to let me alone, saying, I had Sermons enough to Answer for
already, and that it would add to my great Account; if they offered to compel
me to go, I would desire them to let me alone, and I would go with them the
next time, if I lived till then; but my aim was to make away my self just
before the time came, for I thought I had better go to Hell sooner, than hear
the Word still, and thereby increase my Torment, and heap up wrath against the
Day of wrath, as I often expressed it.

I would sometimes say to my Cousin Walker, will you not pity me, that must as
sure as that there is a God, for ever burn in Hell; I must Confess I am not to
be pitied, for did you know me, you would abhor me, and say Hell was too good
for me; yet however pity me as I am your Fellow Creature; and once thought my
self not only a Woman but a Christian, and though I was such a dreadful wretch as
now it appears; yet I did not know it, I verily thought my self in a good
condition; and when you see me come to my horrible End, which I am sure will be
ere long; though you must loath me, yet I say, pity me.

Yes he would say, if I thought it was true I would pity you, but I do not
believe it. I used to say, God could not save me, and the reason I gave was;
that God could not deny himself.

I found within my self (as I apprehended) a scorning and jeering at Religion,
and them that professed it, and a despising of 'em, when I came to the height of
my distemper, the struggling and fighting that was in me continually at first
(while I combated with Satan) left me: When I complained how vile I was, my
Friends would tell me, It was not I, but the Devils Temptations, I would
Answer, No, it is from my self; I am the Devil now, the Devil has now done his
work, he has done tempting of me; he has utterly overcome me; Then why are
you so troubled? would some say; I would Answer, Have I not cause to be
troubled, (think you) that am assuredly given up to the Devil and Eternally
Damned. I would write in several places on the walls with the point of my
Sizers, Woe, Woe, Woe and alas to all Eternity; I am undone, undone for ever,
so as never any was before me.

Upon some sudden occasion I would sometimes smile, but when I did; I would
exceedingly check my self, and be the more troubled afterward.

Mr. Walker endeavored to get Mr. Baxter to come to me, but he still missed of
him when he came to Town; No, (said I) God will not let Mr. Baxter come to such
a Wretch as I am; but I had then a secret desire to see him, rather than any
one else. And to my best remembrance my Cousin Walker told me that he asked me
if I would believe better of my self, if Mr. Baxter told me my condition was
safe; and that I answered, Yes.

When another Christian Friend Mr. Mason, brought me acquainted with any of
Gods People, I would say, Alas Mr. Mason, you will dearly repent this; and how
must I Curse you in Hell for all that you did in kindness to me.

What is here writ of Mr. Blake and Mr. Mason, is but to hint what may be said
of my Carriage toward them.

The next Spring which was in May, 1665. My Aunt Wilson came up to London,
being restless in her mind till she saw me; when I heard that my Aunt was come
to High-Gate to her Brother's House, and did not come to London till Monday, I
often said I hoped to have seen my Aunt before I dyed; but now I shall not;
this fire within me, will kindle and burn me before Monday; on Monday my Aunt
came, I being taken with the first sight of her, went with her to dinner to a
Friends house in the Old-Jury; Mr. Hatt's House, who afterward Married her.
but was at my old Language still every Day, That the Fire would kindle within
me and burn me: the Sickness then increasing, my Aunt resolved to take me down
again into the Country, which I was very glad of; for there I thought I should
live more privately, and be less disturbed; (for so I accounted of the kind
visits of Friends.) A week before Midsummer we set forward toward Darby-Shire,
and an uncomfortable Journey we had, for by the way I would not eat sufficient
to support Nature; when I was come to Snelstone again, I was where I would be;
for there I could do what I pleased, with little opposition; there I shunned
all Company though they were my near Relations; nor could I endure to be present
at Prayer, or any other part of Gods Worship, nor to hear the sound of reading,
nor the sight of a Book or Paper; though it were but a Letter, or an Almanac.

The Lady Baker was pleased to write me several Letters which I would not so
much as look on, nor hear read by others, one being brought me, and I pressed
much to receive it, tore it in pieces. Nay I would strike the Horn-book out of
my Child's hand; but that would trouble me as soon as I had done it: I would
wish I had never seen Book, or learned letter; I would say it had been happy
for me if I had been born blind; daily repeating my accustomed Language, that I
was a Cursed Reprobate, and the Monster of the Creation.

One Sabbath Day being disturbed about some small trifle, I fell into violent
passion; weeping even to roaring, and cried out, I was made to be damned, God
made me to that very end, to show the power of his Justice more in me than in
any other Creature.

My Aunt sometimes would tell me; that my expressions were so dreadful she knew
not how to bear them; I would answer roundly, but what must I do then, that
must feel them; I would often say to my Aunt, Oh, you little know what a dismal
dark condition I am in; Methinks I am as dark as Hell it self: my Aunt would
say, Cousin, would you but believe you were melancholy it might be a great
means to bring you out of this Condition; Melancholy, would I say, I have Cause
to be Melancholy, that am as assuredly Damned as that there is a God; and no
more hopes of me than of the Devils; I have more Cause to be Melancholy than
they have, it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God. Heb.
x. verse. 31.

My Aunt would persuade me to seek God in the use of means, from that Argument
of the resolution of the four Lepers, in the 2 King. vii. 4. I would Answer
with scorn, I have heard that often enough.

One fit my humor was such, that when Friends would have argued with me about
my condition, I would not speak, but only give them some short scornful Answer
and no more; but I would be sometimes in one temper and sometimes in another;
my Aunt would take the advantage of my best humor, to talk with me then, and
the main thing she designed in most of her Arguments with me was, to convince
me of the fallacy and delusion that was in my Opinion; That it was so
infallibly revealed to me that I was Damned; but alas all took no place with
me; but when she began to speak with me of such things, I would generally fling
away in a great fume, and say; Will you not let me alone yet, methinks you
might let me have a little quiet while I am out of Hell; this was almost my
daily practice while I was with my Aunt: I was usually very nimble in my
Answers, and peevishly pettinacious to please my own cross humor.

My Aunt told me she believed God would not have exercised me so with
Afflictions, from my Childhood, if he intended to reject me at last; I
answered, Do you not remember what Mr. Calamy used to say, That unsanctified
Afflictions par-boyle the Soul for hell; Oh, said I, that I had gone to hell as
soon as I had been born, (seeing I was born to be damned) and then I had not
had so many sins to have answered for, then I should not have lived to be a
Terror to my self and all that know me; and my Torments in Hell would have
been far less.

When my Grandmother had told me of the depths of the Mercy of God in Christ: I
would answer with indignation; What do you tell me of a Christ; it had been
better for me if there had never been a Savior, then I should have gone to
Hell at a Cheaper Rate.

Toward Winter I grew to Eat very little, (much less than I did before) so
that I was exceeding Lean; and at last nothing but Skin and Bones; (a
Neighboring Gentlewoman, a very discreet Person that had a great desire to see
me, came in at the backdoor of the House unawares and found me in the Kitchen,
who after she had seen me, said to Mrs. Wilson, She cannot live, she has death
in her face) I would say still that every bit I did Eat hastened my Ruin; and
that I had it with a dreadful Curse; and what I Eat increased the Fire within
me, which would at last burn me up; and I would now willingly live out of Hell
as long as I could.

Thus sadly I passed that Winter, and toward Spring I began to Eat a little
better.

This Spring in April, 1666. my good Friends Mr. Shorthose and his Wife, whose
Company formerly I much delighted in, came over, and when I heard they were
come and were at their Brothers house, half a mile off, and would come thither
the Friday after; Ah, says I, that I dreaded, I cannot endure to see him, nor
hear his voice; I have told him so many dreadful Lies; (meaning what I had
formerly told him of my experiences, and, as I thought, infallible evidences of
the Love of God toward me; and now believed my self to be the vilest Creature
upon Earth) I cannot see his face; and wept tenderly, wherewith my Aunt was
much affected, and promised that when he came he should not see me; (I would
have seen neither of them, but especially my He-Cousin) On the Friday, soon
after they came in, they asked for me, but my Aunt put them off till after
Dinner, and then told them, she had engaged her word they should not see me,
and that if she once broke her promise with me, I would not believe her
hereafter; with such persuasions she kept them from seeing me, but not
satisfied them; for that Night Mr. Shorthose was much troubled, and told his
Wife if he had thought they must not have seen me, he would scarce have gone to
Snelstone; the next day they Supped at Mr. Robert Archer's House, Mrs. Wilson's
Brother that then lived in the same Town, where my Aunt Supped with them; at
the Table something was said of their not seeing Mrs. Allen, but after Supper
Mr. Shorthose and his Wife stole away from the Company to Mrs. Wilsons, where
they came in at the backside of the House suddenly into the Kitchen where I
was; but as soon as I saw them, I cried out in a violent manner several times;
Ah, Aunt Wilson have thou served me so! and ran into the Chimney and took up
the Tongs; No, said they, Your Aunt knows not of our coming; What do you do
here? said I, We have something to say to you, said they, but I have nothing to
say to you, said I, Mr. Shorthose took me by the hand and said, Come, come, lay
down those Tongs and go with us into the Parlour, which I did, and there they
discoursed with me, till they had brought me to so calm and friendly a temper,
that when they went, I accompanied them to the door and said; Methinks I am
loath to part with them; Mr. Shorthose having so good encouragement, came the
next day again, being Sabbath day after Dinner, and prevailed with me to walk
with him into an Arbor in the Orchard, where he had much discourse with me,
and amongst the rest he entreated me to go home with him; which after long
persuasions both from him and my Aunt, I consented to, upon this condition,
that he promised me, he would not compel me to any thing of the Worship of
God, but what he could do by persuasion; and that week I went with them, where
I spent that Summer; in which time it pleased God by Mr. Shorthose's means to
do me much good both in Soul and Body; he had some skill in Physic himself,
and also consulted with Physicians about me; he kept me to a course of Physic
most part of the Summer, except when the great heat of the Weather prevented, I
began much to leave my dreadful expressions concerning my condition, and was
present with them at duty; and at last they prevailed with me to go with them
to the public Ordinance, and to walk with them to visit Friends, and was much
altered for the better.

A Fortnight after Michaelmas my Aunt fetched me home again to Snelston, where
I passed that Winter much better than formerly, and was pretty conformable and
orderly in the Family; and the next Summer was much after the same manner, but
grew still something better; and the next Winter likewise still mending though
but slowly, till the Spring began, and then I changed much from my retiredness,
and delighted to walk with Friends abroad.

And this Spring it pleased God to provide a very suitable Match for me, one
Mr. Charles Hatt, a Widdower living in Warwickshire; with whom I live very
comfortably, both as to my inward and outward man, my husband being one that
truly fears God.

As my Melancholy came by degrees, so it wore off by degrees, and as my dark
Melancholy bodily distempers abated, so did my spiritual Maladies also, and God
convinced me by degrees; that all this was from Satan, his delusions and
temptations, working in those dark and black humors, and not from my self, and
this God cleared up to me more and more; and accordingly my love to, and
delight in Religion, increased; and it is my desire that, lest this great
Affliction should be a stumblingblock to any, it may be known, (seeing my Case
is published) that I evidently perceive that God did it in much mercy and
faithfulness to my Soul; and though for the present it was a bitter Cup, yet
that it was but what the only wise God saw I had need of according to that
place, 1 Pet. i. 6. Though now for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness
through manifold Temptations. Which Scripture did much comfort me under my
former Afflictions in my first Husbands days.

These Promises which are here set down were great supports and refreshments to
me in the time of my various Temptations and Afflictions all along, till I fell
into deep despair, for from my Childhood, God Exercised me with manifold
Trials.

Isaiah, xliii. 1, 2. BUT now thus says the Lord that Created thee, O Jacob,
and he that formed thee, O Israel, fear not for I have redeemed thee; I have
called thee by thy Name, thou art mine. Verse. 2. When thou passest through the
Waters, I will be with thee, and through the Rivers

James v. 11. Behold we count them happy which Endure; ye have heard of the
Patience of Job, and have seen the End of the Lord; that the Lord is very
pitiful and of tender mercy.

1 John, iv. 4. Ye are of God, little Children; and have overcome them, because
greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the World.

THE END.

