EIPEXOK

printer's or publisher's device

THE EXCELLENCY OR HANDY-VVORK OF The Royal Hand.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid for the Author. M.DC.LXV.

To the Puissant and Illustrious PRINCE JAMES Duke of YORK and ALBANIE, LORD of
VLTONE, LORD CHIEF ADMIRAL of ENGLAND, AND KNIGHT of the most Renowned and
Noble Order of the GARTER.
ROYAL SIR,
THough I am of my self a Subject inconsiderable, yet that which I here
adventure to treat of, is of more worth. And, in good earnest, I should not
have been reconciled to my self with the Dedication, had I not laid a strict
injunction upon it, in the first place, to visit the best of Families, that of
Yours; to whom I owe not only my self, but all I have in the world. The
Excellency in this Treatise is the Subject, otherwise (I must confess) twere
much beneath your Highness countenance, cui majora debeantur: Yet, it is Golden
chaffer, Sir, and if but stamped with your Highnesses Acceptance, 'twill pass
Current, and I shall expose it to the surging billows of a Tempestuous World.
It Is plain English, without any intermixture but what is merely necessary; it is
clad (for the most part) in its Mother Tongue, yet a little French puts it into
the mode, and gives it a kind of Reputation. I thought it my Duty to invoke
your Highnesses Patronage; pardon my Ambition in it, and receive it as a
pledge, and the effect of abundance of regards toward You; and if your
Highness judge aright, they may be weighed in the balance with your greatest
Admirers. These Conceptions are the true Issue of my Heart, as well as my
Invention: Be pleased to cast but as kind an Eye upon them, as you have in your
Infancy almost (as I may say) done upon the Author; but Time which has worn
out all things, has him too out of your Remembrance. That which may be the
greatest inducement to your Highness to read this small Product, is the Center
to which it truly points, and may be (God knows how soon) your own concern.
It Is an old Art, but new revived; it is the Refining and Sublimating of LOYALTY
to such a pitch as may render it Gustfull, and all (if possible) after long
Seductions, to their due Obedience to their lawful PRINCE. And being banded by
so good Authority, as indeed it is, it needs no License for its Publication,
and your Highness cannot but give it a Caress.

Yours most affectionately devoted to Love and Revere You with all due
Observance T.A. M.D.

THE EXCELLENCY or HANDY WORK OF THE Royal Hand.
I Cannot but take notice, that for several years last past, diverse persons,
taking the advantage of there being no King in Israel, have hugged themselves
too much, with the vain hopes of having Fortune to be their Mistress, whom they
more courted for Success, than the Deity, boasting themselves the seventh Sons,
Stroakers, and what not, have become great Undertakers, promising by their
manual Touch, the perfect Cure of those Swellings, commonly called by the name
of the Kings Evil. Aegris and astantibus mirabilia pollicentur, indeed more in
a quarter of an hour, than they can make good all their life time: Vitam
vendunt quem longissimam, ut verendum sit nobis, ne sero nimis in calum
redeamus: Their self-conceitedness, and proud blindness, has emboldned them to
so high a pitch, that they have adventured upon those things which they had
neither competent strength to wield, nor any warrant from God Almighty to
attempt, and the more ignorant the more confident; thus have they hooked in
simple Credulity to worship their Idolatry, and admire their Enthusiasms; they
have fished for a Name and Fame amongst the casie deceived vulgar, who lose
themselves in the mist of such men's Ignorance. Thus have they fallen upon
Practice, which has proved so fatal a fall to many of them, that they could
never rise to any thing after; having deluded those which were too big with
belief, and apt to receive that for a spark of Truth (their Reason being
dim-sighted) that lay buried in a heap of Errors.

That many things in this Evil Malady are really effected by Topical
Medicaments, the Authority of most eminent Physicians, and none of the meanest
Chyrurgeons, will make good, and induce us to credit, whose undoubted
Experience must not be contradicted, nor repugned. That indeed which they have
professed themselves potent to effect, by a Touch, and solely upon this
account, because they are the Seventh Sons, has been the Kings Evil; but who
has faith enough to believe this to be natural? for that which is natural has
its dependence on the most inward Principles, and on every Individuum of the
same Species: but this must not be granted, neither does it depend on the
number, for according to the Axioms of Philosophy, a number has no operative
virtue, and likewise Actiones sunt Suppositorum, All Actions are the Products
of the Suppositum, and have their Shore upon the form of things; but the
Seventh Son is said to have that peculiar power which the other Six are
deprived of, and only quatenus the Seventh. Therefore being it proceeds neither
according to the premises, from the form, nor number, it must necessarily, were
it so, have its rise elsewhere; to which I shall speak more home after a little
further progress. Many Families, in the time of the Apostles, did abound with a
numerous Offspring: yet it is not upon Record, neither before the Infancy of
Christian Religion, nor since, that any of the Seventh Sons did ever make any
contention with them, touching the power of working these miracles. The
Subject, is The Operator, the Practiser of this Mystery, to wit, A Gracious
King, who for Clemency exceeds all the Pious and potent Monarchs that ever
lived before Him, whose Pardon, before I can proceed, I am here with all
humility to beg, that I make him again a Subject, being so lately too long one.
The Object, is the Evil Subject, the Kings Evil. As for the Signum
Pathognomonicum, it is so obvious to the Eye, and Touch, that I think it
impertinent to touch at all upon that String, whereby (like Ariadnes Clue) to
direct you to the knowledge of it: Yet because I will not leave you in the
dark, I shall endeavor to decipher these Swellings in their true and proper
colors.

They are called Strumae, which are Glandulae induratae, quas Graeci(...)
vocant.

The Arabians, Scrofulae, in collo plerumque collocentur, they are caused from
Phlegm consolidated in the glandulous parts; some Tuberculae magnae; some
parvae, which are with more facility cured. I would not be thought one of
those, that term Good, Evil; and Evil, Good: Yet there are degrees, I would,
if possible, furnish you with so much insight, as that you may be able to
distinguish betwixt them. Some are, like His Majesty's Subjects, some better
conditioned than others, yet some attended with so much Malignity, that they
will not admit of any cure but what is palliative; Quaedam quasi suspensae huc
and illucfacile moventur, they move to and fro, and yet are not easily removed;
quaedam insertae oriantur, and are frequently disseminated clean though the
Vessels, as Veins, and Arteries; They are for the most part Tumors, consisting
of Equality, neither soft nor hard, but of a medium betwixt both: The
Peripheria round, and it has been generally observed, that those persons which
have been most affected with it, either they themselves, or some of their
nearest Relatives, have been all along for the most part Round, as the World
has gone too long, Sublata causa tollitur effectus. The Cure of all Diseases is
wrought by a depulsion of the Cause. Tactus, quasi Tactus, vim habet solam
Tangendi; The Touch, as Touch, has only the power of Touching: Otherwise by
consequence, that certain virtue which is in the body, were it noxious, would
also by the same Touch be communicated, but the Touch it self has not this
virtue: Seeing then that other Diseases may proceed from one and the same
Cause, in some other parts of the body, the same Touch might prove Energetical
for their removal; but being it cannot be so, the Cure must either be
miraculous, or wholly attributed to the Imagination of the Patient; but we
cannot believe it to be miraculous, for in times past the Apostles and
Primitive Christians, both for the further Illustrating of God's Glory, and
augmenting of Christian Religion, manuum impositione multos sanarunt, have
healed many by a Touch; and most true it is, God will not have miracles
inconsiderately wrought, for the pleasure of any man; So that the Apostles have
signified to us, that, That which they did, was not by their own power, or by
virtue and power of the Touch, and in their own strength, but by the Indulgence
and special Mandate of the Great Jehovah.

Therefore those Seven Sons of Shevah the Jew, who attempting by the same name,
to conjure the Devils, have, by enduring their horrid violence, sufficiently
felt the punishment of their temerarious, and unadvised boldness: Hence we may
conclude, That it is not lawful for ordinary persons to assume so great a power,
their skill in healing is not the Gift of God, as appears by the quality of
the persons, who are generally ignorant, and profane; for which very cause,
God will not reveal his Counsels to them, but to them that truly fear him: It Is
true, if it be his pleasure, he can bring Good out of Evil. There are in the
world, too many of these prodigious and seducing Juglers, which do probably
some small inconsiderable things; These Simpletons, through the pretense and
reputation of Divine power, may cure some simple wounds which only required
Union, which Nature would have done her self. Thus they daily make a noise,
with their forged miracles, and make any Truth of any falsehood, be it never so
notorious, and a prejudicated opinion of such men's supposed sufficiency, they
themselves being not really able to discern betwixt right and wrong, Good and
Evil; they are great Usurpers upon other men's Rights, against whom I shall
advance the Avant-guard of all my might and force, not only to batter, but
totally defeat, depress, and lay these evil Spirits, who have no more dangerous
snare, than this condition of Faith, that those who will have help or succor
at their hands, must believe they can do them good.

As to the Imagination, it being diverse, in some fronger, in some weaker, we
may suppose nothing, but an uncertain Event, can be expected from an uncertain
Cause. The unreasonable part of Fancy juggles too much with the judgments and
understandings of men, that they can scarce contain themselves from believing,
and consulting with some ridiculous folly: thus able is Imagination not only to
deceive sense, but obscure our Reason. If there be any good which the World
fancies in them, they have it by Accident, by the power and virtue of Fancy,
wherein is neither certainty nor continuance.

Hoc privilegium sanandi strumas, est (...) divinum plane munus; The power of
Curing this Evil, is vouchsafed solely to the Kings, by the Grace of God, of
Great Britain, and France, and denied to other Christian Kings; non
proprietaete personarum, sed Divino privilegio; non verborum tantum facultate,
nec medicorum auxilio, sed constantis fidei, and vehementis cogitationis vi,
sanitas speretur. It Is a Legacy bequeathed to then, by God himself. Holy
Remigius, a Reverend Bishop in France, with whose Unction this power flowed to
the Kings of France, as the best Interpreter, doubtless, of this matter, has
declared, That this excellent Virtue is granted to Kings, so long as they shall
remain constant in the Christian Faith; intimating, It would cease if they
forsook, or fell from it; and so long as Faith remained either in King or
Kingdom, he foretold, by the Spirit of Prophecy, he should be a victorious
King: But alas, his Divinity here failed him! for, not long before our
distractions in England, we being assistant to the Spaniard, the French were
much worsted; of which says one, and not impertinently, When Wars in England
once began
Then flourished France, and not till than.


Picardie was most part of it in a Flame; the Scene was laid by Cardinal
Richelieu to introduce the Scots, he had all the qualities requisite to work a
change of State, by his prudence the Stroke was diverted, he directed his
designs to make that Nation flourish, which he lived to see effected; those
that have but the least Spark of Love for the Glory of that Country, when they
read but that name, it must needs raise in them, an esteem, never to be
forgotten. Edward the Confessor, that had the reputation of a singular Piety,
was deemed by the People one that could work Miracles, he cured not only those
(which privilege descended to his Successors) but other Ulcers and Swellings,
which his Successors could not. This being therefore a Prerogative belonging
only to the forementioned Kings, is wholly wrought in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ; it would therefore be a too audacious tempting of Providence, for
other Kings, on whom she would not graciously bestow the gift, to attempt it.
Further, it is worth the observance, That the Kings to whom God granted it, had
it not been upon condition, that they would not transmit this power to their
Successors, unless they were legitimate, and did remain stable in the Christian
Faith. For if an Assassinate or an Usurper (such there have been too late, and
God knows what Fates yet attend Kingdoms) should dethrone a lawful Prince, he
could not (together with his Kingdoms) acquire this virtue. Quippe pro Imperio,
though Cromwell durst do any thing, and wrought no less then Miracles, for his
time, he never so much as offered at this.

That good King Charles the First, of ever blessed memory, when captivated by
those imparallel'd Miscreants, as his manner was, and as Tokens of his great
love to many that had not deserved that kindness at his hands, he cured the
Evil, small pieces of Silver was his gift, for alas he could not arrive to
others, 'twas not the golden Age with him. I shall rehearse a Story, and a very
true one, not long before he Acted his last on that horrid and execrable
Theater. A Great Anti-Royalist and Committee-man, had one only Child, a
Daughter about ten years of Age, which was so blind for a year and a half
together, with her Fathers Evil, I may rather term it then any ones else, that
she could not see at all, non minus morborum quam possessionum haeredes,
Naturae sequitur semina quisque suae. She was brought to Kings-Hatfield in
Hertford-shire, to the Right Honorable the Earl of Salisburie's house, where
His Majesty then was, and desired a Touch from His Sacred hand, which was done
by Special Grace and Favor in one of the Gardens, toward the Evening; the
next morning, she began to perceive a glimmering of light, that could not
before distinguish the day from the night, but was constrained to be led
constantly about the house by a Maid Servant: The Father finding so much
benefit, and seeing relief at hand, became an earnest Petitioner for another
Touch, which His Majesty (that he might complete the Miracle) presently
vouchsafed; by the next morning, she was restored to her perfect sight. The
Good man (I give him now that Epithete) her Father (because he proved so after)
finding so much efficacy, so much of God in His Anointed, he forthwith began to
burst out into tears, and accurse himself, and own him that he had disowned so
long. The truth of all which is to be made out by persons of quality, with
diverse of inferior degree, which ought to be credited, being of good Life and
Conversation. One remarkable story more I shall trespass upon your patience to
repeat, being more concise then the last.

A Child of a Gentlewomans of no mean worth, about Seven years old, being very
infirm and evilly disposed, having received a Touch in the morning, in the
Afternoon one of the Sergeant Chyrurgeons, having a Regard for the Mother, came
to give it a Visit. The Child he found leaning against a Couch in the Room;
casually taking a few Pease out of his Pocket, which he used to employ in
Fontanels, he troll'd them along the Floor, whereupon the Child (taking them to
be Plums) immediately made a shift to go after them, and took them up, which
for some years before was seldom out of Arms, and in a very short time grew a
great Commander of his Legs; This I aver, and from as good hands as the former.
And should I go to perticulars, and sum up all those Miracles (for I dare not
call them less) that have been wrought by that Pattern of true Piety; A Prince
whereof the World was not worthy; the best of all Christian Kings, now
undoubtedly in Heaven, their number would be as admirable as their nature. But
alas! Envy too often attends upon a shining merit:yet virtue will still be virtue
in despite of Fate; though they surreptitiously took away his earthly
emoluments, and his Life into the bargain, they could not take the honor of
this from him that gave it, nor the right thereof, from him that received it;
the Heavens would not so much blaspheme their Maker: As the Fire of their wrath
was too severe, so that of their Zeal, was much more; They were Devils
certainly, that breathed in no other Element, then that of unheard of and
barbarous Immanities; they ran headlong in a graceless method; their Union was
naught, but Conspiracy; their Strength, Outrage; their Hearts were too
obdurate, forgetting all Pity, and Justice too; He became a Martyr for the
Peoples offenses, having few of his own, which he was not so much guilty of, as
his Nature. Here fell a matchless piece of Innocence, merely crucified to the
transgression of the times; we were too remiss in our duties to Him, for which
we have as much cause to request God's Pardon, as now his Son's our Dread and
Dear Sovereign Lord the King; it is far better to be subject to our true born
Prince, rather than to Tyranny and Oppression.

God be blessed for it, he is Rex hominum. His People will (I hope) obey him in
any reasonable moderation, being sufficiently convinced, that he will not
require that at their hands, but what may become the Spirit of amost Excellent
Prince to demand, and Loyal Subjects to grant, may we be readier to give than
He is to ask, at least to yield due Allegiance to Him, whereby to gratify the
Candor, and Goodness of a too too much injured Patience.

This Treatise is writ with an Intention to undeceive the World, and that Wise
men may decline those vulgar Errors, not follow after mere shadows, and lose
the Substance, those stroaking Undertakers being warranted neither by Holy
Writ, nor awful Authority of Antiquity or Probability of Reason; they are in
the Judgment of the World, like our New lights, which like an Ignis fatuus, or
Will with a Wisp, makes men run into such a Labyrinth, that they run themselves
both out of what they have, and their Wits to boot. Truth does not always
receive a just trial, by casual Events. Hap, is a mere Paralogisme, a Fallacy,
and grand Delusion, taking that for a true Cause, which is no cause indeed.
Ease may sometimes be given, and the credit of it to those that do not deserve
it. Opinion weighs much, it is true, and Kings are great Rarities, Seventh Sons
are not. That which God does bestow upon Kings, should be that, which both for
the Rareness and Singularity of the Privilege, might more manifest his Glory;
which would not be, if he should attribute the same thing, and that by right of
birth, to any other. But to deal heartily and ingenuously with you, it is thus.
This Disease of the Evil, is more proper to children, than any other, which by
succession of years, by reason of heat, is many times dissipated, and hereupon
islues a spontaneous ceslation thereof, which is usual with many of those that
are incident to Children; and if thus it is effected, it is not to be attributed
to the uncertain virtue, and power, of those kind of men, that Touch, who have
no Religion at all in them, yet entitle themselves to it: But to Nature it
self, whom Hippocrates styles, Morborum Medicatrix, The Lady Physician of all
Diseases.

Me thinks true Loyalists should set a considerable estimate upon the Bequest
of a dead Sovereign; Let not a Jewel of so much worth be bangled away; should
we, 'twould be an evident sign, we want that love for him which we truly ought
to have, and that we cast an Eye of Contempt as well upon him as his Gift. It Is
a Talent, entrusted with our now Sovereign, for an Improvement; such reputation
were his virtues of, even in foreign parts, and amongst those with whom he was
by some deemed, (as I may say, I hope without offense) an Heretic, that
Strangers could not enough admire Him; His very Gesture was a Net, to catch
their Good Wills.

Exegit ibi monumentum aere perennius, quod nec imber edax, nec Aquilo possit
diruere. To whose everlasting Honor be it spoken, notwithstanding all the
Exigencies, that God had brought him under; all the Stratagems, Politics, and
Fetches laid to ensnare Him; He still withstood them, and continued steadfast,
being Resident some years where a contrary Religion was openly professed, and
maintained; Homebred Incendiaries there were too many, but eternal praises be
given to the King of Kings, ours was out of their reach, as to offer the least
violence to Him, and therefore made it their work, to reach him with their
Tongues, and, if possible, murder Him that way, persuading the People that He
was warping toward Popery. To their shame never to be wiped off, be it
retorted, and our Churches Glory asserted; He has been the same Defender of the
Faith, and Protestant Cause, in the midst of the greatest Temptations, and
strongest Adversaries; His Title was our Fame, the Truth of it our happiness,
and will be His, for which very cause, as a reward of a pious Constancy against
all Extremities, God wrought this for Him, the greatest of Miracles, and yet
the highest of Benefits, to him, and to this Nation, His Restoration, which
has filled the World with astonishment, as our Hearts with exceeding great Joy;
and indeed, 'twas impossible, it should be otherwise, so much stability, and
Divine qualities, as He is truly endowed with; Heaven must needs be fore'd to
do some more than ordinary miraculous Act, for a Person on whom it had bestowed
so many: Bonus Princeps a Domino datur, God was His Guide abroad, the Blessed
Star that directed Him, and the Shield that protected Him, and at last gave Him
to us; let us bless Him, for Him: Have but a Retrospect to His Princely
Christian Patience, know that he might have had Foreign Aid, but, se malle vinci
suis Armis, quam Alienis victorem esse; he rather sat down peaceably conquered
with His own men, then to be Conqueror with an Army of others. These were
Endearments, great Love on His part; if there be not a Return on ours, we are
worse than the vilest sort of men. God, you see, destined his Twelve years
Exile, that He might appear to us in greater Luster and Transcendency. His
Regress brought forth our Sun, which moving in His own Sphere, shines most
gloriously, and rises only to do us good, with healing in His Wings.

Plots we have had without number, laid and discovered by the first Contrivers
of them, but this of His Majesty's Return, was a just, and a real plot, upon
those Regicides, to bring them to condign punishment, to whom I durst once
have appealed, and to their own Consciences, if they did not more repent them
of what they failed to do, than what they did. They boasted themselves, Cods
Children, Saints, and what not; But alas! they were the Sons of men, and wicked
men too, un-sanctified Saints, their Actions spoke them. They should have born
a filial duty to their Lord and King. It Is labor in vain to endeavor to
dis-joyn where God has made a firm Concatenation, tied a knot, not to be untied
by frail mortality; many a good turn he has pleased to do us, but after His
Return to us, being none of the meanest Blessings, we ought to Return to God
Almighty all sorts of Devoirs, otherwise we don't deserve it. 'Twas not the
Healing Convention that did it, but the great and sacred Councels of Heaven.
Let us not make our selves wiser than our Maker, study not to withstand or
oppose what he has appeared so miraculous in.

Undoubtedly Monarchy is the most secure and most preserving form of Government
upon Earth. Submit your Wills to Providence, no Oracle you can better rely
upon, she knows what is best for you, yield to it, and your reward follows
you. He that rebels against his lawful Prince, rebels against his God;
questionless he that would destroy his Sovereign, would also destroy his God,
standing in his way, so united are the Affairs of God and a King; he is in his
Office like to Him, and subordinate to Him. You see that Serpentine Egg of
Conspiracy is no sooner laid, but it is addled; he that is omniscient is not to
learn which way ye intend to steer your Stratagem, but he prevents ye in it.
The Devil he sets his Emissaries to work, and sits as Chairman in your Magical
Conventions, to render Kings contemptible, and bring them into disgrace. The
Plot's no sooner over, but the old Serpent, he gives them over too; you see,
they are no sooner arrested by the Magistrate, but his power immediately
ceases, in not being able to hinder the Justice of the Almighty, his force is
broke, he cannot rescue them from it. They sin against God in Heaven, and his
Church on Earth, and therefore it is thought meet that they should hang betwixt
both, as being unworthy to enter the one, or tread longer upon the other. These
confident sons of Mars melted away like Snow before our Sun; such is the
difference betwixt prosperous wickedness, and persecuted Innocence. They much
mistake, that think Divine Justice sleeps, when it does but wink a while at
such Offenders. Those Sons of Belial, some of them, have felt Gods Justice
here, and, I have that charity for them, may they find mercy in Heaven.

Machiavel reports, in his Questions upon Livy that the French had once their
Kings in such Esteem and Reverence, that they thought every thing did become
them that they did, and that nothing could be more disgraceful to them, than to
give any intimation that such or such a thing was not well done by their King,
being absolutely possessed they could not do a-miss; I would to God this so
excellent a virtue, had been first wafted over into England, with their
fashions, and that 'twere now A la mode. It Is a capital Crime, and not venial,
to Touch but Gods Anointed; David's heart smote him, that he cut off but the hem
of Saul's Garment.

The Romans would have Rebellion to be (...), maximum crimen: and though a
King has not sanc^titatem vitae, yet if he have sinctitatem unctionis, we are
to honor him; he may err and have his failings, it is true, yet in such a case
we are not to take up Gladium vindictae, but Scutum Patientiae; we must help
our selves, not by a violence against him, but by a holy violence, the force of
prayer with God; we must be in charity with him, would we be entertained by
him, whose Title it is to be the Prince of Peace, we must live peaceably with
him, we have all the reason in the world so to do. Il ne parle pas au Roy qui
veut, says the Monsieur: Not every one that would, may speak to Kings: but
such is the great affability and condiscention of ours, he desires that the
most despicable, the most deformed, the poorest wretch in the world, may
receive Grace from him gratis: Being not long since persuaded by some of his
Chyrurgeons to confine himself, to Touch such a certain number at a time; and
being informed, that more were at the Palace gates, crying out for his succor
and help, he told the Chyrurgeon who was to attend the service that month, That
his hand was in, and that all that were there, should then be received: And may
it ever be in, may Gods hand guide it; here is a true generous and Religious
care, Piety is his Practice, Acts of Charity, his daily exercise. Observe but
with what alacrity he does ye good; being sensible, that after he has designed
relief for you, 'twould be, in some degree, a horrible cruelty to deferr
conferring of it: This Divine Privilege being granted to him, how unwilling is
he, to intercept the endowment of the King of Kings. His Compassion becomes a
debt, and to his evil Subjects, which he duly pays. As his Arms are always
open to embrace us, so let our hearts and souls be always wide open, in
fervent supplications for him, Detque Deus coeptis vela secunda suis.

Whatever you have observed in him, that might raise love and admiration, is
hourly augmented; every minute discovers in him new Treasures, of true goodness
and Princely magnanimity. Be gentle to him, he is so to you; certain and
innumerable cares attend a Crown. Frown not upon him, your cordial smiles will
be restorative; do not discompose so noble and so sweet a disposition, whose
chiefest care it is to do ye all good, to do you honor. Behold him without
prejudice, and as one on whom God has been pleased to stamp much of his own
power and Authority; if we pour out our prayers for him, we shall reap the
fruits of them, they will return into our own bosoms. We are obliged both by
the Laws of God and Nature, to be subject to our King; we may see he has more
than ordinary of God in him; he has a shrewd in-sight into the event of things,
and to foresee futurities; there was not one Arrow in all the Quiver of malice
which was not shot at him; you that are disloyal, spend your venom; if you do
not the sooner spit it forth, you will grow to such a bulk, you will burst before
your indefatigable charms, tempered so much with gall, can take effect, be as
bold as bitter. That Prince is truly great, that is as great in Loyalty as in
Advice, being potent in Parliament, he is so insconsed in the affections of his
people, that he is beyond the Trains of Treason at home, and I hope foreign
hostility cannot pierce him.

You see, he is not in love with that which generally most men are, what he has
done without a Parliament and upon the score of his own reputation. This
Expedition against the Dutch may fully convince you, he lays it up in store for
you, he parts with it freely to you, it is for your safety and peace, as well as
his own. England was never till now in such an Equipage, we may boast of it,
and of a Navy worthy of such a master, which strikes terror into all Nations,
and begets the greatest admiration, for which his friends may well love him,
his foes may well fear him: He is one that knows not how to do otherwise than
truly like himself. His incompar^ble endowments and excellencies, have hitherto
preserved him, but not you see from some commotions; yet Divine Wisdom may
think it requisite in this life, to temper the felicity of humane Majesty with
some Distempers.

I cannot but call to mind the Prediction of that most Religious Prince in his
(...) That none would be more loyal to his Son, if God was pleased but to
restore him, than those who, sensible of their errors, felt in their souls
vehement motives to repentance, with desires to make reparation where they have
done amiss, and that he would send them truly zealous to repay, with interest,
that obedience and love to him, which was due to him. The King is now
graciously pleased to look upon them, he receives them with all favor, and
kindness, he has put a great trust into their hands, they have an opportunity,
and (I may say) a blessed one too, to make the words good of that blessed
Diviner, and do good to themselves in it; if they do not improve it, they were
bad, very bad before, but now they will be thought ten times worse. I hope his
Majesty's Lenity has brought them into their right minds, and that they are
come to themselves again, in good earnest it is high time they should; by their
Action now, the prints of their former Revolts may be quite obliterated:
Victory it is true is in the power of the Almighty, and not in the hands of the
insolent; those High and Mighty Hogin Mogins, who owe an Obligation to England,
for their first being: but all our good neighborhood has bin perverted, better
fruit uses to spring from the tree of Gratitude, theirs is turned into
Presumption; as for Encouragement, these Commanders have enough, being the very
same, and having success under Usurpation, it is impossible for them to want it,
under their lawful Sovereign; further to animate them, they have Scripture to
back them, Gods promises, the haughty he will humble, he will most certainly
destroy the proud, to qualify the rankness of their pride, and to cure them
of the Plurisie of it, I question not but God will give them strength and
success to be their Physicians, to make them bleed for it. A good cause does
wonders, those Ships cannot miscarry that are driven with the breath of good
Prayers, and with wisdom, good conduct, and courage. If we shelter our selves
under the shadow of the Omnipotent, we are sure to be possessed of a most
impregnable Fortress, a Hold, that will certainly hold, we cannot be deluded in
our Trusts. A Commonwealth's too near us. I hope that the State of Affairs
there, their States General, and their general State too, may in a short time
admit of a better form of Government; if not, I wish with all my heart that I
might but live to see them reduced to their first Principles; to be once more
styled, The poor distressed States. They have an old Proverb amongst them which
has none of the best Omens, Those that bring themselves into needless dangers,
Dye the Divel's Martyrs.
And I doubt not but we shall bring their Spirits down, even as low as their
Country: Here are (...), Amulets, Golden Engines, to draw and incline the
affections of the People to their King, ad Arcendas noxas alicui corporis
parti, and collo alligantur; ye are secure enough, and when ye have so much
kindness hanged about your necks, me thinks ye should be hanged before ye leave
him.

Having made Digression, rem ipsam jam aggrediar; Not long before His Majesty's
Restoration, it was my fortune casually to be in Company with a Chyrurgeon,
who most audaciously and peremptorily vaunted, That he could never cure the
King's Evil, till he had possessed himself with some of His Majesty's Lands: It
was an Article in His Atheistical Creed, That this virtue went along with them,
though in his undue possessions. I am yet to learn of any that ever yet
adventured upon it, upon this Account, or that ever he experimentally found
that success, never any yet prospered in Rebellion; God always will withdraw
his Blessing from the bloody Hand. From the Influence of a good King, distills
the Balm that cures the Kings Evil; how many thousand in a year does he invite
to draw near to him? amongst whom probably some are admitted, that he might
most justly have commanded, rather a distance, who, when time was, would have
laid their hands heavy upon him, had not God prevented it; Nevertheless, he is
pleased to forget it, and lay his more tenderly upon them: Oh! may he in a more
peculiar manner, be successful unto them, had he the Spirit of distinguishing,
yet his goodness is such, that he would not withdraw his helping hand from
them, like a true Angel of God, he does Good for Evil; he freely accepts them,
and relieves them in their necessities, is kind to his worst foes, and remits,
like an Excellent Prince and a good Christian, the wrong they have at any time
done him: Nay, those that would not do him so much right, as to afford him
their Assistance to help him to his, do not blush to claim an inherent right,
to this Privilege, nay they suppose themselves born to it, though him, not
long since, to nothing.

Me thinks they should be diffident of a blessing; yet since they have so much
esteem for their King, and that through his good fortunes he is credulous, may
he be fortunate in the highest degree; they may rest satisfied, that God has
endued him with so much power, as to effect this so great and eminent a work;
may they live to have just Cause to repent them, that they have so evilly
entreated him.

May they show their Contrition, by living as becomes Loyal Subjects, then they
shall not want my prayers, that God may wipe away that blood which lies upon
them; Beneficium postulat Officium; Every benefit that we receive from our
King, does challenge a duty at our hands. Not long since, all humane Learning
was trampled under feet; His Return has blessed us with the Resurrection of it.
Before, we had many Lords, that vaunted much of Religion, but they divided it
into so many Sects, and Errors, nay Blasphemies, according as the necessity of
their Evil designs, and policy, led them, that one might well have asked, what
the Religion of England was? But blessed be God that has restored our Princes
as at the first, and our Counselors as at the Beginning; Novares, nova
cantica, for new mercies, we must find new praises. God has restored us to the
Life of our Life, our Liberties and our Possessions; before, there were great
pretenses of Laws and a free born people, and what not; and these were, it is
true, necessary to those that had no Title: We stand before God this day, the
Subjects of many Blessings; being under the Power and Jurisdiction of an
imparallel'd Prince, Carendo magis quam habendo, by the want of a King we
should know the better how to value him; not to be thankful for him, and Gods
mercies to us in it, is the death and destruction of mercies; not to
acknowledge them, is as it were to make them our Adversaries. I would have them
well husbanded, that they might be Reservations to greater mercies. As our
thankfulness must appear in our Obedience toward God, so it must in our
Obedience toward our King. Great Britain's Oak, had an immature, untimely
fall, and yet there was one Royal one preserved to be Protector to Him. Regis
and Regni Robor Robur, may we be loving to the Branch, though we were
unfaithful to the Root. A Day of Special Deliverance, calls for a Day of
Thanksgiving. His Majesty took too long a Progress in other Princes Dominions,
but that the great Divinity thought good to have it so, now he may take one in
His Own Kingdom. And 'twas once supposed, that after His great and miraculous
Conquest of Restoration, He would have visited that place of Worcester. God
would have been pleased with such a Sacrifice: But alas! he has scarce yet had
a Vacation from Persecution. The first thing that Theseus did, after the
Victories over his Enemies, was to sacrifice the Spoils to the Tutelar Gods. As
Hercules wore the Lyon's Skin, as a Memorandum of his Victories, so may His
Majesty, as an Addition to His Royal Coat, though never wear it out of His
Memory, nor we neither, as an Emblem of that great and wonderful deliverance,
The Royal-Oke.

To perpetuate the remembrance of which, I wish in that very place an Hospital
or Chapel were erected, and Demeasnes for the maintenance of it, where there
might be an Annual solemn Procession. I would not have this done by His
Majesty's Own Hand, but to His Hand by the public Stock, as an
acknowledgement to the King of Kings, for that unspeakable mercy in the
preservation of Ours. Perhaps I may have the Return of a severe censure for
offering thus far: yet it cannot be said that I interpose in a business
wherein I am not concerned, for I conjecture my self as much as any, and could
His Majesty but be sensible of the thousandth part of the Passion, which I have
ever had (I bless God for it) and solely for Him, I should have Pardon from
Him, for taking this Freedom. He is the Ocean from whence flows those Rivulets
of good Will, which in Gratitude, like them, would oblige us to make our
Returns. Gratitudo est Gratiarum Actio, not a bare Thanks-saying, but a
Thanksgiving: we cannot do too much for him that has done so much for us; he
has stanched that Issue of Blood under which we so long groaned, and has made
it his work to bring us into acquaintance with Peace, and Prosperity: will we
be thankful for these, and why not for health? Prayers and Praises ought to be
always like the Angels of Jacob's Ladder, ascending and descending. When you
approach His Majesty's presence, in tendency to the work in hand, go the right
way, and you will be sure not to fail of your end. Say with holy David', his thy
work O Lord, not man's power; Thy sacred Institution, not man's Invention. It has
been a question in the Schools, An liceat uti verbis ad morbos pellendos? It
shall now be put out of dispute, for God has promised that what soever we shall
ask in his name by Divine ejaculations shall be done unto us. Behold the
modesty of His Sacred Majesty in the very Act expressed, Deus sanat omnes
infirmitates nostras, I Touch and God heals: No charm like this Divine Sentence
in the Lips of the King, words worthy to be written in Letters of Gold, with
the Pen of a Diamond, full of attractions, and secret allurements, and like the
spirit of so Holy and so Magnificent a Prince; he does not assume the honor to
himself, for fear of Cancelling that never to be forgotten Gift, vouchsafed him
by God, in which he is made, next and immediate to him, the sole instrument to
do good to his people. What can satisfy more, that when he has done things
super captum rationis humanae, super omnem doctrinam divinitus concessum, it is
supernatural, an Art that lies above the reach of every Brain: Divine mysteries
are not to be measured by the short Plummet of humane Reason, our
Understandings are much too shallow to fathom them. Magnalia Deisumma and
miraculose conspiciuntur; Let us not pry into the Ark of God's Secrets, it is
too presumptuous Arrogance in any, to question that which was never yet
revealed. The Royal Hand is accompanied with God's Hand, he approves it by many
Miracles, which exceed the condition of Law and Nature; what He does should
beget a firm belief in us, and 'twere Impiety for a Christian in the least to
doubt it; when it is done by his never-failing power, stop thy overbold
Enquiries, with a Deus sic voluit. Yet there are too many that will not trust
Faith on her single Bond, unless Reason be joined for Security with her. The
Substance of Hope is the Being of Beings, our being well, it is no shadow, here
Faith is no fancy, there must be reality in it, since it is not exercised in a
delusory work, which not to credit, is, in a degree, a kind of Blasphemy. Is
any thing hard to God Almighty? He is not like unto him that promises and
performs not, wait for him in this serious and solemn Ceremony, and he will
certainly come and heal thee. Hitherto the Touch has been solely touched upon,
especially that from the hand of His Sacred Majesty, in which there is so much
efficacy, That I want Charity, to be reconciled to the Philosopher, that
asserted Tactum to be ignobilem, and inserted it in the Rear of all the Senses;
it shall have my Vote for the future, to have the Precedence in our new
Philosophy. I shall now entreat upon the Gift, as well as the Giver, being
indeed Individual, and then I must be in Consult with Angels, good Angels, good
Gold. The Blessings of the Father of our Country: Aurum cum primis efficax
praesentissimam vim obtinet, in expugnandis saevissimis morbis, atque
instanranda valetudine ubi collapsa est; which introduces a Story of that most
experienced person Doctor Butler of Cambridge, who being sent for to the Earl
of Lincoln's Son, finding him desperate ill of a malignant Fever, and
speechless; As soon as he came into the Chamber, he calls to the good old Earl
for Gold; he was a great Humorist, His mind to him a kingdom was; at length
that dumb God Gold appeared: The Doctor, instead of putting it into his pocket,
as those that knew him not, might very well have suspected, crams as many
pieces into his Patient's mouth as it would well contain: At which sight, says
the good Earl, If he will eat Gold, Doctor, he shall have it, but beware good
Doctor you do not choke my Child; continuing a while in his mouth, they came
out as black as a Coal. The malignity thus spending it self, the Gentleman
recovered, so that you see Regina Pecunia Quid non? what wonders Gold will do;
She sits Queen Regent at the helm of all Affairs, made him to speak that would
not speak before. Gold, by the Impress of its purity, does omnem a corpore
impuritatem dejicere; Angel Gold, does spiritus foetidos spirare, and vi quadam
attractrice pollere; once in the bosom, it is a good friend, and being tried by
that vestal Fire, must needs do him good at heart that has it. Some think, that
if they have but a Touch from the King, they are presently made whole, their
work is at an end; they are to begin again: Some say, they care not if they get
a Touch; but touch not upon that string with so much indifferency, such
Approaches mar the Success, though Angels, and good ones, attend the Service.
There must be Auri sacra fames, when it is Aurum vitae, and infinite
Restorative, habet spiritum secretissimum, and coelestem imaginem Dei gerens;
if so, no Crucifix more potent. May the celestial powers, the whole Hierarchy
of Angels, that never slumber nor sleep, be our Sovereign's Lifeguard; they
can obviate all approaching Evils, and help Him, and protect Him, in and under
so sovereign a dispensation, so consistent with His Prerogative; let this be
the Return of our loudest praises, that we give Glory to God on High, fear Him,
and honor our King. And that ye may be sure to find benefit in your Addresses,
let this be the Rule, Make not your desires the sole Rule of your Prayers, but
submit your Wills to God's Will; that is a duty incumbent upon you. Prayers have
wings for flying, without fear of falling: Say with good Ezekiah, Heal me, O
Lord, and I shall be healed. Though the difficulties are many, yet Faith, which
has a kind of an Impotency will carry you through all. Ille plures sanat, de
quo plures confidunt; The Sick man's confidence, oft-times speeds beyond all
other remedies, confidentia and alacrilas morbos sublevat.

The Noble Greek gave not that name (...) for naught, quasi basis (...), quod
in Rege salus populi fundata est, (...), a Virtue and Regal Excellency meet for
such a Prince, it adds Luster to His Royal Person, and makes Him the more
Conspicuous and Illustrious in the Eyes of all His People. Some are of that
Judgment that the Commonness of the Gift, makes it to be dis-esteemed; Yet,
bonum, tanto est melius, quanto est communius. God will not unmake his
Miracles, by making them common. May we be heartily affected with the true
sense of God's mercy to us in it, otherwise we make it but a formal Complement,
which will not be approved of by him from whom it is first derived; you have
the Hands of God and a King hand in hand, concentrating in one, and employed as
Supravisors of the work. There is so constant a Communication betwixt them,
that it is impossible but to effect any thing. A good and pious Prince we have,
a King that dropped down unexpectedly from Heaven, whose works are without
compare. When a Man does that which another cannot do, we usually say He
conjures; pardon I pray the Expression: That Magic is laudable and lawful,
where there is not Potentia in nocendo sed Restituendo. He is an Object for
Love and Wonder to stand amazed at.

The Gesture, when we come to receive these Bona Throni vel Scabelli, is
kneeling, which denotes true humility and reverence, and that we ought to pay
to him some Tribute from our Bodies. God pays us well for our pains, and sends
an Angel home with us: Aurea remedia, we have golden rewards. Myserium hoe
celandum, were it not that the effects daily prove so visible; nothing weakens
a man's confidence like Ingratitude, the calling to mind of which, fills the
heart with diffidence. Let us speak of Him as becomes us, reverently imitating
the Tongues of the Apostles, with holy Language; he deserves it at our hands.
The comforts we receive, and particular pledges of true kindness from Him,
should, methinks, beget the re-inforcement of love, proportionable to his
merits. And let me tell you, that he differs only from the Angels, rather in
place, than condition, because he has conferred on him while on Earth, a
portion of Heaven, Angelical Gifts. He is a Prince of easy access and a
patient ear, and patent, indefatigable in hearing us, one that does not
expostulate why we come at any time to give him trouble, because he thinks it
none, supereminent Indulgencies conveyed us. Loves Envoies and Amor vain tout
fors que coeur felon, Love overcomes any thing but a froward or despiteful
heart. If we will not be like our selves, may we be like the Sabine women, with
love and Intercession which conquered two Armies, a Victory more eminent then
the Sword can win, and none surer than the Victory of Prayer. When you go to
celebrate this Mystery, let not your mind be like an Individuum vagum; if it
be, it is but mere Lip-labor, a sacrifice as unacceptable, as that of Cain's.
If you make your addresses amiss, wonder not if you miss, it is all the odds as
may be, but you will: Prayer is the Key that opens the gates of heaven, it is
the never-failing means of bringing thee, if not all that thou think thou
want, yet all indeed thou do. Let your affections be as strong as your
faith. But what is the reason then, say some, that so many Infants and young
Children, that have not the least sense of faith, in them, have redress in
their addresses? You shall have my sense upon it, It Is because they are the
Children of true believing Parents, and it is impossible the Children of so many
Prayers and Tears should be ineffectual, or return without a blessing: The
Prayer of the humble pierces the Clouds, and will not admit of the least Jot a
of denial, till the Highest accomplish their desires; it is like Readiness Sword,
and Jonathan's Bow, never returns empty. Make not your approaches to your King,
for Company, or Fashious sake, as too many do, but with a true acknowledgement
that God is the great spring from whence the benefit must flow, he is much
deceived that trusts too much to himself; where too much considence is in the
means, you thrust out God, who must not be an unconcerned Spectator of humane
affairs, he is worth the care of engaging him on your side. Pray not more to
the Chyrurgeon for access, then to God for success; gratify them where you
find kindness, but let not your Fees fly faster then your Prayers.

Do you expect good by it, doubt of your own worthiness; there is none wanting
in the King. This blessed Mystery so graciously dispensed by God's Vicegerent
here upon Earth, cannot but be sowed in sufficient power; if there be weakness
and folly in them that approach to receive it, if you vacate the Gift, and
frustrate the intent of the Donor, it is not the Kings sault, nor ought to be
laid to his charge, charge your selves with it. When relief does come, it does
not always come in that same (...) of time when the Touch is vouchsafed. There
must be obedience to him that Touches, as well as belief in him to approve it
by. Of those ten in the Gospel that were cleansed of their Leprosy, there came
but one to pay his thanks, yet I fear there is not one in ten hundred, though
he receives as much benefit as he can possibly desire, that comes with his
acknowledgements; may he do it to God, and pay his Allegiance to his King: Nay,
it is credibly reported of a Gentlewoman, that Seventeen years after she had
received what her own heart could wish for, from the hand of that good King,
who did us all good, though we did him all harm, (whom I cannot mention without
tears, and a Preface of all due honor and respect) she sent her Angel to
Goldsmiths-hall, to be employed against him; This was a piece of high
unthankfulness, and ought to have had a better requital. Great Ingratitude,
great punishment; How just had it been with God Almighty to have brought upon
her, as a scourge for so much wickedness, a Recidivation of former accidents,
nay, worse than before, more contumacious and Rebellious, like her self? she
had been paid in her own Coin, and had a reward suitable to her merits. Oh
Temporal! Oh Mores! when injustice and contempt of all truth and honesty was
justified, when Rebellion was brought into countenance and made the mode and
fashion of the times, which ought never to be upon record; he that shall leave
them to posterity, if without partiality he writes them, he will certainly have
as much water in his Eyes, as Ink in his Pen, wherein lived a Generation of
cursed Achitophels, which dreaded the singularity of being innocent. They found
a new gate to heaven, not opened before, to cut their way thither through the
throats of the immaculate; Subjects should be Adjectives, not able to stand
without (much less against) their Lord and Master, or they will make but bad
construction; Had Zimri peace, that slew his Master? Oh Lord! keep us by thy
restraining grace from going along with the rude multitude, by seeming to right
the People, though wrong the King. Let us pray for him as well in times of
quiet as of danger, as well when War is but smoking, as when it is blown into a
flame. Let us be constant and not given to change. It Is Treason summo gradu, in
the highest malignity, to lay the calamity of the People upon on the Prince, as
if the Disease begun in the head, when properly it terminates there. A King
that fore-casts and fore-cares, I am confident, to make you all the better for
him, what horrible injustice will it be in you to injure him? I wish the very
Heathen may not rise up in judgment against you; They were praying for their
Emperors, though condemned by them, in the midst of the flames, Every man
(says Solomon) should be a friend to him that gives Gifts; he is greatly
ours, his favor is as Aurora's dew, which purleth the spangled grass; such
innate seeds are sown in him, as will ever improve him, never deprave him:
Behold him as one, In quo virtutes omnes elucent, and quem colere nihil aliud
est, quam virtutes ipsas colere; to reverence him, without flattery, is nothing
else but to adore his virtues. Let us receive his Commands, as if they came
from heaven, and behave our selves toward him, with due observance, and not,
upon any pretense of infirmity whatsoever, contemn him. God has most
miraculously owned him amongst the storms of State and War; he has sailed
through a boundless Sea of bliss, Si insuperabilis inseperabilis. Division is
like Fire from above, infinite destructive; men's constitutions and their
spirits were volatile, but now I hope God has fixed them, and will keep those
qualities in a right temper and just Symmetry amongst themselves. A true
Princely disposition, moderated with so many inward qualifications, as
meekness, sobriety, and indeed what not? merits the whole Trump and sound
commendation and applause above all other. He is one whom I could dwell upon to
admire, and lose my self in the Maze: Yet Tantus quisque est quantus est apud
Deum; Every one is so great as he is in Gods account; but to be Good and Great
is admirable. Let it not be made a crime to do good; Charity may legally be
Acted without purchasing License ad practicandum. You may see we have more
Gifts than one from him, we had a common deed of Gift, of General Pardon, of
which we are most unworthy, if we do not every day grow better and better, if
we are not the better for mercies, we must be the worse. A good Christian must
inevitably be a good Subject; I must confess I have one quality in me, for
which I have been blamed by many, though in my own apprehension I conceive it
none of the worst, which is, that I cannot be in good earnest in Charity, with
any that ever went out, but to fight against their King; some to this day are
so obstinate, that they will use Arguments to palliate, as if 'twere possible
to extenuate, that great and crying abomination, that horrid Murder of their
King, so notoriously committed; public acknowledgement with Godly sorrow for
it, were the only balm to expiate: when it is urged against them, they have this
Plea in a readiness to retort, That they went not out to fight against him, but
to draw him from his evil Council. They knew their King was forced to open
hostility, and to set up his Royal Standard Se defendendo, and try his Title.
Alas, will some say, we broke off in good time; They had so indeed, had they
not first broke the Ice (the more Capital their crime) and then broke out into
open Rebellion. Would they have acquitted themselves fairly? Why did they not
then, when they heard their King and such a Lord and Master was in the Field,
but that they intended, as plainly since has appeared, to be His; Why did they
not then, I say, throw down their Arms and themselves at His Majesty's feet,
and pay their Allegiance to him, that he might graciously have received them
into His? They had just cause to do it.

Those that adventured at the beginning of the Rebellion their lives and
fortunes to preserve their King, his Heirs and Successors in their just Rights;
those were the men, those were those that were right and true Subjects, too
many of them have been since sufferers indeed, and only upon the score of
Loyalty, for whom I have a very particular regard, because I see them by some
so little regarded. His Majesty is so gracious of himself, that he has owned
many of them, and would more, were there not those that interpose too much
betwixt the beams of that favor and grace, which probably have not themselves
deserved it, some have been and are countenanced too much, few as they ought;
so that in the opinion of those, they are like old Almanacks out of date, or
stand for Ciphers. I must confess, as it is well known, I have been zealous for
the poor castaway Chavalry, for which I have received often reproof and
checks, and merely for speaking but my conscience in their behalf, and have had
it retorted upon me with the greatest wonder, that one that was never in Arms
for His Majesty, should be so earnest to gratify men that would never be
satisfied; But I cannot be of that persuasion. It Is true, I was not in Arms for
him, yet I bless God for it t^^^, and for nothing almost more, than that I
never was against him; yet it is probable I have done him no less service, then
some that were with him, the truth of all which others enough can assert, and I
have retained within me, without the least stain, that principle becoming both
an honest man and a good Subject, Loyalty to my now Sovereign and his Father of
ever blessed Memory before him, and in the worst of times, durst maintain their
Prerogatives; and I suppose such are none of the worst Subjects. My aid, God
willing, shall never be wanting to cast a mite into his Treasury, and without
Ostentation I speak it, and upon Review it will appear, that I have upon all
occasions contributed, beyond indeed what I have, and have exceeded many, that
have far exceeded me in estate. Thus I have done with as sincere Devoires as
any He that His Majesty is pleased to have the best thoughts of; I have done
but my Duty in it, and I shall not forget to do that still, unless a Lethargy
possess my Brain; All I have, as I do, in good earnest, own from his Sacred
Majesty, so I shall cheerfully be ready to prostrate it at his feet, with my
life into the bargain for Him or His, whom I esteem your Royal Highness.

Scrue up all his Majesty's Actions, and you will find them miracles, celebrate
his praises beyond what those of men, might or ought to aspire to, and though
he Touch the Evil, may no Evil touch him. Let not the gates of Hell prevail
against him. My unfeigned and uncessant Prayers shall ever (God willing) attend
him; and my curses, those that wish him worse than their own souls. Those that
will not say Amen to it, deserve to be hanged, I pray God they be not damned.
And may there never want one from that Royal Stem to govern us, and Sway the
Scepter to the end of the world.

And now, Royal Sir, may all your Achievements be crowned with Victory. May
you have more Friends than Flatterers. The greatest hope I have of success in
this grand affair lies in the justness of our Cause, the provident and abundant
care of his Majesty for our preservation, the prudence and courage of your
Highness: That benevolent aspect which has raised the general love of all to
you, does in this occurrence incline the great ones, the Nobility and Chivalry
of the whole Nation to wait upon you: those hearts your Highness lately carried
away with you, were not at such a loss as we were then for your absence, nor
expected you with more impatience. At such a season the stoutest might well
have been weary of such Service. Fortitude in a Prince, is a virtue, true, but
dangerous, should you miscarry we are at a loss irreparable. Great Sir, we have
fraught this our little Vessel with Commodities of no small price. If these
notions hold water, as I hope they will, there will be no great fear of
Leaking, The more fit and seasonable the Present, to present such an Admiral.
Such a one it is as may do wonders: the greatest conquest is that of hearts and
affections. These take as Plots upon all the forces both by Sea and Land, to
reinforce them, if possible, to that which has been too long at too low an
Ebb: In this case, to promote Love, is an Art very lawful and justifiable both
before God and Man. This Tract is calculated exactly to this Meridian, and
designed on purpose, as a Specifique and Sovereign Antidote, defensive
furniture against the sudden incursions upon the Palace-Royal, and that
never-enough to be detested Sin, which fretteth like a Gangreen, and menaceth
to eat out the Life and Soul of Monarchy and Religion, Rebellion. Undoubtedly,
to effect this, is none of the worst piece of Service, but a very good piece;
and if so, I shall think my pains well spent, and have the less regard to
Censure: No times have ever yet vouchsafed to the worthiest of Personages, an
immunity from malignant Tongues, 'twere Vanity therefore in me to expect it. To
endeavor but a public good ever yet merited a Commendum, though not so well
performed as really intended; and this give me leave to say, He must needs have
a strange vitiated Palate to whom none of these will Relish. This Tract is but
of yesterday, as it is short, so it is sweet, breathing forth odoriferous and
most fragrant vapors into the Nostrils of all that are truly Loyal; and I wish
'twere like the Manna in the Wilderness, which adapts it self to every Man's
Gusto.

Having touched long upon a Golden Subject, the Metal being tried by the
Touchstone of your Highnesse's most Gracious Acceptance, I have abundantly my
Reward; and for attempting to deserve your favor, I hope I shall not disserve
my Prince, to whom, I am not more by Conscience bound, than I shall, through
all the Actions of my Life, ever own a particular Inclination to express my
humble duty. Having trespassed thus much upon your Highnesse's Patience, it is
high time to turn my Sails toward the Shore, and cast Anchor for the Present:
Eadem magnanimitate qua magna munera donas parva munuscula accipe; it has been
a Grace for Greatness, at mean men's hands, to accept of small Gifts.

If this chance to have the Honor to kiss His Majesty's most Sacred Hand, it is
more than the Author has yet had himself; if it arrives to that, he has his
end; and the Errata's, and Evil in it, will admit of a perfect Cure.

THE END.

