THE Moderate Trinitarian: CONTAINING A DESCRIPTION OF THE Holy Trinity, Both
according to Scripture, and approved Authors for Learning, and Adherence to the
Trinitarian Doctrine.

BEING An Argument showing that Moderation may and ought to be shown by and to
Persons of different Conceptions concerning some Circumstances relating to the
Knowledge of the Holy Trinity.

Together with a short Reply to Mr. Joseph Taylor's brief Inquiry whether those
who own, and those who deny the Divinity of Christ, may communicate together.

By DANIEL ALLEN.

Blessed are the Peacemakers.
But mark such as cause Divisions, and avoid them.
LONDON, Printed for Mary Fabian at Mercers Chapel in Cheapside, 1699.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
IT was not any Ambition in me (I Will assure thee) to teach my worthy Brethren,
of far greater Parts and Indowments than my self, that induced me thus
publicly to appear with the ensuing Tract: But it was the hideous noise that
the rending and tearing of Churches made, that roused me up, and provoked me
thus publicly to expose my self to the censure of many, when I might have
slept securely in a whole Skin, with my Sentiments locked up in my own Breast.

But I saw: What did I see? Why I thought I saw the sparks of misguided and
intemperate Zeal in diverse well meaning Men, to set some Churches in a Flame;
which like the dreadful Conflagration in London, burnt down to the ground many
famous (tho not Parish) Churches. All that have appeared in print about this
Subject, so far as I observed, have cried out Peace and Truth: yet
notwithstanding, to my discerning, have filled their Buckets with Oil, and
threw them into the Flame. How that could quench it judge you: Nay, thought I,
if all your printing be in that fashion, the Fire will never be quenched. So I
got my Bucket, as I trust, full of Cordial Water, and away come I to the Press.
I thought, if I could be but instrumental to quench and save one Post or Beam
of the Church, my labor would not be lost; and I shall do more good than they
that administer Oil.

Besides, I considered that those little Books, or Buckets of Oil, were very
frequent: every year, or half year, out comes a Piece crying, Heresy! Heresy!
But not one comes like the Dove, with the Olive Branch of Peace in their
Mouths; neither was there one Word tending that way in any of their Writings:
and hereby many young Converts, as well as others, were much puzzled, and made
to doubt. Wherefore I thought if something were said publicly to demonstrate
that there may be a safe Medium and Correspondence found out and maintained
betwixt the two Parties, it might be acceptable to the Doubtful; and through
the Blessing of God might become successful to help the tender Conscience.

There be some so confident and settled, that I have no hopes of them: but then
I consider there be many have not renounced their Reason, and therefore will
hear Reason; to such I speak. I know some will throw away my Writing as Dirt,
while others will condemn it e're they hear it: yet as God has heretofore
blessed my poor Endeavors and Discourses of this kind with success, so I trust
these my Labors will not be in vain.

Neither can I expect to want Readers, since there be some, and not a few, who
know me, and of them not a few that love me; and they will read me because they
love me. And there be some, and not a few, that do not love me, nor the Design
I here pursue; and they will read me to see what they can pick up against me. And
there be some, and not a few, that are staggered in their own Minds, and they will
read me for their own satisfaction, because they long to hear what can be said
for Moderation.

Moreover, I was induced to take this Course, partly because a Book will come
to speak where I cannot, and possibly when I cannot: partly because in arguing
this case, I find that too commonly there are apt to be Heats and Passions,
which commonly prevent persons considering what is said, and the Arguments are
many times cut off by the Buttocks, and so condemned, because not well
understood. I have seen some Men about these things so eagerly contending, that
Heat has blinded them; and like Men tied back to back, tho they were close
together, yet they could not see one another.

But now having my Book in their hand, they may deliberatly consider all my
Arguments to the end, without those Molestations which often happen in Debates.
And if any man fall into a passion with my Papers, when my Person is not
present, if I hear of it, I shall think him to be (as some of them are said to
be in the Tribe of Dan) an angry Fellow.

Kind Reader,
I tread in a Path heretofore untrod by any that I know of: for tho many worthy
men are for Peace and Unity notwithstanding the present Controversy; yet none
that I know of, have publicly appeared to vindicate such a Practice. And I
wish this my Attempt may be a means to provoke some more sublime Genius than
mine, to polish and perfect that which is here rough-drawn. However, since I
lead the Van so far as I know, in so troublesome, toilsome, and difficult a
Path, between those Extremes which have in many Ages puzzled the most Learned
Men; if I should appear to stumble, and sometimes to trip and reel, I hope thy
Candor will accept of my well-meaning, and rather pity than censure me: and
then thou actest like a Christian. And as I profess not my self infallible, and
therefore subject to err; and especially in so untrodden a Path: If any will
Christian-like, inform me wherein I am wanting, I shall esteem him among the
number of my special Friends. In short, however I may have circumstantially
erred, tho I know it not, yet in the main I meant well; and therefore
well-meaning men will take it well. I would, if I could, persuade every one to
be a Healer of the Breach: the unpleasant sound of Discord has too long
afflicted our Ears, and disturbed our Heads. What pity is it we should so run
upon a Party, when amongst our selves there is hardly any considerable Society
that can be found: the Matter is so dark, and so variously understood, that we
that profess to be most Orthodox, are sadly divided and subdivided in our
thoughts, if a strict scrutiny should be made into our Sentiments about it.

That Party of Brethren which I have in this ensuing Treatise mainly and
especially endeavored to vindicate, and to propose a Medium with, are those
which several of my Brethren met in Goswel-street in London in the years 1693,
and 1696. did in a printed Paper publicly protest against, and withdraw from.
As for my Brethren of Socinus's Persuasion concerning Christ, so far as I know
their Principles, I am very opposite to them in my own Thoughts, yet have I
Charity for them. But having but little converse with them, I conceive I am
ignorant of many Points they hold; and therefore I could not so directly
include them in what I have said for Moderation: nevertheless I suppose many
things that I have wrote, do tend to demonstrate that Christian Charity and
Communion may and ought to be shown to them all, tho, as aforesaid, I could not
through Ignorance so directly speak to every point of their case; and I would
advise all my Brethren to be wary how they separate from them only on the
account of that Principle: The dreadful consequences of Division at all times,
but especially at this time of day, ought to make all Christians wary how they
rashly adhere to, or abet such a Practice. Blessed are the Peacemakers: but
mark such as cause Divisions amongst you, and avoid them. And I would advise
all Churches diligently to instill Arguments for Peace and Unity in all their
Members, but in their young men more especially: for of many Evils that I have
seen, this is none of the least, namely, when a young man comes to be useful in
the Public Work of the Church, and in all appearance is like to prove a
hopeful and very useful young man; but by and by some fiery Spirit, heated with
Zeal in this Contr^versy, comes, Jehu like, and lays before him the eminent
Danger he is in, if he abet or communicate with such and such persons; for,
says be, they deny the true Christ; and then the usual Arguments in this case
are urged. The unwary and unexperienced young man swallows all down, and it
presently appears in him: for it is commonly seen to be so, if there were
something within encouraging in this case. I know what I speak by experience.
As I said, this soon appears in his Discourses and Sermons; it is well if he can
preach one Sermon without it, or forbear making it the Subject of whole
Sermons. And this being a new thing, the People are many of them amused, and
their heads filled, and more necessary Truths neglected: and the young men
especially have commonly their heads as full of it as an Egg is of Meat. The
consequence commonly is the breach of the Peace of the Church. I would advise
also all young men to walk in those Paths warily and softly, and beg the
assistance of Grace to guide them in the right way; to behave themselves
humbly, and be exceeding tender of the Peace of the Church they belong to; and
well to consider, that Peace is much sooner broke than repaired.

If my Labors may prove useful, to show any how far the contending Parties are
agreed in the fundamental Points of Faith in God and Christ, and may conduce to
the Peace of Christians, I shall have my end: So rests

Thine to serve thee in what I may, Daniel Allen.


INTRODUCTION.
The Proposition. That Moderation may and ought to be shown by, and to Persons
of different Apprehensions about some Circumstances relating to the Knowledge
and Definition of the Holy Trinity.
BY Moderation I mean Christian Charity and Communion; and what Persons I
directly intend, has been mentioned in my Epistle to the Reader, and what
Circumstances I intend, will more plainly appear in the Sequel of my Discourse.

A general Argument to prove the Proposition.
BEcause the Persons here intended do agree, and differ not in their Opinion
from their Brethren in any essential point absolutely necessary to Salvation,
whether about the Object of Worship, or manner of paying our Christian
Obedience to him; I take it for granted, that it will not be disputed that
persons so qualified as here expressed, are fit Subjects for Christian Charity
and Communion: But the great work will be to prove the Minor, viz. That those
Persons are such as agree, and differ not in the things aforesaid. And to
demonstrate this supposed difficult Case, I shall give a Definition of the Holy
Trinity in the order and manner as follows: viz. first, Of the most High God:
Secondly, Of the Christ of God: Thirdly, Of the Spirit of God. And I shall
describe them according to Scripture-Revelation, and the explanation of
approved Authors both for Learning, Parts, and Adherence to the Athanasian
Belief, both ancient and modern; that so thereby I may show both where the
difference is not, and where it is; that a Judgment thereon may the easier be
made. And for the more clear and distinct understanding of the matter, I shall
handle my Discourse concerning each of these three apart. And first concerning
the most High God.

CHAP. I. Of the most High God.
THis Chapter I shall divide into three Sections: First, of the means whereby
God is known to Men: Secondly, what God most High is: Thirdly, concerning the
manner of paying Adoration and Worship to him.

SECT. I. Of the Means by which God is known to Men.
THE Means to know God are twofold; first, External: Secondly, Internal.

The External Means are the five Senses, informing the Judgment and
Understanding, by and from the Works and Word of God: for there is no rational
Man, but hears, sees, tastes, smells, and feels, sufficiently to inform and
convince him that there is a God, (yea a great and glorious one, the first
Cause of all things.)

1. From his Works. Romans 1.19, 20. Because that which may be known of God is
manifest in them: for the invisible things of him from the Creation of the
World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal Power and Godhead.

But 2. The Imprint of God's Image on the Creature (even the wonderful Power,
Wisdom and Skill which he has showed in forming it, and providing for it)
whereby our Understanding is informed of him through the five Senses, is but a
rough Draught of his Shadow, in comparison of the more ample Discove^y we have
of him in his Word; by which further and clearer Discovery our Understanding
are informed through the Senses of hearing it, and seeing it to read it.

All this Knowledge attained by means of our Senses is e^t^rnal or outward; and
tho necessary, yet is not of it self a saving Knowledge of God, but h^th its
Residence in the Hea^.

That it is necessary is evident: for if we do not know there is a God, or know
the true God by some infallible Demonstrations, we can never regularly, no nor
indeed at all, serve God, except blindly, like the Athenians, who worshipped
they knew not what (or the Unknown God:) And tho we may all in some sense say
so of our selves, in as much as none can find out the Almighty to perfection;
yet of such a Knowledge of God as in and by his Word and Works he ordinarily
discovers of himself, we ought not to be ignorant: which what it is, and what
it is not, shall be my endeavors anon to show. And again, that this Knowledge
alone is not saving, appears, because thousands there be who have and can
discourse very well of God against Atheistical Notions, who yet nevertheless
remain destitute of true saving Faith and Communion with him: therefore although
the external Knowledge of God be good, yea a necessary thing in its place; yet
it is not saving, except sanctified and joined with the internal Knowledge of
God.

Which is the second thing, or kind of Knowledge I am to speak to; and that is
that mentioned and intended Mat. 11.27. All things are delivered to me of my
Father; and no man knows the Son but the Father; neither knows any man the
Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. This
Knowledge properly dwells in the Heart, and is attained by the Exercise of
saving Faith wrought by the Spirit of Christ; it flows from an inward spiritual
Communion the Soul has with God, through the Mediator, by which the humble
Soul sees the Almighty passing by, blotting out, and pardoning its Sins, and
ready and willing to pour into its Bosom all necessary good things of all
kinds; from whence are nourished Hope, Peace, Joy, and Love.

This Knowledge is saving, and it is as soon attained by Persons of weak and
mean Judgment that sincerely seek it, as by any whatsoever, as appears in Mat.
11.25. where Christ thanks his Father in that he had hid those things from the
Wise and Prudent, and had revealed them unto Babes.

SECT. II. Concerning God most High, what he is.
IN this Section you have a Description of God most High, respecting his
Essence, Being, or Substance, and his Essential Properties: and first, in the
Negative; Secondly in the Affirmative: and that first, according to plain Texes
of Scripture; secondly, according to several Authors. In which Discourse are
included these following useful Particulars, viz.

First, How far the contending Parties are agreed. Secondly, wherein they
differ; the Case and the Controversy betwixt them fairly propounded, examined,
opened, and explained. In which are these things following observable.

1. That those things concerning the Knowledge of the most High, wherein they
are agreed, are very plain from Scripture and Reason; but the controversal part
very obscure, not only to Reason and the Unlearned, but also to the
Understandings of the most Profound and Learned.

2. That the things wherein they are agreed are plainly in words at length
declared, both in the Old and New Testament, as matters to be owned and
believed; and therefore absolutely necessary to Salvation; But the
controversal; part is not pressed as a thing to be understood, or necessary to
be believed by the Worshippers of this God: In the Old Testament hardly any
Footsteps of it appear; and it is asserted only by and from consequences from
the new Testament.

3. That both Orthodox and Heretics (so called) are agreed in all the
Essentials and necessary parts of Truth, respecting the Knowledge of the most
High God, harmoniously and unanimously owning and teaching the same things of
his Essence and essential Properties: The Heretics (so esteemed) owning and
worshipping the same God, and no other, that made Heaven and Earth, and
appeared to Abraham, Genesis 17.1. not denying but firmly owning all and whole,
and every part of the same Essence, and all and every essential Property
thereof, according as the abovenamed Orthodox do.

4. That the great Controversy and Difference concerning God betwixt the
abovementioned Parties is not essential, but only circumstantial, viz. about
the manner or Mode of its. subsisting, and not about the Divine Essence it self.

As touching the Knowledge of God, I shall treat first negatively: He is not any
graven Image, or Device of Man's Hands, Acts 17.29. nor no Man; because Man is
mortal, but God cedureth for ever, Psalm. 136.13. nor no Angel; first, because
they are made; secondly, are Messengers, Heb. 1.7, 14. But he is without
beginning, and above all, therefore not created nor sent.

But Secondly, In the affirmative, God is a Spirit or Spiritual Substance, John
4.24. Not a created Spirit, as the Angels; but an infinite, independent,
entire, invisible Essence; the first Cause of, and sovereign highest Power over
all things: Infinite, incomprehensible, unsearchable in Glory, in Power, in
Strength, in Wisdom, in Knowledge, in Justice, in Love, in Mercy, in Bounty, in
Goodness, in Purity, in Compassion, in Eternity, in Truth and Perfection.

These are the essential and inseparable Properties of the Divine Essence or
Being of God most High, the immediate Object of Divine Worship.

There may be, and Scripture shows there are some who in a subordinate manner
bear the name of God, because he allows it them as ruling from and under him;
and therefore as Viceroys or chief Magistrates under God in their places, they
bear, tho less properly, the name of God (to give an instance or two in the
room of many) of this kind or sort are Angels, of whom Paul speaks, 1 Cor.
8.15. where he says, There he that are called Gods in Heaven; who surely could
not be false Gods, for they could not get to Heaven; therefore Angels through
the Excellency of their work obtain that honorable Name; and so do men, John
10.35. But to pass this; only he that has th^se essential Properties, is God
most High: on which Properties I Will enlarge a little. If he be invisible, then
it is not safe for me to form any shape of him in my Apprehensions, any
otherwise than a Glorious, unwordable Being. If he be independent, then he
stays only on himself, and all things stay on him. If he be infinite in Power
and Perfection, then he is a single uncompounded Essence, only one in Number
and Being: For it is morally impossible that there should be two infinite
Beings; for if one be infinite, the other cannot: and it is alike impossible
that there should be two most Highs; for if they are equal, neither of them
both can say that he is the most High, because there is another as high as he.
Also it alike argues Imperfection; for if one Most High be sufficient, then
another is needless; and where there is more than needs, it is Imperfection.
Again, if one most High of himself be not sufficient without another, that
argues Imperfection. Therefore they that worship the true and most High God,
must and ought to conceive of him as a single impartible Being or Essence; one
in Power, in Will, in Thought, in Knowledge, and in all things belonging to his
Essence. And so has God directed us to conceive of him in his Word; Deuteronomy. 6.4.
Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord. Isa. 44.6. Besides me there is no
God. Mark 12.32. There is one God, and there is none other but he. 1 Cor. 8.6.
But to us there is but One God: There is none other God but one. Ephesians. 4.6.
There is One God and Father of all, who is above all.

Thus far am I come safely, no body having any thing to contradict or gainsay:
(that is, no body that owns the true God) But on all hands we are agreed about
the Eternal Essence and Divine Properties.

These things as undeniable, all Christian Men believe, the Scripture proves,
and God's Works manifest. This Description is necessary for me to understand,
in order to direct me how to place and exercise my Faith in God aright, how to
pay my Duties and Worship to him, and consequently to my Salvation.

But now I am arrived at the Borders of the Controversy betwixt the
Trinitarians and the Unitarians, the Athanasians and nicknam'd Arians.

But to pass my Task, it is requisite to give yet a further Description of this
One most High God; which following Description is said to be drawn from
Scripture consequences, but is much more plainly set down in words at length in
other Authors.

1. I shall first cite the Athanasian Creed on this Subject: The Catholic
Faith is this, That we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity;
neither confounding the Persons nor dividing the Substance.

2. The Nicene Creed says thus: I believe in One God the Father, Maker of
Heaven and Earth, and of all things visible and invisible; and in one Lord
Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God; begotten of the Father before all
Worlds; God of God, Light of Light; very God of very God, begotten not made; of
one Substance with the Father, by whom all things were made: And in the Holy
Spirit, the quickening Spirit, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, and in
like manner is adored and glorified with the Father and the Son, and who spoke
by the Prophets.

3. Next I shall cite the first of the 39 Articles of the Church of England;
There is but One living and true God, etc. and in Unity of this Godhead there
be three Persons, of one Substance, Power and Eternity.

4. Next I shall cite Mr. Joseph Wright in his Book intitul'd, Brief
Animadversions on five Articles, page 2. So that we did then, and do hold that
there is One only true and living God, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, all
three of the very same Divine Nature and Being. And in the same Book, page 3.
lin. 28. When we say these three are one, we did, and now believe that the
Father, Word (or Son) and Holy Spirit, are all three of the same Divine Nature
and Being from everlasting to everlasting, the Creator and Governor of all
things, One only true and living God, in three distinct and undivided Divine
Persons: Thus far Mr. Wright.

5. Next I shall cite Dr. Owen in his Book entitled, The Doctrine of the
Trinity vindicated, printed An. 1669, page 29. In the Declaration of this
Doctrine unto the edification of the Church, there is contained a further
explanation of the things before asserted, as proposed, directed, and in
themselves the Object of our Faith; namely, how God is one in respect of
Nature, Substance, Essence, Godhead, or Divine Being: How being Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, he subsisteth in these three distinct Persons. And Page 112.
The distinction which the Scripture reveals between Father, Son and Holy
Spirit, is that whereby they are three Persons distinctly subsisting in the
same Divine Essence or Being. Now a Divine Person is nothing else, but a Divine
Person upon the account of an especial Property subsisting in an especial
manner: as in the Person of the Father there is the Divine Essence or Being,
with its Property of begetting the Son, subsisting in an especial manner in the
Father; and because this Person has the whole Divine Nature, all the essential
Properties of that Nature are in that Person. Page 122. Seeing here that the
name of God supplies the place of a Species, tho it be singular absolutely, as
it respects the Divine Nature, which is absolutely singular and One, and cannot
be multiplied; yet in respect of communication it is otherwise, it is
communicated unto more.

6. I shall cite next Mr. John Preston in his Book intitul'd, Life eternal, or
a Treatise of the Knowledge of the Divine Essence, fourth Edition, printed 1034,
page 48, 49. If there be two things in God, then there is Multiplication: now
all Multiplication arises from some Imperfection, from some want and defect:
for if one would serve, two would be needless; if one Medicine would cure, two
would be unnecessary; so in all things else. So that the reas^n of
Multiplication is, because one will not serve the turn: Therefore God being
all-sufficient, it is not needful, yea it cannot be, that a breaking in two
should be admitted in him, and consequently he must be most simple, without all
composition, a pure and entire Essence, full of himself, and nothing besides.
And a little further thus: Wheresoever there is any composition, there must be
two or three things; so that there may be a Division; they are separable, tho
not separated: But where Division is, there may be a Dissolution, and so
Destruction, though it never be. But of God we cannot say that this may be, and
consequently there cannot be two things in him: but what he is, he is One most
simple, most pure, and most entire Being, without all Composition and
Multiplication. If God be not simple, there must be parts of which he is
compounded; but in God blessed for ever there are no parts, because then there
should be Imperfection, for every part is imperfect. I shall cite one Author
more, and then make some use of the whole.

7. Mr. Thomas Monk in his notable Book of the Trinity, entitled, A Cure for
the cankering Error, Page 55. has these words: Not to the end it should make a
Multitude of Gods, or divide the Essence, but to distinguish the Persons,
because tho there be one Person of the Father, another Person of the Son, and
another of the Holy Ghost, yet the Father is not another thing, or another God
distinct from the Son and the Holy Ghost; neither is the Son another thing, or
another God distinct from the Father and the Holy Ghost; neither is the Holy
Ghost another thing, or another God distinct from the Father and the Son;
because the Nature of God is but one and indivisible; although the Father be
one, the Son another, and the Holy Ghost another: and therefore they are not of
diverse natures, of another and diverse Substance, not conjoined or knit together
in one Substance (as Men which have one common Essence) not only of the like
Substance, but of one and the same Substance; have the same Essence, the same
Eternity, the same Will, the same Operation, etc. And page 57. ' Qu. Be there
any parts or kinds in God? Answ. None at all, because he is a most simple
Essence; which does admit no Composition or Division, and simply and in every
respect of Unity one.

Having given you this Description of the Most High God, both from the Holy
Scriptures, and those Authors; I shall now come to make that use of it, which
at first I promised and intended; and that is, to show, that there is no
essential, but only a circumstantial difference in the Apprehensions of the
Parties before named, concerning the Most High God, and the Description here
given of Him. Only note, that that which concerns the difference about the Son
and Holy Ghost, will be here spoken unto but occasionally and in short, because
I shall treat more largely, distinctly, and directly of them in their proper
place: Whereas I am now precisely treating of the Most High God.

But to the end that a plain Discovery of the Difference concerning the Most
High (which has made such a Noise and Confusion in the World in many Ages, and
in our times) may appear, I shall state the Sum of the case in this one short
Question.

Whether the most Glorious, Eternal, Entire, Uncompounded, Undivided,
Vndividable Essence of the one Most High God, do (at the same time, and at all
times from Eternity to Eternity) subsist all and whole both in one Person, and
also in like m^nner in three Persons, or all, and whole only in one Person?

Our dividing Brethren are for the first part of this Question, and our accu^^d
Brethren are for the latter part thereof.

That this is the Sum of the Difference, and that this Diff^rence is only
Ci^cumstantial, is now my business to make appear; which I shall endeavor to
do, partly from the former Description and Quotations, partly from the natural
force of our Opinions, and partly from further Quotations.

But in the first place, give me leave to treat a little in the Negative. Let
us first observe where the difference is not: The Question controverted is not
whether or no any of the Idols of Israel of old, or any of the Multitude of the
Egyptian Gods, or ancient Heathen Deities formerly worshipped by them, or the
false Deities worshipped by Infidels in foreign Parts now; I say, the Question
is not whether any of these be the true God or no. Neither is the Question
whether the glorious Essence or Godhead, which the Scripture says is in Heaven,
whether He alone, and only He, be the Most High God, and that we ought to pay
our duty to none but Him, and such as He shall delegate under him: for these
things are owned on all hands. Neither is it at all questioned on either hand
whether there be above one Most High God, or whether his Essence be infinite,
eternal, independent, all Wisdom, Power, Greatness, Holiness, Justice, Love,
Mercy, Knowledge, Bounty, Goodness, Truth, Perfection. Nay, in all the Essential
Properties of the Divine Nature which Holy Scripture and Reason do teach, there
is still a joint Consent and Agreement on all hands. Where then is the
difference, as to cause so loud a noise of Heresy! Heresy! these Men deny the
Foundation of all Christian Religion and Worship; nay deny the true God!

Why let us consider a little, since there is an agreement about, and in all
the essential Properties of the true God, and an Agreement which Essence is the
true God. Is there any known material difference about the Essence it self? the
matter of it let us examine.

No, we find none here neither: for that it is an entire, uncompounded,
impartible, undividable, one Substance, or Essence, those supposed Heretics
say, and so say we. Let us look over the Quotations already cited: First, says
Athanasius's Creed, not dividing the Substance. 2. The Nicene Creed says, One
Substance. 3. The first of the 39 Articles says, one living and true God,
without Body, Parts or Passions, of One Substance. 4. Mr. Wright says, that all
three are in the same Divine Nature, and being in three distinct and undivided
Divine Persons; and on that account grants that the Father is the only true
God. 5. Dr. Owen says, God is One in respect of his Nature, Substance, Essence,
Godhead, or Divine Being: and further says, that the name of God is a singular
absolutely, as it respects the Divine Nature; which is absolutely s^ngular and
One, and cannot be multiplied. 6. Mr. Preston says that God being
Allsufficient, it is not needful, yea it cannot be that a breaking in two
should be admitted in him, and consequently he must be most simple without all
composition, a pure and entire Essence, full of himself and nothing besides:
And a little further says, consequently there cannot be two things in him, but
what he is he is One most simple, most pure, and most entire being, without all
Composition and Multiplication: and further he says there are no parts in him.
Lastly, Mr. Monk says, That the Persons, tho distinct amongst themselves, yet
are not differing things one from another, because the nature of God is but One
and indivisible; and further says, they are not conjoined or knit together in
one Substance, as Men which have one common Essence: They are not only of the
like Substance, but of one and the same Substance, have the same Essence, etc.
And in answer to the Question, Are there any Parts or Kinds in God? answers,
none at all; because he is a most simple Essence, which does admit of no
Composition or Division, and simple, and in every respect of Unity One.

Thus you see, having summed up the Evidence, as says the Foreman, so they say
all, they are all agreed in their Verdict; both Orthodox, and Heretics (so
called) are thus far in all respects jointly and fully ag^eed as with one
Voice, to publish that their apprehension of the one true God respecting his
Essence, is an undivided, undividable, entirely one Substance, not subsisting
or possible to be subsisting in parts, or having any Parts in him. And so says
the Scripture, God is a Spirit, not Spirits.

And indeed this Doctrine of the Unity of the Divine Essence we must maintain,
or else we do nothing: for if once we admit of several parts in that Essence,
we may as well admit (and there seems a necessity that it should be) so many
several Spirits, and indeed so many Most High Gods; which can be called one
only by consent and agreement, or at most one in kind.

But the Doctrine of Plurality of Gods most High is repugnant to Reason,
refuted by Scripture, and abhorred by Mahometans.

Besides, if you divide Essence in your thoughts, then you must divide the
Essential Properties, such as Mercy, Justice, Wisdom, Bounty, and the rest; I
say, you must divide them into as many parts as you divide the Essence in your
thoughts: As for example: Suppose you divide it into three parts; then you must
suppose in your mind three Attributes of Justice, three of Mercy, three of
Wisdom, and so of all the rest; or else you must imagine some of the Attributes
in one part, and some in another: as thus, Justice and Power in one, Mercy and
Wisdom in another, Truth and Bounty in another, and so of the rest: or else you
must imagine that some of the parts have none of the Attributes, and that will
be Blasphemy and N^nsense; since I think all will confess that nothing can be
essentially God most High, but that which is or has all the Divine Essential
Properties. And so go which way to work you will, if you admit of Parts, you
confound the Substance, as Athanasius says. But enough of this. We are
unanimously agreed in the Unity and Undividedness of the Divine Essence. Well,
thus far are we come, looking for the difference, but finding none. Why where
is it? What is become of it? that great difference that has troubled the World
and Church so many hundred years, and set good men together by the ears To^th
and Nail, occasioned a great Volume of hard, bitter, sharp, biting Words
against each other? and yet you see we are all agreed about the main Matter,
Substance, or Essence of the most High; nay and in all the essential Properties
of him too: And yet can there be any material difference about him
notwithstanding? that is strange! how can this thing be?

Why yes, yet there is a difference: but whether a material one or no, must be
left to my considering Reader to judge. It is not whether this Divine undivided
Essence, about which, and all its essential Properties, we are fully agreed;
whether, I say, it subsist in one Divine Person: For this is also jointly
agreed on all hands, as I shall presently show: But it is this, Whether it
subsist only in One Divine Person, or both in One, and also in like manner in
Three. The Orthodox is for the latter, the Heretic affirms the former.

Thus near are we come, and I doubt not anon to show you that we are yet nearer
than all this. But first I Will demonstrate this: tho first of all we must treat
of the word Person, what in this Controversy is understood by it: And because I
am a little at a loss to explain the thing, I will therefore give you Dr. Owen
and Mr. Monk's Description. First, Dr. Owen, if you look back to the first
Quotations of him: Now (says he) a Divine Person is nothing else but a Divine
Person upon the account of an especial Property of subsisting in an especial
manner. Secondly, Dr. Hall, as I find him quoted by Mr. Monk, Page 46. of his
Cure for the cankering Error, has these Words: We may think here of one
Substance in three Subsistences, one Essence in three Relations, one Jehovah
begetting, begotten, proceeding, Father, Son, Spirit: yet so as the Son is no
other thing from the Father, but another Person; or the Spirit from the Son.
Also Mr. Monk, in his 63 page, propounds this Question, How does the word
Essence differ from the word Person in God? his answer is, Essence is the
Nature, which is not more belonging to one, and less to another of the three
Persons, but common to them all, yea one and the same, and cannot be divided;
and is all in each one of them, not without them, subsisting by it self, to
wit, the very Deity it self. And therefore the essential Properties which be in
them are one in number, of one nature. Now Person is the subsisting in the
Divine Nature, or the nature of God; which having relation to others, is
distinguished by some incommunicable Properties: for indeed the Persons are
only distinguished, not severed: as indeed three men are indeed separated, tho
they be one in kind. The Reason is, because the Essence of God is infinite and
impartible, and therefore it is all in every Person, which are not severed one
from another, but only distinguished amongst themselves. But as for the Essence
of Angels and Men it is finite and partible, so that it is not all in every
single Person, but part in one, and part in another. One Passage he has in
page 39. Fourthly, All the Attributes whether relative, negative, or positive,
or if any other, in that they proceed from the Essence, are true of every
Person, because the whole Essence is in every Person: The Father is eternal,
the Son is eternal, the Holy Spirit is eternal, because the whole Essence is in
every one of them.

I need not cite any more, because so far as I am able to distinguish, Dr.
Owen, Dr. Hall, and Mr. Monk have spoken the general sense of all that have
writ on this Subject. And now having showed you the Description that these men
give, if I can tread right in this narrow Path, I will try to give you,
according to the best of my judgment, the sense of what they mean by the word
Person or Persons in the Divine Essence.

First then, I do suppose by Person here is not intended a distinct separate
Being from the Essence, or from one another; nor yet a distinct spiritual
Substance: for this were to divide the Substance into three distinct divided
Persons. Neither must it be supposed that Person has a distinct Mind or Will
from the Essence or the other Persons, for that will necess^rily imply three or
four Minds and Wills in the Most High, which would be absurd. Neither must the
Person have any one part of the Divine Essence peculiar to it self, for that
would divide the Essence into parts, and the Divine Properties also, and so
bring all into confusion, as has been shown: therefore Person must be supposed
to be something not at all separated from any part of the Essence, or of the
other Persons: Therefore, says Mr. Monk, Essence is the nature which is not
more belonging to one, and less to another of the three Persons, but common to
them all, yea one and the same, and cannot be divided, and is all in each one
of them; and therefore concludes, that the essential Properties which be in
them are one in number, that is, that the essential Property of Love, and the
essential Property of Mercy, and the essential Property of Justice, and all the
rest, are all and whole in one Person, and all and whole in another. And
therefore elsewhere says, That all the Attributes (both relative, negative, and
positive, or any other) of the Divine Essence, are true of every Person,
because the whole Essence is in every Person. So that in short the thing is
this, that a Person separate from Essence is nothing, but is only the whole
undivided Essence, subsisting in a certain manner or mode; that is, in one
manner in the Father, in another manner or mode in the Son, and in another
manner in the Holy Ghost: that is, not three distinct intelligent Beings, but
only one infinite entire distinct intelligent Being, subsisting in three
undivided inseparable Manners or Modes.

And this is the general sense, so far as I was ever able to discern, of all
the Authors that ever I read on this Subject.

But if this be the Knot of the Controversy about the most High God, perhaps
some will say it is dark: I say, perhaps so too; very like it may be so, else
what is the matter, think you, that so many Men who have long been loving
Friends and good Men, yet by this Controversy have had their Eyes so blinded,
that they could not see one another with an Eye of Charity? And what else
should be the reason that in the Churches where it has been controverted,
there has oftentimes arose such a Mist and thick Darkness, that many could not
see their Seats at the Lord's Table? And if any shall ask me the meaning of the
matter, I must answer with Mr. Monk page 43. That the perfect manner how one
person is in another is incomprehensible and unutterable in this Life.

And for my own part, I shall much rather choose to admire the matter than to
illustrate my explanation; and I will add with Mr. Monk in the aforesaid page,
to be wise above what is written, is not Wisdom, but perilous Sin and Folly.

And it will not out of my Head, but that it had been much better for every
body to have left off at the Description of the most High, even there where we
on all hands were so well agreed, rather than to have run further for a plainer
Description till we have almost lost our selves.

And now a word by the way to my Brethren, who for distinction sake I call of
the Athanasian Persuasion. Many, or most of you are not ignorant of the bitter
Words and Deportment that have dropped from the Tongues and Pens of many against
their Brethren, because of their differing Apprehensions about the most High
God: and now thus far are we come, scanning the difference, and it remains in
this narrow Corner; for all are agreed that that Glorious Eternal Being, whose
Throne is in the Heavens, or the Heavens is his Throne, whom the Heaven and
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, whose Presence fills Heaven and Earth, even
that this Glorious Being or Essence, and he only, from everlasting to
everlasting is the one and only most High God, the Original of all Power,
Authority, Wisdom, Life, Light, Knowledge, Nature, Perfection, Goodness, Bounty,
Mercy, Justice, Love, Action, and Being. And further, you are all agreed that
this very Essence is an impartible, uncompounded Essence: So that our differing
Brethren own the same most High, the same Essence for Number, Nature, and Kind,
owning all and whole of the Divine Essence and essential Properties, as full in
all respects as we our selves, not abating one of them, no nor any part of one
of them, worshipping it with the same, and as much Adoration and Respect as we
our selves, owning the very same Substance and no other: So that the difference
is not about Substance, Matter, or Properties; but only about a certain Manner
or Mode of subsisting: yea yet further, both agreeing that whatever is God most
High, whether Essence or Property, tho improper to distinguish it, is all and
whole in the Person of the Father. This none of us all dare deny: for then we
shall throw down our own Opinion, Root and Branch. Nay further, it is jointly
agreed b^ (...) that whatsoever is God most High, whether Essence, Attribute,
or Person, it is all in every one, and consequently in the Father: See Mr. Monk
page 38. Because a Person signifies both the Essence and its Relative Property,
all the Persons having one and the same Essence, it follows that in respect
of the Essence one person is in another. Thus all amounts to thus much: You say
that Essence, and all that we properly call God, and worship, is in the Person
of the Father, and so say they: only you require them to confess that the
Essence subsisteth not only thus, but also in two other distinct Manners or
Modes: This is all. And truly methinks it looks like a very hard case, that our
Brethren should own the whole Essence with all its Royal and Essential
Properties, and likewise own all his mighty Works of old, and now, whereby he
has made himself known, and likewise reverence and honor it as highly as our
selves; and yet we must exclude them Communion at the Table of the Lord, only
and merely for a Circumstance, that is, a differing Manner or Mode of
subsisting; which yet also is so dark and dubious, that not one of us durst
once touch it with our Pe^^ to explain it. Shall we then be so positive, so
highly conceited of our own Judgments in so intricate, so mysterious a Matter,
which yet at most is but a Circumstance, (viz. a Mode or Manner of subsisting)
not any part of the thing it self, the Essence it self? Shall we censure,
condemn, and stigmatize our good Brethren, every way else as able for Parts,
Knowledge, Purity of Manners, and zealous for God and his Ways as our selves?
Shall we represent them Denyers of the true God, Broachers of Heresies, nay
damnable Heresies? Surely no: Be it far from us; lest it be thought that an
evil Mind has had dominion over us: more especially, since admitting their
Sentiments to be in this case circumstantially erroneous (for a Heresy I will
not allow it) yet it hinders not at all, or is no Impediment to our paying
Adoration or Worship to the most High, as I shall come to show in the next
Section. But first let me observe unto you that all those things respecting the
Essence and essential Properties wherein we and all our Brethren are agreed,
both Scripture and Reason in all plainness teaches: But this controversal part
concerning the treble Manner or Mode of the subsisting of the Divine Essence,
is neither taught by Reason, nor found in, or is Scripture Language; I say, it
is not Scripture Language, but only drawn from some Inferences and Consequences
of and from the holy Scripture. I say, when we have only Consequences to foot
upon in a case of this nature and difficulty, still it calls for the more
Moderation and Tenderness toward persons of differing Apprehensions in such a
tender point, who withal are as orthodox in the main every way as our selves.
But now I come to the next point.

SECT. III. Concerning the manner how we ought to pay our Worship and Adoration
to this one most High God.
IN the creating of this I shall include and resolve this following Question:
Whether it be the declared Pleasure of the Almi^hty that his Subjects should
pay their Ado^ation to the Matter subsisting, or the ^^^^r o^ su^sisting?

(...) ^ully thus: Whether it be the (...) ^^^^sure of the Almighty that his
Subjects should pay their Adoration unto him with and under the Conception and
Appellation of One Supreme Sovereign single Substance, unseparable in Essence
and Divine Properties, subsisting in one Person? Or, whether it be his pleasure
it should be paid unto him under the notion and appellation of a single Essence
subsisting in three distinct Manners, Modes, or Persons?

In the resolving of this Question I shall premise this by the way: That the
Order, Manner, or Mode of paying our Ad^ration, and our Conceptions of the
Object of Worship in the Act of Worship ought not to be regulated by our
Conceptions, but to be decided merely by the Directi^n and Rule God is pleased
to give us about it in his Word. For it is not what we think fit, but what he
sa^ is most proper, and our Duty: And theref^re I take this f^r granted, that
the H^ly Scr^ptures are our only whole sufficient Rule to ^uide us in all
points of Faith and go^d Manners respecting Salvation, to guide us in the
understanding of the Object and Act of Worship, and in our conception of the
Object in the Act thereof.

And for want of keeping close to this Rule, so many Innovations and
Instit^tion^ have been introduced; people thinking still to mend things by
bringing it nearer to their own Conceptions, have often made it worse in not
heeding the Standard.

These things p^emised, I shall give my Answer to the Question, and do say,
that to me it does not a^pear that it is the pleasure of God that Worship
should be paid unto him under the appellati^n, and with the c^nception of a
single Essence subsisting b^th in one and three distinct Manners, Modes, or
Persons.

But rather that it is his declared Will that his Subjects should pay their
Adoration to him under, and with the conception and appellation of one supreme
Sovereign and singular Substance, insepar^ble in Essence and Divine Properties,
subsist^ng in one Divine Pers^n and Spirit. And for this I will give my Reasons.

First, as has been hinted, I take it for granted that let the Doctrine of
three Persons in one Essence be as clear as the Sun, yet with wha^ conceptions
we must worship must be c^nf ^^ble t^ God's Word: B^t now to the Reasons. My
first Reason i^, notwithstanding the various Appellatio^ which God chose in
f^rmer Dispensations to make himself kno^n to his S^bjects by as the Object of
th^^^ W^rship, tho they did plainly discover the Unity of h^s E^s^nce, and also
his essential Properties, yet I remember not one Discovery of him as a single
Essence in a threefold subs^st^n^^, or one Essence and three P^rs^n^. And there
seems no such discovery under the (...) Dispens^tion. Which will app^^r, ^irs^,
(...) take notice how he dis^over^ hims^^^ in gen^ral, both at first to Adam;
se^^ndly to N^^^ before and also after the F^ood, and hi^ (...) forth the Law
to the Generations (...) Flood; also to Abraham, I^^^^, Jac^^, M^^^, and to
I^rael in general; and in partic^lar in giving sorth his Law. N^w o^ s^rv^
(...) ^^^^ral to all such as he make^ discovery of himself as the Object of
their Worship, he ma^^s use of such Denominations (...) ar^ of the ^^ngular
number, as I, M^, M^, (...) Min^; and not we, or ours. Li^ewise w^^n ^^y ^f
(...) did mention this sacred M^^^^ in p^^^^, their Worship, they made (...)
such E^pressions, as showed it was their S^nt^m^nt that they conceived of him
as one entire O^ject, and not one and three; ^s Thee, Th^^ Thou, ^r Thine; not
Ye, You, Y^^r, (...) Yours: which shows that ^hateve^ th^^ ^^lieved of
different Pe^s^ns in that one sin (...) Essence, or an one entire Substance in
a ^^^^fold Manner or Mode of subsisting ((...) yet no where appears that they,
or any o^ t^^^ before-named did) but if so, a^ a^ resai^, yet it appears they
th^ught it their Duty t^ give Appellations to denominate, and consequently to
conceive of the Object o^ t^^ir Worship as a single one in one Person, ^r
intelligent Being, without thinking it so material to take notice of Name, of
(...) of a threefold manner of subsistin^, (...) ^^n^le Essence both in one and
three, in the A^t of Worship; which yet sure, were th^s s^ material and
essential a part of right ^^rshi^, (as now supposed) methin^s it^ (...) have
appeared, if not in all, yet a^ l^^st in (...) of the many Instanc^s we have in
Scri^ture, of Persons expre^si^^ th^mselves in t^^ (...) of Worship and
Adoration.

^^t ^^w to return (...) the first, t^ ^^t, Gods dis^^v^ring hi^^^^ to man: In
the first place to avoid an Obj^^t^^^, o^^er^e, I am not spea^ing of what i^
said ^hen ^^d speaks concerning making Man, or going down to see the Builders
of Babel; for this is foreign to my present business (which is not now to
dispute pro or con, either to prove or deny the Doctrine of three Persons in
one Essence) but my particular Business is to show how God has discovered
himself to Man. Therefore let none cry out and say, you have forgot the word Us
in the forenamed places: For, first, whether it be there pr^cisely demonstrated
three undivided Persons in one intelligent Being, the Dissenters from
Athanasius's Creed will not be wanting to bring Reasons to the contrary, which
(as aforesaid) is not now my business to take notice of. But, secondly, observe
if they do, yet these are Words spoken in Heaven, which no mortal Man did ever
h^ar, n^r were they directed to man, but spoken in the Heav^nly Mansions by him
who perfectly knows and understands himself. But that which I insist upon is,
that always when God directs his Speech to Man, or Men, disc^vering himself to
them as the Object of their Worship, he the^ speaks in the singular number. Now
this I take for granted, because I think it will not ^e denied that the Manner
or Mode of God^ describing of himself (...) Man, as the Object of their
Worship, o^ght to be the Directions of our Conceptions ^f him in the Act of
Worship: And that this is not plural, but singular, will appear in the
particular Examination of the above-hinted Instances.

1. To begin with Adam, Genesis 3.11. Have thou eaten of the T^ee, where^f I
command^d that thou should not eat? and ver. 15. I will put enmity, etc. Then
to Noah, Genesis 6.13. And God said unt^ Noah, The end of all Flesh is come before
M E, and behold I will destroy them: ver. 17. Behold I, even I do bring a Flood
of Waters. Ver. 18. But with thee will I establish my Covenant.

2. The like, or the same Expressions you have, Chap. 7. at ver. 1, 4. and
Chap. 9. In the Deed, Contract, or Covenant, whereby God makes himself kn^wn
to, and with the new World after the Deluge, we find him thus expressing
himself, ver. 3. The green Herb have I given you. Ver. 5. Your Blood of your
lives will I require, at the hand of every Beast will I require it; and at the
hand of every Man's Brother will I require it. Ver. 9. And I, even I establish
my Covenant with you. Ver. 11. And I will establish my Covenant with you. Ver.
13. I do set my Bow in the Cloud. Ver. 15. And I will remember my Covenant
which is between Me and you, and every living Creature of all Flesh; and the
Waters shall no more become a Flood to destroy all Flesh. Observe, the Covenant
made with all Flesh, was under the notion of a single Being, and not a
threefold subsisting.

Now touching God's discovering and describing himself to Abraham the first
time, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3. Get thee into a Land that I shall show thee; and I will
make of thee a great Nation: And I will bless thee, and I will bless them that
bless thee. The second time of appearance, ver. 7. And the Lord appeared unto
Abram, and said, Unto thy Seed will I give this Land. The third time of
appearance, Chap. 13.15, 16. Fourth time of appearance, Chap. 15.1. The word of
the Lord came unto Abraham in a Vision saying, Fear not, I am thy Shield.
Likewise ver. 7, 14, 18. and Chap. 17.1, 2. at the making the Covenant the Lord
appeared unto Abraham and s^id, I am the Almighty God, walk before Me, and be
thou perfect; and I will make My Covenant between Me and thee. But not to
mention any more of Abraham, which we might, let it suffice that at every
appearance recorded it was never with a plural Denomination.

Next, for Isaac, Chap. 26.2, 3, 4, ^. And the Lord appeared unto him, and
said, Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the Land which I shall tell thee of,
sojourn in this Land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee, and unto
thy Seed I will give all these Countries; and I will pe^form the Oath which I
swear unto Abraham thy Father; and I will make thy Seed to multiply. Because
that Abraham obeyed my Voic^, and kept my Charge, my Commandments, my Statutes,
and my Laws.

Next, for Jacob, Chap. 28. verse. 13, 15. And behold, the Lord stood above it,
and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy Father, and the God of Isaac; the
Land whereon thou lie, to thee will I give it. And behold, I am with thee,
and will keep thee in all places whither thou go, and will bring thee again
into this Land: for I will not leave thee until I have done that which I have
spoken.

Next we come to Moses, Exodus 3. ver. 6. Moreover he said, I am the God of thy
Father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And in ver.
13, 14, 15. the most High is particularly desired by Moses upon an emergent
occasion to discover himself, that he and Israel might know how to conceive of
him aright. And God gives him particular direction what to say: And Moses said
unto God, Behold, when I come unto the Children of Israel, and shall say unto
them, The God of your Fathers has sent me unto you; and they shall say to me,
What is his name? what shall I say unto them? And God said unto Moses, I AM
that I AM; and he said, Thus shall thou say unto the Children of Israel, I AM
has sent me unto you. And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shall thou say
unto the Children of Israel, The Lord God of your Fathers, the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob has sent me unto you: this is my name
for ever, and this is my memorial unto all Generations.

Now surely if the conception of a Trinity of Persons in God were so absolutely
necessary in the Act of Worship as is now taught, who can but suppose that the
Almighty, especially being so particularly desired to declare himself, and that
also in order, and to the end that Israel might put their trust, and act faith
in him aright; who can think, I say, but that the Almighty would have m^de a
plain discovery thereof in this place? On the other side; tho God do here make
himself known by such Names or Memorials as sufficiently discover the Oneness
of his Being, and also his essential Properties, both Mercy, Goodness, Wisdom,
Truth, Love, Bounty, Justice, and the rest, which were all discovered to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, whose God he here declares himself to be; yet what
Man not prepossessed can ever imagine that God intended, or Israel could by
this Description of God, conceive of him as a threef^ld subsistence?

And to the end that you may see the scope of this Description in others
Opinions as well as my own, I will quote two Authors: first, Mr. Monk in the
Book forecited, page 25. I AM, that is (says he) I am the only true God, truly
subsisting, and not only through the opinion of Men as Id^ls are: I am he that
has an everlasting Being, unchangeably subsisting of it self, not depending
upon others, infinite, most simple, the Author and Cause of the being of all
things: not a borrowed, changeable, finite, dependent, and compound Being, etc.
as all the Creatures have: Of this mine Essence will I give thee the highest,
most express and general name of all, [He that is.]

Secondly, I shall quote Mr. Preston in his forecited Book, page 96. As if he
should say, if yet they cannot understand what this name is, it is the same
that I was known by to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob: what I was to them, the
same will I be to you. I was known to them by my Word, and by my Works, and by
my Miracles; and the same shall you find me: it is that God which has sent me
unto you [this is my name.] Which Words are to be referred not only to the
latter Words, but to the former, I AM THAT I AM. Thus far Mr. Preston. And thus
you see here is nothing perceived in this Discovery of a Trinity of Persons in
others Opinions, or our own Reason.

The next discovery of himself we find in Exodus 6.23. And God spoke unto Moses,
and said, I am the Lord: And I appeared unto Abraham, and unto Isaac, and unto
Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my Name JEHOVAH was I not known t^
them. Here I note two things: first, that God does plainly here declare how he
taught and directed Abraham, Is^ac, and Jacob to act Faith in, and conceive of
him, viz. as a God Almighty, All-powerful, All-sufficient, All-wise, etc. But
he mentions not in the least his subsisting in a Trinity. S^condly, I observe
that God does here m^ke a m^re f^ll, copious, profound and ^am^le Di^c^very of
himself to his Subjects than at any time heretofore, by giving them his Name
JEHOVAH, being the clearest and most proper name of his Being and undivided
essential inseparable Properties: which sacred Name the Jews deservedly and
greatly rever^nce; ins^much that the Author of the Book, entitled, The
Father's Spectacles to behold his Child, says in his 110. page, the Je^^s hold
it not (...) to use the name JEHOVAH at all, but by the Pri^st^ in the
S^nct^^^y only, and that but once a year. And ^iting ^^le^'^ Exp^s^^^r, s^^^,
JEHOVAH (...) nev^r prono^^^ed (...) the Je^^ on pain of Dea^^, only by the
Priest in the Sanct^^ ^an^torum, and that on the day of Exp^^^i^n, be^^^ bu^
once a year. And yet notwithstanding thi^ further Di^covery, and their great
Reverence to the Name, I do not understand that I^^ael did thereby c^ncei^^ a
distinction of Pe^s^ns in that one Essence h^ld forth thereby. And I perce^ve
the Author (my Respected F^iend) last cited in his (...) and 10^ page, when he
paraphrases on the word (tho he be a Disciple of the ^i^ene Creed) yet notes
not a distinction of Per^^ns d^rectly and properly flowing, as the genuine
sense of this Word: But that properly and directly it imports and expresses the
Divine Being with all the essential Properties. And the most that I can
remember I ever read in any Author treating of this Word, amounted to no more
but this, viz. That this sacred Name of the most High, was the direct and
proper Name of the Divine Essence, and all its inseparable Properties, tho not
excluding, yet not declaring, discovering or revealing it ^nd^r a threefold
personal su^sisting.

But further; when God discovers himself as the only Object of the^r Worship,
prefixed in the fore fr nt of hi^ Holy Law, Exodus 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, ^. First,
he declares himself by hi^ name; I am the Lord thy God: Secondly, (...) his
Works; Which has br^ught thee ^ut ^f the ^^nd of Egy^t. In the first Verse is
the Attr^^^te ^f hi^ (...), and Severity a^^^nst ^i^: I the (...) t^^ (...)
jeal^us G^^, ^^^ting the ^^i^^^ty, ^c. The ^th Verse ^^^tai^ the Att^i^^te of
hi^ Love: She^^ng M^^c^ u^t^ the (...) that love m^. The Re^d^^ (...)
^r^perties were man^f^s^^d in the W^^^ ^^rst mentioned, viz. b^^n^in^ them
(...) where his Patience, (...) Pity, (...) Wisdom, his Power were eminently
shown.

Methinks, as aforesaid, if it had been the will of God that Israel his
peculiar People should have worshipped him with the C^nception of a Trinity in
the Act of Adorat^on, that then he would, in this place especially, have
discovered something thereof, since he is here more amply discovering his Will
and their Duty than at any time heretofore. And yet here appears no such thing;
but rather still the Object of Worship is discovered under the notion of a
single Being, I am the Lord. And this with his Works and Attributes, appears to
be all the Description of him.

Then again, at M^ses his repeating that which our Savior calls the first and
great Commandment, containing the principal part of Duty and Worship to this
sacred Object, the ^r^face runs thus, Deuteronomy. 6.4. He^^ O Isr^el, the Lord our
God is One Lord.

Here i^deed it is reaso^able to conclude that God ^^tended his Subjects should
worship him under the notion, appellation, and c^nce^tion of One. But who can
think that by this he intended to teach them to do it under the notion and
appellation of three?

Lastly, as touching God's discovering of himself under the somer Dispensation:
Tho I confess when the words Holy One are used, they do not always particularly
respect the most High, yet whenever they are used in holy Writ, as most proper,
so they are always used to signify a single Person. Now tho I shall not cite
the particulars being too large, yet I promise to any that shall seriously
desire it, thi^ty several places in the Old Testament, where he is denominated
the H^ly One; and I can be better than my word. And on the other side, I
challenge any body to show me one place where he calls himself, or is called
the Holy Three: and if so, it is a strong presumption at least, that he ^^uld
be worshipped under the notion of a h^ly One, or sin^l^ Pers^n.

^^d thus having (...) over some of the most prin^^^^ places wh^^e God has
discovered (...) to his Su^je^^s, and c^llected them t^^^t^^r, I conceive any
indiff^^ent Person, l^^^ing ^^^st seriously (...) ^h^^, will conclude that any
person having no other grounds to conceive a Trinity of persons in this one
Essence than what arises from those Descriptions; it is not likely he should be
induced by those Passages to conceive a Trinity of Persons in this one Essence
and Object.

Not that I hereby (as aforesaid) deny the thing it self, viz. the Doctrine of
three Persons; but show that it is not likely that the Almighty does require a
particular Conception of three Persons in the act of Worship, but only one;
since he has left the notion of three so very dark, as indeed not discernable,
in those very places where he discovers himself as the Object of Adoration: And
has chosen such Epithets to declare himself generally and universally, as
properly do infer a single Essence not revealed, as subsisting in three
Somewhats, Manners, Modes, or Persons.

And further, it is observable that the holy Scriptures speaking of, and
holding forth the One most High, do often repeat the Unity of his single
undivided Essence, as also the Greatness of his Power, his Wisdom, and the
Residue of his Essential Properties: they are sound in multitudes of places in
Scripture, as if Persons could never enough be told, and made sensible of those
things, wherein all Parties are agreed; and as if they could never have too
powerful conceptions of it in the Act of Worship. Methinks therefore it is
strange, that so especial a point, as this is thought to be, should be left so
dark and obscure, even to that degree that a man without any other help than
those Scriptures of the Old Testament (of which now I speak) which speak
directly of the most High as the Object to be worshipped; I say, may almost (if
not altogether) as soon conceive in his mind three hundred distinct Persons in
this Essence as conceive three. What f^llows hence then but that that Person
which sincerely worships the most High, (...) of him as subsisting in one
undi^^d ^ssence, in one Person, as we on all ^^nd^ b^lie^e him to do, and
worships him with such Sentiments as he in conscience thinks th^se plain
Passages before recited do ^^turally hold f^rth; what hinders, I say, but that
we may think that he worships the most High aright, and according to the
Scripture, although he distinguishes not the Manners or Modes of his sub^^sting?
which indeed in it self is something hard to the unle^rned at least, to
distinguish in their thou^hts t^^e^ distinct persons, and not also at the same
time to conceive three real substantial distinct Beings or Substances.

I therefore humbly, conceive that those that think they ought, and find they
can in the act of Worship distinguish the Persons, and not at the same time
divide in their thoughts the Substance, I say let them do s^: and they that
think themselves not obliged, and think they cannot well make this distinction
in their thoughts, my opinion is, let them alone to serve God after the old
fashion that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob served God in: And not for so small a
matter ^e stigmatized as Atheists, Denyers of the true God, Her^ticks, and such
other infamous Characters, corrupting good Manners.

But in the next place: having shown in the foregoing Discourse how God has
manifested himself, I now in the second place come to show how, or in what
manner the aforesaid Adam, Abraham, Ja^ b, Moses, and Israel, did conceive of
the most H^^h when they addressed themselves unto him: which appears not to
respect his sub^^sting, but his Essence and essential Properties, which yet
further con^irms it, that either they were ignorant of a ^hreefold subsisting,
or else did not think it expedient or necessary to contain it in their c
nceptions as a necessary part of, and in Divine Worship: This in general will
appear, in that they always used such Exp^essi^ns as belong to the singular
number, as thee, thy, th^n, or thine; which show that they did not directly pay
their respects to distinct Person, but t^ one ^^^^nc^ without distinction;
since ^e n^^^r read that they made use of y^, y^^, y^^^, or yours.

But to make it more ^lain, we will examine the particular Instances. First,
Adam, Genesis 3.10, 11. he said, I heard thy V^ice, and the W^man whom thou gave
me, etc. Next Abraham, Genesis 15.2. And ^^raham ^^^d, Lord God, what will thou
give me? Chap. 17.18. O that Ismael might live before Thee! And when he would
make his Servant swear by the True God, Chap. 24.3. he did not distinguish him
as one in three, but says he, I will make thee swear by the Lord, the God of
Heaven, and the God of the Earth! Also when the Servant several times in this
Chapter directs his Prayer to this God, he does not distinguish him personally
in three; but says, O Lord God of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good
speed. Then for Jacob, when he tells his Father Laban how his Substance came to
be increased, Genesis 31.42. he does not say the God subsisting in three Persons,
but says he, the God of my Father, the God of Abraham, etc. and Chap. 32.10. I
am not worthy of the Mercies, and all the Truth which Thou have showed me. Ver.
11. Deliver me I pray thee. And thou said, I will surely do thee good. In
short, in several places he distinguishes him verbatim as God discovered
himself to Abraham, viz. God Almighty, but not one word of God in three
Persons. Next Moses, Exodus 5.23. For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in Thy
Name, he has done evil to this People. Neither have Thou delivered thy People
at all. Chap. 15.1. Then sang Moses and the Children of Israel this Song unto
the Lord: He has triumphed gloriously, the Horse and his Rider has He thrown
into the Sea. And in this Song you have the Terms, he, thee, thy, thou, thine,
him, repeated no less than 35 times, and yet neither you, yours, they or them
once mentioned, respecting the most High. Thus have I briefly run over the sum
of the most remarkable Instances of persons paying their Devotions to the most
High in the Old Testament; and I might have instanced David, Solomon, Daniel,
and many others, yea down to Zechariah's days: and it appears as if they were
all agreed to conceive of, and acknowledge an undivided, single Essence, and its
Properties. But no Footsteps do appear of their distinguishing the Essence in
three persons in their Conceptions. And if the Israelites ever had any such
conception of God, methinks it should not be lost; and if not lost, it is
strange Josephus should not mention it, since he gives an account of things as
far back as Moses, even from the beginning; and often speaks of God and his
essential Properties, describing the true Object of the Jews Worship, and yet
always speaks of him as one in Unity of Essence, but hints not a word of diverse
Persons. And as Josephus then, so the Jews now acknowledge no such thing, as Mr.
Monk says page 70. he says the Doctrine of the Trinity is contrary to the
Blindness of the Jews, who do affirm an Essence altogether without distinction.
Now, I say, it is strange if this were understood amongst them (especially as so
material a thing as is now supposed) that then both the Jews now (who yet
profess the true God, and are zealous of the Mosaical Law) and Josephus so long
ago, should yet be ignorant of so remarkable a matter.

In the next place, I come to the New Testament, to see whether we may judge it
the Will of God that we should worship and adore his Essence, as subsisting in
one Person, or in three: And first I will consider the Apostle Stephen, what he
says of the most High, Acts 7.2. he calls him, the God of Glory; and ver. 32.
he cites and describes the ancient Description without enlarging, viz. I am the
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And ver. 48. The
most High dwells not in Temples made with Hands. Herein is a discovery of God's
Greatness, but no distinguishing his Persons. And remarkable it is that Paul
about to instruct the ignorant Athenians in the knowledge of the true God, as
the Object of their Worship, Acts 17.23, 24, 25. first lets them know that they
ignorantly worshipped the unknown God, and that him he would declare unto them:
And accordingly says, God that made the World, and all things therein, seeing
that he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with men's
hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all Life, and Breath,
and all things. Herein the Apostle very notably sets forth his most glorious
Attributes, and invisible Being, by his creating and preserving of all things:
But says not one word of the distinction of Persons. Now if the Knowledge of
this were so necessary to be known in order to Salvation as is imagined; Paul
had no less need to instruct these ignorant Athenians therein, as much as in
the Knowledge of the Essential Properties and Power. Next we will consider Ephesians.
4.6. There is One God and Father of all, who is above all. Here you see a plain
discovery of the Unity of the Godhead, and his Supremacy, but the Description
of Persons is still wanting. To this I will add 1 Cor. 8.6. But to us there is
but One God, the Father of all things. Here again the Object of Worship is
described as the first Cause and Foundation of all things (of whom are all
things.) 2. The Inseparableness and Oneness of his Being is asserted (but One
God.) 3. He is so far from directing us to fix our Conceptions on him, as
distinguished into three Persons, that he solely centers him in One, even as
subsisting in the Father. Now what rational Man can conclude from hence, but
that we are to conceive of the Object of Worship as entirely subsisting in, and
to be called by the Appellation of the Father, and so to be worshipped? That
is, in plainness, that we are to conceive that all that we believe to be God
most High, whether Essence, Attributes, or Persons, whatever we may think of
its various subsisting in our selves, yet it is to be adored and distinguished
by the Person of the Father; where we all say that it is all and whole.

But further, I shall add the Authority of him who cannot err. John 4.22, 23,
24. Ye worship ye know not what: We know what we worship; for Salvation is of
the Jews. -- But the hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall
worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth: for the Father seeks such to
worship him. God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him, must worship Him in
Spirit and in Truth.

From this pertinent place I note as follows; First, That it contains a
Discourse of our Savior directly concerning Worship: 1. Blaming and describing
the ignorant false Worshippers; Ye, the Samaritans, worship ye know not what.
2. Describing the true Worshippers: 1. By the manner how, in Spirit and in
Truth. 2. The Matter or Object what; and that described two ways: 1st. His
Essence, a Spirit: 2dly. The Person who, viz. the Father; the true Worshippers
shall worship the Father. Further, from this Text I observe; 1. They cannot be
true Worshippers that worship they know not what. 2. They that worship the
Father as the proper Object of Divine Worship, are not such as worship they
know not what, but such as know what they worship. 3. They that worship the
Father, conceiving of him, as containing the glorious inseparable Essence or
Spirit, being worthy above all things to be worshipped; these I say are not the
false, but the true Worshippers of God; and provided they perform their Worship
spiritually, shall be accepted by him, because he seeks such to worship him. 4.
That it is the Will of God, and Direction of Christ, that of all the Persons
believed to be in the Deity, God the Father is to be conceived as the most
proper Person for us to direct our highest Adoration to. 5. That he that
conceives that the Godhead, and all its essential Properties, subsist in the
Father as the proper Object of Divine Worship, conceives not amiss; because,
according to Christ's Rule, he is a true Worshipper. 6. That we may lawfully
have Communion with any such Persons, if that be all their fault, because they
are true Worshippers, and with better we cannot well join. 7. I observe that
when Christ describes the Object of our Worship, he is so far from
distinguishing or teaching us to distinguish the Persons in that Object, that
he contains all under the denomination of one only Person, even the Father.

Next I shall cite the Instruction of our Lord, expressly injoining us to pay
Adoration to God the Father, and acknowledge all to be his. Mat. 6.9. After this
manner therefore pray ye: Our Father who art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name;
thy Kingdom come; thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, etc. -- for
thine is the Power and the Glory for ever. Amen. From this I observe: 1. That
it is the Will of God, as declared by Christ, that the order we should observe
in our Conceptions of God Almighty, and in pouring out our Desires to him, is
positively and directly to pray to God the Father, as the proper Appellation
and Object of our Prayers. 2. That he that prays to God the Father, prays in
that respect aright, and to the true God. 3. That it appears not that in our
Prayers we are injoined to distinguish the Persons, if we regard and eye by
Faith the Being or Essence we worship: 1. Because, if such a thing as
distinguishing the Persons in Prayer were a Duty, or material, our Savior
would have inserted it in his Directory, since he here gives an account of all
the material Points of Prayer. 2. Because on the contrary he expressly injoins
us to direct our Desires (not to three, but) to one Person, even the Father;
withal teaching us to use such Expressions as are most proper to a single
Person, viz. three times thy, and once thine. 4. I observe that our Lord
directs us to render and ascribe such Excellency, full Power, Sovereignty,
Protection, Sacredness, Bounty, Clemency, Glory to the Father, as are only
proper to be given to the whole and only Godhead; which still shows that the
proper glorious Object of Divine Worship is the whole Godhead, as truly
subsisting all and whole in the Person of the Father, and under that
Appellation to be worshipped. And as I have hitherto treated of positive
Directions in this case, I shall briefly cite some Examples of Christ and his
Apostles, as our Pattern to follow, whereby it may further appear most
agreeable to Scripture to worship one Person. First, Christ's Example, Mat.
11.25. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth. Here he pays the duty
of Thankfulness to the Father, and owns him as supreme Sovereign. Mark 14.36.
And he said, Abba, Father: all things are possible to thee, take away this Cup
from me; nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. Next I shall cite the
Apostles: Romans 8.15. Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby ye cry,
Abba, Father. Romans 15.6. That ye may with one Mind -- glorify God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Gal. 4.6. God has sent forth the Spirit of
his Son into your Hearts, crying, Abba, Father. The next Instance shall be the
Adoration of Paul to this single Person; Ephesians. 3.14. For this cause I bow my
Knee to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Jam. 3.9. Therewith bless we God,
even the Father. 1 Pet. 1.17. And if ye call on the Father, etc. And indeed it
were tedious to cite all those Texts that give Testimony to this thing. These
Gleanings are set down, that ye might believe that the proper Object of Divine
Worship is the one most High God, as truly subsisting all and whole in the
Person of the Father: And believing it, that ye might direct your Adoration to
him accordingly, and also have Charity toward all those who have no other
material fault but worshipping the Father as the proper Object. Nay, methinks
there is no Point of Divinity in the Holy Scriptures more clear than this
thing, as any indifferent Eye may see: it is not a thing drawn from doubtful
Consequences; but plainly revealed, often repeated, and never contradicted, but
confirmed by the universal Practice of the Prophets and Primitive Saints, and
also by Christ and the Apostles; namely, That the most High is to be worshipped
as a single impartible Essence, in one single Person, without the Worshippers
being obliged at the same time to distinguish three distinct Subsistings and
Denominations.

And on the other side, there is not one Instance to be given where any Man is
recorded in the word of God, our only Rule and Guide, to adore the most High
God under the apprehension of one Essence in three Persons; that is, I mean,
did direct his Prayers or Thanks to three Persons. And here I must take
occasion moderately to check some of my worthy and beloved Brethren, useful in
the Ministry, who a little heated with an inordinate Zeal for the Doctrine of
three Persons in the Godhead, fearing they may prejudice the Doctrine it self
by yielding too much to its opposite, do on the other side as much overshoot
the Mark, and form their Petitions quite beyond all Scripture-Injunction and
Example. And tho no Examples, nor any thing like them can be given, yet they
must conclude their Prayers, To thee, O Lord, Father, Son, and holy Spirit,
three Persons, one eternal God, be Honor, Glory, Praise, etc. What shall one
think of this, but that those Men think if they should not direct and form
their Prayers to the Almighty better than Abraham, Jacob, Moses, the Prophets
of old, and Christ and his Apostles did, their Prayers would be very defective,
and not accomplished as they ought? Truly, to be zealous in a good thing is
commendable; and that is a good thing for which we have Precept or Pattern: but
for this there is neither. Now when we take the liberty to add to Divine
Worship, however agreeable to our Opinions, and however well-meaning our
Intentions may be, yet if our Device want Authority from sacred Record, we mar
instead of mending: for as there is a time for every Purpose, so is there a
Rule for every Practice. God is the God of Order, and the supreme Giver of a
Rule in all Institutions and Worship: and when beyond the express Rule, we
shall foist in any Formality in Duty, we cast Dishonor on them of old, to wit,
the Prophets and Apostles, yea Christ and God himself, as if he had been short
in giving sufficient Rules, or Christ and his Followers short in understanding
him. And thus endeavoring to mend, Formality, beyond Rule, or express Precept
or Example, has (as I hinted before) occasioned all or most of the Innovations
in Institutions and Forms of Divine Worship: As for example, because Christ
says, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of God, and drink his Blood, ye have
no Life in you; therefore as if persons were bound to take more care for their
Children than God himself directed, for many Ages they gave them the Lord's
Supper, tho they had no express Scripture for it. Likewise because the Apostle
says, Make melody to the Lord, and rejoice; and again I say, rejoice, and the
like; therefore without rule some have invented Organs, as proper to heighten
Rejoycings. Likewise because the Scripture says, Confess your Faults one to
another; therefore the Roman Church has invented Auricular Confession. And
truly tho I would be sparing in comparisons, yet I would have all my Brethren
see that it is dangerous to add Devices of our own; and that it is hardly
sufficient, because the Scripture says, There are three that bear Record in
Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one; that
therefore we must say in our Prayers, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, three
Persons, and one eternal God; when we have no precedent that ever any did so,
who yet knew how to pray as well as we, having the first Fruits of the Spirit.
And, as I said before, were the distinction of Persons in that one Essence as
plainly discovered by Scripture and Reason, as the Oneness of that Godhead is
(which yet I must confess it hardly is) yet the manner of our Conceptions and
our Expressions to, and Appellations of the Object of Worship in the Act of
Worship, must depend upon God's Will, and Christ's Direction, and not our own
Device.

And now, according to my promise, concerning the Knowledge of the most High,
and paying Worship to him, I hope I have convincingly shown the joint Agreement
on all hands among the Parties abovementioned, and that at most there is but a
circumstantial difference between them; and no material one seems to be in
their thoughts either concerning God or Worship unto him, both believing in the
very same God that created the Heavens and Earth, the very same Essence all and
whole, the very same that was and is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the
same God and no other that is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, the very
same God that Christ directs us to call Father, owning all his essential
Properties, Power, and Prerogatives, each believing him to subsist all and
whole in the person of the Father, and under that Appellation most proper to be
worshipped; only there is a little difference about this threefold manner of
subsisting, a thing (as has bin shown) that God and Christ have at least been
sparing in declaring at any time, when he made discovery of himself in all
Ages. And therefore I hope the Belief of it not to be looked upon so binding,
or the ignorance of it so damning, as to be the Test of Communion.

And now, according to my promise, I shall come to speak of the second Person
of the Trinity, viz. the Christ of God.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Christ of God.
THIS Chapter contains four Sections: First, showing that we are all agreed
about the Person of Christ, who he is.

The second treats of his Offices, therein also showing that we are agreed.

The third answers this Question; Whether or no it be required, that in order
to our right believing in, and worshipping of the Person of Jesus of Nazareth,
we must worship him as the most High God.

The fourth treats particularly of his human Nature.

Sect. I. Showing that we are all agreed about the Person of Christ, who he is.
GReat have been the Mistakes of many about the Person of the Messiah. There
seem to be in all Nations such Sparks of Light as inform them they have need of
some one to be their Friend to appease Divine Wrath, and speak to the most High
for them; to which purpose the Jews adhered to one Benchochab in the Reign of
Adrian, who pretended to be the Messiah, but came to nothing. Likewise in 1666,
they followed one Sebastius Sevi: And after that one More pretending to be
Christ, who both came to nothing. And they now look for a Messiah to come, tho
not Jesus of Nazareth. The Persians rely on Haly, the Turks on Mahomet; and the
Quakers say it is something within, viz. a Spirit, or spiritual Substance. And
there shall yet come (especially in the last times) many Pretenders, calling
themselves Christ's, which shall be found Liars.

But our Brethren and we all agree that he and no other, that was born of Mary,
called Jesus of Nazareth, nailed to the Cross by the order of Pontius Pilat, in
the days of Tiberius Caesar; that he, I say, was, and is the Christ of God, the
Savior of the World. And why we should cry out upon one another, that such a
one denies the true Christ, and believes in another Christ, I see no Reason,
since we all agree that that one Person, born of Mary, was, and is the true
Christ. It Is true, their Sentiments and ours may not be alike about his
Substance, in his preexisting before his Incarnation: but as that is a Mystery
hard for the Ignorant to understand, and Men of the greatest Parts commonly
lose themselves in it; so I do not find the Apostles press it as material to be
believed in, and understood: their main design seemed to be to prove, that he
was the same Person the Prophets spoke of; and to open the Power and Efficacy
of his Death and Sufferings; but were very sparing in talking of his
preexisting; which yet if it had been necessary to Salvation, it seems to me
they would have opened it as well as other Points. But supposing our Brethren
mistaken in their Conceptions concerning Christ, what he was before his
Incarnation; yet have they the same Respect and Love for his Person as we have,
believe him to be the very Christ of God as much as we, believe his Death to be
available, and look upon him to be as sufficient a Savior as we do; and since
they pitch on the very same Person that we do, I cannot think that they believe
in a false, or another Christ.

Sect. II. Concerning the Offices of Christ, showing also that we are therein
agreed.
HIS Name Jesus signifies a Savior, and Christ is in English, Anointed; so
that this Person we speak of, is the Anointed of God to save Mankind: His
principal Office is to mediate between the most High offended, and the Lump of
Men offending, 1 Timothy 2.5. Now concerning his Mediatorship, our Brethren and we
agree, both believing that he is truly Man, having the Actions and Passions of
Men, as eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. And that he had a reasonable Soul;
that he is to be accounted our Prophet, Priest, and King; that his Death and
Bloodshed is sufficient to ransom the World; that there is no Remission of Sins
without him; that he now fits at the right hand of the most High; that he shall
one day judge the Quick and Dead; that he has now all Authority in Heaven and
Earth; that he is the true Son of God; that he is above the Angels; that his
Flesh is the true Heavenly Bread; that whosoever eats thereof shall live for
ever; that his Blood received by Faith is Drink indeed; that he bare our Sins
in his own Body on the Tree. In these things touching the Person and Offices of
Christ, and in other material Points of like nature, there is an Agreement; and
why there should be such a falling out, I cannot guess, unless through Pride we
will have all Men see as we see, and in such things as seem not to be preached
by the Apostles as necessary.

Sect. III. Treating on, and answering this Question: Whether or no we are
required, in order to our right believing in, and worshipping of the Person of
Jesus of Nazareth, to worship him as the most High God?
BEfore I come directly to answer this Question, I shall first speak of the
Worship and Adoration due to him, as he is the Christ of God, and in that
Capacity (to be sure) subordinate and subject to the Father. Now I think it is
on all hands allowed, that Glory and Honor is to be given to Christ, as he is
the Mediator. And the Reason why all Glory, and such Honor is to be given to
him, is, because all Power in Heaven and in Earth is given to him, Mat. 28.19.
Now I observe that Divine Honor is never to be given to the most High because
of a Power given him; for the most High gives all things, but no Power or
Authority can be given to him; he has it all originally in himself. Now the
Power here spoken of, was a Power given unto him; therefore he had it not as
most High, but as Christ, a confessed Subject, and received it of the Father.

Moreover, it is said, John 5.22, 23. For the Father judges no man, but has
committed all Judgment unto the Son, that all men should honor the Son, even
as they honor the Father. And verse. 26. For as the Father has Life in
himself, so has he given unto the Son to have Life in himself. From hence I
note, that there is an Honor to be given to Christ, as to one invested with
Power by and from another; and that God the Father has given and bestowed on
him Power and Judgment, partly on purpose that Men should pay him this Honor.

And tho Comparisons, as we use to say, will not run on all four; yet for
Illustration sake I will instance the Case of Joseph: Pharaoh was King, yet
says he to Joseph, Genesis 41.40. Thou shall be over my House; and according unto
thy Word shall all my People be ruled: see I have set thee over all the Land of
Egypt; and they cried before him, Bow the Knee. A Badg of Homage and Honor
very probably given to the King when he rode amongst the People.

Here you see, tho Pharaoh were King, yet the Execution of the Power, and the
Honor of the Government is given unto Joseph. So although the Father, or the Most
High, be he that has Authority originally, yet the Honor of it, and the
execution of it in Heaven and in Earth is given unto the Son, and he shall keep
it and execute it until he has subdued all his Enemies, and then shall deliver
it up to God, even the Father: 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Now about this
Honor and Power there is no Controversy that I know of, every one of either
Party granting that Christ has not this Power and Honor, as he is essentially
God most High, because then he could not receive it, nor yet ever deliver it up
again, as in all plainness he is said to do. And this kind of Advancement, and
Power, and Prerogative is intended, Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. where it is said, God
has set him far above all Principalities, and Powers, and Might, and Dominion,
and every Name that is named, not only in this World, but also in that which is
to come; and has put all things under his Feet. The like is mentioned and
intended, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and
given him a Name which is above every Name: That at the Name of Jesus every
Knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the
Earth; and that every Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
Glory of God the Father. The like also is intended Heb. 2.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and in
many other places is this kind of Dignity spoken of. But, as aforesaid, this
matter is not controverted; but the Knot of the Question is, Whether over and
above this Honor, which is to be given unto him as Christ, and a principal
Officer and Representative of the most High; I say, whether over and above this
Honor we are not bound to worship him as the most High himself: that is, not
as one deserving Honor and Obedience because of Dignity and Power given him,
but as one deserving and requiring it, having originally all Power and Dignity
dwelling essentially in him, and he the only supreme Giver of it to others.

To this weighty Question, with all Modesty and Submission to better Judgments
(from whom, if occasion be, I expect Information) I humbly answer, No; that
such Worship is not formally to be paid to the Person of Christ as he is the
Christ of God.

Mistake me not; let none suppose that I hereby deny the Person of Christ to be
essentially God: But I say, allowing that, yet it follows not from thence that
we are to pay our Devotion to Christ as to the most High.

My Reasons for it are as follows: First, Because when the Apostles preached
and discovered him unto the World, they seem to discover and preach no such
Belief and Practice.

And first, for Peter's first Sermon to the Multitude, Act. 2. which caused the
Plantation of the first Christian Church: he preaches Salvation through the
name of Christ, verse. 21. he let them know that Jesus of Nazareth was no
Impostor, but a man approved of God by Miracles, Wonders, and Signs, ver. 22.
he speaks of his Death and Sufferings, ver. 23. his Resurrection, v. 24. his
Exaltation, ver. 33. and v. 36. concludes, Know assuredly that God has made
the same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ.

Here you see Peter omits no material thing: he speaks of his Merits; They that
call on him shall be saved: his Death, Resurrection, Exaltation, receiving
Empire and Honor; God has made him Lord: but not one word of his being
essentially God, and so on that account the Object of Divine Worship; which
yet, had it been so material a Point as is now thought, did deserve as much to
be preached as any of the other. Likewise in his second Sermon Acts 3. he
preaches Christ from Verse. 13. to the end; yet not one word of his being
essentially the most High. The like i^ to be observed in the fourth Chapter.
Man^ places I might run over, but for brevity sake I shall only take notice of
two more: one is where Peter i^ sent to tell Cornelius what he ought to believe
and do, Acts 10. v^rs. 36. he lets Cornelius know that Jesus wa^ Lord, as
before he told the Jews, God had ^ade him both Lord and Christ: He t^^ls him
that God had sent the Message of Peace by him, he tells him he was the Anointed
of God; he tells him he was a Miracle-Worker, which showed that God was with
him: he tells him of his Death and Resurrection: he testifies him to be the
same the Prophets prophesied of to come: he preaches Remission of Sins through
Faith in his Name: he declares him to be ordained Judge of Quick and Dead; but
not one word that he is to be worshipped as essentially God Most High; which
had it been a point of Faith, would surely have been told Cornelius and the
Gentiles. Likewise when Paul informs the ignorant Athenians, Acts 17.31. after
he had described the true God, he describes Christ distinct from God as the
ordained Judge of the World, but speaks not of his Godhead.

My second Reason is, Because as he is Christ he is distinguished from God, and
an Officer under him: and therefore so as he is Christ to be believed in,
saying of himself, his Father is greater than he, and than all, the Scriptures
that direct us in our Faith in Christ, direct us to understand his Office; but
seem to be silent concerning his Essence: Neither does Christ any where require
us to worship him as the most High; but we are to pray, to give thanks, and
perform our Homage to the most High through Jesus Christ, as the new and living
way consecrated for us.

But thirdly, nothing is Christ but what is anointed, (for Christ in plain
English signifies anointed.) Now the Divine Essence was not anointed nor
incarnate; for who should anoint it, unless we will say the Divine Essence
anointed the Divine Essence with the Divine Essence? Some will say that that is
absurd; and verily except we have a mind to fall into the contradictory
ridiculous Opinion of the Quakers, I think we can plead at most for no more
than this, viz. that the second Person of the Trinity was incarnate and
anointed, and not the Divine Essence it self: And if ye will not believe me,
believe Mr. Tho. Monck, in his Cure for the cankering Error, page 98. where he
tells you, we always distinguish betwixt the Essence of the Son and the Person;
saying, the Essence is one with the Father, but not his Person: Therefore we
say his Person was begotten, not his Essence; and we also say his Person took
Flesh of the Virgin Mary, not his Essence; and therefore it was the Person of
the Son that was born of her, not the Father, nor the Spirit; for tho the
Essence of the three be one, yet the Persons be distinct: and page 114. he
reckons up the Absurdities will else follow, viz. that the Father was he that
took Man's Nature upon him, was tempted of the Devil, suffered Hunger and
Thirst, was buffeted and scourged of the Jews, and put to death by wicked
hands; is greater than himself, sent himself into the World: he gave himself a
Seat at his own Right Hand; he is the express Image of himself, etc. and many
other Absurdities he reckons up; these may suffice.

Now I humbly conceive Divine Homage and Adoration is to be given to the
Essence of the most High, and not to a particular manner of its subsisting; to
wit, to a Person, which yet is all which is or was anointed (according to Mr.
Monck's Opinion.)

But then I know it will be said that each Person, and so the second Person,
contains in it all the Essence. Let it be so, I will allow that in the Person
of Christ dwelt all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily, according to Col. 2.9.
But then it must also be allowed that the Essence dwelt there as something
distinct from the Anointed, and not as the Anointed it self: It must also be
allowed that the most High dwelt in Christ incognito, as some great Princes
appear in foreign Courts and Places incognito, that is, tho they are personally
present, yet they decline to receive those Royal and Princely Honors due to
their Character; receiving them only or chiefly in their Palace Royal. So tho
the Almighty dwell in the Person of Christ, yet we are not taught to say, our
Father who art in the Person of Christ, but our Father who art in Heaven; which
Expression he desires we should use while the Person of Christ was on Earth.
And we have before shown that we are to worship the Divine Essence, as
subsisting all and whole in the Person of the Father; neither are we any where
commanded or directed to say, our Son who art in Heaven, or our Spirit who art
in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name; but only our Father.

And since the Divine Essence seems not to desire us to worship him under the
Denomination, or in the Person of the Son, I think it safest for us to worship
him as truly and wholly subsisting in the Person of the Father, and under that
Denomination.

Besides, the Names of Son and Spirit, howsoever with respect of Essence they
are believed to be God; yet I say these Names seem to distinguish them from
God, and do denote them as Officers under God. Therefore it is said the Father
is greater than I, and than all: the Son knows not the Day and Hour of
Judgment, but the Father only.

Likewise the Spirit when he comes, he shall not speak of himself; but what he
hears that shall he speak.

From the whole I conclude, that the Christ of God ought in our Faith
concerning him to be distinguished from God himself; and that whatever may be
said of the Divine Essence dwelling in Christ, yet nothing was Christ but what
was anointed; and that only the Person was anointed, or was incarnate,
according to Mr. Monck's Opinion.

And further, that whatever Divine Essence dwelt in Christ, or was Christ; yet
the proper place to pay Adoration to it, is in the Person of the Father, and
that he that worships the Father, worships all the Divine Essence under the
proper Name and Appellation under which it should be worshipped, to wit that of
the Father.

These things considered, I see no reason why we should so stigmatize our
Brethren, because they worship the most High under the proper Name and Person
that they ought; and do not use improper Names to do it by, as our Son who art
in Heaven, or our Christ who art in Heaven, or our Spirit who art in Heaven;
since those Names or Persons, whatsoever their Essence be, do not require us to
worship the most High in them; but to understand and improve the Knowledge of
their Office; and remember that that Person who was nailed to the Cross, who
cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? was the Mediator betwixt
God and us, the very Christ, the anointed, who did never require his Disciples
to worship him as the most High.

SECT. IV. Treating particularly of his Human Nature.
AS touching the Contention about the human Nature of Christ, strange it is to
me, (and would have been stranger, had I not once dipped my Fingers in the same
folly) that Men so well agreeing in the main substantial Points of the Faith of
Christ, should yet notwithstanding so teaze one another about a Circumstance so
dark as this is: They all believe that his Body was the true Son, and sent of
God, that he was a real Man, that he was a sufficient Sacrifice and Savior:
But all this will not satisfy them, except they know what he was made of; yet
the Scripture leaves it so, that if we make any determination, we must bring
the plain Words to our meaning; for as it is said, he was made of the Seed of
David according to the Flesh, it is also as expressly said, the Word was made
Flesh, John 1.14. And Solomon the wisest of Men, and the greatest Searcher into
Nature's Secrets that ever was, says, Who do know how the Bones do grow in the
Womb of her that is with Child? speaking of an ordinary Conception.

If an ordinary Conception be so dark then, much more this Conception of our
Lord, which was beyond, and contrary to the Course of Nature: Therefore to make
the Ignorance thereof so damning, and the certain Knowledge of it the Test of
Communion, seems to savor of Presumption; and it is something pleasant to see
old grave men discoursing so seriously and learnedly how far any Woman
contributes toward any Child conceived in her; a thing so intricate, that the
most famous Philosophers have been at Daggers Draw about it: and when any man
has thought his Thought about it, he may be right, and he may be wrong,
because we are all left without light to travel in those Paths.

For my part I intend not to follow them in this Discourse or Controversy, the
whole appearing to me, and to many others, to be needless; since tho it must be
granted that somebody is, and must needs be mistaken, and under
Misapprehensions in the case, yet the Mistakes are not so pernicious to lead
the mistaken to question whether this be the true Messiah, promised to Adam,
and all along prophesied of by the Prophets; but they, whoever they be, are
very confident, as well as the other, that this is the true Christ; therefore
pray why all this stir? this Jehu-like driving seems not to savor much of a
true Christian Spirit. But I shall conclude this Section with a Comparison for
illustration of my meaning, which I have heretofore frequently made use of,
sometimes with good success, in Discourses of this kind.

We will imagine two Persons, A and B, Servants to C, do grow refractory, and
run away from C, and deservedly in their rambles are taken by the Enemy, and
made Slaves of in a foreign Land, help themselves they cannot; but C hearing,
and well understanding their Misfortune and Misery, notwithstanding their
former Ingratitude, yet pities them, and sends by a trusty hand a sufficient
Ransom to redeem them, and obtain their Liberty.

The Ransom arrives, and they are accordingly redeemed, and presently embark to
go home to C; as they sail homeward, (they being, as well they may be, much
affected with their Liberty) they are often discoursing concerning their
Ransom, they both agree, and question not that it was none of their Deserts,
but the free Love and Bounty of C was the cause of the Ransom's being sent;
neither do they question in the least whether or no it be come, or being come,
whether it be sufficient; for in all this they are satisfied: But in their
Discourse it happens this Question is dropped; that is Whether the Ransom was
Gold or Silver? A thinks he has sufficient Reasons to believe it was Silver;
and B thinks he has as sound Reasons to believe it was Gold: they terribly
enforce their Arguments on both sides, and possibly neither of them both
certainly know the truth of the matter, or have any infallible or certain Rule
to know, yet they are both very confident; one says, he is sure he is in the
right, and he is sure the other is in the wrong. And so after they have vexed
and teased one another more than enough, the Contention at last arises so high,
that A will stay no longer in the same Ship with B, but will leave him, and
sail in some other Ship; nay stay, says B, do not leave me, since I love you,
and we are agreed in the main things, and do find, thanks be to C, that the
Ransom was sufficient; and why should we part about this Circumstance,
especially since we were both Partners in Slavery and Misery, and were both
made happy and set at liberty by this one Ransom? and since we are both
Strangers in this Country, neither is there any in the Ship speak the same
Language that we do, let us enjoy the Comfort of each others Society, and be
helpful one to another in Advice and Discourse; who knows, being amongst
Strangers and Enemies, how we may need each others help? and consider how
comfortable it will be for us, that have been loving Friends and Companions and
Fellow-Country-men, to talk together in our own Language, while those
Barbarians gabble in an unknown Tongue, and barbarous Language? Therefore pray
do not leave me, but tarry with me. Ay says A, if you will say as I say, and think
as I think, that the Ransom was Silver, I Will tarry with you then, and all shall
be well; but if you will not say so, I am resolved I Will be gone, I Will keep you
company no longer, nor I Will regard nor take no more account of you than of one
of those Strangers and Infidels from whence you come; nay you are full out as
bad as they, or rather the worst of the two; you deserve, if you had your
Desert, to be cursed out of my Company.

Says B, these are hard Words, and so much the harder coming from one I so much
esteem, and for so small an occasion: Howbeit, I am not by any of your
Arguments convinced that you are right; I cannot say as you say, I think still
the Ransom was Gold; nevertheless, tho I think you are mistaken, I can and will
bear with you, pray shake hands, and be Friends, and bear with me; pray don't
leave me, our parting will be very pernicious and uncomfortable, and those
Barbarians in the Ship will take n^tice of it, and check us with it, and every
body will wonder at it; and which is worst, C that sent the Ransom, and did us
so much good, will know of it, and be very much offended with us: therefore
pray be persuaded to tar^y with me. No not I, says A, I am resolved I Will be
gone, and I Will print some Papers, and expose you, and I Will put a Bear's Skin
upon you; and if I can, I Will make all them in the Ship believe that you are a
Bear inde^d, and all the Dogs in the Ship shall bark (...) you, that you shall
have but little Comfort or Peace in your Voyage; and so in the mind I am in,
I Will never come at you more, or bid you God speed, and so adieu.

Away flings A in a great Heat, down sits B, fetching a deep Sigh, and becomes
exceeding melancholy, that he must sail alone. Now every body will be ready to
think that this was a very untoward, scurvy, simple Trick of A, for so slight
an occasion to deal so with B, and leave him, thereby exposing both himself and
B to the odd Censure and Derision of the Bystanders. Yet what do some wise Men
do less than the same thing?

While both Parties in this Controversy were running from God, and taken
captive under Sin and Wrath, and were unable to help themselves, God saw and
pitied their Condition, and freely sends his Son to ransom and redeem them to
the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God; he accordingly offers his Body, and
redeems them from Sin and Wrath; they both without doubting do agree that
contrary to their Deserts God freely sent his Son, and that Jesus of Nazareth
was he, and that he was a sufficient Ransom. But at the same time the Question
is dropped, what was that Body made of? says one Party, all that died on the
Cross to redeem us was originally a Creature of the Earth, of the Dust of the
Ground: No, says some of the other Parties, that which died for our Sins, tho
it were a real and true natural Man, yet originally was not of the Dust of the
Ground, nor a part of the polluted fallen Lump, but of a more noble Extract, to
wit, the Lord from Heaven: And amongst other things, it is said they think so
for this reason; because if the most High could honorably with respect to his
Justice, take any part of the fallen Lump, and sanctify it, and accept of it
without any Mediator or Sacrifice offered for it; nay so accept of it not any
in its own behalf, but also as a Ransom satisfactory for all the rest of that
Lump; then it will follow that there was no absolute necessity for the
satisfaction of Justice that there should be any Mediator at all, since it
appears that a part of that fallen Lump was accepted without any Mediator at
all; but I Will not meddle with the Controversy. In the mean time the other Party
represented by A in our Similitude, say, except you say as we say, and think as
we think, that that which died was of the Earth, we will leave you, and reject
you as Heretics: No says the other Party represented by B, not so, we are your
Brethren, we love you, pray don't part from us, we live in the love of Christ;
we own the same Person to be Christ that you do; we believe him to be as
sufficient a Ransom as you do; we believe him to be the Son of God as well as
you, only we think in this matter you are mistaken; yet we are willing to bear
with you, and embrace you. If you leave us, God will be offended, good men
grieved, young Converts staggered, and the World will laugh at us, and scoff
us. No, says the other Party represented by A, we will leave you, say what you
will, you deserve no Charity nor Indulgence, you ought to be excommunicated, if
you had your due: We will expose you in printed Papers; we will persuade every
body, if we can, that you are Bugbears: we say you are no Christians; you hold
such Heresies as are sufficient to corrupt all the Churches, and to root the
Christian Religion out of the World: You are worse than the Papist, and as bad
as Atheists; nay you do deny the true God, and the Lord that bought you; you
will bring on your selves swift Destruction; and therefore we will purge our
selves of you, and so adieu.

Lamentable it is, and to be bewailed, that they who should strive together for
the Faith of the Gospel, should strive to wound their Brethrens Reputation,
representing them as the worst of Men: surely brotherly Compassion, and
brotherly Communion, with a friendly and charitable Bearing, would be to the
Gospel much more adorning, in our selves much more becoming, and to our
Brethren much more edifying. Let us live in the Love of God, and keep pure the
Doctrines of Christ, leaving those Mysteries till we shall know as we are
known. There is one thing more I had almost slipped: some will say our Brethren
own Christ to be the Son of God; but that signifies little, so long as they do
not tell us how he is the Son of God. To which I answer, That it is unjust to
condemn them for what we our selves are guilty of: for there is none of us all,
while we tell them of Eternal Generation, that dare once open our Mouths to
tell them how it is. And while they say Eternal Generation is against Reason,
we say it is above Reason, and cannot be comprehended by Reason. It Is true we
tell them by the Pen of Mr. Monk, page 72. That the Person begets, and is
begotten, but the Essence neither begets, nor is begotten; and page 98. we
say his Person was begotten, not his Essence. But some will say we have no
Scripture says so; and do what we can, yet some young Converts, ignorant
Persons, and those of mean apprehension, tho they may be honest-hearted Men and
Women, yet in this case are so dull of hearing, that they^l hardly ever
understand it.

But enough of this. I shall now in the next place come to treat of the Holy
Spirit, the third Person of the Holy Trinity.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Holy Spirit.
I Shall do little more in this Chapter, than transcribe what I have wrote on
this Subject almost ten years ago in a private Letter, which yet has been made
considerably public in Kent, London, and elsewhere; and having yet received no
Answer to it, I shall transcribe so much of it as relates to the Controversy
concerning the Holy Spirit, viz. Herein I shall first consider how far we are
agreed in this also: There is none of you do question whether this be he that
moved upon the Waters in the Creation, or whether he be holy; or whether this
be he that descended on our Lord Jesus Christ; or whethat that he declares and
makes known the very Mind and Will of God or no; or whether his Operations may
be properly called the Works of God or no; or whether it be he that our Lord
Jesus Christ said should come or no; or whether his Assistance be helpful to
mortify Sin, and perform Duties toward God with acceptance: nay, not only in
this, but about all his Actions in the Saints, which I shall not stand in
particular to name, both respecting the Manner, Matter, and Magnitude of them,
I do think you both agree. So then still the d^fference lies here, whether he
himself be the Essence of the most Hi^h from Eternity: a thing no where
required to be known that I know of in the whole Book of God.

But admit it ^e so, that the Holy Spirit is in himself the most High God, then
must it follow that he, as the most High, created the Heavens and the Earth,
and so still preserves the Creation: Then it follows that he that worships the
most High God that created the Heavens and the Earth, and still preserves the
same according to that Knowledge attained of him in his Word; he, I say, then
worships this Holy Spirit as much as he that particularly names him, although in
respect of his O^fice, he looks upon him differing from this most High God; and
verily if we will heed the Scriptures, so we must all: for what he is in
respect of his Essence, is not there expressly declared; but as he is manifested
to us under the Notion of the Holy Spirit, he is declared to be different from
the most High God, and therefore so to be believed in, John 16.13. For there it
is said of him, That when he comes, he speaks not of himself, but what he
hears; sure not from himself, but from another that he speaks. From whence it
i^ plain, that in respect of his Office, which is the thing signified by the
denomination of [Holy Spirit] he is distinguished from the most High God, and a
Messenger sent from him; and verily I think it highly necessary that every
Christian should so conceive of him: for it is the Spirit that makes
unutterable Groans and Intercession for us unto the most High God, and not the
most High that makes Intercession to the most High. He then that believes in
and of the Holy Spirit according to those Articles wherein you are agreed, I
think his Faith in him is sufficient and according to the Scriptures.

AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING A Short REPLY to a Book Intitul'd, A Brief Inquiry
whether they who assert, and they who deny the Divinity of our Lord Jesus, may
have Communion together at the Lord's Table, written by Mr. Joseph Tailor.
HAVING finished the precedent Sheets before I saw Mr. Taylor's Book, I could
not therein take notice of it. Mr. Tailor is one who for his Ingenuity I have
long time highly esteemed, tho we were never much personally acquainted. The
reading his Book puts me in mind of what I mentioned in my Epistle to the
Reader concerning those little Buckets of Oil frequently starting forth from
the Press upon us to increase and inflame our Contentions: and I cannot forbear
comparing this to one of those fiery Bombs charged with such Matter, that in
whatsoever Church it falls and fires, that Church is in danger of being rent
and torn in pieces. I think every body ought to set to their hand, according to
their ability, to prevent the fatal Consequences of so mischievous a thing.

At first sight I believed that a Reply thereto would be a very suitable
Appendix to my Book; but I shall be very brief, and not follow him into all
particulars; partly because I would not swell this Piece too much, and partly
because I have heard that it is expected that a more full and distinct Reply
will come from another hand.

First, I observe that Mr. Taylor's main Arguments are originally French, and
first appeared to the World in that Language: however, they are now adorned
with an English Face and Tongue; and tho they were foreign by birth, yet they
are now naturalized by the Act and Deed of an English Hand and Pen. Mr. Tailor
confesses page 14. That he f^llows Monsieur Abbadie in his French Treatise of
the Divinity of our Lord: and I can assure you, that the manner and matter of
Mr. Taylor's chief Arguments stand so fair and orderly, and in some places
almost verbatim in Monsieur Lamoth's Discourse of the Divinity, with the Texts
of Scripture (as they stand in Mr. T's Book) in their order cited and impr^ved,
that at first sight I began to think I had got another Impression of Mr.
Taylor's Book in my hand. However, this Conclus^on I quickly came to, that one
must needs, in great measure at least, be the Father of the other; and because
Lamoth's bears date 1693, I concluded that his was senior. However it be, I
wish Mr. Tailor, e're he undertook this Task, had well considered that we had
already but too many English Incendiaries; and therefore that there was the
less need to call in those French Refugees to help pull down the Peace of our
Churches about our Ears.

But to proceed, the design of Mr. Taylor's Book, as he tells us, is to show
and evince that those who assert, and they who deny that Christ is God, of the
same Essence of his Father, ought not to have Communion together at the Table
of the Lord. This he endeavors to demonstrate from ten Reasons so called.

But first, I must own my Ignorance of Mr. Taylor's meaning by that Expression,
which he often uses [Christ is God of the Essence of his Father] by which I
think he must mean one of these four things.

First, That Christ's Divinity is an Essence flowing from, or begotten of the
most High, the same in kind, tho distinct in number.

Or secondly, That his Divinity is a part of the same Essence that is in the
Father.

Or thirdly, That his Divinity is all and whole of the Divine Essence it self.

Or fourthly, That he intends none of the Divine Essence, or eternal Being,
neither in part nor whole, but only the second Person.

If he means the first, that the Divinity of Christ is of the same kind with
the Essence of the Father, but another distinct intelligent Being, and that
this is also God most High; then this destroys the great Article of one
Substance, wherein so joint an Agreement is: And God will then be no longer
one, but unavoidably two entire, distinct, intelligent Beings; and so we shall
have two Gods, two most Highs, two Almighties, two Alknowing ones: all which is
nonsense beyond the fourth degree, as well as untruth. But sure he does not
intend so.

Therefore, secondly, suppose he intends the same Essence of the Father for
number, that is, a part of it; and so there is a part in the Father, and
another part in the S^n or Christ, which is Christ; but then this is to
ove^throw all our ancient Creeds and Councils so much relied upon in this Case.
Athanasius's Creed will be thwarted, which says, not dividing the Substance.
Dr. Owen, Mr. Wright, Mr. Preston, Mr. Monk, the 39 Articles, which say without
parts, will all come in against him: and, as I showed before, if we divide the
Essence, we must in our thoughts divide the essential Properties. But I do not
think Mr. Tailor will oppose himself to Reason, and so many famous Men and
Creeds ancient and modern, which will appear against him; and deny the absolute
Simplicity and Unity of God into the bargain.

But then, thirdly, if he means the Divinity of Christ is all and whole of the
eternal supreme Being it self; then it follows, that the whole Essence of God
most High was incarnate, was anointed, was sent from Heaven to do another's
Will, became our Mediator; yea that the whole Essence of God had a Father, for
Christ had a Father, not only as he was the Son of Man, but as he was the Son
of God. This contradicts Mr. Monk, and I think most other Writers, who say, the
Person, not the Essence, was incarnate and anointed: and indeed the other seems
a little strange; for who should anoint it? with what should it be anointed?
who should send it? who should it mediate unto? Besides, if all the Divine
Essence be anointed, there is absolutely as much necessity of a Mediator
betwixt us and Christ, as betwixt us and the Father, except it be said that the
Person of the Father only is offended. Now we know the Person of the Father is
not the Essence it self; for then Father must be anointed, and incarnate, and
sent, etc. But he (the Father) is said to be only a certain manner of the
Divine Essence its subsisting: And then we must suppose that the Divine Essence
it self was not so much, or at all offended; but only one of the Modes or
Manners of its subsisting. But this will be thought deep mysteries to Co^ntry
people. My short sight cannot see how to av^id this, except we will say, that
as the whole Divine Essence subsists in the Father, there it is supreme, the
giver of all things, Highest, and can do all things, the anointed, the
offended: But as the same whole Divine Essence subsists in the Son, or Christ,
it is distinct from the Father, it is sent, was anointed, incarnate, a Subject,
a Mediator, a Reconciler, could do nothing of it self. I know not whether Mr.
Tailor will take this Course or no; but if he do, I am sure he will destroy the
Notion that Christ is to be worshipped as most High G^d: for if the d^v^ne
Essence appear only supreme in the Person of the Father, then in him (to wit,
the Father) and under that name it is most proper t^ be worshipped; which i^
m^st a^reeable to S^ripture. And as it is Christ, it is a distinct thing from
God the Father; therefore as it is Christ, and so an O^^icer, we are to act
Faith in what it does, and not in what it is, since its essential Perfections
appear supreme only in the Person of the Father.

But fourthly, suppose Mr. Tayl^r intends none of all these; and tho he over
and over talks of Christ's being of the same E^sence of the Father, yet he
intends nothing less; and that one Jot or Tittle, neither in whole nor part of
the Divine Essence was incarnate, anointed, or was Christ, but only the second
Person of the Trinity distinct from Essence (to wit, the S^n.) And this indeed
is Mr. Monk's Opinion in his Cure for the ^ankering Err^r, page 98. We always
distinguish between the Essence of the Son, and the Pers^n, saying the Essence
is one with the Father, but n^^ his Person; theref^re we say, his Pers n was
begotten, not his Ess^^^e: and we also say, his Person took Fle^h of the Virgin
Mary, not hi^ Essence. This also seems to be the Opinion of many other Authors,
although I have not now opportunity to search and quote them. But if this
indeed should be his Opinion, how ^inely is he caught then? for they that have
received his Book for Orthodox and good proof, are taught to bel^eve that such
Persons as de^y, or do not believe that Christ is essentially God, are to be
marked out for Excommunication and Damnation. Now if Mr. Tailor believes that
the Divine Essence, neither whole nor part, j^t or tittle, was incarnate,
anointed, or was Christ, but only the Person, then he must needs be one of them
appointed f r Des^ruction and Excommunication, and so his fiery Bolt is
returned into his own Bosom.

But suppose this indeed should be his meaning, that only the second Person (as
I think most believe) was in^arnate and an^int^d, then by Pers^n he intends
either an int^lligent Being, Mind, or Spirit distinct from the one Essence, and
the other two Persons; or else he intends only a certain Manner or M^de of
sub^^sting of the one intelligent Being. If he intends the former, he must
b^lieve three or four distinct intelligent Bei^^ ^, Min^^, or Spirit^, in God;
and I think t^^t will be three or four Gods.

B^t I could ^^ford ^lmost to pass my word for Mr. T^ylor, that he does not
intend so: Therefore I rather take him in the latter sense, to wit, a Mode or
Manner of subsisting distinct from Essence. If so, then it will still follow
that Christ is not to be worshipped as essentially God most High; for then he
is not the Essence, but only a Manner or M^de of it. And I have before pr^ved
divine W^rship, as to the most High, is to be given to the Divine Essence it
self, and n t directly and formally to any particular Manner or Mode of it.

I mi^ht speak more to this, but I fear I have said so much already, that some
ignorant People will be ready to think we Trinitarians, at least some of us,
hold strange and nice Notions of Christ: Nay, perhaps they will say that we
hold that Christ, as to his human Nature, or Manhood, is no Person, but a
Nature only; and as to his Person is not Essence or Substance, but only a
certain Manner or Mode of Essence: But enough of this. When all is done, I
cannot tell which is Mr. Taylor's meaning; and therefore I hereby pray him, if
he appears in print again, to e^pl^in himself more distinctly and directly in
this case.

I now come to consider his Reasons. His first Reason why such as believe, and
such as disbelieve Christ to be of the Essence of his Father, ought not to have
Communion together at the Table of the Lord, is, That either they that believe
it, or those that disbelieve it, must needs be Idolaters, and they must esteem
each other either guilty of Blasphemy or Id latry. To which I return these
following Repl^es.

First, I mislike the fashion of this Reason.

1. I do not approve the Expressions of Idolatry and Blas^hemy, being too gross
to be bestown so li^erally on Persons so nearly united in the Faith of the true
God, and the true Christ and ^is Laws, as I have in the foregoing sheets shown
they are. Milder Constructions and Expressions better become the Cause.

2. This manner of arguing seems to me too des^erate. Mr. Tay^^r takes this
Weap^n point^d at both end^, and ventures to set one point at his own Breast,
trusting in the stren^th of the ^kin of his own Cause, and so makes a thrust at
his ^r^thren.

Although Mr. Tailor be a fallible Man, yet he is so con^^dent that his
Conceptions are certainly right in this confessed Mystery and Controversy, that
has puzzled the most learned Men in all Ages (and sadly divides them at this
time) that he ventures to proclaim it to the World, that in case he be
mistaken, he is an Idolater, and leaves himself so upon Record to Posterity. I
have heard of some who would hazard the loss of one of their Eyes, rather than
their Neighbors should enjoy both theirs: Mr. Tailor will run the hazard of
being accounted an Idolater, in case he be in the wrong, rather than his
differing Brethren shall go without the Imputation of Idolaters and Blasphemers.

Secondly, I see no ground for that Clause in his Reason, viz. That they that
disbelieve Christ to be essentially God, are Idolaters. I take Idolatry to be
giving Divine Adoration and Worship to any Object, as if he were the most High
God, when it is not the most High God.

Now these Unitarians that do not believe Christ to be essentially God most
High, do not worship him as such, but as one receiving Power and Authority from
another. But if Mr. Tailor be of the opinion that it is Idolatry, for any
Reason, to give Worship and Honor to any Creature (as he seems to say page
23.) therein I dissent from him: for although to worship any Creature as the most
High when God allows it not (that is, when it does not immediately represent
him) be Idolatry, yet when Creatures shall and do immediately represent God
m^st High, and receive Authority from him, I see not but we may without
Idolatry worship them: for else first we shall in a manner impute Idolatry to
Abraham, Moses, David, John, and others; f r I remember Abraham bo^^d his Head,
Genesis 18. when the three Angels came to him, and ma^^^ intercessi^n t^ ^ne of
them for Sodom, ^i^ing him the Denomination of my Lord: I suppose n^ body
thinks this Angel was essentially God; for then A^raham could not have seen
him. Likewise Moses is commanded to pull off his Shoes in honor to the
a^pearance of God by his Angel in the Bush. Likewise David fell on his Face to
the ground before the Angel, and seems to direct his Prayer unto him, 1 Chronicles.
21.10, 17. Likewise Co^nelius gives the Denomination of Lord to the Angel, Acts
10.4. Likewise John the Divine falls at the Angel's Feet, Rev. 1.17. for tho
the Revelation was Christ's, which God gave him, yet the discovery to John was
made by the Angel, Chap. 1.1.

But again, Mr. Tailor allows himself and others to worship a Creature without
the imputation of Idolatry, namely the human Nature of Jesus Christ, which, in
his own Opinion, is a Creature only; yet it was worshipped when it was on
Earth, and Men begged Mercy of it: It is and ought to be worshipped now, and
shall be worshipped hereafter.

But if Mr. Tailor reply, that this is for this particular reason, viz. because
it is personally joined unto the Di^ine Nature, and therefore is not a Creature
only.

I answer, 1st, That if we may, for any Reason, give worship to a Creature
without being Idolaters; then at least his first Pos^tion is not universally
true, viz. That to worship any Creature is Idolatry.

But 2ly, Suppose what Union you will in an orth^dox Sense, yet the Divine
Nature is no part of the human Nature, nor the human any part of the Divine
Nature, but they are really distinct; therefore the human Nature, and every
part thereof, is a Creature only.

And 3ly, Holy Scripture, if you will believe and heed that, does not any where
say that we are to worship the Man Christ, because it is personallly joined to
the Divine Nature; but the Reason given why we should worship it, i^, because
it has received, and God has given and committed unto it Power, Authority,
and Judgment: The principal Reason for so doing is, that all men should honor
the Son as they honor the Father. Likewise Phil. 2.9, 10. Wherefore God has
highly exalted him, and given him a Name, which is above every Name, that at
the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, both ^f things in Heaven, and things
in Earth.

But thirdly; I further reply to M^. Taylor's first Reason, That although, in case
he be mistaken, he has wilfully thrust himself into the numb^r of Idolaters,
and theref^re deserves but little p^ty; yet out of Charity I will help him a
little, and ende^^our to show him that tho he should be m^^ ^ken, yet he is no
Idolater, nor yet the other (...).

My reason f^r it is this; He dir^ ^s Adoration and Worship to the whole Divine
Eternal Being, that created all things, the true God, allowing also in him all
the essential Attributes. Now he that worships the true God, cannot be an
Idolater.

It is true, if Mr. Tailor be mistaken, he i^ in an Error, because he worships
this Essence in the wrong place, to wit, in the Person of Christ, when it
should be in the Person of the Father only in Heaven: but s^ill it is the same
Essence, he intends that and no other than he who i^ the God of Abraham.

And on the other hand; if the Unitarians be mist^ken, yet they intend to
worship the same Essence all and whole, and no other; they bel^eve it t^ be in
the Person of Christ, ^ut not to be an^inted. They conceive it t^ be an entire
Being subsisting in the Father, yet still the very Essence that we worship, and
no other: Therefore neither can they be Idolaters. I will conclude my Answer to
this first Reason with this Argument.

They that worship all and whole of the Di^ine Essence of the Eternal and
Supreme being, who is the true God, are not therein, nor cannot be Idolaters or
Blasphemers. But both Trinitarians and Unitarians worship all and whole of the
same Divine Essence of the Eternal and Supreme Being, who is the true God:
Ergo, neither Trinitarians nor Unitarians are Idolaters or Blasphemers.

Thus I hope his first Reason is mortally wounded.

His second Reason is, page 5. Because they that deny Christ is essentially God
most High, deny the Person of the Son of God, and thereupon deny the true
Christ, and bring another in his stead.

He endeavors to prove this bold Assertion thus: If the Pers^n of Christ
consist both of a divine and human Nature, which is the whole of his Person,
then they who deny both Natures in Christ, deny the whole of his P^rs n.

I answer, first, I utterly deny, and Mr. Tailor cannot prove, that any of our
Brethren disown both Natures in Christ.

But secondly, as has been shown, Mr. Tailor ought to have showed what he
intended by Divine Nature, whether the Essence of God in kind, in part, or in
whole; or whether none of it, but a Person only.

Thirdly, I have heard some say that the human Nature was no part of the Person
of Christ: And they seem to argue not without Reason; for, say they, if the
second Person in the Tr^nity be God, then it was a perfect and complete Person
before its assuming Flesh: for whatever is, or is in God, is perfect and
complete to a tittle; now that which is perfect and complete, can have nothing
added to it without making it imperfect, as a Yard or Ell that is exact and
perfect in measure can have nothing in the least measure added to its length,
but you make it thereby imperfect. Therefore though it be believed that human
Nature was joined to this Person, yet it was no part of the Person; and Mr.
Taylor's supposition that Chr^st's Person consists of a divi^e and human
Nature, cannot be true.

But, Fourthly, Mr. Tailor does but suppose that Christ's Person consists of
divine Nature or Essence, he does not here offer to prove it: Now tho it should
be true, and granted that others have proved it; and tho it be supposed that he
can prove it, yet till he has proved it, it is but begging the Question: And
therefore I need here say no more to it.

But, Fifthly, Mr. Tailor improves this Reason, p. 6. thus: If they that deny
what is essential to his Godhead may be said to deny God, then they may be said
to deny Christ, who deny what is essential to his Person.

Whatever may be said to this, I will not now quarrel with it; I think I can
give it him, and yet not hurt my Cause. But my eye is upon another Assertion,
p. 7. derived from this: The divine Nature is essential to the Person of Christ.

To this I answer, First, (as to the former) Till this Assertion be proved, the
Question is but begged.

Secondly, I do not see the Consequences of this Argument. I confess they who
deny that Christ received Power from God, deny his Authority; they that deny
him to be anointed of God, deny him to be the Christ of God; they who deny him
to be Christ who was born of Mary, deny the true Person of Christ: but how they
who deny him to be the Essence of God, deny his Person, I verily do not see;
unless Mr. Tailor had first said and proved, that Christ could not be a Person
except he were essentially God, or which is all one, that to be of the Essence
of God, is an essential Property of a Person. But I do not think that this can
be thought or proved to be the necessary Part of a Person; for then no Man can
be a Person except he be of the divine Essence. I conceive, if any Man should
deny that Christ had a Mind, a Soul, a Life, etc. he would indeed deny the
Person of Christ, because he denis him to have or to be that without which it
is impossible to be a Person. But to deny Christ to be a Person, except he be
essentially God, is strange Logic to me, and I doubt not to most considering
Men. Now the Unitarians, at least those whom I mainly vindicate, do believe
that Christ had all that needed to make him a complete Person, as Life, Soul,
Mind, etc. They also believe that this Person was anointed of God, which is
sufficient to make him a complete Christ; and they are right in all, and deny
none of his Offices. I Will conclude my Answer to this Reason with this Argument:
They that believe that Jesus of Nazareth had all that was sufficient to render
him a complete Person, and a complete Christ, cannot truly be said to deny the
true Person of the true Christ. But the Unitarians believe that Jesus of
Nazareth had all that was sufficient to make him a complete Person and a
complete Christ. Therefore the Unitarians cannot truly be said to deny the true
Person of the true Christ. Thus this Reason lies a bleeding.

But his third Reason is, p. 10. Because that a Man cannot be said to be a true
Believer in Jesus Christ, that denis Christ to be of the Essence of his Father.
And his ground for this Reason is this, Because there can be no Act of Faith
without the true Object of Faith. This latter Assertion I can grant him.

Now the true Object of Faith in this case is Jesus of Nazareth; but, quite
contrary to Mr. Tailor, I argue: If the Unitarians have the true Object of
Faith, then they are in that Particular true Believers in Christ; but they have
the true Object of Faith, Ergo they are true Believers in Christ.

I prove the minor thus: If Jesus of Nazareth be the true Object, and they
believe in him, then they have the true Object of Faith: But Jesus of Nazareth
is the true Object of Faith, and they believe in him; therefore they (the
Unitarians) have the true Object of Faith.

But if Mr. Tailor intends by having the Object of Faith, that none can have a
true Object of Faith, except they understand and know the true Nature and
Matter thereof, and whereof it consists; then I confess I am wholly of
another Mind from him: for at that rate we can have no Object of Faith, because
we are utterly ignorant of the original Nature of any Thing or Substance. Must
not Israel believe that the Manna was sufficient Food, because they knew not
the Original, or the Nature of it? Must not I believe that there is a Sun,
because I am ignorant from what that glorious Orb was produced? Neither do we
know its Nature; nay, we know not the Nature of any Being, tho such as we daily
converse with. It Is much controverted by some of the greatest Searchers into
Nature's Secrets, whether the Fire be Light or Heat, or whether it be either or
neither of them both. Must not I believe I have a Soul, tho ignorant of its
Substance? Neither do I certainly know its Original, whether produced by
natural Generation or Infusion. Must not I believe there is a Wind, tho I know
not its Substance or Matter? To conclude, In the same hour I was writing this,
I cast my eye on Dr. Sherlock's Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity; and
in page 7. I found these words; It is so far from being a wonder to meet with
any thing we do not perfectly understand, that I know nothing in the world
which we do perfectly understand: it is agreed by all Men, who ever considered
this Matter, that the Essence of things cannot be known, but only their
Properties and Qualities. Thus far Dr. Sherlock.

Mr. Taylor's fourth Reason is in page 11. Because they that deny Christ to be
the Essence of God, deny the Lord that bought them.

This Reason standing on the same bottom with the former, the same Answer may
suffice.

His sixth Reason (for he has no fifth that I can find) is: This Principle of
Christ's being the Essence of God, is the Rock upon which Christ has built his
Church. For proof of which he cites Mat. 16.15. where Peter confesses, Thou
art Christ the Son of the living God: And our Lord says, Upon this Rock will I
build my Church. But the necessary Consequence of Mr. Taylor's Reason or Proof
is so far off, that my dull Genius will not reach it: I will put it into the
form of an Argument.

To be a Son of God, is to be the Essence of God: But Christ owns that he is
the Son of God; Ergo, He owns he is the Essence of God.

But then perhaps some unhappy Brain or other will say, At that rate of
Reasoning one may prove Adam, Angels and Saints to be all the very Essence of
God; for they are all called Sons of God. I speak not this as supposing that
Christ is the Son of God in no other Sense than Adam, Angels, and Saints are;
but to show how short Mr. Taylor's Arguing comes of what he intends it for.

But Mr. Tailor says, page 13. Except by the word Son of God, we understand
one and the same thing, it is impossible we should have one and the same Faith.

If this be true, setting the Unitarians aside, there are not many of us
Trinitarians have one and the same Faith: for some by Son of God intend a
distinct intelligent Being and Mind from Father and Spirit, as Dr. Sherlock.
Some say, it is only a Mode of the divine Essence, but not the divine Essence
it self, as Mr. Monk. Some in effect say, it is called a Person, but indeed in
a proper Sense is not; and that therefore it is a Somewhat, as Dr. Wallis. Some
say, it is a Quality and Property of the divine Essence. Some say, it is the
Essence it self. The Schoolmen say, it is God knowing himself by a reflex Act.
Thus you see we are all to pieces amongst our selves; and when we are united,
and understand by the Son of God one and the same thing, it is like the
Unitarians will fall in with us.

But alas, alas! now am I come to the killing Reason of all Reasons, to wit the
seventh, page 13. if I can but dispatch it, I shall think my Work near done; it
is this:

The Doctrine of Christ his being the Essence of God, is a Principle of that
Consequence, that the Christian Religion stands or falls with it.

To demonstrate this, Mr. Tailor lays down these two fearful and monstrous
Positions, namely: That if Jesus Christ be not true God, of the same Essence
with his Father; it follows, first, that the Mohammedan Religion is preferable
to the Christian, and Mahomet was a greater Prophet than Christ.

Secondly, That Christ was an Impostor and Deceiver; the Jews did justly in
sentencing him to Death for Blasphemy: That the Christian Religion is Idolatry
and Superstition, and the Messiah is not yet come.

This roaring Reason makes a terrible Noise in Country Churches. If this be
true, 'twere enough to make a Man afraid to come near a Unitarian as long as
one lives. Unitarians did I say? nay, Mercy, Mercy; for as to several of our
leading Trinitarians, what will become of them? for Mr. Monk plainly denies
that Christ is the Essence of God, but only a Person or Mode. Dr. Wallis is of
the same Mind; and I am almost afraid Mr. Tailor is leaning that way; and if he
should, what a lamentable thing would that be!

But now by way of Reply: First, observe that this Expression, Christ of the
Essence of his Father, is not directly in express terms taught us by our Lord,
or the holy Scripture. Secondly, That our Proofs are only Consequences, a long
time ago, and still much controverted by very learned Men; and yet Mr. Tailor
adventures to be so confident as to say in effect, that supposing his Opinion
be not true, that is, if he be mistaken, then Christ must needs be beneath
Mahomet, nay an Impostor, and the Jews did well to put him to Death for
Blasphemy.

These are very high Words, and look too bold and presumptuous. I confess if
the Pope and Church of Rome had said so, it had been no very surprising thing;
because they believing themselves infallible, might therefore look upon their
Interpretation of Scripture, even in the most nice and dubious Points, to be
certainly and infallibly true; for infallible Persons cannot err.

But for Mr. Tailor, who (I doubt not) thinks himself a fallible Man; for him,
I say, to hug and magnify his own Opinion in so intricate and curious a
Question, wherein (as has been hinted) the most learned Trinitarians are
greatly divided in their Apprehensions, and to value it at such a rate as to
think and proclaim that either his Notion must be true, or Christ must be
false, this is very amazing. And I cannot forbear thinking that Mr. Tailor had
Monsieur Lamoth's Book by him, when he penned this Reason. Lamoth in his
Discourse of the Trinity, p. 15. has these Expressions; That in case the
Doctrine of the Trinity, as now held, be not true, then the Apostle Paul had
not common Sense, nor any tolerable degree of Understanding, nay was a Madman;
and the rest of the Apostles were Blasphemers. And page 33. I make no
difficulty (says he) to say, they have deceived us most shamefully, and their
Writings are no better than continual Blasphemy if Christ be not God.

But, Secondly, I shall endeavor to demonstrate, that in case Mr. Tailor
should be mistaken, and Christ be supposed not to be of the Essence of God, yet
it does not thence follow (notwithstanding all Mr. Tailor says) that he was
worse than Mahomet, or that the Christian Religion is worse than Mahometism: To
which purpose I will consider what he says.

His chief, if not only Reason for this, is in page 15. Because the Christian
Religion brings in Idolatry, but Mahomet abolishes it.

I answer, I shall not concern my self with Mahometism, nor magnify it for
expelling Idolatry: But for the Christian Religion, that it brings in Idolatry
in the case supposed, I deny; for if the Christian Religion necessarily brings
in Idolatry, it must be either in the Unitarians or the Trinitarians: But it
does not necessarily bring in Idolatry in the Unitarians, nor yet in the
Trinitarians; therefore the Christian Religion does not necessarily bring in
Idolatry.

To make short; for proof of the minor, I refer you to the close of my Answer
to his first Reason.

I come now to his second monstrous Assertion, namely, If Christ be not the
Essence of God, then he is an Impostor.

Now the consequence of this I deny, and on the contrary affirm, that tho
Christ were not of the Essence of the most High, yet he is no Impostor; which I
prove by this Argument.

If Christ did never affirm himself to be the Essence of God, nor compel any
Body so to believe; then tho he should not be so, yet in this he is no
Impostor. But Christ did never affirm himself to be the Essence of God, nor
compel or command any Body so to believe: Ergo, Although he should not be so, yet
in this case he was no Impostor.

The minor I thus prove:

If Christ did ever affirm himself to be the Essence of God most High, or
command any Body so to believe; then Mr. Tailor, or some body else, can show us
where or when he did so. But Mr. Tailor nor no body else can show us where or
when he did so: Ergo, Christ did never affirm himself to be the Essence of God.

In Argumentation that which appears not is not: when an Instance is given that
Christ did so, then my Argument must fall to the ground.

And it is remarkable that when the Jews charged him, that he being a Man made
himself God, John 10.33. after he had told them that Men in their Law had been
called Gods, says he, ver. 36. Say ye of him that the Father has sanctified,
and sent into the World, Thou blasphemest, because I said I am the Son of God?
From whence I observe, that whatever the Essence of Christ is, yet he as Christ
did not oblige any Body to believe that he was of the Essence of God; for he
does not here plead or answer: Say ye of him who is the Essence of God? but him
whom the Father has sent. So that the Essence of God is not only not
expressed, but utterly hidden and excluded in this Answer, for that Essence can
be sent by none.

In the next place; As Christ has not any where that I know of required us to
believe him to be the Essence of God, so neither does Mr. Tailor prove him to
be so.

To prevent Mistakes, take notice, as I never did, so I do not now deny that
Christ is essentially God: it is a great and deep Controversy. But I say,
whatever others have done, or Mr. Tailor can do, he in this Book, I humbly
conceive, has not done it; and till he has done, he begs the Question. I will
scan his Proofs, tho it had been better for another, than I who am a
Trinitarian, to have done it. Another Inconveniency also attends me, viz. I
have not room enough, but am constrained only to touch at things: However, in
short I will hint at the most remarkable things I observe, and not stand to
speak to all Particulars.

His first Essay is page 24. Because the Names of God are applied to Christ.
First, I answer, That those who read impartially those Texts he cites, may find
that several of them speak particularly of God the Father. Secondly, It does
not necessarily follow, because the Name of God is sometimes given to Christ,
that therefore he is essentially God most High; for the Name of God has been
given to Men, to Moses, to Solomon, and diverse chief Magistrates.

Secondly, he says page 25. That the incommunicable Names of God are given him,
namely, Jehovah, and I Am. I answer, both these Names have also been applied to
Angels, Zech. 3.1, 2. Exodus 3.4, 14.

Next, Mr. Tailor comes to distinguishing Characters, p. 26, 27. First
Omnisciency: his Disciples say, Thou know all things. I answer, I remember
the Woman of Tekoah told David, that he was as an Angel of God, to know all
things that were done in the Earth; and yet David was not God. Also the Angel
that appeared to Abraham could tell Sarah that she laughed, tho she laughed but
in her mind. Likewise the Prophet could tell Jeroboam's Wife who she was, and
why she came, e're he saw her. And on the other side, Christ expressly says,
that the Father shows him all things; and that Revelation which John had of
Christ, Christ had and received first of his Father, Rev. 1.1. And yet he says
that he knew not the day of Judgment.

Next Mr. Tailor urges his Omnipresence; Christ would be with his Disciples to
the end of the World. But does not Paul tell the Colossians, Col. 2.5. That tho
he was absent in the Flesh, yet he was present in the Spirit, joying and
beholding their Order? yet Paul was not God.

Next Mr. Tailor urges his Omnipotency; he had all Power. But does not Christ
say, that all Power was given him? which could not be as he was God; for God
most High can have no Power given him. And, Secondly, the Son says expressly,
John 5.30. I can of my self do nothing.

Next Mr. Tailor urges his Immortality. But it is said of a Man (viz.
Melchisedec) that he was without beginning of Days or end of Life, and abides
for ever. Moreover, the Text Mr. Tailor cites may mean God the Father. A larger
Answer may be given hereafter, if God permit; at present let this suffice to
these Instances.

And whereas Mr. Tailor urges, page 29. The Works that Christ did. I confess
this had been a good Argument, had not Christ done it in his Father's Name and
Power, and affirmed, that of himself he could do nothing; and when he raises
Lazarus, he prays to his Father to show whence the power came.

Next Mr. Tailor urges that Christ was one with the Father. But does not Christ
pray, John 17.22. That his Disciples may be one, as he and his Father are one?
which Oneness of Christ's Disciples cannot be supposed to be meant of Essence;
for Christ's true Disciples are no more one in Essence after Conversion than
they were before.

As to what Mr. Tailor says from page 33, to 38. concerning worshipping
Christ; for answer, the Reader may observe what I have said concerning
worshipping Christ in the first part of this Book, where I think I have shown
that the whole Divine Essence is to be worshipped as subsisting in the Person
of the Father, and that Divine Worship (I mean the highest Adoration) is not to
be given to the Persons of the Trinity distinct from one another; for that
cannot be done without making three or four distinct Objects of our highest
Adoration, which ought not to be. I have also shown that the Worship due to
Christ is as he is Mediator, and the immediate Representative of God to us; and
that we are to worship him as one that has received Power from another, John
5.23. And this Worship is to be given to him as he is a Man; for it was the
Manhood that was exalted; That at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow. And
it is very remarkable that the Worship we are to pay to Christ is in honor of
another, to wit the Father, Phil. 2.10, 11. every Knee is to bow to him, and
every Tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father.
Every Tongue speaking to the Judge confesses that he is Lord, to the honor of
the King his Master. From the forecited place I argue:

He that receives Worship and Honor, in honor, and to the glory of another,
is not himself worshipped as the supreme Being and highest Power. But Jesus
Christ receives Worship and Honor, in honor, and to the glory of another;
therefore he himself is not worshipped as the supreme Being and highest Power.

Lastly, Mr. Tailor urges, page 39. That those Scriptures of the Old Testament
that are applicable to none but the most High God, are ascribed to him, viz. to
Christ. That is (as I take his meaning) some Scriptures that speak of God in
the Old Testament are applied unto Christ in the New; and so he gives diverse
Instances. I did design to have given a particular Reply to each of his
Instances; but because I have exceeded my Bounds already, I shall content my
self at present with some Replies in general.

First, I observe he cites some Texts in the New Testament, and applies them to
Christ, which speak only of God the Father.

Secondly, The Scripture is not altogether without Instances, that sometimes
that which in a strict and most proper sense belongs only to God most High, yet
has in some sense been applied to Creatures, and to that which was not his
Essence. It is proper only to the Essence of God to cause man to die with the
sight of it. No man, says God, can see my Face and live: Yet when Jacob
wrestled with the Angel, Genesis 32.30. he seems to attribute this Property to the
Angel, looking on it a great wonder that his Life was preserved; says he, I
have seen God face to face, and my Life is preserved. He whom Jacob here calls
God, is called an Angel. In Hosea 12.4. he is called the Lord God of Hosts, the
Lord is his Memorial. And the Angel that appears in the Bush to Moses, takes to
himself the incommunicable Names and Work of the most High.

And if the applying some Scriptures in the Old Testament, speaking of God, to
Christ in the New Testament, be an Argument to prove him to be God; at that
rate of reasoning I can prove Christ to be David, and to be all Israel, and
John the Baptist to be Elias; because David, speaking of himself in the 22d
Psalm, says, ver. 18. They parted my Garments amongst them, and cast Lots upon
my Vesture: And likewise of himself, Psalm. 69. says, They gave me also Gall for
my Meat, and in my thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink. Now these Texts in the
New Testament, Mat. 27.34, 35. are expressly applied to Christ: Is Christ
therefore David? Likewise it is said, Hosea 11.1. When Israel was a Child, then
I loved him, and called my Son out of Egypt: and this is applied to Christ,
Mat. 2.15. Is Christ therefore all Israel? And because the Lord says, Mal. 4.5.
Behold, I will send you Elijah the Prophet; which is expressly applied to John
the Baptist, Mat. 11.14. and Luke 1.17. will it therefore infallibly prove John
to be Elias? Many would look upon this to be strange and absurd arguing.

As to Mr. Taylor's last three Reasons, because I haste to have done; and
because I think when what I have wrote is considered, they will do neither good
nor hurt to our Cause; I will therefore wholly omit them.

In what I have said as a Reply to Mr. Taylor's Endeavors to prove that Christ
is of the Essence of God, I would not be understood as denying the thing,
neither did I ever deny it: but my Design is to show him and others, that if he
intends to prove this point, ^e must raise his Arguments to a higher pitch, or
add new ones, because these are too obscure and weak to do it.

Tho in the main I profess my self orthodox, yet if in any place I have dropped
any such Expressions as may be judged novel, I hope the candid Reader will
consider that the Controversy is deep, and variously understood and explained
by the most learned of our Party, as has been hinted, namely, Dr. Sherlock,
Dr. Wallis, Dr. S -- th, Mr. Monck, and others; who do all of them, in some
considerable point or other, differ from each other about these things: It Is
therefore no wonder if in some point or other I should not agree with all of
them.

And if at unawares I shall or have advanced any Expression contrary to sound
Doctrine, upon information and conviction I shall be ready to sign a
Recantation. And if after this Apology, any body shall in any kind maliciously
persecute me, I think I shall suffer with more honor than my Prosecutor can
prosecute me.

The Author hereof having much to do, and laboring under several Infirmities,
and troubles of Mind, desires the Prayers of such as may receive any advantage
by his Labors.

FINIS.

