THE Life and Death of Mr. JOSEPH ALLEINE, Late Teacher of the Church at
Taunton, in Sommersetshire, Assistant to Mr. Newton.

Whereunto are Annexed Diverse Christian LETTERS Of His, Full of Spiritual
Instructions tending to the Promoting of the power of Godliness, both in
Persons, and Families.

AND HIS FUNERAL SERMON Preached by Mr. Newton.

LOFDON, Printed for Nevil Simmon, at the Princes-Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1672.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. THE Introduction, by Mr. Richard Baxter, p. (...) CHAP. II. A brief
Relation of his early setting forth in the Christian Race from his Childhood;
and some Memorials of his first beginnings, and earnest pursuit of Learning in
the University. Written by an eyewitness thereof, p. 18 CHAP. III. A brief
Character of him, by Mr. Richard Alleine, showing how eminently he was
qualified for the Ministerial service and warfare whereunto he was called, p.
18 CHAP. IV. An account of his godly Life and Practice, and of the course of
his Ministry in Taunton; given by Mr. George Newton, the Reverend Pastor there,
whose Assistant he was, p. 33 CHAP. V. A further Account of his Ministry, by
way of Supplement to the former: By one of his Fellow Laborers, who was his
intimate Friend, p. 39 CHAP. VI. A full Narrative of his Life from his
silencing to his Death; by his Widow, Mr. Theodosia Alleine, in her own words:
Wherein is notably set forth with what patience he ran the Race that was set
before him, and fulfilled the Ministry that he had received in the Lord, p. 52
CHAP. VII. Some Notes by another, whose House he lodged in, p. 97 CHAP. VIII.
An entire and exact Delineation of this Holy Person. Written by one of his
familiar Acquaintance: Presented as the Portraicture of a complete
Gospel-Minister, p. 102 CHAP. IX. A few Additions to this Character, by his
intimate Friend Mr. Richard Fairclough, p. 123
LET the Reader know, (to assure him that Faction and Partiality are not the
Authors of this History) that the two full Narratives that are not subscribed,
are written by two Conformable Ministers of very great sincerity and abilities,
who were long and intimately acquainted with Mr. Joseph Alleine.

REader, thou art desired to take notice, That that part of the Life which is
drawn up by Mrs. Theodosia Alleine, was sent up by her to a worthy Divine, by
him to be published in his own Style, she not imagining it should be put forth
in her own words. But that worthy Person, and diverse others, upon (...), saw no
reason to alter it, but caused it to be printed as it is.

These Books following are Published by Mr. Richard Baxter; and Printed for
Nevil Simmons, at the Princes-Arms in Saint Paul's Churchyard.
1. HIS Aphorisms of Justification. 2. The Saints Everlasting Rest, in quarto.
3. Plain Scripture Proof of Infant Church Membership and Baptism, in quarto. 4.
The right Method for a settled Peace of Conscience, and Spiritual Comforts, in
32 Directions, in octavo. 5. Christian Concord: or, the Agreement of the
Associated Pastors and Churches of Worcestershire, in quarto. 6. True
Christianity; or, Christ's Absolute Dominion, etc. In two Assize Sermons
preached at Worcester; in twelves. 7. A Sermon of Judgment preached at Paul's,
London, Dec. 17. 1664. and now enlarged, in twelves. 8. Making light of Christ
and Salvation, too often the issue of Gospel-Invitations; manifested in a Sermon
preached at Laurence-Jury in London, in octavo. 9. The Agreement of diverse
Ministers of Christ in the County of Woroester, for Catechizing, or Personal
Instructing all in their several (...) that will consent thereunto; Containing,
1. The Articles of our Agreement. 2. An (...) to the People to submit to this
necessary work. 3. The Profession of Faith and Catechism, in octavo. 10.
Guildas Salvianus, The Reformed Pastor, showing the Nature of the Pastoral
Work, especially in private Instruction and Catechizing, in octavo. 11. Certain
Disputations of Right to Sacraments, and the true Nature of visible
Christianity, in quarto. 12. Of Justification: Four Disputations clearing and
amicably defending the Truth, against the unnecessary oppositions of diverse
Learned and Reverend Brethreu, in quarto. 13. A Treatise of Conversion,
Preached and now published for the use of those that are strangers to a true
Conversion, etc. in quarto. 14. One Sheet for the Ministry, against the
Malignants of all sorts. 15. A Winding Sheet for Popery. 16. One Sheet against
the Quakers. 17. A second Sheet for the Ministry, etc. 18. Directions to
Justices of the Peace, especially in Corporations, to the discharge of their
Duty to God, etc. 19. The Crucifying of the World by the Cross of Christ, etc.
in quarto. 20. A Call to the Unconverted to Turn and Live, and accept of Mercy,
while Mercy may be had, as ever they would find Mercy in the day of their
extremity, from the Living God: To be read in Families where any are
unconverted, in twelves. 21. Of Saving Faith: That it is not only gradually,
but specifically distinct from all Common Faith. The Agreement of Richard
Baxter with that very Learned consenting Adversary, that has maintained his
Affertion by a pretended Confutation in the end of Sergeant Shepherds Book of
Sincerity and Hypocrisy, in quarto. 22. Directions and Persuasions to a sound
Conversion, etc. in octavo. 23. The Grotian Religion discovered, at the
invitation of Mr. Thomas Pierce in his Vindication; with a Preface, Vindicating
the Synod of Dort from the calumnies of the new Tilenus; and David, Peter, etc.
and the Puritans, and Sequestrations, etc. from the censures of Mr. Pierce, in
octavo. 24. Confirmation and Restoration, the necessary means of Reformation
and Reconciliation, in octavo. 25. Five Disputations of Church Government, in
quarto. 26. A Key for Catholics, to open the juggling of the Jesuits, and
satisfy all that are but truly willing to understand, whether the cause of
Roman or Reformed Churches be of God; and to leave the Reader utterly
inexcusable that after this will be a Papist, in quarto. 27. A Treatise of
Self-denial, in quarto. 28. His Apology against the Exceptions of Mr. Blake,
Kendal, Crandon, Eires, L. Moulin, in quarto. 29. The unreasonableness of
Infidelity, in four parts, etc. in octavo. 30. The Worcestershire Petition to
the Parliament, for the Ministry of England, defended, etc. in quarto. 31. His
Holy Commonwealth, or Political (...), opening the true Principles of
Government, etc. in octavo. 32. His Confession of Faith, etc. in quarto. 33.
His Humble Advice; or the Heads of those Things which were offered to many
honorable Members of Parliament, etc. in quarto. 34. The Quakers Catechism; or
the Quakers questioned, in quarto. 35. An Account of his present Thoughts
concerning the Controversies about the perseverance of the Saints, in quarto.
36. His Letter to Mr. Drury for Pacification, in quarto. 37. The safe Religion;
or three Disputations for the Reformed Catholic Religion, against Popery, etc.
in octavo. 38. Catholic Unity; or the only way to bring us all to be of one
Religion, etc. in twelves. 39. The true Catholic, and Catholic Church
described, in twelves, etc. 40. The successive visibility of the Church, of
which Protestants are the foundest Members, etc. in octavo. 41. A Sermon of
Repentance. 42. Of Right Rejoicing. 43. A Sermon of Faith before the King. 44.
A Treatise of Death. 45. The Vain Religion of the Formal Hypocrite, etc. in
several Sermons preached at the Abbey in Westminster, in twelves. 46. Two
Sheets for poor Families, etc. 47. Short Instructions for the Sick, a sheet.
48. A Saint, or a Bruit, etc. in quarto. 49. The mischief of Self-Ignorance,
and benefit of Selfacquaintance, in octavo. 50. Universal Concord, etc. in
octavo. 51. The last Work of a Believer, etc. in twelves. 52. The Divine Life,
in three Treatises: The first, Of the Knowledge of God: The second, Of Walking
with God: The third, Of Conversing with God in Solitude, in quarto. 53. The
Reasons of the Christian Religion, etc. 54. Directions for weak distempered
Christians, to grow up into a confirmed state of Grace, etc. 2. The Characters
of a sound confirmed Christian, written to imprint on Man's Mind the true Idea
or Conception of Godliness and Christianity, in octavo. 55. Now or Never, in
twelves. 56. The Life of Faith, in three parts, in quaerto. 57. The Cure of
Church-Divisions: or Directions for week Christians to keep them from being
Dividers, and Troublers of the Church, in octavo. 58. A defense of the
Principles of Love, which are necessary to the Unity and Concord of Christians;
and are delivered in a Book, called the Cure of Church Divisions, in octavo.
59. A second Admonition to Mr. Edward Bagshaw, written to call him to
Repentance for many false Doctrines, Crimes and especially fourscore palpable
Untruths in matter of Fact, deliberately published by him in two small Libels,
in which he exemplifieth the Love-killing and depraving Principles of
Church-Dividers: And tells the World to what Men are hastening, when they
sinfully avoid Communion with true Churches and Christians, for tolerable
faults, in octavo. 60. The Difference between the Power of Magistrates and
Church Pastors, and the Roman Kingdom and Magistracy, under the Name of Church
and Church Government, usurped by the Pope, as liberally given him by Popish
Princes, in quarto. 61. The Church Told of Mr. Edward Bagshaws Scandals, and
warned of the dangerous snares of Satan, now laid for them, in his Love-killing
Principles, in quarto. 62. The Duty of Heavenly Meditation, in quarto. 63. How
far Holiness is the Design of Christianity, in 4to. 64. God's goodness
Vindicated, with respect to the Doctrine of Reprobation and Damnation, in
twelves. 65. The Divine Appointment of the Lord's Day, in octavo. 66. More
Reasons for the Christian Religion, and no Reason against it, in twelves.
There is now extant another Treatise of Mr. Jos. Allens, Entitled, An Alarm
to Unconverted Sinners; with many Practical Cases of Conscience, in octavo.

There is now in the Press, and will in a few Months be Published, A CHRISTIAN
DIRECTORY, Or sum of Practical Divinity.

With the Pertinent Cases of Conscience.

BEING

A Promptuary and Help for
1. Young Preachers. 2. Masters of Families. 3. Private Christians, in their
daily Practice.
And some performance of the request of many Foreign Divines long since made to
A. Bp. Usher, and published by Mr. Dury.

By Richard Baxter.

In Folio.

Books Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings-Arms in the Poultry.
Folio.
PRins New History of the Kings of England. Stapletons Translation of Juvenal.

Quarto.
Mount Pisgah, or a Prospect of Heaven; Being an Exposition on the Fourth
Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians, by Tho. Case.

The Real Christian; or a Treatise of Effectual Calling; wherein the Work of
God, in drawing the Soul to Christ, being opened according to the Holy
Scriptures, some things required by our late Divines, as necessary for a right
preparation for Christ, and a true closing with Christ, which has caused, and
does still cause, great trouble to some serious Christians, are with due
respects to those Worthy Men brought to the Balance of the Sanctuary, there
weighed, and accordingly judged, by Giles Fermin.

The Christian Man's Calling; or a Treatise of making Religion ones Business,
wherein the Christian is directed how he may perform it in his Religious
Duties, in Natural Actions, in his Particular Vocation, in his Family
Directions, and in his own Recreations. By George Swinnock, late Preacher at
Great Kingbal in the County of Bucks.

An Exposition of the Song of Solomon, by James Durham, late Minister at
Glasgow; with a Preface prefixed by Doctor Owen.

Mr. Caryls Exposition of the Book of Job.

The Sinners Sanctuary; or a Discovery made of those Glorious Privileges
offered unto the Penitent and Faithful under the Gospel; being forty Sermons on
the Eighth Chapter of the Romans, by Hugh Binning.

The Quakers Spiritual Court Proclaimed.

Doctor Robert Wilds Letter to a Friend in London, upon the receipt of his
Majesty's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience; together with his Poetica
Licentia, or a Friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist.

Octavoes and Twelves.
Heaven on Earth; or the best Friend in the worst of Times: To which may be
added, A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Thomas Mosely, an Apothecary; with a
full account of his Conversion, drawn up by his own hand before his death; and
published by James Janeway, Minister of the Gospel.

A Token for Children; Being an Exact Account of the Holy and Exemplary Lives,
and Joyful Deaths, of several Young Children, in two Parts, by James Janeway.

Memorials of God's Judgments, Spiritual and Temporal; being Sermons preached
in London, during the late Visitation, by Nicholas Lockier.

Lazarus Redivivus; or a Discovery of the Trials and Triumphs that accompany
the Work of God, in and about his People; laid open in several Sermons, by N.
Blakie.

Fenners four Sermons against Popery.

Bishop Ushers Life and Death.

A Plat for (...); or the Seamans Preacher; delivered in several Sermons on
Jonah's Voyage to Niniveh, by John Rither, Preacher of God's Word at Wapping.

THE Life and Death Of that Excellent Minister of Christ, Mr. JOSEPH ALLEIN,
Late Teacher of the Church at Taunton in Somersetshire; Assistant to worthy
Mr. Newton.
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
AS History is both Useful and Delightful to Mankind; so Church History above
all, has the pre-eminence in both: for it Treats of the greatest and most
necessary Subjects: It is most eminently Divine, as Recording those Works of
God, in which he most Graciously condescendeth unto Man, and those Actions of
Men, in which they have most nearly to do with God; and Treating of those Holy
Societies, Events, and Businesses, in which God's Holiness is most conspicuous,
and his Honor most concerned in the World. The Narratives of the great
Victories and large Dominions of Alexander, Caesar, Tamberlain, or such others,
are but the Portraiture of Phantasms, and the Relation of the Dreams of Vagrant
Imaginations, or of the Lifeless motions in a Poppit-Play, where there is much
stir to little purpose, till the Play be ended; further than the Matters of
God, and of the Church, and Men's everlasting concernments, are comprehended in
them. The report of one Souls Conversion to God, and of the Reformation of one
Family, City, or Church, and of the noble Operations of the blessed Spirit, by
which he brings up Souls to God, and conquereth the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil; the Heavenly Communications of God unto Sinners, for their Vivification,
Illumination, and holy Love to God, and to his Image, are so far better than
the Stories of these grand Murderers, and Tyrants, and their great Robberies,
and Murders, called Conquests, as the Diagnosticks of Health are than those of
Sickness: Or, as it is more pleasant to read of the Building of Cities, than of
their ruins; or of the Cures of a Physician, than of the hurts done by
Robberies and Frays; yea, of the Healing of Immortal Souls, than of the
overhasty destroying of men's Bodies, which would quickly turn to Dust of
themselves, if these valiant Murderers had but the patience to stay the time.

And among all parts of Church History, the Lives of Wise and Holy Men, do seem
to be not least Useful and Delightful; (which is the reason why Satan has so
marvelously and successfully bestird himself, to corrupt this part of History
with so many impudent lies in the Popish Legends, as might render all such
Narratives afterward Contemptible and Incredible, and might destroy the Ends:)
Therefore is the Sacred Scripture so much Historical; and the Gospel it self is
not a Volumn of well composed Orations, or a Systeme, or Encuclopaedia of the
Sciences and Arts; nor yet a great Volumn of unnecessary Laws; but the History
of the Life and Death of Christ, and the wondrous Works of Himself, and his
Spirit in his Servants, and a Record of those brief Laws and Doctrines, which
are needful to the Holiness and Happiness of Man.

In the Lives of Holy Men we see God's Image, and the Beauties of Holiness, not
only in Precept, but in Reality and Practice; not Pictured, but in the
Substance: And though the Precepts and Rules be more perfect in their kind, as
wanting no Degree or Part, yet the real Impress and Holiness in the Soul, is
that living Image of God, which is the end of the former, and of which the
Scripture is but the Instrumental cause. And Holiness in visible Realities, is
apt to affect the World more deeply, than in Portraiture and Precept only.
Therefore, we find that Satan and his Instruments, are used to do that against
the Scriptures exemplified in the Godly, which they have not done against the
Scriptures in themselves: They can bear the bare Precepts of a perfect Rule,
who cannot bear the very imperfect practice of them in a Holy Life. Many have
burnt Martyrs, that could endure good Books. Living Holiness most exciteth
Malice! Besides, that the best of men have Imperfections, which may be a
pretense for Detraction, Slander, and Persecution, when the Sacred Rule is not
so boldly to be accused, till they are ripened in Malignity and Audacity.

Many a one can read with Reverence the Life of a dead Saint, who will neither
imitate nor endure the Living. And I doubt not but many can bear the Narrative
of this holy persons Life, who could not have endured to see themselves
condemned in the Exercises of his present Holy Zeal.

And yet it is not to be denied, but that Humane Nature yet contains such
Principles and Inclinations, as give an honorable testimony to goodness; For
the exercises of prudent, impartial, equal Virtue, and eminent holiness in a
Heavenly Life, and in the joyful Hopes of the invisible Blessedness, and in
servent Love to God and Man, and in an innocent Life, and Self-denying
endeavors to do good to all, do so much convince and awe Man's Nature, and so
powerfully command Approbation and Honor, that Satan and bad Men could not
resist them; were it not that such excellent Persons are too Rare, and that the
far greater number of good Men are lamentably imperfect, and tainted with many
unlovely Faults: And were it not (...) for two great advantages that Satan
lays hold on; that is, Men's Strangeness and Disaecquaintance with those that
are good, and the Slanderous reports of them by others. And whoever notes it,
shall find, that most that ever Hated and Persecuted men of eminent Holiness,
were such as never intimately knew them, but only at a deceitful distance, and
such as heard them odiously described by lying Tongues.

And it is not a small benefit of this kind of History, that the Weak and Lame
Christians may see such excellent Examples for their imitation; and the
sluggish and distempered Christian may have so real and lively a reproof; and
the discouraged Christian may see that higher degrees of goodness, are indeed
attainable; and that the dark and troubled Christian may see the Methods in
which Gods Spirit does work upon his Servants, and see that a Genuine Christian
life, is a Life of the greatest joy on earth: And that the sloathful Hypocrite,
may see that Religion is a serious Business: And that the factious Christian,
may see that a man may be eminently Holy, that is not of his Opinion, Side, or
Party: And that both the proud domineering Pharisee may see, that eminent Piety
is separated from his Traditions, Formalities, Ceremonies and Pomp: And the
Opinionative Hypocrite may see, that Holiness consists of something else,
than in circumstantial and siding Singularities, and in a condemning of other
men's outward Expressions, or Modes of Worship, or a boisterous Zeal against the
Opinions and Ceremonies of others.

And it is a notable benefit of this kind of History, that it is fitted to
Insinuate the Reverence and Love of Piety into young unexperienced Persons: For
before they can read much of Theological Treatises with understanding or
delight, Nature enclineth them to a pleasure in History, and so their Food is
sugard to their Appetites, and Profit is entertained by delight. And nothing
takes well with the Soul, that is not pleasant to it; nor did he ever know the
true way of Educating Youth, or doing good to any, that knew not the way of
drawing them to a pleasedness, and love to goodness: Omne (...) punctum qui
miscuit utile dulci.

On such Accounts, we may conclude that such men as Melchior Adamus, Mr. Samuel
Clark, etc. that have served the Church with this sort of History, have done no
small or useless Service; which we the easilier perceive when we remember at
what rates now the Church would purchase a full History of the Lives of all the
Apostles, and all the Eminent Pastors of the Churches for the first two
hundred, or three hundred Years; yea, or but of some few of them. And how much
of the History of the Times they lived in, is contained in a just History of
such men's Lives.

It were to be wished that more did as Thuanus, at large; or as Scultetm, in
his Curriculum vitae suae at least; or yet as Junius, and many others, that
give us a Breviate of the most considerable Passages of their own lives:
Because no man knows usually those intimate Transactions of God upon men's
Souls, which are the Life of such History, or at least no useless part. But men
are commonly supposed to be so selfishly partial, and apt to overvalue all
their own, and to fish for applause; and it is so meet to avoid appearances of
Pride, and Ostentation, that few think meet to take this course. And the next
desirable is, That their intimate Friends would write their Lives at large, who
are best able; as Camerarius has done Melancthons; and Beza, Calvin's; and as
the Lives of Bucholtzer, Chytreaas, and many more are written.

But none of all this must be expected concerning this our Brother: Because he
was young, and taken away before any had thoughts of gathering up his Words or
Actions for any such use: Those that have done this little, being his Fathers,
and Seniors, who looked to have died long before him: And because he lived in a
time of Trouble, and Division, and Suspicion, in which every man had great
concernments of his own to mind; and in which men are afraid of praising the
Holy Servants of God, lest it offend those that in some things differed from
them.

The special Excellency of this Worthy Man, lay chiefly in the Harmony and
Compleatness of such particular Gifts, and all of them in a high Degree, as use
to exalt the fame of others, in whom some one or few of them is found. And all
these in a man so young, as unless in one Job. Picus Mirandula, one Keckerman,
one Pemble, in a Country, is rarely to be found. Do you desire the
Preparatives of Languages, and Philosophy? In these he was Eximious, as his
Treatise de Providentia, Licensed for the Press (of which more anon) does show;
with several other Manuscripts of like nature. How thoroughly had he searched
the Writings of Philosophers? How fully had he found out how much Natural
Reason does attest, and speak for the Attributes and Providence of God, and the
Principles of a Godly Life. And how much Supernatural Revelation presupposes,
and finds ready to entertain it and befriend it in the Light and Law of
Nature? How excellently able was he to deal with the Naturalist at his own
Weapons, and to shame them that call Religion an unproved or unreasonable
thing? No doubt it was an excellent help to his own Faith, to have so clear and
full a sight of all those Subsidiary natural Verities, which are known propriae
luce, and are out of the reach of those malignant Suggestions, by which the
Tempter is often questioning Supernatural Truths. Few Christians, and too few
Divines do dig so deep, and proceed so wisely, as to take in all these natural
helps; but overpassing those presupposed Verities, do ost leave themselves open
to the subtle affaults of the Tempter, who knows where the Breach is; and
will some; times urge such Objections on them, as need a Solution (...) those
helps which they are ignorant of.

Do you look for an high degree of Zeal? In this he was Mavelous, being a
living Fire, continually burning in the love of God and Man; still mounting
upward, and kindling all that were capable about him; As prone to Fervor and
Activity, as earthen Natures to Cold and Idleness; not weary of well doing; not
speaking slightly, and with indifferent affection of the great Jehovah, and of
holy things; but with the reverence and seriousness, as became one that by
Faith still saw the Lord: Not doing God's Work with an unwilling or a sluggish
heart, as if he did it not, nor as those that fear being losers by God, or of
giving him more than he deserves, or getting Salvation at too dear a rate: But
as a Soul that was Kin to Angels, which are active Spirits, and a flame of Fire
that came from God, the Lord of Life, and Father of Spirits, and lives in God,
and is working and passing up to God. As one that knew that none other work was
worthy of a Man, (and approveable by any Reason, save that which is made a
Salve to sense) except only the Souls Resignation, Obedience, and Love to God,
and the seeking of the Heavenly durable Felicity, in the use of all those Means
which God in Nature, and Scripture, has appointed for the obtaining of it.

It is too common to find men that are long and deep Students in Philosophy,
and the Doctrinals, and Methods of Theology, to be found none of the most
Zealous or serious Divines; and for the learned Doctors to be but of the
coursest and weakest sort of Christians. Because they exercise the Head almost
alone, and take little pains to work what Truths they know upon their Hearts:
As if the head were more diseased with sin, than the Heart is, and the Heart
had not as much need of a Cure: Or as if God's Grace did not as much dwell in
the Will, as in the Understanding; and the Heart had not the noblest Work to
do. Life, Light, and Love, are the Inseparable Influences and Effects of the
Sanctifying Spirit: But yet sometimes the Indisposition of the Receiver, may
keep out one of them more than the rest. Light alone may be profitable to the
Church, by breeding Light in others: But Life and Love, also are as suitable
means to produce their like, as Light is. And without them, it is not a flashy
Light and frigid Knowledge that will save the Soul.

And on the other side, alas, how ordinary is it for Zeal to make a bussle in
the Dark, and for those that are very earnest to be very blind? And strong
Affections (not to God himself, but about the exercise of Religious Duties) to
be guided by a weak Understanding: And so for such well-meaning Persons, to
make most haste when they are out of the way, and to divide and trouble the
Church and Neighborhood, by their fervency in Error, till late Experience
has ripened them to see what mischief their Self-conceitedness has done? O!
how happy were the Church of God, if great Understanding and fervent Zeal, were
ordinarily as well conjoined, as they were in this worthy Man.

And many have much Reading, and plentiful Materials for Learning, who yet were
never truly Learned, as being Injudicious, and never having well digested what
they Read, into the habits of solid Understanding. But so was it not with this
our Brother, as his very Letters fully witness: How clearly and solidly does he
resolve that great Question which he speaks to? As one that had Theology,
not in his Books only, but in his Head and Heart.

And I account it no small part of his Excellency, that his Judgment led him to
dwell so much on the great Essentials of Godliness and Christianity; the Love
of God, and a holy, just, and sober Life: And that he laid not out his Zeal
diseasedly, and unproportionably, upon those outward Circumstances, where the
noise does call off the minds of too many, from the inward life of Communion
with God: His Sermons, his Conference, his Letters, were not about Mint and
Commin, but about the Knowledge of God in Christ, which is the Life Eternal.

Yet that he did not prostitute his Conscience to the Interest of the Flesh,
nor subject God to the World, nor deny Selfdenyal and the Cross of Christ; nor
Hypocritically resolve to shift off the costly part of Religion, on pretense of
Indifferency or Smallness of any thing, which he thought God forbad him; you
need no other proof than the following History.

And he was not one of those weak well-meaning Ministers, who think that their
mere Honesty is enough to deserve the esteem of worthy Pastors; nor was he one
of those proud and empty Persons, who think that the Dignity of their Function
is enough to oblige all to bow to them, and to be Ruled by them, without any
personal Wisdom, Holiness, or Ministerial Abilities, suitable to their Sacred
Office: But, so great was his Ministerial Skilfulness in the public
Explication, and Application of the Holy Scriptures, so Melting, and Winning,
Convincing and Powerful, his unaffected sacred Oratory; so wise and serious his
private dealing with particular Families and Souls, that it is no wonder if God
blessed him with that great success, which is yet visible among the People
where he lived, and which many of his Brethren wanted. For he did not by
slovenly Expressions, nor immethodical Extravagances, nor unsound injudicious
erroneous Passages, nor by jocular Levities, or by nauseous Tautologies, make
Sermons, or Prayers, become a scorn; nor give advantage to carnal captious
Hearers, who for every hair, not only abhominate the wholsomest Food, but also
write Books to breed their own Disease in others: Nor yet did he by an affected
unnatural curiosity of Jingling Words, and starched Phrases, make Sermons like
Stage Plays, and destroyed the Peoples Edificacion, or their reverence of Holy
Things: But he spoke as one that spoke from God, in the Name of Christ, for
men's Renovation and Salvation, in a manner suitable to the Weight and Holiness
of the Matter.

And his servent Zeal and Thirst for the Peoples Conversion and Salvation, was
a great advantage to his Success. For; (...) men's Parts be never so great, I
seldom have known any man do much good, that was not earnestly desirous to do
good; If he long not for men's Conversion, he is seldom the means of Converting
many. For there is a certain lively seriousness necessary in all our Studies,
to make our Sermons suitable to their ends, and in all our Preaching, to make
them fit to reach men's Hearts; without which they are as a blunted Knife, or as
a Bell that is cracked, or any other unmeet Instruments, unable for their proper
use. And though God can work Miracles, and therefore can work without means, or
without their fitness, yet that is not his ordinary way, and therefore is not
to be expected.

And his great diligence from House to House in private, was a great promoter
of his Successes. I never knew Minister, who prudently and diligently took that
course, to be unprosperous in his Work; but by them that have wisely and
faithfully used it, I have known that done, that before seemed incredible: And
truly, when I think of some men yet living, and some few (too few) places
(great places) which by the great Abilities, and excellent Preaching, the
Personal Exhortations, and Catechizing, the (...) Pains, and the extraordinary
Charity to the Poor, the the holy exemplary Lives of their Pastors (I can
scarce forbear naming four or five of my Acquaintance) have been so generally
seasoned with Piety, that the great Market Towns have become as Religious, as
the selected Members, which some think only fit for Churches; it makes me
conclude, that it is principally for want of such a Ministry, that the World is
so bad, and that greater things are not done among us: And that for another
sort of men to cry out of the Peoples Ignorance and Profaneness, and obstinate
Wickedness, while their (...), Sloth, Miscarriage, and Negligence, is the
cause; is as little honor to them, as to the Physician or Surgeon, that when
he can skilfuller but few, does cast the blame upon the Patient, when
skilfuller men do cure the like.

And his great humility in stooping to the meanest, and conversing with the
poorest of the (...), and not affecting things above him, nor (...) by (...)
into men of worldly Wealth and Power, no doubt helps on his great Successes;
though it was not the way to Preferments, Honors, no nor Safety and Quietness
to the Flesh. Had Balaam (...) throughout sincerely, it had been a very
honorable and comfortable word to him from King Balack, Number. 24. 11. I thought
to promote thee to great honor, but (...), the Lord has kept thee back from
honor. It is more honorable and comfortable to be kept from honor by God and
a good Conscience, than to be honored by men on sinful terms.

And the moderation and peaceableness of this holy Man, was very exemplary and
amiable; which I the rather mention, because in these distempered times of
Temptation, too many think that the excellency of Zeal lies in going to the
furthest from those they differ from, and suffer by. And because some will
think, that knew no more of him, but only how often and long he lay in the
Common Goal, that sure, he was some violent unpeaceable Zealot. No, his Zeal
was for Peace and Quietness, for Love and for good Works: He was not used to
inflame men against Dissenters, nor to Back-bite others, nor to make those
odious that were willing enough to have made him so: He fled from one extreme
with fear, and suspicion of the other. He was indeed himself a Silenced
Minister, in a Place, and among a People who had his heart, and who had been
blessed with his fruitful Labors; and his Judgment was, That it is Sacrilege
for a Minister Consecrated to God, to alienate himself, and violate that
Covenant and Ministerial Dedication, by giving over his Work as long as he has
ability and opportunity, and the peoples Souls have a true necessity. And
therefore he chose that long Imprisonment, rather than voluntarily to Surcease.
But whilst he had Liberty, he went often to the public Assembles, and was a
Hearer where he was wont to be a Teacher, and encouraged the People to do the
like. He spoke not evil of Dignities, nor kindled seditious Principles or
Passions in the Peoples minds, nor disaffected them against Authority, nor
aggravated his own Sufferings to exasperate their minds against such as he
suffered by; though how great they were as to the Effect, the Sequel will
acquaint you. In all, he did in patience possess his Soul, and learned still
more patience by the things which he suffered, and taught others what he
learned himself.

But above all, it is his highest excellency in my eyes, that he attained to
the right temperament of the Christian Religion, and to a truly Evangelical
frame of Spirit, suitable to the glorious hopes of Faith, and to the wonderful
love of our Redeemer. And when most Christians think that they have done much,
if they can but weep and groan over their Corruptions, and can abstain from the
lustful Pollutions of the World, in the midst of many doubts and fears; LOVE
and JOY, and a HEAVENLY MIND, were the Internal part of his Religion; and the
large and fervent PRAISES of God, and THANKS GIVING for his Mercies, especialiy
for CHRIST, and the SPIRIT, and HEAVEN, were the External Exercises of it. He
was not negligent in confessing Sin, nor Tainted with any Antinomian Errors;
but PRAISE, and THANKSGIVING, were his Natural Strains; his frequentest,
longest, and heartiest Services: He was no despiser of a broken Heart; but he
had attained the blessing of a healed joyful Heart. The following Narratives,
the strain of his Letters, but above all the admirations of his nearest
Friends, will tell him that will enquire, how his tryumphant Discourses of the
Hopes of Glory, and his frequent and fervent Thanksgiving and Praise, were the
Language which he familiarly spoke, and the very business of his Heart and
Life. And, O how amiable is it to hear the Tongue employed seriously, and
frequently, in that which it was made for; even in the praise of him that made
it! And to see a man passing with joyful hopes toward Immortality! And to live
as one that seriously believes, that he must quickly be in the Heavenly
Church, and live with God and Christ for ever. O how comely is it to see a man
that says, he believes that Christ has redeemed him from Hell, and
reconciled him to God, and made him an Adopted Heir of Glory, to live like one
that was so strangely saved from so great a misery, and with the most
affectionate gratitude to honor the Purchaser of all this Grace: And how
uncomely a thing is it to hear a man say, That he believes all this Grace of
Christ, this Heavenly Glory, this Love of God, and yet to be inclined to no
part of Religion, but fears and complainings, and scarce to have any words of
Praises or Thanksgiving, but a few, on the by, which are heartless affected,
and constrained. O did Christians, yea Ministers, but Live with the Joy and
Gratitude, and Praise of Jehovah, which beseems those that believe what they
believe, and those that are entering into the Celestial Chore, they would then
be an honor to God and their Redeemer, and would win the World to a love of
Faith and Holiness, and make them throw away their worldly Fool-games, and come
and see what it is that these Joyous Souls have found: But when we show the
World no Religion, but Sighing, and Complaining, and live a sadder life than
they, and yet talk of the glad-Tydings of Christ, and Pardon, and Salvation, we
may talk so long enough, before they will believe us, that seem no more to be
Believers our selves, or before they will leave their fleshly pleasures, for so
sad and dreadful a Life as this.

And as this kind of Heavenly, Joyful Life is an honor to Christ, and a
wonderful help to the Converting of the World, so is it a Reward to him that
has it; which made this Holy Person live in such a vigor of Duty, such
fervor of holy Love, and such continual Content in God, so that the Kingdom of
God in him was Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; which others
think consists in Meats, Drinks, and Days, in Shadows and Circumstances, in
Sidings and in singular Conceits, Romans 14. Col. 2. 16. It was not a Melancholy
Spirit that acted him, nor did he tempt his People into such an uncomfortable
state and strein. But in the multude of his thoughts within him, the comforts
of God did delight his Soul: His Meditation of God and his Redeemer was sweet,
and he rejoiced in the Lord. He delighted in the Law of the Lord; and when
delight invited him, no wonder if it were his Meditation day and night, Psalm.
1. 2. and 104. 34. and 119. 103. and 94. 19.

And how great a Solace was this in his Sufferings, when he could be in a Goal,
and in Heaven at once? When he could, after the terrible torment of
Convulsions, have the foresight and taste of Heavenly Pleasures? Nihil Crus
sentit in Nervo, cum Animus est in Coelo, says Tertul.

And as he lived, so he died, in Vigorous, Joyful Praises, and Thanksgivings:
Reviving out of his long speechless Convulsion, into those fervent Raptures, as
if he had never been so impatient of being absent from the Lord, as when he was
just passing into his Presence; or rather as if with Stephen, he had seen
Heaven opened, and Christ in his Glory, and could not but speak of the
unutterable things which he had seen. I deny not but his vigorous active
Temper, might be a great help to all his holy Alacrity and Joy, in his
healthful State: But when that frame of Nature was broken by such Torments, and
was then dissolving, to hear a dying Man about sixteen hours together, like the
ferventest Preacher in the Pulpit, pour out his Soul in Praises and
Thanskgiving; and speak of God, of Christ, of Heaven, as one that could never
speak enough of them; and that with a Vivacity and Force, as if he had been in
former Health, and to triumph in Joy as one that was just laying hold upon the
Crown; surely in this there was something that was the Reward of all his former
Praise and Thankfulness; and that which must needs tell the Auditors the
diference, not only between the death of a Righteous Believer, and the wicked
Unbeliever, but the weak and distempered Believer; also the difference between
a sound and a diseased Christian, and between the tryumphant Faith and Hopes,
of one that saw the God and World invisible, and the staggering Faith, and
trembling Hopes of a feeble and distrustful Soul; and between the death of one
that had been used to converse in Heaven, and to make Thanksgiving and Praise
his Work, and of one that had been used to cleave to Earth, and make a great
matter of the concernments of the Flesh, and to rise but little higher in
Religion, then a course of outward Duty animated most with troublesome Fears:
Though he died not in the Pulpit, yet he died in Pulpit-Work.

And I must also note, how great an advantage it was to himself, and to his
Ministerial Works, that he was possessed deeply with this true sentiment, That
the PLEASING of GOD is the proper ultimate end of Man, (not doubting but it
includes the notion of glorifying him) for thus his heart was rightly
principled, and all his Doctrine and Duties rightly animated.

And as in all his Ministry, he was extraordinarily addicted to open to the
Hearers the Covenant of Grace, and to explain Religion in the true Notion of
Covenanting with God, and Covenant-keeping, and greatly to urge men to
deliberate well-grounded Resolutions in this Holy Covenant (as one that
understood that Baptizing is truly Christening, and that Baptism and the
Lord's Supper are our Sacramental Covenanting, and that we need no new
Descriptions nor Characters of Grace and Church-Titles, if we understand what
these Sacraments truly mean:) So God was pleased to give him a certainty and
sense of his Divine Faithfulness, in fulfilling the Promises of his Covenant,
and a lively sense of all the benefits of it; and his Faith in God for the
performance of his part, was as strong and fixed, as was his own Resolution, in
the strength of Grace to be true to God: I compare not his resolution to God's
Fidelity; for what comparison between God and Man, but only to his belief of
God's Fidelity, and his comfort in the assurance of the Conclusion. And as he
was resolved through Grace never to forsake Christ, so Christ did never fail
him, nor forsake him. And in his Ministry, in his Sufferings, and his Death,
this Faith, this Hope, this Heavenly Joy, was his support and strength; and in
the Valley of the shadow of Death, he feared no evil. But when his flesh and
heart failed, as to natural strength, the Lord was the Rock or Strength of his
Heart, and never failed him, Psalm. 73. 25. Let me die the death of the
Righteous, and let my last end be like his.

I have premised this general Skeleton, as Limners and Builders first draw the
Pillars and Stamina of their Work, which the following Narratives will fill up:
And I have given you this general Index, or Contents, of what is distinctly
contained in the Sequel. For the History is not drawn up by one Hand, nor as by
one that intended rather to show what he could say, than what the Person was,
and did: But it is the brief Account of the several parts of his Life, drawn up
by several of his most worthy and judicious Friends, that were present, or most
intimate and familiar with him. And I take this to be the best Advantage to a
History, as to the Truth, which should satisfy the Incredulous, though not as
to Uniformity, and a fluid Style, which might please the Curious. For a Man's
Life is like a War or Battle: No dispersed War, no nor any one particular
Battle, can fully be described by the Observations of any one man alone: But
one Man is but in one place, and sees only that which is within his own
prospect, which his proper station did advantage him to see: But when
Intelligent Men from each part of the Army do every one bring in their several
Narratives, all set together, may be a satisfactory History of the whole War,
or Fight: So when a Man's course of Life is transient, and one is his Familiar
in his Youth, and another at riper Age, one in the University, and another in
the Ministry; one in Prison, and another at Home; one in Health, and another at
Death; it is no one of himself that can credibly report the whole. And
therefore though by variety of Style, it may seem a Ceuto, or incongruously
composed; yet Truth being the Soul of History; that is best which is best fitted
to the lovers of Truth. And though one part be written by a Woman, (his Widow)
and another by his Reverend Father in Law; another by that worthy Pastor whom
he assisted; another by a Fellow Minister, and another by a Scholar of his
intimate Acquaintance, etc. Yet is there such Agreement in them all, and such
Evidence of unquestionable Verity, especially to all that know these Worthy and
Faithful Persons, that for my part I take it as coming to me with greater
advantage, than if it had been an evener Thread, drawn out by one skilful Hand
alone; as the writing of the History of Christ by the four Evangelists, is
advantageous to the Christian Faith. The plainness and open Breast of a Godly
Widow, and of so many Holy and most credible Friends, is another kind of
Evidence, than the contrived History of a Learned Man, which is fitted to the
Interest of a Party, to which the persons Fame and Honor seems requisite: I
know not how a History of this Nature could come to the World with fairer
humane Evidence of unquestionable credibility than this does.

And let Posterity know (for I need not tell it to this present Age, who live
in the Light) that though this Servant of Christ excelled very many of his
Brethren, yet it is not that such men are wonders in this Age, that his Life is
singled out to be recorded to Posterity: But because his affectionate Friends
and Auditors, are forwarder than many others, hereby to tell the World, what
Effects his Holy Doctrine, and Example, has left upon their hearts: It makes
the Writers heart to bleed, to think how many thousands of Souls do perish by
Ignorance, and ungodliness, even in England, and how many vast Kingdoms of the
World are deprived of the Gospel.

If you ask, What Labors he has left behind him? I Answer; First, The great
numbers of Holy Souls converted, confirmed, and edified by his Doctrine, and
the Example of his holy Life. The Specimen, or Exemplar of a right Minister of
the Gospel, which he has left to the Neighbor Ministers that knew him, and to
those that now possess their Places, and to all the Ministers of the Land, and
to the Ages that are yet to come: For who will not be convinced of the
necessity and sweetness of Holy Diligence, in so good 2 Work, and become
Laborious in the Word and Doctrine, who seriously reads such Examples as this
here set before him? And who that considers it aright, can choose but see, how
greatly such Holy Laborers do differ from those that Preach the Gospel in
strife and envy, to add affliction to Paul's Bonds, Phil. 1. 15. And those that
use their Ministry but as Lawyers use the Laws, to get Preferment and worldly
Wealth by it; that they may say, Soul, take thy Ease, Eat, Drink, and be Merry,
thou have Goods enough laid up for many years: Till they hear at last, Thou
fool, this night shall they require thy Soul; Whose then shall the things be
which thou possessest? So is every one that lays up Riches for himself, and
is not Rich toward God.

Secondly, And for Writings, who can expect that a man that entered upon the
Sacred Ministry at Twenty One years of Age; and died about Thirty Five, and
lived in such exceeding Ministerial Labors, should leave many Books behind him
of his Writing, (in an Age wherein we have had too many Books, and too few such
Ministers) yet the following History tells us, He is the Author of tha Synopsis
of the Covenant, in Mr. Richard Alleins Book. He Printed an Exposition of the
Assemblies (...), with an Exhortation to use it. As also Prayers for his
Peoples (...): And left a Book to work on the Unconverted, not yet Printed. And
he has left (alas, imperfect!) a good part of a body of Natural Theology,
called, Theologia (...) (...) De cognitione Dei. 2. De Existentia Dei. 3. De
(...) and Substantia Dei. 4. De Attributis Dei in genere, and (...) de ejus
Unitate. 5. De Perfectione Divina, etc. 6. De Decretis Divinis. 7. De
Providentia Divina. 8. De (...), de Precibus. In all which he succinctly
delivers in a very good Latin Style, the Christian Doctrine; and then by way
of Annotations, adds the Testimony of the Ancient Philosophers: so that you
have together a sum of sound Doctrine, and the fullest Attestation of Ethnicks
consent that ever I have seen; being such a Promptuary for any one that has
not leisure to peruse, or to gather to such particular uses the Philosophers
themselves that I know not where you can find the like. For every Sheet or two
of his Doctrine on the Subject, there is about eight, ten, twelve, or more
Sheets of Collected Attestations. The rest are all impersectly written, only
that De Providentia, has his Ultiman Manum, and is Licensed for the Press; but
being Latin and Greek, and such Books having too few Buyers in England, none
yet is found that will be at the charge of Printing it, much less altogether;
though indeed (though imperfect) it is pity they should be separated. The Title
of this Licensed Piece is, Theologiae Philosophicae, sive Philosophiae
Theologicae specimen: In quo AEterni Dei Providentia solius Nature lumine
comprobatur, validissimis rationum momentis demonstratur, quoad Parts,
Species, Objecta, and explicatur; Contrae omnes denique Adversariorum
Objectiones firmatur: Ex Aristotele, Platone, Chalcidio, Sallustio, Firmico,
Empirico, Jamlico, Antonino, Epecteto, Proclo, Simplicio, Cicerone, Seneca,
Macrobio, Porphyrio, Xenophonte, Galeno, Plutarcho, Plotino, Tyrio, Appuleio,
Alcinoo, alisque Philosophis, Oratoribus and Poetis, tum Graecis tum Latinis,
ad Atheorum Convictionem, and Orthodoxorum confirmationem; Elucubratione J. A.
Anno Dom. 1661.

CHAP. II. A Brief Relation of his early setting forth in the Christian Race,
from his Childhood: Also some Memorials of his Industrious and Prosperous
pursuit of Learning, and of his singular Piety during his Abode in the
University. Written by an Eyewitness thereof.
MR. Joseph Allein, Born in the Devizes in Wiltshire, in the Year 1633. During
his Childhood, showed forth a singular sweetness of Disposition, and a
remarkable Diligence in every thing he was then employed about. The first
observable Zeal of Religion that appeared in him, was in the eleventh year of
his Age, about which time he was noted to be very diligent in private Prayer,
and so fixed in that Duty, that he would not be disturbed, or moved by the
coming of any Person accidentally into the places of his Retirement. This and
other Fruits of a Serious and Gracious Spirit, were the common observation of
the Family. From this time forward, the whole course of his Youth, was an
even-spun thread of Godly Conversation, which was rendered more amiable, by his
sweet and pleasant deportment toward all he conversed with. While he thus
openly began to run his Christian Race, his Brother Mr. Edward Allein, a worthy
Minister of the Gospel departed this Life: Whereupon he earnestly desired to be
brought up in Preparation, to succeed him in the Work of the Ministry. Which
good Motion, his Father gladly hearkened unto, and speedily prepared to putit in
Execution. Such was his great diligence at School, that he redeemed for his
Book, the time allotted for Recreation. In the space of about four years, he
attained to very good knowledge in the Latin and Greek Tongues, and was by his
Schoolmaster, adjudged fit for University-Studies. After which, he abode some
time with his Father in the Country, where a worthy Minister of the Place read
Logic to him: And when he was about sixteen years Old, he was placed in
Lincoln College in Oxford.

He had not been long in the University, but a Wiltshire Place becoming void in
Corpus Christi College, he was chosen SCHOLAR of that House: The Pregnancy of
his Parts, assuring all that his own MERITS were the SOLE FRIENDS, the ONLY
MANDAMUS which brought him in.

Being entered and settled, he gave both early and constant Proofs, of his
indefatigable Industry; Signalizing thereby his love to Learning, and evidently
Demonstrating how much he abhorred to be found a Drone in such a Hive. He
esteemed a College an otherguess place than a VICTUALING HOUSE, and coming
into this with a Nobler design, than only to TAKE COMMONS: He thought himself
happy in nothing so much, as the advantage he had gained for the best Aquists.

I have known too many, who in the very Places which they have got by their
Parts, have lost the Parts which got them their Places; and peradventure had
been excellent excellent Scholars, had they never had those Encouragements to
be so, which they unhappily won from their Competitors. For Idleness enervates
the strength of Nature, and makes those Loggs that might have been Mercuries;
but this Person was none of those. He quitting himself so well at the Election,
was but a Pledge and Earnest of his doing better afterward. He made it appear
to all observing him, that when he stood, he stood not so much for a Place, as
for the Accomplishments by his future studiousness attainable in it, demeaning
himself like one, who even in the days of his Vanity, well understood how
profane a thing it was to live in a School of Learning, no otherwise than as
if it were a Sanctuary for Lasiness, or a Place priviledg'd with nothing else
but Leave and Opportunity to eat the Founders Bread, with no other sweat of the
Brow, than what is provoked in a Ball Court.

Never had Learning a truer Drudge since she kept House in Oxford. At her Work,
he was both day and night, thinking all time too little, no pains too much that
he spent in her Service: When but a Schoolboy (as I have heard) he was
observed to be so studious, that he was known as much by this Periphrasis [ The
Lad that will not play] as by his name: And sure I am, when in the University,
he was so generously and ingeniously bookish, that he deserved to be called,
The Scholar, who by his good will would do nothing else but Pray and Study.

Courteous he was, and very civil to all Acquaintance: But if they came to
visit him at Studying times, though they were sure enough to find him within,
yet withal so busy generally with better Company, as to have no leisure to let
them in. And if at this they were moved, and murmured, and went away offended
with him, he cared not. That notable Principle of Joachimus Fortius, which shut
him up, bearing him out, and being his relief in all such Cases, Viz. Better it
is that they should wonder at thy rudeness, than thou should lose thy time;
for only one or two will take notice of that, but all Posterity would be
sensible of this.

His Appetite to his Business being that to him, which Allarms in their
Chambers are wont to be to others; seldom it was that he could be found in Bed
after four in the Morning, though he had stayed up on the same occasion on
which he then rose, till almost One overnight.

For though whilst Junior Scholar, he obtained many weekly SLEEPING DAYS for
others, yet in many years he could hardly vouchsafe himself so much as one.

And as thus he begrudg'd himself his Rest, so thus also his very Food: It
being as familiar with him to give away his Commons (at least) once, as with
any others to eat theirs twice a day. As if he who was never satisfied how many
Volumns soever he devoured, had looked upon it as a kind of gluttony, to eat
that Meal, the time of eating which might without prejudice to Health, have
been better spent upon a Book. Porphyries Wish, viz. That he were able to live
without eating, and drinking at all, that so he might be wholly taken up about
nobler things, Is sure the with of thousands in the Leardned World. Certain I
am it was his, and that if Piety would have suffered him, and they had not been
such dears Friends, he would have fallen out with God, for tying his Soul to
such a Body, as could not subsist without (what he would often call no better
than time-consuming things) Meat, and Drink, and Sleep.

That this his laborious Studiousness, was as delightful and pleasant to him,
as the highest Voluptuousness can be to the most sensual Sot; I conclude not
only from the constancy of it, but from his charging Matrimony, to which
afterward he became a Subject, with no greater tyranny, than the necessity
which it laid upon him, of being kinder sometimes unto himself, than he was
wont to be in Oxford. For being Married, an intimate Friend of his of the same
College, who had thoughts of changing his Condition, wrote to him, and (in a
(...) manner) desired of him an Account of the Inconveniences of Marriage; to
whom he returned this pleasant (but very significant) Answer. Thou would
know the Inconveniences of a Wife, and I will tell thee; First of all, whereas
thou risest constantly at four in the Morning, or before, she will keep thee
till about six. Secondly, Whereas thou usest to study fourteen Hours in the
day, she will bring thee to eight or nine. Thirdly, Whereas thou art wont to
forbear one Meal a day at least for thy Studies, she will bring thee to thy
Meat: If these be not Mischiefs enough to afright thee, I know not what thou
art.

Through his Industry (with God's Blessing on it) he exceedingly prospered in
his Studies, and quickly appeared a notable Proficient. He would often say, he
chiefly affected rational Learning, valuing Skill in Languages, only for the
sake of things, and those things most, which were of all most likely to improve
his Judgment. And the truth of his words was sufficiently evident: For all that
knew him, knew him to be as good a Linguist, so as smart a Disputant, and an
excellent Philosopher. When he performed any Academical Exercises, either in
the Hall, or in the Schools; he seldom or never came off without the Applause,
or (at least) Approbation of all, but the envious; who also themselves, even by
their very Detractions, in spite of their Teeth, commended him; there being to
the Ingenuous, no surer sign almost of his having acquitted himself well, than
that such, as they could not endure it should be said so.

Certain I am, his pregnant Parts, and early Accomplishments, were so much
taken notice of in the College, that so soon almost as he was but Batchellor
of Arts, he was even compelled to Commence a Tutor; and presently entrusted (to
speak within compass) with as great a number of Pupils as any in the House.
Some of his Scholars are now Graduates in Divinity, and singular Ornaments of
that flourishing Society, (as Mr. John Rosewel, B. D. Mr. Nicholas Horseman, B.
D. etc.) others of them, who left the University, have not gone without
considerable preferments in the Church, (as Mr. John Peachil, lately Lecturer
at St. Clements Danes, without Temple Bar; Mr. Christopher Coward, Prebendary
of Wells, etc.) And I make no question but all of them (which are yet alive)
honor his memory, and will at any time be ready to express the grateful sense
which they retain of the advantage they received from his prudent instructions
and pious Examples.

It Is true indeed, he had no advancement proportionable to his Merits whilst he
staid amongst us: But if there were any thing to be blamed for that, 'twas
nothing else but his own Self-denial. For a Chaplains place becoming void, he
chose that before a Fellowship, which he knew well enough, in a little time,
would of course, and by right, have been certainly his. And this choice having
been made by him at first deliberately, he never after in the least repented,
but rather often reflected on with a great deal of content and comfort. For he
had always such an huge affection for Prayer, that he and his Friend could
hardly ever walk and discourse together, but before they parted (at his desire)
they must also go and Pray together. And what a pleasure then may we think it
was to him, twice a day to engage a whole Society, in so dear an Exercise, with
a Let us pray! Frequently indeed have I heard him say, He prized the Employment
above that, which generally we reckoned much better Preferment, and looked upon
it as his honor and happiness.

And 'twas well with us that so he did, it being hardly possible that the duty
of the place should have been by any discharged better than it was by him. We
were not used to a great deal of Noise, vain Tautologies, crude Effusions,
untelligible Sense, or mysterious Nonsense, instead of Prayer. His Spirit was
serious, his Gesture reverent, his Words few, but premeditated and well
weighed, (...), solid, and to the full expressive of his as truly humble as
earnest desire. He loathed the sawciness, which went by the name of Holy
Boldness, and drew near to God; not as if he had been going to play with his
Mate, but as became a Creature overaw'd with the Majesty of his great Creator.
He prayed with the Spirit, and the Understanding also; confessed Sin with real
Grief, inward Hatred, and Detestation; and begged the Mercies he came to beg,
like one that felt the want and worth of what he begged, with Faith and
Fervency, and true Importunity; his Affections working, but working rationally
as well as strongly.

And this (as I doubt not it prevailed above) so it had on us the more powerful
influence, because we found it to be no mere Religious Fit, but exactly
agreeable to the habitual frame and disposition of the Man. It Is a shrewd
reflection which Suidas makes on the Philosopher Sallust, (how truly I know
not, he is neither civil nor just to some) (...). Sallust's carriage was
strange to all men; For though when he read his Philosophy Lectures, he did it
gravely and very solemnly; yet at other times he played the Child, and that most
ridiculously. And there are too many, both Chaplains and Preachers, who justly
merit as bad a Censure: Whilst Praying and Preaching, they appear demure, and
mighty devout; yet take them out of their Desks, and Pulpits, and they are as
light, as vain, and frothy; yea, extremely dissolute as any others. But it was
not so with this Person: For he was always composed and serious, grave and
reverend, above his Age. He set God always before him, and wherever he was,
labored to live as in his Presence. It was his solemn business to be
Religious, his great endeavor to walk by Rule; his main design in all his
ways, to approve himself unto his Father, which saw in secret, and his daily
exercise to keep a Conscience void of offense, both toward God and toward man.

As for the pleasures and delights of Sin, he highly (...) and abhorred them;
was so above them, that he could not (...) them: Quam (...) carere! How (...)
was it to him (as said once St. Austine) to want those (...)! And as for lawful
delights and pleasures, although he did (...) unto, and now and then solace a
while, and entertain himself with them, yet how little was his heart unto them,
or was he (generally) taken with them! He was as formal in using them, as some
Christians are in God's Service; as they sometimes do pray, as if indeed they
prayed not; and hear, as if they heard not; so he rejoiced in such things as
these, as if indeed he rejoiced not. He looked upon them, compared with others,
as upon his Righteousness, compared with Christ's, as very vanity, yea, dross
and dung. His conversation being in Heaven, his sweetest Comforts, and most
prised Refreshments, were Divine and Heavenly. His Soul took often a delightful
prospect of Eternity, viewing the Regions of Bliss and Glory, looking wishly at
(her Fathers Seat) the Mount of Joy, aspiriring after a nobler Mansion, and
hugging her self in a comfortable persuasion, that it would not be long ere she
should be in it. And hereupon as he little minded any Earthly glory, so he
little minded or cared for the poor and empty delights of sense.

However, he was not morosly pious, nor did his Affection to God and Goodness,
and the things Above, make him either a Timon or a Cynic; (It had not then been
so true and genuine, and of so right a kind as it was) Homilitical Virtue he as
much excelled in as any other, and the decried Morality found ever with him
very great respect, being recognized as an integral part of his Religion.

He was of as sweet a disposition, and of as highly civil a conversation, as a
man (subject to the common frailties of humane nature) almost could be. He had
scarce a gesture which did not seem to speak, and by a powerful and charming
Rhetcrick, affect all whom he conversed with. Were it not that so many other
moral Perfections and Excellencies besides that, it might as truly be said him,
as, by the Historian, was of the Emperor, in respect of his clemency, That he
was Totus ex comitate, made up as it were of nothing else but Courtesy and
Affability.

For a Friend, I think I may safely say, He was one of the truest that ever
Person had interest in; and withal, as pleasant as a serious Christian could
well wish. He loved not rashly, but where he loved, he loved entirely; and who
ever came to be entertained in his Affections, were sure to find a warm
Lodging: There was no more but only one thing, which he thought too much for
any, for whom he thought not his Love too good. He could not sin (knowingly,
and willingly) for any Friend he had on Earth. When Lelius in the presence of
the Roman Consuls, (who after thecondemnation of Tiberius (...), pursued all
that had been formerly intimate with him) came to enquire of Caius Blosius, his
chiefest Friend, what he was willing to have done for (...): He answered, All
things: What all things, replied Lelius? Suppose he had willed you to burn our
Temples, would you have done it at his request? I know, said Blosius, he could
never command it; but if he had, I had obeyed him. I confess this Friend did
never dare to be such a Friend, or any thing like him: But Usque ad Aras, so
far as lawfully and conscientiously he might do any thing, he stuck at nothing
wherein he might serve, pleasure, or gratify them he loved.

And yet his love was not engrossed by his Friends only; for whilst to them he
showed himself friendly, good nature as well as Christianity, obliged him to be
kind to all, and (according to his ability) to the Poor bountiful. He was too
frugal to throw away his Charity, yet not so covetous as to withold it when
he met with Objects to whom 'twas due. He did not think the little he had so
much his own, as that his necessitous Brethren might not claim a part in it;
and therefore gave them as if he had been paying Debts, and not bestowing Alms.
But of all most admirable was his affection to the Souls of others, and his
desire to do good to them. This indeed was most conspicuous, and seemed to show,

Velut inter Ignes
Luna minores.
Much like the Moon appearing bigger, and shining brighter than the other
Stars. The sage Pythagoras, I remember, gave this very mystical, but wise
advice unto his Scholars, ((...)) By no means to eat their own Brains;
intending by it, (as it is conceived) that they should not keep their Reason (of
which the Brains is an immediate Instrument) unto themselves, but still employ
it for the advantage of others. And sure this Person did forbear to eat, but by
his abstinence, fed many others with his Brains, i. e. his enlightened, improved
Reason. Some there are, to my knowledge, who at this day do verily think, they
should never have found the way to live, to live for ever, if he had lived unto
himself. Eminent was his charity to the poor Prisoners in Oxford, Goal; among
whom first (as the reverend Mr. Perkins did at Cambridge) of his own (...) he
began to Preach, and held on constantly ((...) he remained in Town) once a
fortnight, for a year and upwards, encouraging them to give attendance on his
Ministry, by a considerable allowance of Bread (that week he preached) at his
proper cost and charges. Frequent visits also was he used to make at other
times, to other persons in the World that were but mean and low; his main
design (together with the relieving of their temporal wants) being to assist
their Souls, and help them forward in their way to Heaven. And indeed, in all
his Converses, wherever he was, he was like Fire, (as (...) was used to say
of (...)) (...); Warming, Refreshing, Quickening all that were about him, and
kindling in them the like zeal for God and goodness, which he had in himself.
Whoever they were that came to visit, or to be (...) with him, it was their own
fault if they got not by him so much good, as to be for ever the better for
him. It was hardly possible to be in his company, and not to hear such things
from him, as, if well weighed, might have been enough to make one out of
conceit with Sin, and in love with Virtue, as long as one lived. Though he did
not say (as Titus once) yet by his actions, we may judge he thought that he had
even quite lost a day, when none had gained somewhat by him. He lived as if he
had been quickened with that saying, (which I have somewhere met with in
Tertullian) Quid prodest esse, quod esse non prodest? To what purpose is it to
live, and not to live to some good purpose.

But this was that (this ardent love to the Souls of men) that quickly deprived
us of his company, it carried him down into the Country, where, how he
demeaned and carried himself, let others speak.

CHAP. III. A brief Character of him by that Reverend Person Mr. R. A. who was
nearly related to him, showing how eminently he wus qualified for the
Ministerial Service and Warfare, unto which he was called.
OF his Extract, I shall say little; He was the Son of a godly Father, Mr.
Tobie Allein, sometime of the Devizes, an understanding, affectionate, prudent,
and signally humble, and experienced Christian; who died suddenly, but sweetly;
his Son surviving him not above a year or two. He having been languishing for
some time, at length he seemed to be upon eecovery, and went about his House;
on the morning before he died, he arose about four; about 10 or 11 he came down
out of his Closet, and called for something to eat, which being prepared, he
gave Thanks, but could not eat any thing: His Wife perceiving a sudden change
in him, persuaded him to go to his Bed; He answered, No, but I will die in my
Chair, and I am not afraid to die; He sat down and only said, My Life is hid
with Christ in God, and then he closed his Eyes with his own hands, and died
immediately. No more of the Father: Concerning his Son I shall speak,

What he was, and what his temper and behavior was.

As a Man. As a Christian. As a Minister.
1. As a Man. He was, 1. Of quick natural parts, and great acquired Abilities,
concerning which I shall need say no more, there being a fuller Account given
by another Hand.

2. Of a composed grave and serious temper and behavior, not at all morose,
but full of candor, free, affable, cheerful, and courteous.

2. As a Christian. He was for exemplary Holiness and Heavenliness of mind and
life, much elevated above the ordinary Rank. He lived much in delightful
Communion with God, his Soul was greatly exercised in Divine Contemplation, and
he would sometimes speak (to provoke others, whom he wished the same delights,
to the same exercise) what ineffable pleasure, sweetness, and satisfaction his
Soul had found in his stated Meditations on the Divine Attributes, distinctly
one by one. In his Discourses he would speak much and passionately to the
commending and exalting of the Divine Goodness, and of the inexpressible
dearness and tenderness of the Divine Love. In Prayer he was not ordinarily so
much in confession or complaining of Corruption and Infirmities, (though he
expressed a due sense of these) as in the admiring and praising of God in his
Infinite Glorious Perfections, in the mention of his wonderful Works,
particularly of those Wonders of his Love revealed in Jesus Christ. In some of
his Letters to me, when he had been speaking of the Grace and Goodness of God
to him, (of the sense whereof he would seem to be even quite swallowed up) he
would break off with some such Expressions as these, I am full of the Mercies
of the Lord; O Love the Lord for me; O praise the Lord for my sake; O help me,
help me to praise the Lord.

His whole Life was adorned and beautified with the admirable luster of his
particular personal Graces.

1. He was a Man of Love. His sweet amicable and courteous converse, was such
as made him the deliciae of his Acquaintance, and made way for the
entertainment both of his serious Counsels and severer Reproofs: He grew dear
unto the Saints that knew him, because they saw in his very face and all his
Carriages, how very dear they were to him. His compassion to those in distress,
his bounty to those in want, (wherein he abounded beyond his ability) his
forbearance in case of offenses, his affectionate Language and Carriage, his
readiness to all obliging Offices of Love to his Relations, to his Friends, to
Strangers, to Enemies, did evidently declare how he loved them. Especially his
Love was let forth in fuller streams upon the Congregation where he exercised
his Ministry. The People of his Care, were the People of his Delight. His
ardent longing for their Souls, his rejoicing in their Souls -- prosperity, his
bleedings and breakings of Soul under any of their falls or infirmities, his
uncessant labors among them, both publicly, and from House to House, his
frequent and affectionate Letters to them when he was absent; his earnest
desire to live and die, and be buried amongst them, (declaring to them, That if
he died within fifty miles of Taunton, his will was to be brought and buried
there, that his Bones might be laid with their Bones, his Dust mingled with
their Dust) these all declare how greatly they were in his Heart.

2. He was a Man of Courage. 1. He feared no dangers in the way of his Duty,
knowing that He that walks uprightly, walks surely. In cases less clear, he was
very inquisitive to understand his way, and then he fixed without fear.

2. He feared not the faces of Men, but where occasion was, he was bold in
admonishing, and faithful in reproving; which ungrateful Duty he yet managed
with such prudence, and such expressions of Love, and compassion to Souls, as
made his way into hearts more easy, and his work more succesful.

3. He was a Son of Peace; Both a zealous Peacemaker among differing Brethren,
in case of personal Quarrels and Contentions; and he was also of sober and
peaceful Principles, and an healing Spirit, as to Parties or Factions upon the
account of Religion. He had an awful and reverend regard to Magistrates,
abhorring all provoking and insolent expressions, or mutinous and tumultous
Actions against them.

4. He was a Man of Truth and Righteousness; Both as to his own personal
practice, and also was much in pressing it upon others, especially professors
of Religion, to be examplarily just in their dealings, and true in their words;
to be wary in promising, and punctual in performing. O how often and
passionately have I heard him bewailing the Sins of Promise-breaking and
deceitful dealing, whereof such as he has known to be guilty, have understood
both by Word and Writing how much his Soul was grieved at them, for the wrong
they did hereby to their own Souls especially, and the reproach they brought
upon the Gospel of our Lord.

5. He was of great Patience. To say nothing of his behavior under sufferings
of other kinds, his great weakness, and long languishing for some years
together, and his constant serenity, calms and quietness of Spirit, in all that
time, so far from the least touch of murmuring, that he was still blessing the
Lord for his tender dealings with him, have given the World a full proof that
he was of a patient Spirit.

6. He was Eminent in Liberality; He not only did, but devised liberal things,
and by liberal things did he stand; He studied and considered how he might both
give himself, and procure from others, relief for those in want: He gave much
Alms daily, both in the place where he lived, and wherever he came. When
there were Collections at any time for pious and charitable uses, He stirred up
others to bountiful giving, both by Word, and also by his Example. In the
Collection for the Fire in London, He gave publicly such a liberal proportion
as he thought meet to be an example to others; and (as I came occasionally to
understand) lest it should be misjudged, he had been known to give more, he
gave more than as much again secretly. He distributed much amongst his
Relations. His Aged Father, and diverse of his Brethren, with their large
Families, being fallen into decay, he took great care for them all, and gave
education to some, Pensions to other, Portions to others of them; and
notwithstanding all this, he had but a very small matter of Stock to begin
upon, and never above 80 pounds per ann. that I know of, and near the one half
of his time, not above half so much; only by the industry of his Wife, who for
diverse years kept a Boarding-School, his income was for that time considerably
enlarged. He took great pains in journeyings abroad to many Gentlemen, and oath
rich Men in the Country, to procure a standing supply for such Nonconforming
Ministers as were in want.

7. He was of an Active Spirit. He went about doing good. As he was abundant
and uncessant in his Labors in the Congregation where he lived; So wherever
he came, he would be scattering some good Seed, not only among the Adult, but
he would be dealing much with the Children in those Families into which he
came, asking them Questions, giving them Counsel, and sometimes leaving them
his Counsel in Writing. In his own Family (which was great whilst his Wife kept
Boarders) he was exceedingly industrious; the gravity of his Carriage,
contempered with much sweetness and affability toward those young ones, begat
in many of them, the Awe and Love, as of Children to their Father, and made way
for the success of his Endeavors with them, which was considerable upon diverse
of them. At Bath, while he lay sick there, he sent for many of the Poor, both
Old and Children, and gave them Catechisms, engaging them to learn them, and
give him an account; who came cheerfully and frequently to him, being
encouraged hereto by his Familiar and Winning Carriage; his giving them Money,
his Feeding and Feasting them. He would sometimes say, It Is pity that Counsel
of our Lord (Luke 14. 13.) of Feasting the Poor, was no more practiced amongst
Christians.

8. He was of an humble Spirit. Though God had so exceedingly listed him up in
the Hearts of others, yet he was not puffed up in his own: He was low in his
own eyes, and despised the praise of men. His whole carriage was without the
least ostentation, and he was of great condescension to the Weakest or Meanest.
Once or twice he was complaining to me of the pride of his Heart; I (judging it
to proceed rather from an holy jealousy of himself, and a tenderness of the
least spark of that evil, than from any power it had upon him) replied to him
(as I remember) to this purpose: If he had a proud Heart, he had it to himself,
for none else could perceive it. But he answered, Some men that are proud
enough, have more wit than to let every one know it. Another time making the
same complaint in a Letter to me, he added this: But my naughty heart, whilst I
am writing this, is in hope you will not believe me. So watchful was he, as to
epsy and check the least motions of that Lust, which he so much abhorred.

3. As a Minister. He was settled in Taunton Magdalen, as an Assistant to the
Reverend Pastor there; with whom, as a Son with the Father, he served in the
Gospel. I shall say nothing here, there being a large Account given under the
Hand of that worthy Person.

But besides his Labors in that great Congregation, in which alone he was
fixed, the care for many other Congregations was daily upon him. He went forth
frequently into several places about the Country, amongst the poor ignorant
people that lived in dark Corners, and had none to take care of them, and both
Preached to them himself, and stirred up many of his Brethren; whose forward
minds readily joined with him, to set up standing Lectures amongst them. He had
an Eye to poor Wales, and had an influence upon the sending over some Ministers
to them: He resolved also to have gone and spent some time amongst them
himself, and by all the disswasions of his Friends, from his great Weakness and
Unfitness for Travail, he was hardly withheld from his Purpose.

CHAP. IV. An Account of his Godly Life and Practice, and of the Course of his
Ministry in Taunton, given by Mr. George Newton, the Reverend Pastor there,
whose Assistant he was.
MR. Joseph Allein came to my Assistance, in the Year 1655. being then in the
One and Twentieth year of his Age; and we continued together with much mutual
Satisfaction.

I soon observed him to be a young Man of Singular Accomplishments, Natural and
Acquired. His Intellectuals solid, his Memory strong, his Affections lively,
his Learning much beyond the ordinary Size: And above all, his Holiness
eminent, his Conversation exemplary; In brief, he had a good Head, and a better
Heart.

He spent a considerable part of his time in private converses with God, and
his own Soul; he delighted very much to perform his secret Devotions in the
view of Heaven, and the open Air, when he could find advantages fit for his
purpose. He used to keep many days alone, and then a private Room would not
content him, but (if he could) he would withdraw himself to a solitary House,
that had no inhabitant in it: And herein he was gratified often by some private
Friends of his, to whom he did not impart his design: Perhaps it was, that he
might freely use his Voice as his Affections led him, without such prudential
considerations and restraints as would have been necessary in another place;
and that he might converse with God without any avocation or distraction.

His conversation with others, was always mingled with Heavenly and Holy
Discourses; he was ready to Instruct, and to Exhort, and to Reprove, which he
never failed to do (when he thought it necessary) whatever the event might be:
But he performed it usually with such respect, humility, tenderness,
self-condemnation, and compassion, that a reproof from him did seldom, if at
all, miscarry.

In the Houses where he Sojourned, their Hands fed one, but his Lips fed many;
God freely poured Grace into his Lips, and he freely poured it out. None could
live quietly in any visible and open sin, under his inspection: When he came to
any House to take up his abode there, he brought Salvation with him; when he
departed, he left Salvation behind him. His manner was, when he was ready to
depart, and to transplant himself into some other Family, (as that the exigence
of his condition and the time, did more than once constrain him to) to call the
People one by one into his Chamber; from whence it was observed, that scarce
any one returned with dry eyes.

In matters of Religion, and the first Table, his strictness was so exemplary,
(which was near to rigor) that I have scarce known any of his years keep pace
with him. Surely he did more than others; His Righteousness exceeded not the
Publican only, but the Pharisees too. He was much taken with Monsieur de Reuty,
(whose Life he read often) and imitated some of his Severities upon better
grounds: How often have I heard him to admire (among many other things)
especially his self-annihilation, striving continually to be Nothing, that, God
might be all.

But here he stays not, he was a second-Table-man, a man of Morals; I never
knew him spotted in the least degree with any unjust or uncharitable Act. And I
am sure, the many failings of Professors in this kind, touched him to the very
quick, and brought him low; drew Prayers, Tears, Complaints, and Lamentations,
both by Word and Letter from him, though yet the Lord would not permit him to
behold and reap the Fruit before he died.

He had an eminently, free, and bountiful heart to his power; and I may truly
say, beyond his power; yea, much beyond it, he was willing of himself. It is
but seldom that the best do need restraint in these Matters; and yet we read of
some who brought more than enough, yea, much more than enough, Exodus 36. 5. So
that there was a Proclamation issued out, to put a stop upon their Bounty, and
it is added presently, so the People were restrained. Men universally almost do
need a Spur, but he did rather need a Bridle. When other men gave little out of
much, he gave much out of little; and while they heapt and gathered up, he
dispersed and scattered abroad. He did not hide himself from his own flesh, but
was helpful to Relations, as some of them have great reason to acknowledge. His
charity began at home, but it did not end there; for he did good to all,
(according to his opportunities) though especially to the Household of Faith. He
considered the Poor, he studied their condition; he devised liberal things; he
was full of holy Projects, for the advancement of the good of others, both
Spiritual and Temporal; which he pursued with such irresistible vigor, and
zeal, and activity, that they seldom proved abortive.

He was a man of extraordinary condescension to the infirmities of weaker
Brethren, as they that are most holy, and best acquainted with themselves, are
wont to be: Instructing those that were contrary minded in meekness; If God
peradventure would give them repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth:
Restoring those who were overtaken with a fault, with the Spirit of Meekness.
So dealing with them in such a loving, sweet, and humble way, as considering
himself, lest he also might be tempted. In their confessed failings, he was no
way supercilious, captious, and censorious; he would maintain a good opinion of
another, upon a narrower footing than many others, who (to say no more) were
nothing stricter, holier, humbler, than himself would be. His Charity, Believed
all things that were to be believed, and Hoped all things that were to be
hoped. And when he deeply condemned the Action, he would not judge of the
Estate: Indeed he had more charity for others than himself; and though he were
sufficiently mild in his judgment of others, he was severe enough in his
judgment of himself.

He was not Peremptory in matters that belong to doubtful Disputations: He laid
no more weight and stress on Notions, and Opinions in Religion, that wholly
depend upon Topical Arguments, than belongs to them. He was not like many who
are so over-confident in their determinations, that they will hardly hold
communion; Nay, scarce so much as a pleasing conversation with any man (how
gracious soever) who cannot think, and say, and act in every thing as they do.
He would allow his Fellow Members the Latitude that the Apostle does; and so
would freely and familiarly converse with those who are sound in the Faith, (as
to the fundamentals of Religion) and who were strict and holy in their lives,
of all Persuasions.

His Ministerial Studies were more than usually easy to him, being of a quick
conceit, a ready, strong, and faithful memory, a free expression (which was
rather nervous and substantial, than soft and delicate) and which was best of
all, a holy Heart that boiled and bubled up with good matter. This (...) him on
all occasions, not with warm affections only, but with holy Notions too. For
his Heart was an Epistle, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the
Living God: And out of this Epistle, he drew many excellent things. In the
course of his Ministry, he was a good Man, and in his Heart a good Treasure;
whence he was wont continually to bring forth good things, both in public and
private.

He was apt to Preach and Pray, most ready on all occasions to lay out himself
in such Work, yea, spending himself in such Work: When my sudden Distemper
seized upon me, put him at any time (as many times they did) upon very short
and (...) preparations, he never refused; no, nor so much as fluctuated in the
undertaking: But being called, he confidently cast himself upon the Lord, and
trusted perfectly to his Assistance, who had never failed him; and so he
readily and freely went about his Work without distraction.

He began upon a very considerable stock of Learning, and Gifts Ministerial and
Personal, much beyond the proportion of his Years, and grew exceedingly in his
Abilities and Graces, in a little time. So that his profiting appeared to all
Men; he waxed very rich in heavenly Treasure, by the blessing of God on a
diligent hand, so that he was behind in no good Gift. He found that precious
promise sensibly made good, To him that has (for use and good employment)
shall be given, and he shall have abundance. He had no Talent for the Napkin,
but all for Traffic, which he laid out so freely for his Masters use, that in
a little time they multiplied so fast, that the Napkin could not hold them. I
heard a worthy Minister say of him once, (not withont much admiration) Whence
has this man these things? He understood whence he had them well enough, and
so did I, even from Above, whence every good and perfect Gift proceeds: God
blessed him in all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Things, and he returned all
to Heaven again; he served God with all his might, and all his strength; he was
abundant in the Work of the Lord; he did not go, but run the ways of his
Commandments: He made haste and lingered not; He did run, and was not weary; he
did walk, and was not saint. He pressed hard toward the Mark, till he attained
it; his Race was short and swift, and his End glorious.

He was infinitely and insatiably greedy of the Conversion of Souls, wherein he
had no small success in the time of his Ministry: And to this end, he poured
out his very Heart in Prayer and in Preaching; He imparted not the Gospel only,
but his own Soul. His Supplications, and his Exhortations, many times were so
affectionate, so full of holy Zeal, Life, and Vigor, that they quite overcame
his Hearers: He melted over them, so that he thawed and molified, and sometimes
dissolved the hardest Hearts. But while he melted thus, he wasted, and at last
consumed himself.

He was not satisfied to spend himself in public, but used constantly to go
from House to House, and there to deal perticularly (where he had a free
reception) both with the Governors, and with the Children, and with the
Servants of the Household, instructing them especially in the great Fundamental
necessary Truths of the Law, and of the Gospel, where he observed them to be
ignorant: Gently reproving them, where he found any thing amiss among them.
Exhorting them to diligence, both in their general and particular Callings:
Entreating them who were defective, by any means to set up the Worship of God
in their Houses, and to make them little Churches, by constant reading of the
Scripture, that so the Word of Christ might deeply dwell among, and in them
richly, by careful Catechizing of the Children, and the Servants, if the
Governors were able; by frequent Meditations, Conferences, Repetitions of that
which they had heard in public, especially by daily Prayer, Morning and
Evening, that so they might avoid that dreadful indignation which hangs over,
and is ready to be poured out upon the Families that call not upon God. He made
the best inspection that he could, into the state of every particular Person,
and so accordingly applied himself to check, to comfort, to encourage, as he
found occasion. All which he did with so much tenderness, humility, and
self-denial, that they gained very much on the affections, and respects of all
that received him, and wrought them at least to outward conformity; so that
they who were not visited in the beginning, at length came forth and called
upon him to come to their Families and help them.

Thus did he wear himself away, and gave light and heat to others: He usually
allowed himself too little sleep to recruit and to repair the Spirits which he
wasted with waking. His manner was to rise at four a Clock at the utmost, many
times before, and that in the cold Winter Mornings, that he might be with God
betime, and so get room for other studies and employments. His extraordinary
watchings, constant cares, excessive labors in the Work of his Ministry,
public and private, were generally apprehended to be the cause of those
distempers and decays, and at last of that ill habit of body, whereof in the
end he died.

He was the gravest, strictest, most serious, and composed young Man that I had
ever yet the happiness to be acquainted with. And yet he was not rigid in his
Principles, his moderation was known to all men that knew him.

CHAP. V. A further Account of his Catechizing, both in Public and Private, by
Mr. G.
WHen he did Catechize the greater Sort in Public, before he was Silenced, his
manner was to begin with Prayer for a Blessing upon that Exercise: And having
proposed some Questions out of the Assemblies Catechism to them, he was
careful, not only to make them perfect in rehearsing the Answers there set
down, but also to bring them to a clear understanding of the sense and meaning
of the said Answers, and of all the Terms and Phrases in which they are
expressed; And to draw some practical, useful, inferences from those Heads of
Divinity contained in them. Moreover, when any distinction was necessary for
the clearing up of the matter in hand; he would be also instructing his
Catechumen's therein; Now this he would do, by proposing several other
Collateral Questions, besides those in the Catechism; which Questions, together
with the Answers to them, himself had before drawn up, and sent to them in
writing.

In the Even of the Lord's Day, his course was to repeat his Sermon again, in
the public Place of Worship, where abundance of People constantly resorted to
hear him; which when he had done, several Youths were called forth, which did
give him an Account of the Heads of all his Sermon by Memory.

As for his Method in going from House to House, for the instructing of Private
Families, it was this; He would give them notice of his coming the day before,

Desiring that he might have admittance to their Houses, to converse with them
about their Soul-Concerns, and that they would have their whole Family together
against he came. When he came, and the Family were called together, he would be
instructing the younger sort in the Principles of Religion, by asking several
Questions in the Catechism; the Answers to which he would be opening and
explaining to them. Also he would be enquiring of them about their spiritual
Estate and Condition, laboring to make them sensible of the evil and danger of
Sin, the corruption and wickedness of our Natures, the misery of an unconverted
State; stirring them up to look after the true Remedy proposed in the Gospel,
to turn from all their sins unto GOD, to close with Christ upon his own Terms;
to follow after Holiness, to watch over their Hearts and Lives, to mortify
their Lusts, to redeem their Time, to prepare for Eternity. These things as he
would be explaining to their understandings, that they might have clear
apprehensions about them; so he would be pressing the practice of them upon
their Consciences, with the most Cogent Arguments and Considerations, minding
them of the great Privileges they did enjoy, the many Gospel-Sermons that they
did or might hear, the many Talents they were entrusted withal, and the great
account that they had to give to the GOD of Heaven. Telling them how sad it
would be with them another day, if after all this they should come short of
Salvation. Besides, he would leave with them several Counsels and Directions to
be carefully remembered and practiced for the good of their Souls. Those that
were serious and religious, he would labor to help forward in Holiness, by
answering their Doubts, resolving their Cases, encouraging them under their
difficulties. And before he did go from any Family, he would deal with the
Heads of that Family, and such others as were grown to years of discretion,
singly and apart: That so he might (as much as possibly he could) come to know
the condition of each particular Person in his Flock, and address himself in
his Discourse as might be suitable to every of them. If he did perceive that
they did live in the neglect of Family Duties: He would exhort and press them
to set up the Worship of GOD in their Families, as Reading, Prayer, and
directing them how to set about it, and to take time for secret Duties too.
Such as were Masters of Families, he would earnestly persuade, and desire, as
they did tender the Honor of Christ, and the welfare of their Children, and
Servants Souls to let them have sometime every day for such private Duties, and
to encourage them in the performance of them; neither would he leave them
before he had a promise of them so to do. Sometimes also he would himself go to
Prayer before his departure. This was his method in the general; although with
such necessary variation in his particular Visits, as the various State and
Condition of the several Families did require. If the Family where he came were
ignorant, he would insist the longer in Instructing and Catechizing: If loose,
in reproving and convincing: If Godly, in encouraging and directing.

He did use to spend five afternoons every week in such exercises, from one or
two of the Clock, until seven in the evening: In which space of time, he would
visit sometimes three or four Families in an afternoon, and sometimes more,
according as they were greater or less. This course he would take throughout
the Town; and when he had gone through, he would presently begin again, that he
might visit every Family as often as he could. He often did bless GOD for the
great success that he had in these Exercises, saying, that GOD had made him as
instrumental of good to Souls this way, as by his public Preaching, if not
more. When the Ministers of this County of Somerset, at one of their
Associations which heretofore they held, were debating whether, and how far it
were incumbent upon them to set up private Family Instruction in their
particular charges; Mr. Allein was the Man that they pitched upon for to draw
up his Reasons for that practice, together with a Method for the more
profitable management of it.

An Abridgment of what he drew up, here Follows.
IT being the unquestionable Duty of all the Ministers of the Church of Christ,
To take heed to all the Flock over whom the Holiest has made them Overseers;
and to Teach, and Preach, not only publicly, but from House to House; not
only taking a general care of the whole, or calling out the chiefest of the
Sheep, for our particular Care and Inspection, as the manner of some is, and
leaving the rest to sink or swim: But as good Shepherds iniquiring into their
Estates, observing the particular Marks, Diseases, Strayings of our Sheep, and
applying our selves suitably to their Cases; In a word, warning every man, that
we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus; Therefore it behooves us, to
study to do this great Duty in such a manner, as may be acceptable to God, and
profitable to our Flocks. The directions for performing this Duty, are either
more general, or more special; for the more general Directions, they are either
such as concern the entrance on this Duty, or the performance of it. For those
that concern the Entrance:

1. It will be necessary, that we convince the People of the necessity of this
Duty.

2. That we study to manage this great Work to our Peoples best advantage.

3. That we set apart such set-times for this great Work, as upon consideration
we shall find most convenient for them and us, resolving to be constant in
observing them.

4. That we pray for Wisdom from Above, what, and how to speak.

5. That we send word to the People, when we intend to visit them, that they
dispose of their business to receive us.

For those that concern us, in the mannaging of the Duty:

1. The Family being called together, we may, if time and convenience permit,
begin with Prayer.

2. The Family, consisting of Superiors, and Inferiors, it would not be amiss
to begin with the Inferious; for many can hear their Children, and Servants
Examined contentedly, that cannot bear it themselves: For that they will not
disdain to give an account of themselves before their Superiors, though their
Superiors would disdain to give account before them; and here it will be
necessary to enquire into their Knowledge, Practice, States.

1. Their Knowledge; here we may examine what progress they have made in the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and try them in the Catechism.

2. What they do gain by the public Ministry, what they remember of the Sermon
last heard.

2. In their Practice.

1. In their Duty toward God; where it may be useful to inquire, if they make
Conscience of secret Prayer; the necessity of it may be expressed, the nature
of it opened, and some heads of Prayer explained; and if they be such as need
it, it would be useful to commend to them some form, for the present help.

2. In the Duties of their Relations toward (...); and if they be pressed to
Faithfulness, Diligence, and Uprightness, the Duties they owe to those that
were over them, it would be very convenient.

3. Into their Estates; and here we may take an account of them, what they
think of the state of their Souls, showing the paucity of them that are saved,
the desperate (...) of the heart, the infinite danger of being deceived, the
wiles and devices of Satan to beguile them; from whence, and such like
Arguments, we may press them to be diligent in inquiring, what the case of
their Souls is, to be jealous of themselves, where we may take occasion to show
them,

1. That every Man by Nature is in a damnable estate.

2. The absolute necessity of Conversion.

3. By what signs they may know whether they remain in, or are delivered from,
this Estate: which signs should be few, plain, certain, and infallible, sounded
upon the clear evidence of the Word; and because the searching Work is so
displeasing to the Flesh, that it might disingage them to come too close at
first, It may not be amiss to defer this, till we had got some interest in
their Hearts, by a loving tender carriage.

3. The Inferiors being thus dealt with, may be (...) to their several
Employments, and then we may take occasion to discourse with the Heads of the
Families, proceeding as prudence shall direct upon some of the forementioned
particulars.

1. We may enquire whether they perform this great Duty of Prayer in the
Family, offering them helps if they need.

2. We may press them to Instruct and Catechize their Families.

3. We may (...) them to the strict Sanctifying the Lord's Day.

4. If they are poor, we may draw forth the Hand of our (...) toward them.

5. If we know any evil by them, we may take them aside privately, showing them
the sinfulness of their practice, and engaging them to promise reformation.

6. We should leave with them some few particulars of greatest weight, often
repeating them till they remember them, engaging them to mind them, till we
shall Converse with them again.

7. Our dealing with them, must be in that manner that may most prevail, and
win upon their hearts.

1. With Compassion; being kindly affectioned to them, Charging, Exhorting,
Comforting every one of them, as a Father his Children.

2. With Prudence; warning and teaching them in all Wisdom, applying our selves
to the several Cases and Capacities.

1. To the Rich in this World, showing more respect as their places require,
charging upon them those Duties that are required of them in special.

2. To the poor, you may be more plain and free, pressing upon them those
Duties that are most proper to their condidition.

3. To the Aged, we must be more reverent, laboring to root out of them the
love of the World, showing them the dangerousness of Covetousness, and the
necessity of making speedy preparations for Eternity.

4. The Men are to be exhorted to Temperance and Sobriety; diligence in their
Callings, etc.

5. Women to Meekness, Humility, Subjection to their Husbands, and constant
infusing good Principles into their Children.

3. With Patience, being gentle to all Men; in meekness instructing those that
oppose themselves, bearing with their dullness, rudeness, and disrespectfulness,
waiting for their repentance.

4. With all faithfulness, giving no occasion of offense, that our Ministry be
not blamed.

5. With Zeal, as Apollo, fervent in Spirit, teaching diligently the things of
the Lord, etc.

6. With plainness, not betraying their Souls to Hell, and ours with them, for
want of faithfulness, and closeness in our dealing with them; it being not
sufficient in general, that no Drunkard, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven; but telling them plainly, and particularly, such is your looseness,
your ignorance, that I fear you are in an unconverted state.

7. With Authority; dealing with them in the power and demonstration of the
Spirit.

8. With Humility; Not lording it over God's Heritage, but condescending to men
of low Estates: Nor disdaining to go into the Houses of the meanest.

The sort of Directions are more special, respecting the several sorts of our
People, who may be ranked into four Heads, the Ignorant, Profane, Formal,
Godly.

First, For the Ignorant: Our Work with them will be,

1. To convince them that are Ignorant, which may be done by showing their
inability, to answer some plain familiar Questions.

2. To show them the dangerous, yea, the damnable nature of ignorance.

3. To Press them with all possible earnestness, to labor after knowledge.

4. To answer their carnal Pleas for their ignorance, when wilful.

Secondly, For the Profane: It would be necessary to deal with them
convincingly, showing the certain damnation they are running upon.

Thirdly, For the Formal: With these we must deal searchingly, and show them,

1. How easily Men may mistake the Form of Godliness for the Power.

2. The undoing danger of resting in being almost a Christian.

3. The most distinguishing differences between an Hypocrite and a sincere
Christian.

Fourthly, For the Godly: To these we must draw forth the Breasts of the
Promises, opening to them the riches and (...) of Christ; inquiring into their
growth in Grace; quickening them to labor after assurance, to be steadfast in
the Faith; patient in suffering; diligent in doing the Will of Christ, (...) of
good Works, always abounding more and more.

There is one thing more, in which his self-denial, and other Graces, were very
exemplary: Namely, his faithfulness in reproving the miscarriages of
Professors, sparing none, whether High or Low, whether Ministers or Private
Christians; yea, although they had been never so dear in his affections, and
never so obliging in their carriage to him, yet if he found in them any thing
that was reproveable, and blameworthy, he would deal with them faithfully and
plainly about it, whatsoever the issue and event were.

One time when he was going about such a Work, he told a Christian Friend, with
whom he was very intimate and familiar; Well (says he) I am going about that
which is like to make a very dear and obliging Friend, to become an Enemy: But
however, it cannot be omitted, it is better to lose man's favor, than GOD's.
But GOD was pleased (then, as well as diverse other times besides, when he went
about business of this nature) to order things for him, better than he could
have expected, and so to dispose of the heart of the Person with whom he had to
deal, that he was so far from becoming his Enemy for his conscientious
faithfulness to him, that he loved him the better ever after as long as he
lived.

As to his judgment about the Arminian Controversies, as far as I can perceive,
who have discoursed with him about them, it was much-what the same with Doctor
Davenants, and Mr. Baxters.

He was a Man of a very calm and peaceable Spirit, one that loathed all
tumultuous carriages and proceedings; he was far from having any other design
in his Preaching, than the advancement of the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, by the
conversion and salvation of Souls: This was the mark that he had in his eye;
this was that for which he labored, and ventured, and suffered, and for which
he thought he could never lay out himself enough.

Though he were but a young Man, yet in his carriage he was exceeding serious
and grave, and (...) very humble, courteous, and affable, condescending to
discourse with the poorest and meanest Persons, for their spiritual good, as
soon as with the greatest and richest.

And indeed so unblameable and convincing was he in the whole of his
conversation, that there were very few religious and sober Persons that knew
him, either in Town or Country, either Ministers, or People, (yea, though some
of them differing in judgment from him) but did highly approve of him. And for
his Brethren in the Ministry here in these parts, such was his holy and
discreet deportment amongst them; that he had as great an influence upon them,
as few others had the like.

He was full of holy projects, often bethinking himself by what ways and means
he might more effectually promote the honor of Christ, and the benefit of
Souls, and whatsoever he apprehended to be conducing to these highest ends, he
would prosecute with that wisdom and vigor, that he seldom failed of bringing
it to a comfortable and successful issue.

Of which Projects, this is one which I shall here insert. Having considered
how much the Conscientious, and frequent performance of the duty of
Self-Examination, might tend to the bringing down of Sin, and furtherance of
Holiness, both in heart and life; He did earnestly press the said Duty on his
Hearers in his Preaching, directing them in the performance; and not only so,
but dealt with them also in private about it, and got a promise from the most
of them, that they would every night, before they did take their rest, set
about this Duty; and spend some time in secret, on purpose to call themselves
to an account, how they had carried it that day, by proposing several Questions
to their own hearts, which Questions he had referred to several Heads, and
drawn up for them in writing.

And not a few of them have acknowledged, that they have cause to bless GOD,
who stirred him up to put them upon this practice, which they have found very
helpful to them in their daily Christian Walk.

USEFUL QUESTIONS, Whereby a Christian may every day examine himself.
PSALM. 4. 4. Commune with your Hearts upon your Beds.

EVery Evening before you sleep (unless you find some other time in the day
more for your advantage in this Work) sequester your self from the World; and
having set your heart in the presence of the Lord, charge it before God to
answer to these Interrogatories.

For your Duties. Q. 1. Did not God find me on my Bed, when he looked for me on
my knees? Job 1. 5. Psalm. 5. 3. Q. 2. Have not I prayed to no purpose, or
suffered wandering thoughts to eat out my duties? Mat. 18. 8, 9. Jer. 12. 2. Q.
3. Have not I neglected, or been very overly in the reading God's Holy Word?
Deuteronomy. 17. 19. Josh. 1. 7, 8. Q. 4. Have I digested the Sermon I heard last?
Have I (...) it over? and prayed it over? Luke 2. 19, 51. Psalm. 1. 2. and 119.
5, 11, 97. Q. 5. Was there not more of custom, and fashion in my Family
Duties, than of Conscience? Psalm. 101. 2. Jer. 30. 22. Q. 6. Wherein have I
denied my self this day for God? Luke 9. 23. Q. 7. Have I redeemed my time from
too long or needless visits, idle imaginations, fruitless discourse,
unnecessary sleep, more than needs of the World? Ephesians. 5. 16. Col. 4. 5. Q. 8.
Have I done any thing more than ordinary for the Church of God, in this time
extraordinary? 2 Cor. 11. 28. Isa 62. 6. Q. 9. Have I took care of my Company?
Prove. 13. 20. Psalm. 119. 63. Q. 10. Have not I neglected, or done something
against the duties of my Relations, as a Master, Servant, Husband, Wife,
Parent, Child, etc. Ephesians. 5. 22. to Chap. 6. ver. 9. Col. 3. 18. to chap. 4.
ver. 2.
For your Sins. Q. 1. Does not sin sit light? Psalm. 38. 4. Romans 7. 24. Q. 2. Am
I a mourner for the sins of the Land? Ezekiel. 9. 4. Jer. 9. 1, 2, 3. Q. 3. Do I
live in nothing that I know or fear to be a sin? Psalm. 119. 101, 104.
For your Heart. Q. 1. Have I been much in Holy Ejaculations? Neh. 2. 4, 5. Q.
2. Has not God been out of mind? Heaven out of sight? Psalm. 16. 8. Jer. 2. 32.
Phil. 3. 23. Q. 3. Have I been often looking into mine own Heart, and made
conscience of vain thoughts? Prove. 3. 23. Psalm. 119. 113. Q. 4. Have not I
given way to the workings of Pride, or Passion? 2 Chronicles. 32. 26. Jam. 4. 5, 6,
7.
For my Tongue. Q. 1. Have I bridled my Tongue, and forced it in? James 1. 26.
and 3. 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 39. 1. Q. 2. Have I spoke evil of no Man? Tit. 3. 2. Jam.
4. 11. Q. 3. Has the Law of the Lord been in my mouth as I fat in my House,
went by the way, was lying down, and rising up? Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. Q. 4. Have I
come into no company where I have not dropped something of God, and left some
good savor behind? Col. 4. 6. Ephesians. 4. 29.
For your Table. Q. 1. Did not I sit down with an higher end than a Beast,
merely to please my Appetite? Did I eat, drink for the glory of God? 1 Cor. 10.
31. Q. 2. Was not mine Appetite too hard for me? Jude 12. 2 Pet. 1. 6. Q. 3.
Did not I arise from the (...) without dropping any thing of God there? Luke 7.
36, etc. and 14. 1, etc. John 6. Q. 4. Did not I mock with God when I pretended
to (...) a blessing, and return thanks? Acts 27. 35, 39. Mat. 15. 36. Col. 3.
17, 23.
For your Calling. Q. 1. Have I been diligent in the duties of my Calling?
Eccles. 9. 1 Cor. 7. 17, 20, 24. Q. 2. Have I desrauded no man? 1 These. 4. 6. 1
Cor. 6. 3. Q. 3. Have I dropped never a lie in my Shop or Trade? Prove. 21. 6.
Ephesians. 4. 25. Q. 4. Did not I rashly make, nor falsely break some promise? Psalm.
106. 33. Jos. 9. 14, etc. Psalm. 15. 4.

An Addition of some brief Directions for the Morning.
Direct. 1. If through necessity or carelessness you have omitted the reading
and weighing of these Questions in the evening, be sure to do it now. D. 2. Ask
your self, what sin have I committed, what duty have I omitted? Against which
of these Rules have I offended, in the day foregoing? And renew your
repentance, and double your watch. D. 3. Examine whether God were last in your
thoughts when you went to sleep, and first when you awake. D. 4. Enquire
whether your care of your heart and ways, does increase upon your constant
using of this course for Self-Examination, or whether it does abate, and you
grow more remiss. D. 5. Impose a task of some good meditations upon your selves
while you are making ready, either to go over these Rules in your thoughts, or
the Heads of some Sermon you heard last, or the Holy Meditations for this
purpose in the Practice of Piety, or Scuders Daily Walk. D. 6. Set your ends
right for all that day. D. 7. Set your watch, especially against those sins and
temptations that you are like to be most incident to that day.
CHAP. VI. A full Narrative of his Life, (from his Silencing till his Death) by
his Widow Mrs. Theodosia Allein, in her own Words; wherein is notably set
forth with what patience he ran the Race that was set before him, and fulfilled
the Ministry that he had received of the Lord.
BEfore the Act for Uniformity came forth, my Husband was very earnest day and
night with God, that his Way might be made plain to him, that he might not
desist from such Advantages of saving Souls, with any scruple upon his Spirit;
In which, when he saw those Clauses of Assent and Consent, and Renouncing the
Covenant, he was fully satisfied: But he seemed so moderate before, that both
my self and others, thought he would have Conformed: He often saying, He would
not leave his work for small and dubious Matters: But seeing his way so plain
for quitting the public Station that (...) held, and being thoroughly
persuaded of this, that the (...) of the Ministers out of their Places, did not
(...) them from preaching the Gospel; he presently took up a (...) resolution
to go on with his Work in private, both of (...) and Visiting from House to
House, till he should be (...) to Prison, or Banishment, which he counted upon,
(...) assisting him: And this Resolution, without delay, (...); for the
Thursday after he appointed a Solemn Day of Humiliation, when he preached to as
many as would adventure themselves with him at our own House: But it being then
a strange thing to the most Professors to suffer, they seemed much afrighted at
the threatenings of Adversaries; so that there was not such an appearance at
such opportunities as my Husband expected; whereupon he made it his Work to
converse much with those he perceived to be most timorous, and to satisfy the
Scruples that were on many amongst us; so that the Lord was pleased in a short
time to give him such success that his own People waxed bold for the Lord, and
his Gospel: and multitudes flocked into the Meetings, at whatsoever season they
were, either by day or night; which was a great encouragement to my Husband,
that he went on with much vigor and affection in his Work, both of Preaching,
and Visiting, and Catechizing, from House to House.

He went also frequently into the Villages and Places about the Towns where
their Ministers were gone, as most of them did fly, or at the least desist for
a considerable time after Bartholomew day: Wherever he went, the Lord was
pleased to give him great success; many converted, and the generality of those
animated to cleave to the Lord and his ways.

But by this the Justices rage was much heightened against him, and he was often
threatened and sought for; but by the Power of God, whose Work he was delighted
in, was preserved much longer out of their hands than he expected: For he would
often say, If it pleased the Lord to grant him three months liberty before he
went to Prison, he should account himself favored by him, and should with more
cheerfulness go, when he had done some Work. At which time we sold off all our
goods, preparing for a Goal, or Banishment, where he was desirous I should
attend him, as I was willing to do, it always having been more grievous to me
to think of being absent from him, than to suffer with him.

He also resolved, when they would suffer him no longer to stay in England, he
would go to China, or some remote Part of the World, and publish the Gospel
there.

It pleased the (...) to indulge him, that he went on in his Work from (...)
(...) (...) the 26th after: Though often (...), yet he was never (...), though
the People both of the Town and Country were grown so resolute, that they came
in great multitudes, at whatever season the Meeting was appointed, very seldom
missing twice a Sabbath, and often in the week: I know that he has Preached
fourteen times in eight days, and ten often, and six or seven ordinarily in
these Months, at home and abroad, besides his frequent converse with Souls. He
then laying aside all other Studies which he formerly so much delighted in,
because he accounted his time would be but short. And the Lord (as he often
told me) made his Work in his Ministry far more easy to him, by the supplies
of his Spirit both in Gifts and Grace, as did evidently appear, both in his
Doctrine and Life; he appearing to be more Spiritual, and Heavenly, and
affectionate then before, to all that heard him, or conversed with him.

He was upon a Saturday in the evening, about six a clock, seized on by an
Officer of our Town, who had rather have been otherwise employed, as he has
often said, but that he was forced to a speedy execution of the Warrant, by a
Justice's Clerk, who was sent on purpose with it to see it Executed, because he
feared that none of the Town would have done it.

The Warrant was in the Name of three Justices, to summon him to appear
forthwith at one of their Houses, which was about two miles from the Town, but
he desired liberty to stay and Sup with his Family first, supposing his
Entertainment there would be such as would require some refreshment: This would
not be granted, till one of the chief of the Town was bound for his speedy
appearance: His Supper being prepared, he sat down eating very heartily, and
was very cheerful, but full of Holy and gracious Expressions, suitable to his
and our prosent state. After Supper, having prayed with us, he with the
Officer, and two or three Friends accompanying him, repaired to the Justices
House, where they lay to his charge, that he had broken the Act of Uniformity
by his Preaching; which he denied, saying; That he had Preached neither in any
Church, nor Chapel, nor place of public Worship since the 24th of August, and
what he did was in his own Family, with those others that came there to hear
him.

Here behold hom many Ministers have these eight or nine years been silenced in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, whose Holy Skill and Conscience, Fidelity and
Zeal, is sucht, as would have justly advanced most of the Ancient Fathers (...)
the Church, to far greater renown, had they been but possessed with the like:
Of whom indeed the World is not worthy. O! how many of them am I constrained to
remember, with joy for their great Worth, and sorrow for their Silence! But
though Learning, Holiness, wonderful Ministerial Skill, and Industry,
Moderation, Peaceableness, true Catholecism, absolute Dedication unto Christ,
Zeal, Patience and Perseverance, did not all seem sufficient to procure his
Ministerial or Corporal Liberty in his latter years; yet they did much more for
him than that, in qualifying him for the Crown which he now enjoys; and to
hear, Well done good and faithful Servant, enter into thy Masters Joy.

But, alas, Lord! What is the terrible future evil, from which thou take such
men away! And why is this World so much forsaken? As if it were not a Prayer of
Hope which thou have taught us, Thy Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven.

He has Printed a small Book, called, A Call to Archippus, to persuade the
silent Non-conformists, to pity Souls, and to be faithful in the Work to which
they are Devoted and Consecrated, how dear soever it may cost them.

He held that Separation in a Church was necessary many times from the known
corruptions of it. But allowed not Separation from a Church, where Active
Compliance with some sinful Evil, was not made the Condition of Communion. And
in this way he frequently declared himself in Health and Sickness, and most
expressly in my hearing on his Bed of Languishing, when he was drawing near his
Long-Home.

And that the People were not disobliged from attending upon their Ministry,
who were ejected out of their Places, as his Book entitled A Call to Archippus
shows; after that Black and Mournful Sabbath, in which he took his farewell
with much affection of his Beloved People.

When he was taken up for Prison, he was not only contented, but joyful to
suffer for the Name of Jesus and his Gospel, which was so dear to him;
Intimating, that God had given him much more] time than he expected, or asked of
him, and that he accounted it cause of rejoicing, and his honor, that he was
one of the first called forth to suffer for his name.

Although he was very suddenly surprised, yet none could discern him to be in
the least moved.

He pitied the condition of his Enemies, requesting for them, as the Martyr
Stephen did for those that stoned him, That God would not lay this sin of
theirs to their charge. The greatest harm that he did wish to any of them, was,
That they might thoroughly be Converted and Sanctified, and that their Souls
might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

He was very urgent with those that were Unconverted, to look with more care
after their Salvation, now they were removed from them that longed for it, and
had watched for their Souls; using this as an Argument often, That now they
were fallen into the hands of such, many of which, if not most of them, had
neither Skill nor Will to save Souls: And setting home upon them with most
tender Affections, what miserable Creatures they were while Unregenerate,
telling them how his Heart did yearn for them, and his Bowels turned within him
for them; how he did pray and weep for them, while they were asleep, and how
willingly he had suffered a years Imprisonment: Nay, how readily he could shed
his Blood to procure their Salvation. His Counsels and Directions were many,
and suited to the several states of those he thus Conversed with, both as to
their degree and place, and their sins and wants, and would be too long to
recite, though I can remember many of them.

To his fellow Prisoners, he said, The Eyes of GOD and Angels are upon you, and
the eyes of Men are upon you; now you will be critically observed. Every one
will be looking that you should be more Holy than others, that are called forth
to this his glorious Dignity, to be the Witnesses of Christ Jesus, with the
loss of your Liberties.

He was eminently free from harsh censuring and judging of others, and was
ready to embrace all in Heart, Arms, and (...), Civil and Religious, any that
prosessed saving (...) Jesus Christ, and did not overthrow that Profession by
some Fundamental Error in Doctrine or Wickedness of Life and Conversation.

And yet they accused him of being at a Riotous Assembly, though there were no
Threats, nor dangerous Words; no Staves, nor Weapons, no Fear so much as
pretended to be struck into any man, nor any other Business met about, then
Preaching and Prayer. Here he was much abused, receiving many scorns and scoffs
from the Justices, and their Associa es, who were met to hear his Examination,
also from the Ladies and other Gentlemen, who called him often Rogue, and told
him, he deserved to be Hanged, and if he were not, they would be Hanged for
him: With many such like scurrilous Passages, which my Husband received with
much patience; and seeming, as they apprehended by his Countenance, to slight
their Threatenings, they were more enraged at him: They urged him much to accuse
himself, which they seeing they could not bring him to; and having no evidence,
as appeared after, yet did make his Mittimus for to go to the Goal on Monday
Morning, after they had detained him till twelve at Night, abusing him beyond
what I do now distinctly remember, or were fit to express.

As soon as he returned, it being so late, about two a Clock, he lay down on
the Bed in his Clothes, where he had not slept above two or three hours at the
most, but he was up, spending his time in Converse with God, till about eight a
Clock; by which hour, several of his Friends were come to Visit him: But he was
so watched, and the Officer had such a charge, that he was not suffered to
Preach all that Sabbath, but spent the day in discoursing with the various
Companies, that came flocking in from the Town, and Villages, to visit him;
Praying often with them, as he could be permitted. He was exceeding cheerful in
his Spirit, full of admirations of the Mercies of God, and encouraging all that
came to be bold, and venture for the Gospel, and their Souls, notwithstanding
what was come upon him for their sakes: For, as he told them, he was not at all
moved at at, nor did not in the least repent of any thing he had done, but
accounted himself happy, and under that Promise Christ makes to his, in the 5th
of Matthew, That he should be doubly and trebly blessed now he was to suffer
for his sake: And was very earnest with his Brethren in the Ministry, that came
to see him, That they would not in the least desist when he was gone, that
there might not be one Sermon the less in Taunton; and with the People to
attend the Ministry with greater Ardency, Diligency, and courage, than before;
assuring them how sweet and comfortable it was to him to consider what he had
done for God in the months past: And that he was going to Prison full of Joy,
being confident that all these things would turn to the furtherance of the
Gospel, and the Glory of God.

But he not being satisfied to go away, and not leave some exhortations with
his People, he appointed them to meet him about one or two a Clock in the
Night, to which they showed their readiness, though at so unseasonable a time:
There was of Young and Old, many hundreds; he Preached and Prayed with them
about three hours.

And so with many yearnings of his Bowels toward them, and theirs toward him,
they took their farewell of each other; a more affectionate Parting could not
well be.

About nine a Clock, he with two or three Friends that were willing to
accompany him, set out for Ilchester: The Streets were lined on both sides with
People, and many followed him a foot some miles out of the Town, with such
lamentations, (that he told me after) did so affect him, that he could scarce
bear them; but the Lord so strengthened him, that he passed through them all
with great Courage and Joy, laboring both by his cheerful Countenance and
Expressions, to encourage them.

He carried his Mittimus himself, and had no Officer with him; but when he came
there, he found the Jailer absent, and took that opportunity to Preach before
he went into the Prison; which was accounted by his Adversaries, a great
addition to his former Crime. As soon as the Jailer came, he delivered his
Mittimus, and was clapped up in the Bridewel Chamber, which was over the common
Goal. When he came to the Prison, he found there Mr. John Norman, late Minister
of Bridgwater, who for the like cause, was Apprehended and Committed a few
days before him, (a Man, who for his singular Abilities in Preaching, his
fervent Zeal, and Holy Boldness in the Cause of Christ, his Constancy to his
Principles in the most Wavering and Shaking Times, joined with an exemplary
Carriage and Conversation, was deservedly had in great repute among the People
of God in these Western parts; and indeed there were very few that knew him,
either among the sober Gentry, or Commonalty; but for his eminent Parts, and
spotless Life, had great respects for him.) There were also five more
Ministers, with fifty Quakers, which had all their Lodgings in the same Room,
only parted with a Mat, which they had done for a little more Retirement. It
was not long after before Mr. Coven, and Mr. Powel, with eight more, were
brought into the same place, being taken at Meetings; which made their Rooms
very straight, and it was so nigh to the upper part of the Prison, that they
could touch the Tiles as they lay in their Beds; which made it very irksom, the
Sun lying so hot on it all the day, and there being so many of them, and so
much Resort continually of Friends, they had very little Air, till they were
forced to take down the Glass, and some of the Tiles, to let in some
Refreshment. But here they were confined to Lie, and eat their Meals, and had
no place but a small Garden, joined to the place where all the Common Prisoners
were; which was no Retirement for them, they having there, and in their
Chamber, the constaut noise of those Wretches, except when they slept; who lay
just under them, their Chains rattling, their Tongues often Blaspheming; or else
Roaring and Singing by Night, as well as in the Day: And if they went into the
Courts of the Prison, there was the sight of their Clothes hanging full of
Vermin, and themselves in their Rags and Chains: But that which was most
grievous to them, they had no place to retire to God in, neither alone, nor
together. They were also much molested by the Quakers, who would frequently
disturb them by their Cavils, in the times of their Preaching, Praying, and
Singing, and would come and work in their Callings just by them, while they
were in Duties, which was no small disturbance to them: And the want of the Air
was more to my Husband, than to most of them, because he always accustomed
himself, both in Oxford, and after, to spend his most secret Hours abroad in
by-Places, in the Fields or Woods.

As soon as he came into the Prison, he Preached and Prayed, that he called the
Consecration of it. After he had spent a day or two in the Prison, being
willing to have me either in the Town, or there, to attend him, and to keep
company with his Friends, who came frequently to visit him, he then began to
fit up his Lodging; having prevailed with the Keeper for one Corner, which was
more private than the rest, to set his Bed in, about which he made a little
Partition by some Curtains, that so he might have some convenience for
Retirement. This was much comfort to him, and after a few Weeks, he got leave
of the Keeper to go out a Mornings and Evenings a mile or more, which he did
constantly, unless the Weather, or his Keepers fury did hinder him.

Their Diet was very good and sufficient, and sometimes abundant, by their
Friends kindness. Here they Preach once a day coustantly, sometimes twice, and
many came daily to hear them, eight or ten miles round about the Country; and
Multitudes came to visit them, it being a strange sight to see Ministers laid
in such a place. Their Friends were exceeding kind to them, endeavoring by
their frequents Visits, and provisions for Diet, and supplies of Money, to make
their Prison sweet to them.

But my Husbands Labors were much increased by this, spending all the day in
converse, he was forced to take much of the Night for his Studies, and secret
Converse with God.

Thus he with my Brother Norman, and his Company, with their fellow Prisoners,
continued in that place for four Months, being tossed from Sessions to Assizes.
On the 14th of July following, he was brought to the Sessions held at Taunton,
and was there Indicted for Preaching on May the 17th, but the Evidence against
him was so slender, that the Grand Jury could not find the Bill, so that he was
not brought to his Answer there at all: And his Friends hoped he should have
been dismissed, it being the constant practice of the Court, that if a Prisoner
be Indicted, and no Bill found, he is Freed by Proclamation, But however, my
Husband was sent to Prison again until the Assizes; and to his Friends that
earnestly expected his Enlargement, he said, Let us bless God that his Will is
done, and not the will of such Worms as we.

August the 24th, He was again Indicted at the Assizes, and though the Evidence
was the very same, that at the Sessions was by the Grand Jury, judged
Insufficient yet now at the Assizes, the Bill was by them found against him. So
was he had to the Bar, and his Indictment read, which was to this purpose: That
he, upon the 17th day of May, 1663. with twenty others, to the Jurors unknown,
did Riotously, Routously, and Seditiously, Assemble themselves together,
contrary to the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, and to the great Terror
of his Subjects, and to the evil Example of others. Unto which, his Answer was,
That as to Preaching, and Praying, which was the truth of the Case, of these
things he was guilty, and did own them as his Duty; but as for Riotous Routous,
and Seditious Assemblies, he did abhor them with his Heart, and of these he was
not guilty. At last he was found guilty by the Petty Jury, and was Sentenced by
the Judge to pay an Hundred Marks, and to lie in Prison till payment should be
made. Sentence being pronounced against him, he only made this brief Reply:
That he was glad that it had appeared before his Country, That whatsoever he
was charged with, he was guilty of nothing but doing his Duty, and that all did
(...) the Evidence, was only that he had Sung (...) Psalm, and Instructed his
Family, others being there, and both in his own House: And that if nothing that
had been urged would satisfy, he should with all cheerfulness and
thankfulness, accept whatsoever Sentence his Lordship should pronounce upon
him, for so Good and Righteous a Cause. Thus from the Assizes he was sent to
Prison again, where he continued a whole Year, wanting but three days.

But the Winter coming on, they were willing to try if they could have the
favor to be removed to the Ward, this place being like to be as cold in the
Winter, as it had been hot in the Summer, (there being no Chimney in the whole
Chamber) which with some difficulty they obtained; and then had more
comfortable Accomodations in all respects.

Here they had very great Meetings, Week-dayes, and Sabbath-dayes, and many
days of Humiliation, and Thanksgiving. The Lords-dayes many Hundreds came. And
though my Husband, and Brother Norman, had many Threats from the Justices and
Judges, That they should be sent beyond Sea, or carried to some Island, where
they should be kept close Prisoners; yet the Lord preserved them by his Power,
and thus ordered it, that their Imprisonment was a great furtherance to the
Gospel, and brought much Glory to him, both by their Preaching and Conversing
with Souls: In which they had great Success through his Blessing on their
Labors. My Husband having here more freedom, made a little Book, Entitled A
Call to Archippus, to stir up his Nonconforming Brethren, to be diligent at
their Work, whatsoever Dangers and Sufferings they might meet withal: And
because he could not go to his Flock, he had prepared for them, The Synopsis of
the Covenant, which was after placed into one of my Fathers Books.

And for the help of the Governors of Families, in their Weekly Catechizing
those under their charge, he explained all the Assemblies shorter Chatechism;
to which he annexed an affectionate Letter, with Rules for their daily
Examination; which were Printed and Dispersed into all their Houses by his
Orde, while he was a Prisoner. He also writ many Holy, and Gracious, and
affectionate Letters to all his Relations, and many other Friends, to many
Churches of Christ in other parts and places, both far and near.

His Sufferings that he underwent for the sake of the Gospel, could neither
remit his Zeal, not abate his Activity for God, but he would gladly embrace all
Opportunities of doing him Service. The Minister who was appointed to Preach at
certain times to the Fellons in the Prison, being by sickness disabled for that
Work, he freely performed that Office among them, as long as he was permitted;
earnestly exhorting them by Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, to secure the eternal welfare of their Souls; freely bestowing
upon them, according to his Ability, for their Relief; that by doing good to
their Bodies, he might win upon them to receive good for their Souls. He was
very forward to promote the Education of Youth, in the Town of Ilchester, and
Country adjacent, freely bestowing Catechisms on those that were of poor
Families, to instruct them in the Principles of Religion; stirring up the Elder
to Teach, and encouraging the Younger to Learn. He was a serious and faithful
Monitor to his fellow Sufferers, if he espied any thing in any of them, that
did not become the Gospel, for which they suffered.

Here, as elsewhere, he was a careful redeemer of his time his constant
practice was, early to begin the day with God, rising about four of the Clock,
and spending a considerable part of the Morning in Meditation and Prayer, and
then falling close to his Study, in some corner or other of the Prison, where
he could be private. At times, he would spend near the whole Night in these
Exercises, not putting off his Clothes at all, only taking the repose of an
hour or two in his Nightgown upon the Bed, and so up again. When any came to
visit him, he did not entertain them with needless impertinent Discourse, but
that which was serious, profitable, and edifying; in which he was careful to
apply himself to them, according to their several capacities, whether Elder or
Younger; exhorting them to those gracious Practices, which by reason of their
Age, or Temper, Calling, or Condition, he apprehended they might be most
defective in, and dehorting them from those Evils they might be most prone and
liable unto. He rejoiced that he was accounted worthy to suffer for the Work of
Christ; and he would labor to encourage the timorous and faint-hearted, by his
own and others experience, of the Mercy and Goodness of God in Prison, which
was far beyond what they could have thought or expected. He was a careful
observer of that Rule of the Lord Jesus, Mat. 5. 44. Love your enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despitefully use you, and persecute you. It was none of his practice to exclaim
against those that were the greatest Instruments of his Sufferings.

In all his Imprisonment, at present, I could not discern his Health to be the
least impaired, notwithstanding his abundant Labors; but cannot but suspect,
as the Physicians judged, that he had laid the foundation for that Weakness,
which suddenly after surprised him, and was his death.

At his return from the Prison, he was far more earnest in his Work than
before; yet willing to preserve his liberty among his People, who had no
Minister that had the oversight of them, though some came and preached while he
was absent: And the People flocked so greatly after him, that he judged it best
to divide the Company into four, and resolved to Preach four times each Sabbath
to them: But finding sensibly that would be too hard for him, his strength much
decaying, he did forbear that course, and preached only twice a Sabbath as
formerly, and often on Weekdays at Home and in the Country; and spent what
time he had else from his studying, in private converse with God, as formerly
he had done: Pressing all that feared the Lord, especially those that were of a
more weak and timorous Spirit, to a life of Courage and Activity for God, and
to be much in helping one another, by their Converses, now Ministers were
withdrawn; and to be much in the Work of Praises and Thanksgiving to God,
rejoicing and delighting themselves in him; and with cheerfulness and
readiness, denying themselves for him, and resigning themselves, and all they
did enjoy, to him: Letting the World know, they could live comfortably on a God
alone, on his Attributes and Promises, though they should have nothing else
left.

But it pleased the All-wise God, to take him off from the eager pursuit of his
Work, and designs for him, by visiting him in the later end of August, with
much Weakness, so that he had not above three months time after he came out of
Prison: For he going about sixteen miles, at the request of a Society, whose
Pastor was not able to come among them to Preach, and to Administer a more
solemn Ordinance; he was so disabled, that he was able not to perform the great
and chief Work, though he did adventure to Preach, but with much injury to
himself, because he would not wholly disappoint the People, who came so far as
many of them did: With much difficulty, after three or four days, I made way
to get him home to Taunton, where we then sojourned, and presently had the best
Advice the most Able Physicians, both in and round the Town, could give; who
advised together, and all judged it to be from his abundant Labors, and the
Preaching too soon after his Meals; as he did, when he Preached four times a
Sabbath, whereby he had so abated the natural heat of his Stomach, that no Food
would digest, nor oftentimes keep within him: He would assure us, he was in no
pain, but a constant discomposure in his Stomach, and a failing of his
Appetite, that he could not for many Weeks bear the scent of any Flesh-meat,
nor retain any Liquors or Broths, so that he consumed so fast, that his Life
seemed to draw to an end: But the Lord did so bless the means, that he
recovered out of this Distemper, after two months time, but so lost the use of
his Arms from October till April, that he could not put off nor on his Clothes,
nor often write either his Notes, or any Letters, but as I wrote for him, as he
dictated to me: He was by all Physicians, and by my earnest beseechings often
diswaded from Preaching, but would not be prevailed with, but did go on once,
and sometimes twice a Sabbath, and in his private Visiting all that Winter; in
the Spring, the use of his Arms returned, for which he was exceeding thankful
to the Lord; and we had great hopes of his Recovering; and making use of
further Remedies, he was able to go on with more freedom in his Work: And the
Summer following, by the use of Mineral-Waters in Wiltshire, near the Devises,
where he was born, his strength was much increased, he finding great and
sensible good by them.

But he venturing too much on what he had obtained, his weakness returned
frequently upon him the next Winter, and more in the Spring following, being
seized as he was at the first: But it continued not long at a time, so that he
did Preach often to his utmost strength (nay, I may say, much beyond the
strength he had) both at Home and Abroad; going into some remote parts of the
Country, where had been no Meetings kept all that time the Ministers had been
out, which was two Years: And there he engaged several of his Brethren to go
and take their turns, which they did with great success.

He had also agreed with two of his Brethren to go into Wales with them, to
spread the Gospel there; but was prevented in that, by his weakness increasing
upon him: It was much that he did, but much more that he desired to do.

He was in this time much Threatened, and Warrants often out for him; and he was
so far from being disturbed at it, that he rejoiced; that when he could do but
little for God, because of his Distempers, God would so far honor him, that he
should go and suffer for him in a Prison. He would often with cheerfulness say,
They could not do him a greater kindness: But the Lord was yet pleased to
preserve him from their rage, seeing him not then fit for the inconveniences
of a Prison.

The five Mile Act coming in force, he removed to a place called Wellington,
which is reckoned five miles from Taunton, to a Dyers House, in a very obscure
place, where he preached on the Lord's-Dayes, as he was able: But the vigilant
Eyes of his old Adversaries were so watchful over him, that they soon found him
out, and resolved to take him thence, and had put a Warrant into the Constables
hand to apprehend him, and sent for our Friend, and threatened to send him to
Goal for entertaining such persons in his House: So my Husband returned to the
House of Mr. John Mallack, a Merchant, who lived about a mile from Taunton, who
had long solicited him to take his House for his Home: We being in such an
unsettled state, my Husband thought it best to accept of his courteous offer:
But many of his Friends were willing to enjoy him in the Town, and so earnest,
that he did, to satisfy them, go from one to another, staying a fortnight, or
three weeks, or a month at each House; but still took Mr. Mallacks for his
Home: This motion of his Friends he told me, (though it was troublesome for us
to be so unsettled) he was willing to embrace, because he knew not how soon he
might be carried again from them to Prison, and he should have opportunity to
be more intimately acquainted with them, and the state of their Souls; and of
their Children and Servants, and how they perform their Duties each to other in
their Families.

He went from no House without serious Counsels, Comforts, or Reproofs, as
their Conditions called for; dealing with all that were capable, both
Governors and others particularly, acquainting them faithfully and most
affectionately, what he had seen amiss in any of them.

He went from no House that was willing to part with him; nor had he
opportunity to answer the requests of half that invited us to their Houses: So
that he would often bless God, and say with holy Mr. Dod, That he had a hundred
Houses for one that he had parted with; and though he had no Goods, he wanted
nothing, his Father cared for him in every thing, that he lived a far more
pleasant life than his Enemies, who had turned him out of all: He was
exceedingly taken with God's Mercy to him, in Mr. Mallacks entertaining him and
me so bountifully, the House, and Gardens, and Walks, being a very great
delight to him, being so Pleasant and Curious, and all Accommodations within
suitable, so that he would often say, That he did as Dives, fare deliciously
every day: But he hoped he should improve it better than he did, and that God
had inclined him to take care for many Poor, and for several of his Brethren in
the Ministry; and now God did reward him, by not suffering him to be at the
least expense for himself or me.

He was a very strict observer of all Providence of every day, and did usually
reckon them up to me before we went to sleep, each night after he came into his
Chamber and Bed, to raise his own Heart and Mind, to praise the Lord, and to
trust him, whom we had such experience of, from time to time.

The time of the Year being come for his going to the Waters, he was desirous
to set one day apart for thanksgiving to God, for all his Mercies to him and
them, and so to take his leave of them.

Accordingly, on the 10th of July, 1665. diverse of his Brethren in the
Ministry, and many of his Friends of Taunton, met together to take their leave
of him before his departure, at the House of Mr. Mallack, then living about a
mile out of the Town. Where after they had been a while together, came two
Justices, and several other Persons attending them, brake open the Doors by
force, (though they might have unlatched them if they had pleased) and with
Swords came in among them. After much deriding and menacing Language, which I
shall not here relate, having taken their Names, committed them to the custody
of some Constables, whom they charged to bring them forth the next day, at the
Castle Tavern in Taunton, before the Justices of the Peace there. The next day
the Prisoners appeared, and answered to their Names; and after two days
tedious attendance, were all Convicted of a Conventicle, and Sentenced to pay
three Pounds a piece, or to be committed to Prison threescore days. Of the
Persons thus Convicted, but few either paid their Fines, or suffered their
Friends to do it for them. My Husband, with seven Ministers more, and forty
private Persons, were committed to the Prison of Ilchester: When he, together
with the rest of his Brethrtn and Christian Friends, came to the Prison, his
Carriage and Conversation there was every way as Exemplary, as in his former
Confinement. Notwithstanding his weakness of Body, yet he would constantly take
his turn with the rest of the Ministers, in preaching the Gospel in the Prison;
which turns came about the oftener, though there were eight of them there
together, because they had Preaching and Praying twice a day, almost every day
they were in Prison; besides other Exercises of Religion, in which he would
take his part.

And although he had many of his Flock confined to the Prison with him, by
which means he had the fairer opportunity of Instructing, and watching over
them, for their Spitual good; yet he was not forgetful of the rest that were
left behind, but would frequently visit them also, by his Letters, full of
serious profitable Matter, from which they might reap no small benefit, while
they were debarred of his bodily presence. And how greatly solicitous he was
for those that were with him, (that they might be the better for their Bonds,
walking worthy of the many and great Mercies they had enjoyed during their
Imprisonment; that when they came home to their Houses, they might speak forth,
and live forth the Praises of GOD, carrying themselves in every respect as
becomes the Gospel, for which they had been Sufferers) you may clearly see by
those parting Counsels that he gave them that Morning that they were delivered,
which I shall recite in his own Words, as they were taken from his Mouth in
Shorthand, by an intimate Friend, and fellow Prisoner, which you may take as
follows, etc.

Mr. Joseph Allein his Exhortation to his Fellow Sufferers, when they were to
be Discharged from their Imprisonment.
DEarly Beloved Brethren, my Time is little, and my Strength but small, yet I
could not consent that you should pass without receiving some parting Counsel,
and what I have to say at Parting, shall be chiefly to you that are Prisoners,
and partly also to you our Friends, that are here met together. To you that are
Prisoners, I shall speak something by way of Exhortation, and something by way
of Dehortation.

By way of Exhortation.
First, Rejoice with trembling in your Prison-Comforts, and see that you keep
them in a Thankful-Remembrance. Who can tell the Mercies that you have received
here? My time, nor strength, will not suffice me to recapitulate them. See that
you rejoice in GOD, but rejoice with trembling. Do not think the account will
be little for Mercies, so many and so great. Receive these choice Mercies with
a trembling hand, for fear lest you should be found guilty of misimproving such
precious benefits, and so wrath should be upon you from the Lord. Remember
Hezekiah's case, great Mercies did he receive, some Praises he did return, but
not according to the benefit done unto him; therefore was wrath upon him from
the Lord, and upon all Judah for his sake, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. Therefore go away
with a holy Fear upon your hearts, lest you should forget the loving kindness
of the Lord, and should not render to him according to what you have received.

Oh my Brethren, stir up your selves to render praises to the Lord: You are the
People that GOD has formed for his Praise, and sent hither for his Praise; and
you should now go Home as so many Trumpets to sound forth the Praises of GOD,
when you come among your Friends. There is an Expression, Psalm. 68. 11. The
Lord gave the Word, great was the company of them that published it. So let it
be said of the Praises of God now, Great was the company of them that published
them. GOD has sent a whole Troop of you here together, let all these go home
and sound the praises of GOD wherever you come; and this is the way to make
his Praise glorious indeed. Shall I tell you a Story that I have read: There
was a certain King that had a pleasant Grove, and that he might make it every
way delightful to him, he caused some Birds to be caught, and to be kept up in
Cages, till they had learned sundry sweet and artificial Tunes; and when they
were perfect in their Lessons, he let them Abroad out of their Cages into his
Grove, that while he was walking in this Grove, he might hear them singing
those pleasant Tunes, and teaching them to other Birds that were of a wilder
Note. Brethren, this King is GOD, this Grove is his Church, these Birds are
your selves, this Cage is the Prison; GOD has sent you hither, that you should
learn the sweet and pleasant Notes of his Praise, And I trust that you have
learned something all this while, GOD forbid else. Now GOD opens the Cage, and
lets you forth into the Grove of his Church, that you may sing forth his
Praises, and that others may learn of you too. Forget not therefore the Songs
of the House of your Pilgrimage, do not return to your wild Notes again; keep
the Mercy of GOD for ever in a thankful Remembrance, and make mention of them
humbly as long as you live; then shall you answer the end for which he sent you
hither: I trust you will not forget this place. When Queen Mary died, she said,
That if they did rip her up, they should find Callis on her Heart. I hope that
men shall find by you hereafter, that the Prison is upon your heart, Lichester
is upon your heart.

Secondly, Feed and feast your Faith upon Prison-Experiences. Do not think that
GOD has done this only for your present supply. Brethren, GOD has provided
for you, not only for your present supply in Prison, but to lay up for all your
Lives, that experience that your Faith must live upon, till Faith be turned
into Vision. Learn dependence upon GOD, and confidence in GOD, by all the
Experiences that you have had here, Because thou have been my help (says the
Psalmist) therefore under the shadow of thy Wing will I rejoice. Are you at a
loss at any time, then remember your Bonds. We read in Scripture of a time when
there was no Smith in all Israel, and the Israelites were fain to carry their
Goads and other Instruments, to be sharpened, down to the Philistines: So when
your Spirits are low, and when your Faith is dull, carry them to the Prison to
be sharpened and quickened. Oh how has the Lord confuted all our fears! Cared
for all our necessities! The Faith of some of you was sorely put to it for
Corporal Necessities: You came hither, not having any thing considerable to pay
for your Charges here, but GOD took care for that: And you left poor miserable
Families at home, and no doubt but many troublesome thoughts were in your
minds, what your Families should do for Bread, but GOD has provided for them.

We that are Ministers, left poor starvling Flocks, and we thought that the
Country had been now stripped, and yet GOD has provided for them. Thus has the
Lord been pleased to furnish us with Arguments for our Faith, against we come
to the next distress: Though you should be called forth to leave your Flocks
destitute, you that are my Brethren in the Ministry, and others their Families
destitute, yet doubt not but GOD will provide, remember your Bonds upon all
occasions. Whenever you are in distress, remember your old Friend, remember
your tried Friend.

Thirdly, Let Divine Mercy be as Oil to the flame of your Love: O love the Lord
all ye his Saints. Brethren, this is the Language of all GOD's dealings with
you, they all call upon you to love the Lord your God with all your hearts,
with all your Souls, with all your strength. What has GOD been doing ever
since you came to this Prison? All that he has been doing since you came
hither, has been to pour Oil into the flames of your Love, thereby to increase
and heighten them. GOD has lost all these Mercies upon you, if you do not love
him better then you did before. You have had supplies; to what purpose is it,
unless you love GOD the more? If they that be in want, love him better than
you, it were better you had been in their case. You have had health here, but
if they that be in sickness love GOD better than you, it were better you had
been in sickness too: See that you love your Father, that has been so tender
of you. What has GOD been doing, but pouring out his Love upon you? How were
we mistaken? For my part, I thought that GOD took us upon his Knee to Whip us,
but he took us upon his Knee to Dandle us. We thought to have felt the strokes
of his Anger, but he has stroked us as a Father his Children, with most dear
Affection. Who can utter his loving Kindness! What (my Brethren) shall we be
(...) than Publicans? the Publicans will love those that love them. Will not
you return Love for so much Love? Far be this from you, Brethren, you must not
only exceed the (...), but the Pharisees too; therefore, surely you must love
him that loves you. This is my Business now to bespeak your love to GOD, to
unite your hearts to him; Blessed be God for this Occasion, for my part I am
unworthy of it. Now if I can get your Hearts nearer to GOD than they were, then
happy am I, and blessed are you: Fain I would, that all these Experiences
should knit our Hearts to GOD more, and endear us for ever to him. What? So
much bounty and kindness, and no returns of Love? At least no further returns?
I may plead in the behalf of the Lord with you, as they did for the Centurion:
He loves our Nation (say they) and has built us a Synagogue. So I may say
here, He has loved you, and poured out his Bounty upon you. How many friendly
Visits from those that you could but little expect of? Whence do you think this
came? It is GOD that has the Key of all these Hearts. He secretly turned the
Cock, and caused them to pour forth kindness upon you: There is not a motion of
love in the Heart of a Friend toward you, but it was GOD that put it in.

Fourthly, Keep your Manna in a Golden Pot, and forget not him that has said
so often, Remember me. You have had Manna rained plentifully about you, be sure
that something of it be kept. Do not forget all the Sermons that you have heard
here: O that you would labor to repeat them over, to live them over! You have
had such a Stock that you may live upon, and your Friends too (if you be
communicative) a great while together: If any thing have been wanting, time for
the Digesting has been wanting. See that you well Chew the Cud, and see that
you especially remember the Feasts of Love. Do not you know who has said to
you so often, Remember me? How often have you heard that sweet Word since you
came hither? What? Do you think it is enough to remember him for an hour? No,
but let it be a living and lasting remembrance. Do not you write that Name of
his in the Dust, that has written your Names upon his Heart. Your High Priest
has your Names upon his Heart, and therewith is entered into the Holy Place,
and keeps them there for a Memorial before the Lord continually. O that his
Remembrance might be ever written upon your Hearts, written as with a Pen of a
Diamond, upon Tables of Marble, that might never be worn out! That as Aristotle
says of the cutious Fabric of Minerva, that he had so ordered the Fabric,
that his Name was written in the midst, that if any went to take that out, the
whole Fabric was dissolved. So the Name of Jesus should be written upon the
substance of your Souls, that they should pull all (...), before they should be
able to pull it out.

Fifthly, Let the Bonds of your Affliction, strengthen the Bonds of your
Affection. Brethren, GOD has sent us hither to teach us among other things,
the better to Love one another. Love is lovely, both in the sight of GOD and
Men, and if by your Imprisonment you have profited in Love, then you have made
an acceptable proficiency. O Brethren, look within; Are you not more indeared
one to another? I bless the Lord for that Union and Peace that has been ever
among you; but you must be sensible that we come very far short of that Love
that we owe one to another; we have not that love, that indearedness, that
tenderness, that complacency, that compassion toward each other, that we ought
to have. Ministers should be more indeared one to another, and Christians
should be more dear to each other, then they were before. We have eaten and
drunk together, and lived on our Fathers Love in one Family together; we have
been joined together in one common Cause, and all put into one Bottom: O let
the Remembrance of a Prison, and of what has passed here, especially those
Uniting Feasts, engage you to love one another.

Sixthly, Let present Indulgence fit you for future hardships, and do not look
that your Father should be always dandling you on his Knee. Beloved, GOD has
used you like Fondlings now, rather than like Sufferers: What shall I say? I am
at a loss, when I think of the tender indulgence, and the yearnings of the
Bowels of our Heavenly Father upon us. But (my Brethren) do not look for such
Prisons again.

Affliction does but now play and sport with you, rather than Bite you; but do
you look that Affliction should hereafter fasten its Teeth on you to purpose:
And do you look that the Hand that has now gently stroked you, may possibly
buffet you, and put your Faith hard to it, when you come to the next Trial.
This fondness of your Heavenly Father, is to be expected only while you are
young and tender, but afterward you must look to follow your Business, and to
keep your distance, and to have rebukes and frowns too when you need them.
Bless GOD for what you have found here, but prepare you, this is but the
beginning, (shall I say the beginning of Sorrow, I cannot say so; for the Lord
has made it a place of Rejoicing) this is but the entrance of our Affliction;
but you must look, that when you are trained up to a better perfection, GOD
will put your Faith to harder Exercise.

Seventhly, Cast up your accounts at your Return, and see whether you have gone
as much forward in your Souls, as you have gone backward in your Estates. I
cannot be insensible, but some of you are here to very great disadvantage, as
to your Affairs in the World, having left your business so rawly at home in
your Shops, Trades, and Callings, that it is like to be no little detriment to
you, upon this Account: But happy are ye, if you find at your return, that as
much as your Affairs are gone backward, and behind-hand, so much your Souls
have gone forward. If your Souls go forward in Grace by your Sufferings,
blessed be GOD that has brought you to such a place as a Prison is.

Eighthly, Let the Snuffers of this Prison make your Light burn the brighter,
and see that your Course and Discourse be the more savoury, serious, and
Spiritual for this present Trial. O Brethren! Now the Voice of the Lord is to
you, as it is in the Prophet Isaiah 60. 1. Arise, and shine, now let your Light
shine before men, that others may see your good Works, and glorify your Father
which is in Heaven. It is said of those Preachers beyond Sea, that have been
sent into England, and here reaped the benefit of our English practical
Divinity: At their Return, they have Preached so much better than they had wont
to do, that it has been said of them: Apparuit hunc fuisse in Anglia. So do
you my Brethren, Live so much better than you had wont, that when men shall see
the change in your Lives, they may say of you, Apparuit hunc fuisse in
Custodia. See that your whole Course and Discourse be more Spiritual and
Heavenly than ever. See that you shine in your Families when you come Home; be
you better Husbands, better Masters, better Fathers, study to do more than you
have done this way, and to approve your selves better in your Family-Relations
than you did before; that the savor of a Prison may be upon you in all
Companies, then will you praise and please the Lord.

Ninthly, And lastly, See that you walk Accurately, as those that have the Eyes
of GOD, Angels, and Men, upon you: (my Brethren) you will be looked upon now
with very curious Eyes. GOD does expect more of you than ever; for he has done
more for you, and he looks what Fruit there will be of all this. Oh! may
there be a sensible change upon your Souls, by the Showers that have fallen in
Prison, as there is in the greenness of the Earth, by the showers that have
fallen lately abroad.

By way of Dehortation also, I have these four things to Leave with you.
First, Revile not your Persecutors, but bless them, and pray for them, as the
Instruments of conveying great Mercies to you. Do not you so far forget the
Rule of Christ, as when you come home, to be setting your Mouths to talk
against those that have injured you. Remember the Command of your Lord, Bless
them that curse you, pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute
you. Whatsoever they intended, yet they have been Instruments of a great deal
of Mercy to us; and so we should pray for them, and bless GOD for the good we
have received by them.

Secondly, Let not the humble acknowledgment of GOD's Mercy degenerate into
proud, Vainglorious boasting, or Carnal-tryumph. I beseech you, see that you
go home with a great deal of fear upon your Spirits in this respect, left pride
should get advantage of you, left instead of humble acknowledging GOD's Mercy,
there should be Carnal boasting. Beware of this, I earnestly beg of you, for
this will very much spoil your Sufferings, and be very displeasing in the sight
of GOD. But let your acknowledging of his Mercy, be ever with humble
Self-abasing Thankfulness, and be careful that you do not make his Mercies to
be the Fuel of your Pride, which were to lose all at once.

Thirdly, Be not Prodigal of your Liberty upon a conceit that the Prisons will
be easy, nor fearful of adventuring your selves in the way of your Duty. Alas!
I am afraid of both these extremes on the one hand, lest some among us, having
found a great deal of Mercy here, will now think there is no need of any
Christian prudence, which is always necessary, and is a great duty. It is not
cowardice to make use of the best means to preserve our Liberty, not decling
our Duty. On the other-side, there is fear lest some may be fearful, and ready
to decline their Duty; because they have newly tasted of a Prison for it. Far
be it from you to distrust GOD, of whom you have had so great experience, but
be sure you hold on in your duty, whatsoever it cost you.

Fourthly, Do not load others with censures, whose Judgment, or Practice,
differs from yours, but humbly bless GOD that has so happily directed you. You
know all are not of the same mind as to the Circumstances of Suffering, and all
have not gone the same way. Far be it from any of you (my Brethren) that you
should so far forget your selves, as to be unmerciful to your Brethren, but
bless GOD that has directed you into a better way. Your charity must grow
higher than ever; GOD forbid that you should increase in Censures, instead of
increasing in Charity.

Having spoken to my Fellow Prisoners, I have two Words to speak to you our
Friends and Brethren with us.

First, Let our experience be your encouragement. O love the Lord, ye our
Friends, love the Lord, fear him for ever, believe in him, trust in him for
ever, for our sakes; we have tasted of the kindness of GOD.

You know how good GOD has been to us in Spirituals and in Temporals.
Encourage your hearts in the Lord your God, serve him the more freely and
gladly for our sakes. You see we have tried, we have tasted how good the Lord
is: Do you trust him the more, because we have tried him so much, and found him
a Friend so Faithful, so Gracious, that we are uttterly unable to speak his
Praise. Go on and fear not in the way of your Duty: Verily there is a reward
for the Righteous. GOD has given us a great reward already, but this is but
the least, we look for a Kingdom.

Secondly, and lastly, My desire is to our Friends, that they will all help us
in our Praises. Our Tongues are too little to speak forth the Goodness and the
Grace of GOD, do you help us in our Praises. Love the Lord the better, Praise
him the more, and what is wanting in us, let it be made good by you. O that the
Praises of GOD may sound abroad in the Country by our means, and for our sakes.

HE was prevented of going to the Waters, by his last Imprisonment; for want of
which, his Distempers increased much upon him all the Winter after, and the
next Spring more (...) yet not so as to take him fully off from his Work, but
he Preached, and kept many Days, and Administered the Sacrament among them
frequently.

But going up to the Waters in July 1667, they had a contrary effect upon him,
from what they had at first: For after three days taking them, he fell into a
Fever, which seized on his Spirits, and decayed his strength exceedingly, so
that he seemed very near Death: But the Lord then again revoked the Sentence
passed upon him, and enabled him in six Weeks to return again to his People,
where he much desired to be: But finding, at his return, great decay of his
strength, and a weakness in all his Limbs, he was willing to go to Dorchester,
to advise further with Doctor Lose, a very Worthy and Reverend Physician, from
whom he had received many Medicines, but never conversed with him, nor had seen
him, which he conceived might conduce more to his full Cure.

The Doctor soon perceiving my Husbands weakness, persuaded him to continue for
a fortnight or three weeks there, that he might the better advise him, and
alter his Remedies, as he should see occasion; which motion was readily yielded
unto by us.

But we had not been there above five days, before the use of all his Limbs
was taken away on a sudden; one day his Arms wholly failing, the next his Legs;
so that he could not go, nor stand, nor move a Finger, nor turn in his Bed, but
as my self and another did turn him night and day in a Sheet: All means
failing, he was given over by Physitiand and Friends, that saw him lie some
weeks in cold Sweats night and day, and many times for some hours together,
half his Body cold, in our apprehensions, dying; receiving nothing but the best
Cordials that Art could invent, and Almond Milk, or a little thin Broth once in
three or four days. Thus he lay from September 28, to November 16. before he
began to Revive, or it could be discerned that Remedies did at all prevail
against his Diseases: In all this time he was still cheerful, and when he did
speak, it was not at all complaining, but always praising and admiring God for
his Mercies; but his Spirits were so low, that he spoke seldom, and very
softly. He still told us he had no pain at all, and when his Friends admired
his Patience, he would say; God had not yet tried him in any thing, but laying
him aside out of his Work, and keeping him out of Heaven; but through Grace he
could submit to his pleasure, waiting for him: It was Pain he ever feared, and
that he had not yet felt; so tender was his Father of him; and he wanted
strength (as he often told us) to speak more of his Love, and to speak for God
who had been, and was still so gracious to him. Being often asked by my self and
others, how it was with his Spirit in all this weakness? he would answer: He
had not those ravishing joys that he expected, and that some Believers did
partake of; but he had a sweet serenity of Heart, and confidence in God,
grounded on the Promises of the Gospel, and did believe it would be well with
him to all eternity.

In all this time, I never heard one impatient word from him, nor could upon my
strictest observation, discern the least discontent with this state; though he
was a pitiful Object to all others that beheld him, being so consumed, besides
the loss of the use of his Limbs: Yet the Lord did support and quiet his
Spirit, that he lay as if he had endured nothing; breaking out often most
affectionately in commending the kindness of the Lord to him, saying, Goodness
and Mercy had followed him all his days.

And indeed the loving kindness and care of God was singular to us in that
place, which I cannot but mention to his praise.

We came Strangers thither, and being in our Inn, we found it very
uncomfortable; yet were fearful to impose our selves on any private House: But
necessity enforcing, we did enquire for a Chamber, but could not procure one;
the Small Pox being very hot in most Families, and those that had them not,
daily expecting them, and so could not spare Rooms, as else they might. But the
Lord who saw our affliction, inclined the heart of a very good Woman, (a
Ministers Widow) one Mrs. Bartlet, to come and invite us to a Lodging in her
House; which we readily and thankfully accepted off; where we were so
accommodated, as we could not have been any where else in the Town, especially
in regard of the assistance I had from four young Women who lived under the
same roof, and so were ready, night and day, to help (...), (I having no
Servant nor Friend near me) we being so unsettled, I kept none, but had always
tended him my self to that time: And the Ministers and Christians of that place
were very compassionate toward us, visiting and Praying with and for us often:
And Dr. Lose visited him twice a day for twelve or fourteen Weeks, except when
he was called out of Town, refusing any Fees tendered to him: The Gentry in and
about the Town, and others, sending to us whatever they imagined might be
pleasing to him; furnishing him with all delicates that might be grateful to
one so weak; So that he wanted neither Food nor Physic, having not only for
necessity, but for delight, and he did much delight himself in the
consideration of the Lord's kindness to him in the love he received, and would
often say, I was a Stranger, and Mercy took me in; in Prison, and it came to
me; sick and weak, and it visited me. There was also ten young Women, besides
the four in the House, that took their turns to watch with him constantly; for
twelve weeks space I never wanted one to help me: And the Lord was pleased to
show his power so in strengthening me, that I was every night (all these Weeks
in the depth of Winter) one that helped to turn him, never lying out of the Bed
one night from him, but every time he called or wanted any thing, was waking to
assist her in the Chamber, though as some of them have said they did tell, that
we did turn him more than 40 times a Night, he seldom sleeping at all in the
Night, in all those Weeks: Though his tender Affections were such, as to have
had me sometimes lain in another Room, yet mine were such to him, that I could
not bear it, the thoughts of it being worse to me than the trouble or
disturbance he accounted I had with him, for I feared none would do any thing
about him with such ease; neither would he suffer any one all the day to touch
him but me, or to give him any thing that he did receive; by which I discerned
it was most grateful to him, and therefore so to me; And I never found any want
of my Rest, nor did get so much as a Cold all that Winter, though I do not
remember that for 14 or 15 years before, I could ever say I was one month free
of a most violent Cough, which if I had been molested with then, would have
been a great addition to his and my affliction; and he was not a little taken
with the goodness of God to me in the time of all his sickness, but especially
that Winter; for he being not able to help himself in the least, I could not be
from him night nor day, with any comfort to him or my self.

In this condition he kept his Bed till December the 18th. And then, beyond all
expectation, though in the depth of Winter, began to revive and go out of his
Bed; but he could neither stand nor go, nor yet move a finger, having sense in
all his Limbs, but not the least motion: As his strength did increase, he
learnt to go, (as he would say) first by being led by two of us, then by one;
and when he could go one turn in his Chamber, though more weakly, and with more
fear than the weakest Child that ever I saw, he was wonderfully taken with the
Lord's Mercy to him: By February he was able, with a little help, to walk in
the Streets; (but not to feed himself) nor to go up or down stairs without much
help.

When he was deprived of the use of his Limbs, looking down on his Arms, as I
held him up by all the strength I had: He again listed up his Eyes from his
useless Arms to. Heaven, and with a cheerful countenance said: The Lord has
given, and the Lord has taken, and blessed be the Name of the Lord.

Being asked by a Friend, How he could be so well contented to lie so long
under such weakness? He answered,

What, is God my Father, Jesus Christ my Savior, and the Spirit my sweet
Friend, my Comforter, and Sanctifyer, and Heaven my Inheritance? Shall I not be
content without Limbs and Health? Through Grace I am fully satisfied with my
Fathers pleasure.

To another that asked him the same, he Answers, I have chosen God, and he is
become mine, and I know with whom I have trusted my self, which is enough: He
is an unreasonable wretch that cannot be content with a God, though he had
nothing else: My interest in God is all my joy.

His Friends (some of Taunton) coming to Dorcester to see him, he was much
revived, and would be set up in his Bed, and have all the Curtains drawn, and
desired them to stand round about the Bed, and would have me take out his Hand,
and hold it out to them, that they might shake him, though he could not them;
as he used formerly to do, when he had been absent from them: And as he was
able, thus he spoke to them: O how it rejoices my heart to see your Faces, and
to hear your Voices, though I cannot speak as heretofore to you: Methinks I am
now like Old Jacob, with all his Sons about him: Now you see my weak estate;
thus have I been for many weeks, since I parted with Taunton, but God has been
with me, and I hope with you; your Prayers have been heard, and answered, for
me many ways; the Lord return them into your own Bosoms. My Friends, Life is
mine, Death is mine, in that Covenant I was preaching of to you, is all my
Salvation, and all my desire; although my Body do not prosper, I hope through
Grace my Soul does.

I have lived a sweet Life by the Promises, and I hope through Grace can Die by
a Promise: It is the Promises of God which are everlasting, that will stand by
us: Nothing but God in them will stead us in a day of Affliction.

My dear Friends, I feel the power of those Doctrines I Preached to you, on my
Heart: Now the Doctrines of Faith, of Repentance, of Self-denial, of the
Covenant of Grace, of Contentment, and the rest; O that you would live them
over, now I cannot Preach to you.

It is a shame for a Believer to be cast down under Afflictions, that has so
many glorious Privileges, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, and eternal
Glory. We shall be as the Angels of God in a little while: Nay, to say the
truth, Believers are, as it were, little Angels already, that live in the power
of Faith. O my Friends! Live like Believers, trample this dirty World under
your feet; Be not taken with its Comforts, nor disquieted with its Crosses, You
will be gone out of it shortly.

When they came to take their leaves of him, he would Pray with them as his
weak state would suffer him; and in the words of Moses, and of the Apostles,
Blessed them. The same he always used after a Sacrament: The Lord bless you
and keep you, the Lord cause his Face to shine upon you, and give you peace.
And the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, through
the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good Work to
do his Will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

And then spoke thus, [Farewell, farewell my dear Friends] Remember me to all
Taunton; I beseech you and them, if I never see your faces more, go Home and
live over what I have preached to you, and the Lord provide for you when I am
gone: O! let not all my labors and sufferings, let not my wasted strength, my
useless Limbs, rise up in judgment against you at the great Day of the LORD.

Another time, some coming to Visit him there, he spoke thus to them: O! my
Friends, let your whole Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ;
whether I am present or absent, live to what I have spoken to you in the Name
of the Lord: Now I cannot Preach to you, let my wasted strength, my useless
Limbs, be a Sermon to you: Behold me, I cannot move a finger; all this is come
upon me for your sakes, and the Gospel; It is for Christ and you that I have
thus spent out my self: I am afraid of you, lest some of you, after all that I
have spoken to you, should be lost in the World. There are many Professors who
can pray well, and talk well, whom we shall find at the left Hand of Christ
another day: You have your Trades, your Estates, your Relations; be not taken
with these, but with God: O live on him! For the Lord's sake go Home and take
heed of the World, worldly Cares, worldly Comforts, worldly Friends, etc.
Saying thus,

The Lord having given Authority to his Ministers to bless his People,
accordingly I bless you in his Name, using the same words as before, and so
parted with them; with many other dear Expressions of his Love to them and the
Town.

And thus he was used to Converse with all that came to Visit him, as he was
able, looking always cheerfully upon them, and never complaining of any
Affliction he was under, except it were to excite his Taunton Friends to their
Duties.

In February, he being very desirous to return among his People, he moved it to
his Doctor, who consented to it, fearing that Air might be too keen for him in
March: And hoping that it might much add to his Cure, to satisfy his mind.

In a Horse-Litter I removed him: He was much pleased at the sight of the
Place, and his People, who came flocking about him; and he seemed to increase
in strength, so that he was able to feed himself the Week after he came Home:
But I fearing the frequent Visits of his Friends might be prejudicial to him,
persuaded him to remove to Mr. Mallacks House, which he was again invited to,
and most courteously entertained.

And thus he continued increasing in strength, till the beginning of April, and
then he began to decline again, and was taken after some days with Convulsion
Fits, as he sat in his Chamber one Afternoon, and had three or four more fits
that Night: But in the use of Means, through God's Blessing, he had no more in
three Weeks. One Evening being in his Chamber, he desired me to leave him a
while alone; which I was very unwilling to do, but his importunity made me to
go down from him: But in less than half a quarter of an hour, he was fallen to
the Ground in one of his former Fits, and had hurt his Face; and from his Nose
came much Blood, which was very clotted and corrupt, which Physicians seeing,
did conclude (though it were grievous to me, that under such Weakness, he
should have so sad an Accident) that the fall saved his life: For had not that
Blood come from his Head, he had, so far as they could rationally judge, died
in that Fit, which took away his Senses for the present; but he went to Bed,
and slept so well that night, as he had not in many Weeks before; so that my
Self, and Friends, feared that he had been in an Apoplexy: But he awaked about
six in the Morning, much refreshed, and full of the Praises of God for his
Mercies to him, being very sensible how suddenly he was surprised the Evening
before. After this, he lived always expecting Death, saying often to me and
his Friends, It is but a puff, and I am gone; And therefore would, every Night
after he had been at Prayer, bid all the Family farewell, telling them, He might
be dead before the Morning; and (...) some holy Counsels to them, would depart
to his Chamber: All the while I was undressing him, he would be discoursing of
Spiritual things, it being all his delight; and when we lay down to rest, his
last words were usually, [ We shall shortly be in another Bed, therefore it is
good to mind it, and provide for it apace; farewell my Dear Heart, the Lord
bless thee] and so he would go to his Rest. In his Health and Sickness, his
first Speeches in the Mornings would be, [ Now we have one day more; here is
one more for God; now let us live well this day; work hard for our Souls; lay
up much Treasure in Heaven this day, for we have but a few to live.]

After this, the strength of his Limbs, which were decayed, returned again, and
he was, beyond all expectation, so far recovered, that we had no fears of his
relapsing again: His Appetite, and Rest, and all repaired. But about the sixth
of May, he began again to find weakness in his Stomach, which in a few days so
grew upon him, that he lost his Limbs again; and on the 12th of May, in the
Morning, having lain some days and nights in cold Sweats, as heretofore at
Dorchester, he was again seized with Convulsions, first lying four hours with
his eyes fixed to Heaven, not speaking one Word, not in the least moving
himself, my self and Friends weeping by him, at last he spoke to us with a very
audible Voice, [ Weep not for me, my Work is done] and seemed to be full of
Matter to utter to us, but was immediately seized with a tertible Convulsion,
which was sad to behold; it so altered his Countenance, and put him into such
Sweats, that 'twas strange to see how the drops lay and run down his Face, and
Hands, and Body: This held him two hours or more, and ceased, but he was left
by it without any sense; and in a quarter of an hour, or little more, fell into
another, in which he ratled, and was cold, so that we apprehended every breath
would be his last. The Physician who was then by him, accounted his Pulse to be
gone, and that he would be dead in a few minutes: But the Lord showed his Power
here once again in raising him, so that many that came and saw him, that heard
the next day he was alive, would not believe till they came and saw him again.
These violent Fits went off about twelve a Clock, and he revived, but had no
sense to converse with us till the next day, nor did he perfectly recover them
four days after, and then was as before, and so continued very weak till July,
no strength coming into his Hands or Legs; for the most part confined to his
Bed, but still cheerful in his Spirit, and free to discourse with any that came
to visit him, as long as he was able.

But the Lord had yet more work for him to do: I seeing him lie so hopeless, as
to his Life or Limbs, and considering the Winter was growing on apace, I
proposed it to the Doctors to have him to the Bath; some were for it, others
against it; acquainting my Husband with it, he was much pleased with it, and so
earnest in it, that I sent immediately to Bath for a Horse-Litter, and the Lord
was pleased strangely to appear in strengthening him for his Journey; so that
he that had not in many weeks been out of his Bed and Chamber, was able in two
days to reach near forty miles, (but when he came to Bath, the Doctors there
seemed to be much amazed to behold such an Object, professing they never saw
the like) much wondering how he was come alive such a Journey, and doubted much
to put him in: But he having tried all Artificial Baths, and Ointments, and
Plasters before, he resolved, against their Judgment, to adventure himself.

At his first appearing in the Bath, being wasted to Skin and Bone, some of the
Ladies were afrighted, as if Death had been come in among them, and could not
endure to look toward him.

The first time he went in, he was able to stay but a little while, but was
much refreshed, and had no symptom of his Fits, which he feared the Bath might
have caused again: Through the blessing of the Lord upon this means, without
any thing else, except his drinking of Goats-Milk, he that was not able to go
nor stand, nor move a Finger, could in three weeks time walk about his Chamber,
and feed himself: his impaired Appetite was again restored, and his strength so
increased, that there seemed no doubt to the Physicians of his full recovery,
he having not the least sign of any inclination to his Fits, from the twelfth
of May till his Death drew nigh.

In this time of his being in Bath, his Soul was far more strengthened with
Grace; so that my self, and all that beheld him, and conversed with him,
discerned sensibly his growth; and he was in the nights and days, so
frequently with God, and often in such ravishments of Spirit, from the Joys and
Consolations that he received from the Spirit of God, that it was oftentimes
more than he could express, or his bodily strength could bear; so that for my
own part, I had less hopes of his continuance on Earth than ever before: For I
perceived plainly, the Lord had spared him but to recover strength of Grace,
and to make him a more evident instance of his singular Love, before he took
him hence.

He being now more cheerful than formerly, and more exceedingly affectionate in
his carriage to me, and to all his Friends, especially with those that were
most Heavenly, the Lord was pleased to order it in his Providence; there were
many such then who came to use the Bath, as Mr. Fairclough and his Wife, Mr.
How of Torrington, Mr. Joseph Barnard and his Wife, and several of our Taunton
Friends, and of Bristol Ministers and others, which was a great comfort to us.

His parts seemed to be more quick in his Converses, whatever he was put upon,
either by Scholars, or those that were more Inferior. He had many visitors
there, both of strangers and Friends, who were willing to see him, and
discourse with him, having heard what a monument of Mercy he was; and he would
to all of them, so amplify upon all the Passages of Gods dealings with him, as
was very pleasant to all that heard him; and did affect many that were
strangers to God, and to Religion, as well as to him.

He found much favor, even among the worst, both Gentry and others (such as
would make a scoff at Religion, or holy Discourse from others) would hearken to
him. Though he did often faithfully reprove many for their Oaths, and excess in
Drinking, their lascivious Carriages, which he observed in the Bath; and there
was none of them but did most thankfully accept it from him, and showed him
more respect after, than they had done before: In which he observed much of
Gods goodness to (...), and would often say to me: O! how good is it to be
faithful to God. The vilest of these Persons, as I was by several informed,
said of him, That he never spoke with such a man in his life.

His Reproofs were managed with so much respect to their Persons, and the
honorable esteem he had of their Dignity, that they said, They could not but
accept his Reproofs, though very close and plain: And his way was, sometime
before he intended to reprove them, he would often in the Bath Converse with
them, of things that might be taking with them; and did so engage their
Affections, that they would willingly every day converse with him: He being
furnished (from his former Studies) for any Company, designing to use it still
for Holy ends; by such means has caught many Souls.

While he was in this place, though he had many Diversions, by his using the
Bath constantly every day, and his frequent Visits, besides his Weakness, yet
he kept his constant Seasons, four times a day, for his Holy Retirements;
waking in the Morning constantly at or before five a Clock, and would not be
disturbed till about seven, when he was carried to the Bath. Having the
Curtains drawn close, he spent his time in Holy Meditation, and Prayer, and
Singing, and once again before Dinner, but then he spent less time; and about
half an hour before two in the Afternoon, just before he went abroad.

For though he never attained to so much strength, as to be able to walk abroad
in the Streets without my leading him, or some other, yet he would be employed
for his Lord and Master. His Chair-men that used to carry him to the Bath, he
appointed to fetch him about three a Clock, who carried him to Visit all the
Schools and Almshouses, and the Godly Poor, especially the Widows; to whom he
would give Money, and with whom he would Pray and Converse with them,
concerning their Spiritual States, according as their Necessities required;
engaging those that were Teachers, and Governors, to Teach the Assemblies
Catechism, buying many Dozens, and giving them to distribute to their Scholars;
and many other small Books which he thought might be useful for them; and then
would come and see, in a Week or Fortnight, what progress they had made: He
also engaged several to send their Children once a Week to him to be
Catechized; which they did hearken to him in: And we had about sixty or seventy
Children every Lord's Day to our Lodging, and they profited much by his
Instructions, till some took such offense at it, that he was forced to desist,
and the Schoolmaster was threatened to be cited to Wells before the Bishop, and
many others afrighted from it.

He also sent for all the godly Poor he could find in that place, and
entertained them at his Chamber, and gave to them every one as he was able, as
a Thank-Offering to the Lord for his Mercy to him, and desired them, with
several others, to keep a day of Thanksgiving for him; Mr. Fairclough, Mr. How,
and Himself, performing the duties of the day.

Thus though his Sickness had been long, and his Expenses great, he thought he
could never spend enough for him from whom he had received all: He constantly
gave Money or Apples to all the Children that came to be catechized by him, to
engage them, besides all he gave to the Teachers, and Poor, which indeed was
beyond his ability, considering his Estate: But I am persuaded, he did foresee
that his time would be but short; and having made a competent and comfortable
provision for me, he resolved to lay up the rest in Heaven; he did often say to
me, If he lived never so long, he would never increase his Estate, now I was
provided for; he having no Children, God's Children should have it.

But he was yet again designing what he might do before he took his leave of
the World: And his next work was, to send Letters to all his Relations and
intimate Friends, in most of which he urges them to observe his Counsels, for
they were like to be his last to them. I always wrote for him, for he could
not, by reason of his weakness, write a Line.

At this time he had a great desire to go to Mr. Joseph Barnards, which was
about five Miles from Bath, there to finish his last Work for God, that ever he
did on Earth; which was to promote the Exercise of Catechizing in Somersetshire
and Wiltshire: Mr. Barnard having had a great deliverance as well as himself,
he proposed this to him as their Thank-Offering to God, which they would
jointly tender to him. They had engaged one to another, to give so much for the
Printing of six thousand of the Assemblies Catechism, and among other Friends,
to raise some Money, for to send to every Minister that would engage in the
Work, and to give to the Children for their Encouragement in Learning: This
Work was finished by Mr. Barnard, after my Husband was gone to his Rest.

He finding himself to decline again, apprehended it was for want of using the
Bath, and therefore desired to return, and I being fearful he should ride home,
seeing some Symptoms of his Fits, sent for the Horse-Litter, and so carried him
again to Bath: Where, by the Doctors advice, after he had taken some things to
prepare his Body, he made use of the Hot Bath (the Cross-Bath being then too
cold) and so he did for four days, and seemed to be refreshed, and the
strength that he had in his Limbs to recover, rather than abate; and two of his
Taunton Friends coming to see him, he was cheerful with them: But on the third
of November, I discerned a great change in his Countenance, and he found a
great alteration in himself, but concealed it from me, as I heard after: For
some Friends coming to visit him, he desired them to pray for him, for his time
was very short; But desired them not to tell me of it: All that day he would
not permit me to move out of the Chamber from him, except once while those
Friends were with him. After we had dined, he was in more then ordinary manner
transported with Affection toward me; which he expressed, by his returning me
thanks for all my pains and care for him and with him, and putting up many most
affectionate requests for me to GOD, before he would suffer me to rise as we
sat together: At Night again, at Supper, before I could rise from him, he spoke
thus to me.

Well, now my dear Heart, my Companion in all my Tribulations and Afflictions,
I thank thee for all thy pains and labors for me, at Home and Abroad, in
Prison and Liberty, in Health and Sickness; reckoning up many of the Places we
had been in, in the days of our affliction: And with many other most endearing
and affectionate Expressions, he concluded with many Holy Breathings to God for
me, that he would requite me, and never forget me, and fill me with all manner
of Grace and Consolations, and that his Face might still shine upon me, and
that I might be supported and carried through all difficulties.

After this he desired me to see for a (...) of (...); and I procuring one for
him, he turned his (...), that I might not see, and read the (...) Death in the
latter end of that Book; which I (...) of him, Whether he did apprehend his end
was near? To which he replied, He knew not, in a few days I would see; and so
fell into Discourse, to divert me; desiring me to read two Chapters to him, as
I used to do every night; and so he hasted to Bed, not being able to go to
Prayer; and with his own hands did very hastily undo his Coat and Doublet,
which he had not done in many months before: As soon as he was in Bed he told
me, He felt some more than ordinary stoppage in his Head; and I brought him
something to prevent the Fits, which I feared: But in a quarter of an hour
after he fell into a very strong Convulsion: Which I being much afrighted at,
called for help, and sent for the Doctors; used all former and other means, but
no success the Lord was pleased to give then to any: But they continued for two
days and nights, not ceasing one hour.

This was most grievous to me, that I saw him so like to depart, and that I
should hear him speak no more to me; fearing it would harden the Wicked to see
him removed by such a stroke: For his Fits were most terrible to behold: And I
earnestly besought the Lord, that if it were his pleasure, he would so far
mitigate the heavy (...) I saw was coming upon me, by causing him to utter
something of his Heart before he took him from me; which he graciously answered
me in; for he that had not spoke from Tuesday Night, did on Friday Morning,
about three a Clock, call for me to come to him, speaking very understandingly
between Times, all that day: But that Night about nine a Clock he brake out
with an audible voice, speaking for sixteen hours together, those and such like
words as you formerly had account of; and did cease but a very little space,
now and then, all the Afternoon, till about six on Saturday in the Evening,
when he departed.

About three in the Afternoon he had, as we perceived, some conflict with
Satan, for he uttered these words;

Away thou foul Fiend, thou Enemy of all Mankind, thou subtle Sophister, art
thou come now to molest me! Now I am just going! Now I am so weak, and Death
upon me. Trouble me not, for I am none of thine! I am the Lords, Christ is
mine, and I am his: His by Covenant; I have sworn my self to be the Lords, and
his I will be: Therefore be gone. These last words he repeated often, which I
took muc' notice of; That his covenanting with God was the means (...) used to
expel the Devil and all his Temptations.

The time we were in Bath, I had very few hours alone with him, by reason of
his constant using the Bath, and Visits of Friends from all Parts thereabouts,
and sometimes from Taunton; and when they were gone, he would be either
retyring to GOD, or to his Rest: But what time I had with him, he always spent
in Heavenly and Profitable Discourse, speaking much of the Place he was going
to, and his Desires to be gone: One Morning as I was dressing him, he looked up
to Heaven and smiled, and I urging him to know why, he answered me thus,

Ah my Love, I was thinking of my Marriage Day, it will be shortly: O what a
joyful day will that be! Will it not, think thou my dear Heart?

Another time, bringing him some Broth, he said, Blessed be the Lord for these
refreshments in the way home; but O how sweet will Heaven be!

Another time, I hope to be shortly where I shall need no Meat, nor Drink, nor
Clothes.

When he looked on his weak consumed Hands, he would say, These shall be
changed; This vile Body shall be made like to Christ's Glorious Body.

O what a glorious Day will the Day of the Resurrection be! Methinks I see it
by Faith; How will the Saints lift up their heads and rejoice, and how sadly
will the wicked World look then!

O come let us make haste, our Lord will come shortly, let us prepare.

If we long to be in Heaven, let us hasten with our Work; for when that is
done, away we shall be fetched.

O this vain foolish dirty World, I wonder how reasonable Creatures can so dote
upon it! What is in it worth the looking after! I care not to be in it longer
than while my Mvster has either doing, or suffering work for me, were that
done, farewell to Earth.

He was much in commending the Love of Christ, and from that exciting himself
and me to obedience to him, often speaking of his Sufferings and of his Glory.

(...) Of his Love Letters, as he called the Holy History of his Life, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and his Second coming; The thoughts of which he seemed
always to be much ravished with.

He would be frequently reckoning the choice Tokens Christ had sent him, which
I remember he would frequently reckon up, 1. The Pardon of Sin. 2. A Patent for
Heaven. 3. The Gift of the Spirit. 4. The Robe of his Righteousness. 5. The
spoils of Enemies. 6. The Charter of all Liberties and Privileges. 7. The
Guard of his Angels. The consideration of this last he did frequently solace
himself in, saying to me often, when we lived alone in the Prison, and diverse
other Places; Well, my Dear, though we have not our Attendants and Servants as
the Great Ones, and Rich of the World have, we have the Blessed Angels of God
still to wait upon us, to minister to us, and to watch over us while we are
sleeping; to be with us when journeying, and still to preserve us from the rage
of Men and Devils.

He was exceedingly affected with the three last Chapters of Saint John's
Gospel, especially Christ's parting Words, and Prayer for his Disciples. But it
is time for me to set a stop to my Pen, God did pour into him, and he did pour
out so much, that it was scarce possible to retain the Converses of one day,
without a constant Register: His Heart, his Lips, his Life was filled up with
Grace; In which he did thine both in Health and Sickness, Prosperity and
Adversity, in Prison and at Liberty, in his own House, and in the Churches of
Christ, wherever he came: I never heard any that conversed with him, but would
acknowledge it was to their advantage.

At my Husbands first coming to Taunton, he was entertained by Mr. Newton as a
Sojourner, and after he was ordained in Taunton in a Public Association
Meeting, he administered all Ordinances jointly with him; though he were but an
Assistant, Mr. Newton would have it so, who dearly loved him, and highly
esteemed of him; and seeing him restless in his Spirit, and putting himself to
many tedious Journeys to visit me, (as he did once a Fortnight 25 miles) he
persuaded him to marry, contrary to our purpose, we resolving to have lived
much longer single. The 4th of October 1655. after a year and two Months
acquaintance, our Marriage was consummated.

And we lived together with Mr. Newton, near two years, where we were most
courteously entertained, and then hopeing to be more useful in our Station, we
took a House, and I having been always bred to work, undertook to teach a
School, and had many Tablers, and Scholars, our Family being seldom less than
Twenty, and many times Thirty; My School usually fifty or sixty of the Town and
other places. And the Lord was pleased to bless us exceedingly in our
endeavors: So that many were converted in a few years, that were before
Strangers to God: All our Scholars called him Father: And indeed he had far
more care of them than most of their natural Parents, and was most tenderly
affectionate to them, but especially to their Souls.

His course in his Family was Prayer, and reading the Scriptures, and singing
twice a day, except when he catechized, which was constantly once, if not twice
a Week: Of every Chapter that was read, he expected an account of, and of every
Sermon, either to himself or me: He dealt with them and his Servants frequently
together, and apart, about their Spiritual states, pressing them to all their
Duties, both of First and Second-Table, and calling them strictly to account,
Whether they did not omit them. He also gave them Books suitable to their
Capacities and Condition, which they gave a weekly account of to him or me; but
too often by public Work was he diverted, as I am apt to think, who knew not
so well what was to be preferred.

His Lords-Days Work was great, for though he Preached but once in his own
Place, yet he was either desired by some of his Brethren to supply theirs on
any Exigency, or would go where was no Minister; and so was forced often to
leave his Family to me, to my great grief and loss: In his Repetitions in
Public, as well as Catechizing, his own Family came all in their turns, to
Answer in the Congregation, both Scholars and Servants.

When I have pleaded with him for more of his time with my Self and Family, he
would answer me: His Ministerial Work would not permit him to be so constant as
he would; for if he had Ten Bodies and Souls, he could employ them all, in, and
about Taunton: And would say, Ah my Dear, I know thy Soul is safe; But how many
that are Perishing have I to look after? O that I could do more for them!

He was a Holy, Heavenly, Tenderly-Affectionate Husband, and I know nothing I
could complain of, but that he was so taken up, that I could have but very
little converse with him.

His love was expressed to me, in his great care for me, Sick and Well; in his
Provision for me; in his Delight in my Company; saying often, He could not bear
to be from me, but when he was with God, or employed for him; and that often it
was hard for him to deny himself to be so long absent: It was irksome to him to
make a Meal without me, nor would he manage any Affair almost without
conversing with me, concealing nothing from me, that was fit for me to know;
being far from the Temper of those Husbands, who hide all their Concerns from
their Wives, which he could not endure to hear of, especially in Good Men.

He was a faithful reprover of any thing he saw amiss in me, which I took as a
great evidence of his real good will to my Soul; and if in any thing he gave me
offense, which was but seldom, so far would he deny himself, as to acknowledge
it, and desire me to pass it by, professing to me he could never rest till he
had done so; and the like I was ready to do to him, as there was far more
reason; by which course, if any difference did arise, it was soon over with us.

He was a very tender Master to his Servants, every way expressing it to their
Souls and Bodies, giving them that encouragement in their places they could
desire; expecting from his whole Family that respect, and obedience to his
Commands, which their Rule required; reproving them that were careless and
negligent in observing them.

He was frequent in keeping solemn days of Humiliation, especially against a
Sacrament.

He was a very strict observer of the Sabbath, the Duties of which, he did
perform with such joy and alacrity of Spirit, as was most pleasant to join with
him, both in Public, and in the Family, when we could enjoy him: And this he
did much press upon Christians, to spend their Sabbaths more in (...) and
Thanksgivings, as days of holy rejoicing in our (...).

All the time of his Health, he did rise constantly at, or before four of the
Clock, (and on the Sabbaths sooner, if he did wake) he would be much troubled
if he heard any Smiths or Shoomakers, or such Tradesmen at work at their
Trades, before he was in his Duties with God: Saying to me often, O how this
Noise shames me! Does not my Master deserve more than theirs? From four till
eight, he spent in Prayer, Holy Contemplation, and singing of Psalms, which he
much delighted in, and did daily practice alone, as well as in his Family:
Having refreshed himself about half an hour, he would call to Family Duties,
and after that to his Studies, till eleven or twelve a Clock, cutting out his
Work for every hour in the day. Having refreshed himself a while after Dinner,
he used to retire to his Study to Prayer, and so Abroad among the Families he
was to visit, to whom he always sent the day before; going out about two a
Clock, and seldom returning till seven in the Evening, sometimes later: He
would often say, Give me a Christian that counts his time more precious than
Gold. His Work in his public Ministry in Taunton, being to Preach but once a
Sabbath, and Catechize; he devoted himself much to private Work, and also
Catechized once a Week in Public besides, and repeated the Sermon he Preached
on the Sabbath Day, on Tuesday in the Evening.

He found much difficulty in going from House to House, because it had not been
practiced a long time by any Minister in Taunton, not by any others of his
Brethren; and he being but a Young Man, to be looked upon as singular, was that
which called for much Self-denial, which the Lord enabled him to Exercise: For
after he had Preached up in Public the Ministers Duty to their People, and
theirs to receive them, when they came to them for their Spiritual Advantage,
he set speedily upon the Work.

In this Work, his course was, to draw a Catalogue of the Names of the Families
in each Street, and so to send a day or two before he intended to visit them,
that they might not be absent, and that he might understand who was willing to
receive him: Those that sent slight Excuses, or did obstinately refuse his
Message, he would notwithstanding go to them, and if (as some would) they did
shut their Doors against him, he would speak some few affectionate words to
them; or if he saw cause, denounce the Threatenings of God against them that
despise his Ministers, and so departed; and after would send affectionate
Letters to them, so full of love, and expressions of his great desires to do
their Souls good, as did overcome their Hearts; and they did many of them
afterward readily receive him into their Houses. Herein was his Compassion
showed to all Sorts, both Poor and Rich, not disdaining to go into such Houses
amongst the Poor, as were often very offensive to him to sit in, he being of an
exact and curious temper: yet would he with joy and freedom, deny himself for
the good of their Souls, and that he might fulfill his Ministry among those the
Lord had given him the oversight of.

I perceiving this Work, with what he did otherwise, to be too hard for him,
fearing often he would bring himself to Distempers and Diseases, as he did soon
after, besought him not to go so frequently: His answer would be, What have I
strength for, but to spend for God? What is a Candle for, but to be burnt? And
he would say, I was like Peter, still crying, O spare thy self; But I must not
hearken to thee, no more than my Master did to him: Though his Labors were so
abundant, I never knew him, for nine years together, under the least Distemper
one quarter of an hour.

He was exceeding temperate in his Diet, though he had a very sharp Appetite,
yet did he at every Meal deny himself, being persuaded that it did much conduce
to his Health: His converse at his Table was very profitable, and yet pleasant,
never rising, either at home or abroad, without dropping something of God,
according to the Rule he laid down to others. He was very much in commending
and admiring the Mercies of God in every Meal, and was still so pleased with
his provision for him, that he would often say; He fared deliciously every day,
and lived far better than the Great (...) of the World, who had their Tables
far better furnished: For he enjoyed God in all, and saw his Love and Bounty in
what he received at every Meal: So that he would say, O Wife! I live a
voluptuous life; but blessed be God, it is upon Spiritual Dainties, such as the
World know not, nor taste (...) of.

He was much in minding the Poor, that were in want of all things, often
wondering that God should make such a difference between him and them, both for
this World and that to come; and his Charity was ever beyond his Estate, as my
self and many other Friends did conceive, but he would not be dissuaded,
always saying, If he were Prodigal, it was for God, and not for himself, nor
sin.

There were but few, if any, Poor Families, especially of the godly in Taunton,
but he knew their necessities, and did by himself or Friends relieve them: So
that our Homes were seldom free of such as came to make complaints to him.
After the times grew dead for Trade, many of our godly men decaying, he would
give much beyond his ability to recover them: He would buy Pease and Flitches
of Bacon, and distribute twice a year, in the cold and hard Seasons. He kept
several Children at School at his own Cost; bought many Books and Catechisms,
and had many thousands of Prayers printed, and distributed among them! And
after his Brethren were turned out, he gave four pounds a year himself to a
public Stock for them, by which he excited many others to do the same, and
much more, which else would never have done it: And on any other occasions as
did frequently fall in, he would give even to the offense of his Friends: So
that many would grudge in the Town to give him what they had agreed for;
because he would give so much. Besides all this, the necessities of his own
Father, and many other Relations were still calling upon him, and he was open
handed to them all: So that it has been sometimes even incredible to our
selves to consider how much he did, out of a little Estate, and therefore may
seem strange to others: Moreover, when he had received any more than ordinary
Mercy at the Hand of GOD, his manner was, to set apart some considerable
Portion out of his Estate, and dedicate it to the Lord, as a Thank-offering, to
be laid out for his Glory in pious and charitable Uses.

When I have begged him to consider himself and me; he would answer me, He was
laying up, and GOD would repay him: That by liberal things he should stand,
when others might fall that censured him; that if he sowed sparingly, he should
reap so; if bountifully, he should reap bountifully.

And I must confess I did often see so much of GOD in his dealings with us,
according to his Promises, that I have been convinced and silenced; God having
often so strangely and unexpectedly provided for us: And notwithstanding all he
had done, he had at last somewhat to dispose of to his Relations, and to his
Brethren, besides comfortable provision for me.

Thus his whole Life was a continual Sermon, holding forth evidently the
Doctrines he Preached; Humility, Self-denial, Patience, Meekness, Contentation,
Faith, and holy Confidence (...) in him, with most dear Love to God, and his
Church, and People; and where he longed and panted to be, he is now shiniug in
Heaven, singing Praises to God, and to the (...), which Work he much delighted
in, whilst here on Earth.

CHAP. VII. Some Notes from another, whose House he Lodged in (Mr. F.)
The Narrative of his most Constant, Tender, Compassionate dealing with
ignorant and bad People, in the places when he came, (frequently giving them
Money, with his Exhortations) is mentioned before.
AS for such as feared God already, he was still seeking their Edification, and
stirring them up to a Holy Life: Very much pressing them, to intend God as
their end, and to do whatever they did for God. When the Week began, he would
say, Another Week is now before us, let us spend this Week for God. And in the
Morning he would say, Come now let this day be spent for God. Now let us live
this one day well: Could we resolve to be more than ordinary circumspect, but
for one day at a time, and so on, we might live at extraordinary (...). In the
day time, he would (seasonably) ask People, How did you set out to day? Did you
set out for God to day? What were your Morning Thoughts?

In the Week time, he would often ask the Servants for the Heads of the Sermon,
which they had heard on the Lord's Day before. As he walked about the House, he
would make some Spiritual use of whatever did occur, and still his Lips did
drop like the Honeycomb to all that were about him, to do any Offices for him
in his Weakness, were all well requited. To give a few Instances of his savoury
words.

To one that had done well. There are two things ( said he) that we must
specially look to after well doing, and the special taste of the Love of God. 1.
That we grow not proud of it, and so lose all. 2. That we grow not secure, and
so give the Tempter new Advantages.



Speaking of the Vanity of the World, he said: It is as good be without the
World, and to bear that state as beseems a Christian, as to enjoy the World,
though it were never so well employed: If a Man has Riches, and lays them
out for God, and for his Servants, yet is it as happy a state to receive Alms
of another, so we bear our Poverty aright, and are cheerful and thankful in our
low Estate. (Though yet it is true, that Riches may be used to the good of
others; and it is more honorable to give, than to receive.)



Another time he was saying: How necessary a Duty it is for a Child of God,
placidly to suit with all God's Dispensations, and that a Christian must not
only quietly submit to God in all his dealings, but ever to be best pleased
with what God does, as knowing that he is infinitely Wise, and Good. And, O how
unbecoming a Christian is it to do otherwise.

To which one answering, How short we ordinarily fall as to that temper: He
replied, We have much ground to go yet, but so it must be; but we shall never
be well indeed till we come to Heaven.



Another time said he, O what an alteration will be shortly made upon us! Now
we are the Sons of God, but yet it does not appear (to sight) what we shall be:
Did we imagine only that we shall shine as the Sun in the Firmament, it were
too low a Conception of our (...) hereafter.



Another Morning as he was Dressing, he said, O what a shout will there be when
Christ shall come in his Glory! I ^ contribute to that shout.



Another time, I bless the Lord, I delight in nothing in this World, further
than I see God in it.



Another time (in his weakness) says he: There are three things which must be
unlearned, as being mistakes among men. 1. Men think that their happiness lies
in having the World, when it is much more in contemning the World. 2. Men think
that the greatest contentment lies in having their Wills, when indeed it lies
in crossing, mortifying, and subduing their wills to the Will of God. 3. Men
think it their business and benefit to seek themselves, when indeed it is the
denying of themselves.



Another time this was his advice. 1. Value precious time, while time does
last, and not when it is irrevocably lost. 2. Know the worth of things to come,
before they come, (or are present) and the worth of things present, before they
are past. 3. Value no Mercy as it serves to content the flesh, but as it is
serviceable for God, and to things eternal.



Such was his talk at the Table, where he would be still raised in gratitude
for God's Bounty, and used to eat his meat with much cheerfulness and comfort,
as savouring of a sweeter good.

He took one that was watching with him by the hand, and said: I hope to pass
an Eternity with thee, in the praises of our God: In the mean time, Let us live
a life of praise while we are here, for it is sweet to us, and delightful to
God: It is harmony in his Ears, our failings being pardoned, and we and our
praise accepted through Christ.

Such discourse is, I hope, no great rarity with good men, in the cheerfulness
of prosperity in health; but for a man on the Bed of tedious languishing it is
more rare.

The night before he went to Bath, where he died, he said to the same Person: O
how much more has God done for you, than for all the World of unconverted
Persons, in that he has wrought his Image on your heart, and will bring you at
last to his Celestial Glory: See now that you acknowledge the Grace of God,
and give him the praise of it: For my part, I bless the Lord, I am full of his
Mercy; Goodness and Mercy have followed me all my days; I am full and running
over: And now I charge you to walk cheerfully, and to follow me with your
Praises whilst I am alive.



And for such in the Family as lay under doubts of their condition, he took
great care of them, endeavoring daily to satisfy their Doubts, and answer
their Scruples; and still would be enquiring, whether they had yet any more
settlement: And if they said, they knew not how to try themselves; he would
say, Come, let me help you; and so would take them aside, and propound some
three or four sound Marks, by way of Question, and would ask them whether it
were so with them or not? And if any doubt appeared to remain about it, he
would not easily leave them; till they were somewhat satisfied at that time,
and would bring all down to the (...) Capacity, by putting his Questions
several ways. And if yet doubts remained, he would use all the compassion and
pitifulness that might be, and open to them the goodness of God's Nature, the
sufficiency of Christ, and his readiness to accept returning Sinners; and after
long trial by fairer means, would plainly labor to convince (...) of the Sin
of Unbelief, etc. And for any in the Family that seemed to stick under bare
Convictions, he much urged (...) to go on, and make a through, and sound, and
sure work of it.

In Family Duties, he seemed more excellent than at other times.

He was a man of singular patience in Affliction. Though he lay under such
weakness for certain years, as rendered him almost wholly unable for his
public Work, and many times not able to move a Hand or Finger, or hardly any
other part; yet some that have been much with (...), never heard him once
complain, of one pain or other, unless any asked him, and then would always
make the least of it. And when he lay many nights and never took the least
(...) by sleep, he would never show the least impatiency, nor so much as say,
he had not slept, unless it were asked him. And still would justify and (...)
God, and say, Shall I receive good at God's hand, and no evil?

Speaking of Exhortations and Reproof, he said, It Is the safest course (where
it may be done) to take the opportunity, and not to suffer our backward hearts
to cheat us of the present, on pretense of staying for a fitter time.

As advice for profitable Discourse, he said, It is good for such Christians as
need it, to study beforehand what to speak, that they may always have
something in readiness to bring forth for the benefit of others, which will
prevent impertinencies.

Of Prayer with others he would say; We have need to watch against confining
our Thoughts and Desires to the cases of our own Souls, with the neglect of
those that join with us; but above all, with the neglect of the miserable
World, and of the Church of Christ. For though indeed Hypocrites use to Indite
almost all their public Prayers from the supposed case of those that are
present, and meddle but little with their own sins and wants, unless in
formality: Yet sincere Christians are at first too apt to dwell upon their own
Cases almost alone, insomuch that they have need to be called outward; and as
they grow in Love, they will grow enlarged in the case of their Brethren, but
especially of Public and Universal Consequence.

CHAP. VIII. An entire and exact Delineation of this Holy Person, Written by
one of his familiar Acquaintance; presented in the last place, as the
Portraiture of a complete Gospel-Minister.
First, His Personal Character. His Stature and Complexion.
AS to his Personal Bodily Character, He was of Stature, tall and erect; of
Complexion, clear and lovely, his Countenance being the seat of cheerfulness,
gravity, and love. It contradicted that usual saying, viz. Fronti (...) fides;
for his spritely and serene Countenance was the Index of an active and
harmonious Soul. Anger as it seldom beclouded, so (...) became not that Face
most incapable of sour impressions. It was forced, and so not of long
continuance, for it never appeared but upon Summons, when commanded to
interpose it self, the Glory of GOD, and Honor of Religion being concerned.
Neither did his Reason and Virtue sooner raise than lay it when the Cause was
ceased. He was angry, and sinned not, by being angry chiefly or only for sin.

His Constitution.
He had not a more hail Complexion, than healthful Constitution, hugely fitted
for the Employment in which he was so successful, viz. His Ministerial Labors
and Studies. Insomuch that he has often been heard to confess, that he knew
not what an hours sickness or indisposition was for thirty years and upward,
even until after his first Imprisonment, to which (as it is elsewhere
intimated) it may well be thought that he owed the first and fatal impairs of
his healthful vigor. Since which first decay, it may be affirmed that
contrariwise for some years together, till the period of his life, he scarce
knew what was an hours health. Most deplorable it is, that his great and even
excessive labors, and hard durance, should have been prodigal of that strength
which might perchance have been hitherto employed to the most noble purposes.
But alas, the innocent flames of Divine Love to GOD, and Zeal for his Glory,
and the good of Souls, made all his strength a whole burnt Sacrifice, and as
well devoted, as if sacrificed to the flames of Martyrdom.

His Judgment.
And here some injury would be done to his Worthy Name, should his internal
Excellencies, which are of all the greatest, be wholly forgotten. His Judgment
was as the Pot of Manna, wherein were found and conserved all wholesome
Soul-feeding-Doctrines; most solid and accute it was. For though with the Eye
of his Body he could not see far off, yet with the Eye of his mind or
understanding, he penetrated far into the recesses of difficult Truths, and out
of mental (...) he was wont happily to extricate himself and others, the toil
of his Intellect herein being not so pleasant as successful. He was all
judgment in his enquiries after Truth, and all affection in pursuing and
promoting that which is good.

His Memory.
His Memory was as the Tables of the Covenant, GOD's. LAW being his Meditation
Day and Night, and as the Sacred Records there kept. It was a most Faithful and
Refined Treasury, out of which he continually brought Things New and Old for
the Instruction and Consolation of his Hearers. So (...) it was, that it needed
not, and wholly refused those helps by which it is usually fortified, and its
defects supplied. It knew not the slavery of an imposed task, for what had once
engaged his love, was without delay or difficulty (...) of his Mind or Memory.

His Fancy.
His Fancy was as Aarons Rod budding, ever producing fresh (...) of refined
Divine Wit and Invention. It was quick and happy, a fruitful Storehouse of
hallowed and (...) Notions. Ever pregnant, yet never bringing forth any other
than the Offsprings of Judgment and Discretion. Though it footed high, yet
like a Bird in a String, when it had gone to its (...) length, it was checked
by his Judgment and Humility, left it should ascend above its height.

His Will and Affections.
His Will he had so long lost in the Divine Will, as not to find it, or to be
troubled with its reluctancies under so long and sad a Series of Trials and
Afflictions, as those which attended him constantly to his Grave. His
Affections were strong and servent, and to use his Words, They kept to their
right Objects, and their due Bounds, never inkindled but with a Coal from the
Altar, and then they soared to mavelous Heights. He was indeed, as it were,
all affection in pursuing and promoting the grand interests of Religion. The
Zeal of God's House had consumed him, and that not Blind nor Wild, but well
attempered with Light and Heats. In Sum, what Holy Mr. Herbert said of himself,
that may be said of him, That his Active Soul was as a keen Knife in a thin
Sheath, ever about to cut through, and take its flight into the Region of Souls.

His great Gravity.
But to proceed to some of his excellent Properties. His gravity appeared to be
true and genuine, (as not affected or morose, not through any inability, but
unwillingness to press his Wit to the service of Vanity) resulting from a mind
ever in the awe of God. Because his Presence and Deportment struck such an awe
even on all with whom he conversed, and composed them to a true decorum. So
that as Reverend Mr. Bolton, when walking in the Streets, was so much clothed
with majesty, as by the notice of his coming in these Words, Here comes Mr.
Bolton, as it were to charm them into order, when vain or doing amiss; so this
most grave Divine, wheresoever he came, was as a walking Ghost by his presence,
conjuring them into a grave deportment, his countenance ever pointing at his
awful Soul. What the Image or Statue of Senacherib did speak, that much more
did this lively Image of the most High GOD speak, viz. He who looks to me,
let him be Religious.

This his great gravity was not only Universally discerned by all, but also
more particularly and especially acknowledged and loved by his Brethren in the
Ministry, for there being some matter of moment depending among them, the care
of which was to be devolved on some one man: A worthy Divine far exceeding him
in years, solicited him to take it on him, who modestly waved it, wondering
that they should pitch on one so young and unexperienced as himself, for so
solemn an undertaking: To whom the forenamed Divine replied; That of all the
Ministers, his Brethven, whereof many for Age were his Fathers, he knew none of
greater Gravity, Industry, and fitness for the management of that Affair than
himself.

His Affability.
Neither was he so immured in his Study, as to be a stranger to, or averse
from, that generous and innocent freedom and obligingness of converse, for Love
and Affability, were accurately attempered with his great Gravity. He became
all things to all men, that he might gain the more, and so communicative
innocent and obliging were all his Converses, that he commanded the imitation
and admiration of his Friends, and forced this acknowledgment from his
Adversaries, both Profane, Atheistical, and Sectarian, viz. That if there were
ever a good Man among them, (meaning the Nonconformists) Mr. Ahein was he.

His Charity.
Communicative I say he was, both of Spiritual, and also Temporal good things
together, according to, and even beyond his Power, (as it is elsewhere
abundantly ascertained) both when he heard the loud Complaints of some, and
when he listened to the silent Suits of others, viz. some modest and indigent
Housekeepers, who only spoke by their real needs, and entered their Suits at
the Eyes of an inquisitive Almoner, more than at his Ears. Of the good things
pertaining to this Life, he was often liberal beyond his measure, and of those
pertaining to another Life, often beyond his strength; and by this
Constellation of his Charity and Alms-deeds, he made the one more Profitable,
and the other more Acceptable; the one the greater, and the other the happier,
and more successful; and by this Conjunction also, he approved himself more
perfect before God, the more thoroughly furnished to every good Word and Work.

His Utterance.
His Prolation or manner of Speech was Free, Eloquent, Sublime, and Weighty. Of
him it may be well said, as of our Blessed Savior, That all bear him witness,
and wondered at the gracious Words which proceeded out of his Mouth. It will be
hard to tell what Man ever spoke with more Holy Eloquence, Gravity, Authority,
Meekness, Compassion and Efficacy to Souls, than he did to those to whom in
Instruction, Exhortation, Consolation, Reprehension, he most wisely,
frequently, and successfully applied himself. Few could resist, or stand before
the powerful Charms, and united Force of his Love and Authority, being equally
attracted by the one, and awed by the other. In him, if in any, that common
observation did evidently fall, viz.

Non been convenient, nec in (...) sede locantur Majestas and Amor.

True it is, that this young Timothy (with whom few were like minded, in caring
naturally for the state of his Flock) was at his first entrance on his
Ministry, despised for his Youth, by those who after with shame confessed their
Error, and deplored their rashness, resolving after for his sake, no more to
judge according to appearance, but to honor for their work, and intrinsic
worth, those whom Age has not made Venerable.

Secondly, His Studies and Learning.
As respects his Studies, he had a strong inclination to, and delight in the
Study of the Natural and Ethnic Theology, in which he proceeded to a great
acquaintance with the chief Sects of the Philosophers, especially the
Academicks, and Stoics, of his insight into whom he made singular use, by
gathering their choicest Flowers to adorn Christianity (...); and indeed,
searce did he Preach a Sermon, wherein he did not Select some excellent Passage
or other out of these, whereby to illustrate and fortify his Discourse. And
how well becoming a Divine, and most (...) this his Inclination and Choice was,
is most manifest to considering Men; for hereby he more confirmed himself in
the Christian Religion (which he had espoused with so much Judgment and Zeal)
by a distinct and certain knowledge of the highest Principles and Hopes of the
Ethnic Religions, and by a sober comparing of that with these. He also much
delighted in Anatomy, in which he acquired a considerable skill, which also he
not a little improved by frequent Dissections. And in his public Ministry, he
often made use of this his insight, by composing, with Galen, Hymns to the
Creator, whose infinite Wisdom he was often heard to admire, in the contrivance
of Man's outward frame, and in the rare contexture, dependence, and use of all,
even the minutest parts, in the excellent Fabric of Man's body. As to his skill
in the Languages, it was not contemptible, especially in those three which (as
Ludovicus Vives says) Christ sanctified upon the Cross.

Thirdly, His Moderation and Humility.
He managed his dissents in Judgment from others with great Charity, Humility,
and Moderation, most strictly observing what he still exhorted his Flock unto,
viz. To speak evil of no man, much less of dignities. Insomuch that when his
Judgment was at any time desired concerning any Sermon which he had heard, and
any Minister, (Conformist, or Nonconformist) though weak and mean, he would yet
ever find matter of Commendation, none of Dispraise, judging the Minister and
his Discourse, at least, to be honest, and of good intent. He abhorred to
entrench on the Divine Prerogative, in judging of Men's States before the time;
and in condemning Men's Actions at all adventures, without considering their
lessening or altering Circumstances. And as he liked to judge no man beyond his
Sphere, and speak evil of no Man; so in his Life did he reap as great and
visible Reward as any for this most Christian Practice; for the Tongues even of
all did pay tribute to his good Name; which was a thing so entire and sacred,
that scarce a Rabsheka or Shimei could find a passage by which to invade it.
His good Name was as a precious Box of Ointment, by his Death especially broken
and poured forth, the delicious scent whereof all those Hearts with great
delight retain, which like Lidia's, were open d to his Heavenly Dectrine; and
not only so, but they will perpetuate it, whilst they have Childrens Children
by whom to eternize his Memory.

Fourthly, His Practice as to Church Communion His Judgment as to Obedience to
Authority.
As respects his Practice, and moderate Opinion in point of Church Communion,
and his Judgment in point of Obedience to the Supreme Power, together with his
great regard to, and earnest insisting on Second-Table Duties, (...) may be
said to his worthy Praise. He as frequently attended on the public Worship, as
his opportunities and strength (...), and often declared his very good liking
of some (...), which he heard from the present Incumbent. He did not account
that none could worship God aright, unless in all Instances, and smaller
Circumstances of Worship, they wholly accorded with his Apprehensions; But with
the Divine Apostle he had learnt to say; Notwithstanding every way, (...) in
Pretense or in Truth, Christ is preached, and I (...) do rejoice, yea, and will
rejoice. He knew of how great moment it was, that the public Worship of God
should be maintained, and that its Assemblies should not be (...), though some
of its Administrations did not clearly approve themselves unto him, because
upon the account of some Imperfections and Pollutions in them, supposed or
real, to withdraw Communion, is evidently to suppose our selves joined before
our time to the Heavenly Assembly; or to have found such a one here on Earth,
exempt from all (...) and imperfections of Worshippers and Worship. He
abandoned not all Forms, but their formal use; neither those in particular,
publicly Established, (through a (...) or partiality, as may be affirmed of
too many) but has been heard much to commend that Form of Thanksgiving, both
(...) and Ancient, viz. the Te Deum, and particularly that Sentence in it, The
noble Army of Martyrs praise (...); which he was wont to mention with a certain
Exaltation. So moderate and calm he was in his Judgment, that when the two new
Forms in the Liturgy, viz. on the horrid (...) of King Charles the First, and
on the return of King Charles the Second, were first Printed, he was so far
from Nauseating them, because Forms, or because (...) the stamp of Authority,
that he had ever resolved to read them, (though then only, as I remember,
recommended) had not some occurrences, which I need not name, prevailed with
him at present to forbear.

His Loyalty.
It appeared that he had a due sense of the grand importance of the Obedience
of Subjects to the Supreme Magistrate, by some excellent Sermons which he
Preached on that of the Apostle, Romans 13. ver. 1. a little before his Election;
where, and when his Judgment was so strict, as unjustly to offend some, whose
weakness and ignorance, by reason of a long Proscription of the Regal Power,
had made over-scrupulous, or erroneous. His I oyalty also to his Prince, he
discovered in observing the injunction of the Wise Man, viz. Not to Curse the
King, no not in his Bedchamber, or Retiring-Rooms: for he has often been seen
with indignation to turn from, and hush into silence, all Reports or Surmises,
true or false, which directly or indirectly, did tend to detract from, and
defame Dignities, accounting them no cause of withdrawing or lessening our just
Honor and Obedience; but rather of giving our selves the more to Prayer and
Humiliation.

Fifthly, His respect to Second-Table Duties.
He was not only a man aspiring to the Heights, but also respecting the due
breadth and extent of Religion, being well-advised, how much the Vitals and
Honor of Religion in the World are conserved by, and concerned in a
conscionable discharge of Second-Table Duties. That he had a deep sense of the
great advantage or disadvantage accruing to Religion, by the strict or remiss
performance of the Duties of the Second-Table, and particularly those of the
Fifth Commandment; all bear him witness in, that he upon several Texts for a
long time together, most faithfully instructed his People in Relative-Duties,
(than which, none indeed are more momentous, and less observed) and most
sharply reproved the Guilty for their failures therein; on all which Relations,
their Duties, and Defects, he particularly, and with much Zeal insisted.
Witness also his great grief and indignations, which he frequently conceived,
and with great vehemence expressed in lamenting over, and reproving some
Professors of Religion, for their wretched neglect and breach of some
Second-Table Precepts; the scandal and dishonor of which to Religion, and the
Reiigious, how he resented, none but God and his own Soul did thoroughly know.
He vehemently detested that impious and hellish design of putting asunder (in
this matter) what God has joined together, viz. Those Commands respecting God,
and our Neighbor; both which he has equally appointed to us, as Rules of
Direction and Judgment. He was neither Legalist nor Solifidian; neither
Ritualist nor Enthusiast, not so much above in the Mount with God, as not also
to come down to his Neighbor, whom he did accost as Moses, with both Tables in
his Hand, on which his Life and Doctrine did constantly and excellently comment.

Sixthly, His Labors in the Ministry.
As Respects; His great Industry and happy Labors in the Ministry, together
with his great Prudence and Compassion, in applying himself to the Souls of his
Flock, according to their most pressing needs; none who knew the former, but
must also confess, and admire at the latter.

1. His Prudence in them.
His Prudence; Then in apportioning, as well as designing, the most suitable
and seasonable instructions to his People, was most apparent, in that he was
still (after he had finished a foregoing Text or Discourse) even at a loss, as
he has often expressed himself to some of his Friends, what Subject most
advantageous and seasonable to his Auditory, he should next insist on; so far
he was from aiming or shooting at Rovers in his Divine Instructions and
Exhortations. And so loath he was to labor in vain, and to pass from one
Discourse to another, as one unconcerned whether he had sown any good Seeds or
no on the Hearts of his Hearers; that in the close of his Applicatory part on
any Text, (which sometimes he handled for a considerable while) he ever
expressed his great unwillingness to leave that Subject, till he could have
some assurance, that he had not fought in that Spiritual Warfare against Sin,
as one who beats the Air; when also he expressed his great fear, lest he
should, after all his most importunate Warnings, leave them as he found them.
And here with how much Holy-Taking Rhetoric, did he frequently expostulate the
Case with Impenitent Sinners, in words too many to mention, and yet too weighty
to be forgotten; vehemently urging them to come to some good resolve before he
and they parted, and to make their choice either of Life or Death.

2. His Compassion on Souls.
His Compassion also toward all committed to his charge was most manifest,
especially toward the Ignorant; those that were out of the way, and those that
did move heavily on in the way.

1. On the Ignorant, in instructing and catechizing them.
To the Ignorant. And here knowing that without knowledge the Heart is not, and
cannot be good; and considering also how too successfully the evil one, by
sowing evil Seeds betimes in the hearts of Youth, does ever after forestal and
defeat the most laborious endeavors for their recovery and salvation: Thus
knowing and considering, he was in nothing more industrious, and in nothing
more happy and successful in exerting his industry, than in an early sowing
those Blessed Seeds of Divine Knowledge in the Hearts of all the Youth that he
could reach in person or otherwise; by which they were exceedingly formed to
receive all good Impressions. During the time of his public Ministry on every
Lord's Day in the Afternoon he constantly catechized, before a great
Congregation, the Youth of each Sex by turns, amongst whom were several both
young Men and Women, sometimes five or six of the chief Scholars of the
Free School, sometimes five or six of the Apprentices of the Town, some of
whom, though of man's estate, who accounted it not a disgrace to learn
(according to the guise of this mad World) but to be ignorant. Sometimes, of
the other Sex, five or six young Gentlewomen, who were under his Wifes Tuition,
(and so his Domestic oversight) kept their turns, of whom she had not a few,
and those the Daughters of Gentlemen of good rank far and near, whose laudable
emulation, and love to their Father (as they styled him) and to the Work, was
the cause why they were not so over-bashful as to decline so advantageous a
course; by which, together with domestic Instructions and Example, even all
received a tincture of Piety and Religion, and many a through Impression:
Besides these several Virgins also, and among these the Daughters of some of
the chief Magistrates in the Town did keep their turns. In this his course he
drew out on the short Answers in the Assemblies Catechism, an excellent
Discourse on all the Points of the Christian Theology, which he handled
successfully, reducing his Discourse to several Heads, which he also proved by
pertinent Places of Scripture; which done, he gave both the Heads and Proofs
written at length, on a Week day, to those whom he designed to Catechize on the
ensuing Lord's Day, which, besides the short Answers in the Catechism, and the
annexed Proofs they committed to memory, and rendered on the Afternoon of the
day aforesaid. Throughout all which course he approved himself to be a most
substantial Divine.

Neither did his Catechistical Labors rest here, but also on Thursdayes in the
Afternoon (as I remember) he Catechized in the Church, Street by Street, whole
Families, excepting the Married or more Aged, in order: Which Exercise (I
suppose) he designed as preparatory to his Lord's-Dayes Work. Besides this, on
Saturdayes in the Morning, he Catechized the Free School of that place,
instructing them in the Points of Christian Doctrine, and excellently
explaining the Answers in the Assemblies Catechism, discovering a Mine of
Knowledge in them, and in himself. How excellent was his design, and great his
Labor, besides all this, in going from House to House, and instructing both
Old and Young, is elsewhere abundantly declared. Neither was this his Labor in
vain, but became even as successful as laborious; for there are few but have
gratefully acknowledged that by this means they were either led into the
Knowledge, or induced to the belief, choice and practice of that which was and
is of Sovereign advantage to them to this day. And how happy and likely a
course he took herein to advance Religion in the Nation, on the hearts and
lives of men; and how far less successful and probable all other means are,
aiming at this end, without this initial Work, it is left to all pious and
considering men to judge.

2. On those that Err, by reproving and reducing them.
He had not only compassion over the Ignorant, but also over those who were
out of the way; witness his faithful and effectual discharge of that great duty
of giving seasonable reproofs, of which his great faithfulness there is
abundant mention elsewhere. And by so much the more did his excellent
discharge hereof speak forth his high praise, by how much the more difficult he
ever apprehended it aright to apply it. He has been heard often to say, That
it was far more difficult to him to give, than to take a Reproof, considering
how great Wisdom, Courage, Compassion, Self-denial, etc. is required in order
to its right discharge. And though he was so rarely Passive, and often Active
in this Work, yet the frequency of his giving a Reproof, never made it so easy
as to be less difficut than to receive it. Lut ever his Work was to him, not
only an Act of the greatest Self-denial, but also the result of a strong
conflict within, (...) his Indignation at the Sin, and Compassion on the
Sinner. And yet the consideration of the difficulty was not to him an Argument
to forbear, but rather a stronger Motive to undertake it; who ever delighted to
converse in, and conquer the difficulties of Christianity, both in doing and
suffering. Small difficulties here were not his match, and there were no noble
Achievements in Religion, to which he attained not, or vigorously aspired.

His truly Heroic Spirit.
As it is said of Themistocles, that famous Athenian Captain, that the Acts of
Miltiades broke his sleep; so as truly may it be said of this Blessed Saint,
That the Acts and Monuments of the Famous Worthies, mentioned in the Hebrews,
and of those of the same Achievements with them, in all Ages of the World,
even broke his sleep, by impregnating his Soul with high designs of aspiring
after their perfections. Often therefore he has been heard to excite Christians
so long to move in the Sphere of difficulties, till the sweet severities of
Christianity (as he often called them) were subdued, and even made familiar;
encouraging them with this consideration, That then they would highly approve
their Divine Love and Sincerity, and conceive a pleasure in those difficult
Acts, which would equal, yea, exceed the pleasure of their natural Actions.

3. On the Doubting, by Resolving and Releasing them.
Neither had he only compassion on those that were out of the way, but also on
those who moved heavtly on in the way. How he has often raised and rectifyed
desponding Christians, those who are too prone to account doubting, which is
their Sin, to be their Duty and Virtue. At once he has often (...) them from
the straitness of their needless fears and disquiets, and undeceived them by
discovering the latent unbelief that did lie lurking in such despondings,
assuring them in these words, That under a sly pretense of Humility, they did
call in question God's Veracity.

Seventhly, His singular Piety.
As respects his singular Piety, all who knew him can say much, and yet all but
little, considering how much more (...) escaped the most tenacious memory,
observant eye, and attentive ear. Yet he must be wretchedly inobservant, who
amidst so many and great instances of it, can make no reflections.

How much he conceived it as his own, and others greatest Interest, Ornament,
and Felicity herein to excel, will be manifest by his (...) which he gave to a
young Scholar ready to depart to the University, in words to this purpose: I
know, says he, that you will labor to excel in Learning, but be sure to excel
as in that, so also and especially in Holiness, which (...) render you one of
the most useful and (...) Creatures in the World. Learning will render you
perchance aeceptable to men, but piety both to God and Men: by that you will
shine only on Earth to the Clods thereof, and perhaps in some obscure corner of
it; but this is an Orient Pearl, which will shine in you on Earth and in
Heaven, both to God, Angels, and Men. How much he dwelt on this Exhortation,
and these Apprehensions, will be evident by a Pious Letter which he sent to the
Person forenamed, some years after, wherein his words are these: "O study God,
and study your self closly, and pursue Holiness more than Learning, though both
these together make a happy Constellation, and are like Castor and Pollux;
which when they appear together, do ever presage good to the Mariners. And that
it might appear that he did not only commend Holiness in the general, but also
in the particular and chief Instances of a Holy Life: He excellently proceeds
in the same Letter, saying, ``I much commend unto you those four beautifying
Lessons, so shortly comprehended in this Distich,

Spernere mundum, spernere nullum, spernere sese,
Spernere se sperni, quatuor ista beant.
His Contempt of the World.
Happy is the man that can but learn this. When once a man is arrived hereto,
he is above the Worlds reach, and has attained to the true Heroic mind, so as
that no external commotions will be able to disturb his Tranquillity; neither
will the Comforts or Crosses here below, make any great accession to, or
diminution from the serenity of his Spirit. And indeed, no thing was more
conspicuous in this Blessed Saint, than that generous contempt of the World,
that true loftiness, and yet profound humility of Spirit (of which the Lessons
aforementioned, are but as so many instances) which he recommended unto others.
He was much a stranger on the Earth, like the Kingly Prophet; not because with
old Barzillai he could not, but would not taste or comply with its Pleasures and
Delights; but he was chiefly induced by a forced exilement from his desired and
delectable Habitation, to think on his state of Banishment from his Heavenly
Country whilst here militant upon Earth, and to solace his Thoughts under so
great a grievance, by such Divine Considerations as those, which he mentions in
the following words of his forenamed Letter. It was (says he) the Divine
Argument that Epictetus used for comfort in banishment. Ubique (...) sunt
colloquia cum Deo. I met lately mith a passage out of one of the Fathers, which
I which engraved upon my heart. Cui Patria solum placet, nimis dilicatus est;
Cui omnis Terra Patria, is fortis est; Cui omnis Terra exilium is Sanctus est.
That Is worthy of a Saint indeed to account himself always in the state of
Banishment, whilst in the state of Mortality, like the Worthies that sojourned
even in the Land of Promise, as in a strange Country. Sueh a sojourner I wish
both my self and you, and may the moveableness of our present State fix our
desires upon that Kingdom which shall never be shaken. So far he.

His Universal and Uniform Obedience.
But to proceed; He declared that his Piety was (...) and Excellent by its
universal regard and extent, as to all GOD's Commands, so to all Man's
Converses and Employments, witness his earnest and frequent Exhortations,
whereby he did daily call upon his People to a constant uniform care over their
Hearts and Ways. Nothing did he more passionately dehort them from, than from
that undoing fraud unto their Souls, viz. Confining their Religion to their
Closets, upon the supposal that in so doing they had there put in sufficient
security for their after conversation, and had bid fair for the Divine favor,
as if Religion had taught Men only to kneel, and not how to work; and walk, as
if it were solitary or deformed, loving only to move in the private Path, and
narrow circle of our Morning or Evening Devotions, and so ever before and after
to appear least in sight, or as if it were a fury, and so to be limited, and
not to be entrusted with the universal conduct of our Lives and Actions. For
many there are who think fit rather to make Religion then Vassal, than
undivided Companion; to command it, rather than it should command them, and
therefore they make it to keep its Times and Places, its Postures and due
Distance, and think not good that it retain to their Company, or appear in
their Words or Actions, unless when it may serve the Uses of a cloak and cover
of Hypocrisy and Iniquity.

His care of his Thoughts and Ends, especially Morning and Evening.
But enough of this digression. These his forementioned momentous
Exhortations, attended with most excellent Motives, designed chiefly to direct
them how well to begin, and end the day in the fear, and as in the presence of
GOD, by hallowing their Thoughts, and (as his Words were) setting their ends
aright in the morning, (then making their resolves, and piously fore-casting
the Work of the day following) and by an impartial survey and examination in
the evening of their Compliance or Noncompliance with their foregoing
Prescriptions unto themselves; whether they obtained their designs and ends,
and how they acquitted themselves in the day foregoing.

His delight in Self-examination.
Thus by pointing at the two extremes in each day, he happily secured the
middle. He tacitly convinced them by his own example and great growth in Piety
hereby, and expressly by many other eminent instances, how advantageous a course
he had recommended to them. To this end he much applauded those two no less
excellent than common Books, the Practice of Piety, and Scudders daily Walk. By
this course he had taught himself and others, as by constant, though small
gains, to arrive to great acquests in Christianity, by constant and short
accounts, the more accurately to know the state of their Souls, and the more
easily to discern their Progress or Declinings; so, as the more to rejoice in
and promote the one, and the sooner to put limits to and redress the other.
Also he much inculcated on each Christian, that important duty of
fore-appointing and fixing his ends, not only in the general, but as much as
might be particularly and explicitly before each action of the day, but
especially each solemn Action, revolving and conceiving such a Thought and
Resolve as this in his Mind.

His frequent and generous Designs.
This, or this will I do for GOD, etc. By which heedful course, he assured the
Observer, that he would hallow all his Actions, and reap this treble advantage
(to say no more) both of espousing the Divine Direction and Blessing, and of
obtaining a surer Testimony of his sincerity, and also a stronger motive to
Diligence, and an awful circumspectness in the right discharge of what he
undertook. In compliance with this his excellent Exhortation unto others, he
knew not a day wherein he arose without some Heavenly design of promoting GOD's
Glory, and the good of Souls, accounting it a shame that the Covetous should
arise with such anxious projects of compassing his desired Wealth, the
Ambitious his aerie Honors and Grandeur, the Voluptuous his vain Pleasures;
and that the Religious, who have so glorious a Prize and Trophies before their
eyes, should be Men of no Projects or Designs. If of any, it may be affirmed of
him, that according to his frequent and vehement Exhortation thereunto, he made
Religion his business. Which worthy advice in the same words, he did so often
inculcate, that a Gentleman meeting a plain honest Country Man, and
discoursing of Mr. Allein, cavil'd at this passage which he had often heard
from him, as appearing unto him absurd and unintelligible, not knowing how any
thing (as he said) could be called a Man's business, unless that which is
secular; so foolishly ignorant of the just Interest and Power of Religion, is
an unhallowed heart, and so apt to quarrel with that wholesome advice, and loath
to be in earnest in any thing, unless in the pursuit of Vanity or Vice.

His Delight in Meditation.
Neither did only the frequent and faithful performance of the two great
difficulties of Christianity, viz. Reproof, and Self-Examination, (consisting
of so many complicated Self-denyals) proclaim and improve his great Piety, but
also his so great acquaintance with the delightsome Work of Heavenly
Meditation. A Specimen of his profitable managery of this Work, and his great
Heights herein he often gave in some of his most excellent devotional and
contemplative Discourses, both dropped from his Mouth, and committed to Writing.
And as was his delight, so were his Converses with those Authors who did
increase his contemplative Pleasure; but particularly he delighted in Mr.
Baxters Platform of Meditation on the Heavenly Felicity, in the close of his
Saints Everlasting Rest; great part whereof he so digested, as often to cite it
with great pleasure, prefacing his Citations with these words. Most divinely
says that Man of GOD, Holy Mr. Baxter, etc. And indeed had not his zeal for
GOD's Glory, and the Salvation of Souls, engaged him so much to an Active Life,
he could have even lived and dyed wholly in Divine Contemplation and Adoration;
so much did he delight to shrink within himself, and to abandon the view of the
desperate Adventures, and Antic Motions of a mad World, that so being shut to
these, he might only open his Soul to GOD and Glory, displaying it to the
glorious Beams of the Sun of Righteousness. Therefore did he often delight in
his devotions to converse with the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the
Field, since these were more innocent, and less degenerate than Man.

With Streams and Plants did he delight to walk, and all these did utter to his
attentive Ear the Praise and Knowledge of his Creator, and in his unsettled
sojournings from place to place he did often (to use his Words) look back with
sweetness and great content on the places of his former pleasant retirements,
setting as it were a Mark upon those which had marvellously pleased him in his
Solitudes, by administering to his contemplative delight.

His delight in Praising, etc.
In the Close, His great perfection in holiness was manifest, in that he loved
so much, and lived a life of Praise, and Thanksgiving. Being arrived to some
perfection, he desired and designed to antedate the Work and Songs of Spirits
made perfect. Thus David much proclaimed his perfection in Piety, by his so
great heights in this Heavenly Employment. And its Evident that Saints most
devoted to this Heavenly repast, are most perfect; because the more Men adore
and praise, the less they want, (for sad and constant Complaints, and pensive
Thoughts, are the Attendants of great wants) and the less men want, the more is
their perfection. His Exhortations to Christians did frequently design to raise
them to that sublime life of Praise and Thanksgiving. Often has he reproved
Christians, charging them with the greatest folly and ingratitude in so much
neglecting this so pleasing and profitable duty, and in interessing it so
little in their Religious Exercises. He much condemned them for that too
general practice in thrusting so enlarging a part of their Devotions into so
narrow a Room, as only the close of their Prayers. Especially did he excite
Christians to this Duty on the Lord's Day, as the most proper Work for so
Divine a Festival. Shaming them with the excellent Example of the Primitive
Christians, who welcomed in the Sun that brought so glorious a Day as the
Christian Sabbath with their Heavenly Hymns to their Creator and Redeemer. And
reproving them for so little considering and observing the proper end of its
Institution. But as he respects his own practice a great, yea, and sometimes
the greatest part of his Prayer was Thanksgiving, and indeed he was never so
much in his Element either in Prayer, or in Preaching, as when he was extolling
and adoring the Love of Christ, and marvelling at GOD's infinite goodness in
the Gift of his Son our Savior.

Neither did he so gaze upon and adore Christ his Redeemer and his Redemption,
as to forget to sound forth Praises of GOD, the Creator, for often he has been
heard with admiration and praise, to take notice of the Divine Power and Wisdom
in the Works of Creation, and therefore in the open Air, in the private
retirement of some Field or Wood, he delighted to address himself to God in
praise, that his eyes might affect his heart, and awake his glory. And here
often he has been heard to say: That Man was the Tongue of the whole Creation,
appointed as the Creatures Interpreter, to speak forth, and make articulate the
Praises which they but silentlently intimate.

He much delighted in Vocal Music, and especially in singing Psalms and Hymns,
particularly Mr. Bartons, witness his constant practice after Dinner elsewhere
related. In him it may be said, in as high a degree as of most Saints on Earth,
That each Thought was to him a Prayer, each Prayer a Song, each Day a Sabbath,
each Meal a Sacrament, a Fore-taste of that Eternal Repast, to which he has
now Arrived.

His Time-redeeming Thrist.
To conclude; That he might effect all the excellent purposes of a Holy Life,
he set a high value on his most precious Time, and did with so Wise and Holy
Forecast each day redeem and fill it up, that he did not only not do nothing,
but also not little, though in a little and short time. All Companies did hear
him proclaim the Price of Time, and how excellently and advantagiously he did
it in public before his Ejection, in several most useful Sermons on Ephesians-
(...) 16. many that heard him, do to this day, to their great comfort and
profit, remember. And the more remarkable was this his Holy Thrist, because
prophetical of his short (...) here on Earth.

His diligence and holiness in this his Sphere of Action, was a presage of his
speedy Translation, as with Enoch, to the Sphere of Vision and Fruition, for a
reward of his singular Piety; it being not probable that he who made so great a
haste to dispatch his Heavenly Work, should be long without his desired
Recompense.

CHAP. X. A few Additions to the former Character, by his Reverend and Intimate
Friend Mr. R. F.
HE was a Person, with whom for many years I was well acquainted, and the more
I knew him, the more I loved and admired the rich and exceeding Grace of GOD in
him: I looked on him as one of the most elevated, refined, choice Saints, that
ever I knew, or expect (while I live) to know; and that because (among others)
I observed these things of him.

1. A most sincere, pure, and absolute consecration of himself to GOD in CHRIST
JESUS: his Soul had first practiced the Covenant-Dedication, which his hand
afterward prescribed, as a Pattern to others in his Father-in-Laws Book.

There seemed no sinister end, or false affection, to move or sway him in his
way; But the good pleasure of the LORD, the edification of his Church, and the
Salvation of Souls, were the only marks his eye seemed (at all) to regard, in
his Designs and Acts: I know no other man's heart; but thus he appeared to my
most attentive observation; and so I fully believe concerning him, as much as
of any Person I ever saw.

2. In this his dedication to God, he was carried with the highest and purest
flame of Divine Love that ever I observed in any: And that Love arising from a
clear vision of the Beauty of Divine Perfections, especially his Gospel Love;
the sight of which Beauty and Excellency seemed perpetually to possess and
ravish his Soul: This Love seemed wholly unmixed from all that carnal heat that
would carry him into Fantastic or Indecent Expressions; but his mind seemed to
be always ascending with its might in the greatest calmness and satisfaction.
Thus have I often observed him in frequent and silent elevation of Heart,
manifested by the most genuine and private lifting up of his eyes, and joined
with the sweetest smile of his Countenance, when (I am confident) he little
thought of being seen by any: Thus have I often heard him flow in Prayer and
Discourse, with the clearest conviction, and dearest taste of divine Excellency
and Goodness; and the fullest, highest, and most pleased expression of his
being overcome by it, and giving up his ALL in esteem to it; but this Love, in
the greatest demonstration, appeared by his perpetual greedy and unsatiable
spending of his whole self for the Glory of God, good of the Church, and
Salvatio of Souls. His Head was ever contriving, his Tongue (...), and his
whole Man acting some design for these; so he lived, and so he dyed: He
labored and suffered himself into the Maladies which ended him: And when he
was at Bath, like a perfect Skeleton, and could move neither Hand nor Foot,
when his Physicians had (...) him all Preaching, and diswaded him from Vocal
Praying, (as being above his strength) yec then would he almost daily be
carried in his Bath-Chair to the Almshouses, and little Childrens Schools, and
there give them Catechisms, teach them the meaning of them, and call them to an
account, how they remembered and understood. And he died designing a way how
every poor Child in Somersetshire might Have, Learn, and be instructed in the
Assemblies Catechism; yea and at the expression of his affection, I cannot but
mention the frequentest Ecstasies or Raptures of Spirit, wherein he lay on his
Bed (when his Body was even deprived of all power of its own motion, but with
no great pain) in consideration of Divine Love to him in general, and in
particular, that he felt no great pain: Never heard I God so loved, and
thanked, in the highest confluences of pleasing providence by others, as he
was by him in his affliction, for not inflicting great pain upon him; though he
was otherwise so sad a Spectacle of weakness, and looked so like death, that
some great Ladies often hindered his coming into the Bath, the gastliness of his
look did so afright them.

3. His pure and sacred Love wrought in him a great Spirit of Charity and
Meekness to Men of other Judgments and Persuasions; and great affection
toward all such in whom he found any Spiritual good. His Zeal was all of a
building, and no destroying nature; he had too much wisdom to esteem his own
thoughts to be the Standard of all other Men's: His clear Light and pure Heat,
made him of a more discerning substantial and divine temper, than to reject any
(in whom Charity could see any thing of a new nature) for differing from him in
the Modes or Forms of Discipline or Worship, or Disputable Points.

4. Suitably to his high degree of Holiness and Divine Communion, he enjoyed
the richest assurance of Divine Love to himself in particular, and his saving
interest in Christ. I believe few Men were ever born that attained to so clear,
satisfied and powerful evidence, that his sins were pardoned, and his Person
accepted in Jesus, into eternal Life, and had more glorious fore-tastes of
Heaven. I remember once, coming in when he was kneeling down to Family Prayer,
his Heart was (in that Duty) carried forth into such expressions of love and
praise for the sealings of everlasting Love and Life, as I never heard before
or since; and such as (I am fully satisfied) none could express, but who had
received the White Stone with the new Name in it.

But this was not accidental to him, or unusual; for (whatever Clouds he might
possibly have, though I know of none) yet I am sure (for a good time before his
death) he lived in the very dawning to Glory, both in the full assurance of it
as his Portion, and a Spirit of Sanctity, Love, and Praise, like unto it.

And though in the very hour of his dying, his Disease had heat his Head; and
in his Raptures, he had Expressions, which at another time his Grace and Reason
would not have used; yet, all the Copies, (I have seen of those Transports) in
the substance of them, speak only fuller assurance of God's Love to him, and
his highest returns of love to Christ again.

And I do not at all wonder, that a Person shining so much with the Divine
Image, and living so uninterruptedly in the clearest and nearest Divine
Communion, should enjoy such assurance of God's everlasting Love, and be filled
so with Joy therein, and making such returns of Love and Praise thereto.

CHRISTIAN LETTERS FULL OF Spiritual Instructions, TENDING To the Promoting of
the Power of Godliness, both in Persons, and Families.

Anno Dom. 1672.

CHRISTIAN LETTERS Full of SPIRITUAL INSTUCTIONS, Tending To the Promoting of
the Power of Godliness, both in Persons, and Families.
LETTER, 1.
To his Wife to Dispose her to his Acceptance of Taunton, on small Maintenance.

My Dear Heart.
BY this time I hope thou have received mine by Martin, and also an Answer
touching their Resolution at Taunton. My thoughts have been much upon that
Business of late, so small as the outward Encouragements in point of
Maintenance are, and methinks I find my heart much Inclining that way. I will
tell thee the Principles upon which I go.

First, I say this for a Foundation, That a man's Life consists not in the
Abundance of the things that he possesses. It was accounted a wise Prayer that
(...) put up of old, that he might only be Fed with Food convenient for him.
And certain it is that where men have least of the World; they esteem it least,
and live more by Faith and in dependence upon God, casting their care and
burden upon him. O the sweet breathings of David's soul! the strong actings of
his Faith and Love, that we find come from him, when his condition was low and
mean in the World. How closely does he cling? How fully does he Rely upon God?
The Holy Ghost seems to make it a Privilege to be brought to a necessity of
living by Faith, as, I think, I have formerly hintted thee, out of Deuteronomy. 11.
10. 11. where Canaan is preferred before Egypt, in regard of its dependence
upon God for the former and latter Rain, which in Egypt they could live
without, and have supplies from the River. And certainly could we that are
unexperienced, but feel the Thorns of those cares and troubles that there are
in gathering and keeping much, and the danger when Riches increase of setting
our hearts upon them, we should prize the happiness of a middle condition much
before it. Doubtless, Godliness with contentment, is great gain. Seek thou
great things for thy self (says the Prophet to Baruch) seek them not.
Certainly a good Conscience is a continual Feast, and enough for a happy Life:
no man that Wareth intangleth himself with the affairs of this Life, that he
may please him who has chosen him to be a Soldier. We should be but little
Encumbered with the things of this World, and withal free from a World of
Intanglements, which in a great place committed wholly to our charge, would be
upon our Consciences as no small Burden.

Secondly, I take this for an undoubted truth, that a dram of Grace, is better
than a Talent of Wealth; and therefore such a place where our Consciences would
be free, and we had little to do in the World to take off our hearts and
thoughts from the things of Eternity, and had the advantage of abundance of
means, and the daily opportunities of warming our hearts with the (...) Society
and Conference of Heavenly Christians, and no temptations to carry us away, nor
discouragements in our walking with God, and the due performance of our duty is
(if we pass a true and Spiritual Judgment, as the Holy Ghost in Scripture
would) without comparison before another place, void of those Spiritual helps
and advantages. Let us think with our selves, what though our Purses, our
Estates, may thrive better in a place of a larger maintenance? yet where are
our graces, our souls, like to thrive any way answerable to what they are in
this? We should have but little in the World, and we could live hereafter; but
alas, what is this if it be made up to us, as it will surely be in Communion
with God and his People? If we thrive in Faith, and Love, Humility, and
Heavenly mindedness, as above all places I know we are likely to do there, what
matter is it though we do not raise our selves in the World? the thing it may
well be accounted but mean; but alas, let us look upon it with a spiritual Eye,
and then we shall pass another Judgment of it. Oh! who would leave so much
Grace, and so much comfort in Communion with Christ and his Saints, as we may
gain there, for the probabilities of living with a little more gentility and
handsomness in the world? It Is a strange thing to see how Christians generally
do judge so carnally of things, looking to the things that are seen and
Temporal, and not the things that will stick by us to Eternity. What is it
worth a year? is the Maintenance certain and sure? What charges are there like
to be? these are the questions we commonly ask first, when we speak of settling.
But alas, though those things are duly to be considered too, yet what good am I
like to do? what good am I like to get? (Both which questions I think might be
as comfortably Answered concerning this, as any place in England;) These should
be the main Interrogatories, and the chief things we should judge of a place to
settle in by. What if we have but a little in the World? Why then we must keep
but a short Table, and shall make but a little noise in the World, and must
give the meaner entertainments to our Friends. O but will not this be
abundantly made up, if we have more outward and inward Peace, as we may well
count we shall have. One dram of saving Grace will weigh down all this. Let
others (...) themselves in their Corn, and Wine, and Oil, in their sat Livings,
and their large Tables, and their great resort, is we have more of the Light of
Gods Countenance, more grace, more comfort, who would change with them? surely
if Paul were to choose a Place, he would not look so much what 'twas a year, but
would wish us to take that where we might be most likely to save our own and
others Souls.

Thirdly, That the best and the surest way to have any outward Mercy, is to be
content to want it. When men's desires are over-eager after the World, they much
have thus much a Year, and a House well Furnished, and Wife, and Children, thus
and thus Qualified, or else they will not be content; God does usually, if not
constantly, break their wills by denying them, as one would cross a froward
Child of his stubborn humor: Or else puts a sting into them, that a man had
been as good he had been without them, as a man would give a thing to a
froppish Child, but it may be with a knock on his Fingers, and a frown to boot.
The best way to get Riches, is out of doubt to set them lowest in ones desires.
Solomon found it so: Alas, he did not ask Riches, but Wisdom and Ability, to
discharge his great Trust; but God was so pleased with his Prayer, that he
threw in them into the Bargain. If we seek the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness in the first place, and leave other things to him, God will not
stand with us for these outward, though we never ask them we shall have them
as over measure; God will throw them in as the Vantage. And to this suits the
Experience of our dear Honorathius: And indeed (says he, speaking of God)
Honorathius finds that his only hiding place and refuge, and a place of
Succor, from the Storms that fall upon him, and has had such Helps at dead
lift there, that he is engaged for ever to trust there. For when he has been
lowest, and in the greatest straights, he has gone and made his moan
Heavenward, with free submission to the rightful disposer of all things, and
he has been so liberally supplied, as makes him very confident the best way to
obtain any Mercy, or supply, is to be content to be without it: And he is
persuaded nothing sets Gods Mercies farther off, than want of free submission
to want them. Certainly, God will never be behind hand with us. Let our care be
to Build his House, and let him alone to build ours.

Fourthly, That none ever was, or ever shall be, a loser by Jesus Christ. Many
have lost much for him, but never did, never shall any lose by him. Take this
for a certainty, whatsoever probabilities of outward Comforts we leave,
whatsoever outward advantages we balk, that we may glorify him in our
Services, and enjoy him in his Ordinances more than otherwhere we could, we
shall receive an hundred fold in this Life. It Is a sad thing to see how little
Christ is trusted or believed in the World: Men will trust him no farther than
they can see him, and will leave no work for Faith. Alas, has he not a
thousand ways, both outward and inward, to make up a little outward
disadvantage to us? What does our Faith serve for? Have any ventured themselves
upon him in his way, but he made good every word of the Promise to them? let us
therefore exercise our Faith, and stay our selves upon the Promise, and see if
ever we are ashamed of our hope.

Fifthly, That what is wanting in the means, God will make up in the blessing.
This (...) take for a certain truth, while a man commits himself and his
affairs to God, and is in a way that God put him into: Now if a man have but a
little Income, if he have a great Blessing, that is enough to make it up. Alas,
we must not account Mercies by the Bulk. What if another have a Pound to my
Ounce, if mine be Gold for his Silver, I will never change with him. As it is
not Bread that keeps men alive, but the Word of Blessing that proceeds out of
his Mouth of God; so it is not the largeness of the Means, but the blessing of
the Lord that makes rich. Oh! if men did but believe this, they would not
grasp so much of the World as they do. Well, let others take their course, and
we will take ours, to wait upon God by Faith and Prayer, and rest in his
Promise; and I am confident that is the way to be provided for: Let others toil
to enlarge their Income, (but alas, they will find they go not the right way to
work) we will bless God to enlarge our blessing, and I doubt not but we shall
prove the Gainers.

Sixthly, That every Condition has its Snares, Crosses, and troubles, and
therefore we may not expect to be without them where ever we be, only that
condition is most eligible that has fewest and least. I cannot Object any
thing against the Proposal of Taunton, but the meaness of the Maintenance; but
if our Income be but short, we can I hope be content to live answerably, we
must fare the meaner, that will be all the inconvenience that Animal know, and
truly I hope we are not of the nature of that Animal, that has his Heart in
his Belly. I know how Daniel thrived by his Water and Pulse, and think a mean
Diet is as wholesome to the body, yea, and sarless hurtful than a full and
liberal is; and persuade my self it would be no such hard matter for us
conrentedly to deny our Flesh in this respect. But let us consider how little
and utterly inconsiderable this Inconvenience is, in comparison of those we
must reckon upon meeting with, if God cast us into another place, and whether
this be not a great deal less than the trouble we shall have for want of
comfortable and Christian Society, for want of the frequent and quickening
means we shall here have, in wrangling and contending with the Covetous, or
else losing our dues, in the (...) and (...), and malicious Reports, that are
we see raised upon the best by the wicked in most places, in their contentions
about their right to the Sacraments, in our Intanglement in the cares and
troubles of this life, etc. all which we should be here exempted from. Upon
these and the like cousiderations, I find my heart very much inclined to accept
of their offer at Taunton. I beseech thee to weigh, and thoroughly consider the
matter, and tell me impartially thy thoughts, and which way thy Spirit
inclines, for I have always resolved the place I settled in should be thy
choice, and to thy content. The least intimation of thy will to the contrary,
shall overballance all my thoughts of settling there, for I should account it
the greatest unhappiness if I should thus settle, and thou should afterward
be discontented at the straightness of our condition. But I need not have Wrote
this, had not thou fully signified thy mind already to me, I had never gone
so far as I have. Well, the Lord whose we are, and whom we serve, do with us as
it shall seem good unto him. We are always as mindful as is possible of thee
here, both together and apart. Captain Luke desired me to entreat thee to meet
him one two Hours in a Day, for the (...) of Mercies upon the twenty third Day
of every Month. Send word to me of their Resolution at Taunton, in two Letters,
least possibly one should miscarry, though never a one did yet. I dare not
think of settling under sixty Pound at Taunton, and surely it cannot be less. I
have Written as well as I could on a suddeu my Mind to thee, I have been so
large in delivering my Judgment, that I must thrust up my Affections into a
Corner. Well, though they have but a corner in my Letter, I am sure they have
room enough in my heart: But I must conclude; The Lord keep thee my Dear, and
cherish thee for ever in his Bosom. Farewell mine own Soul.

I am as ever Thine own Heart. JOSEPH ALLEINE.
Oxon, May 27. (...).
LETTER II. [Prepare for Suffering.]
To my dearly beloved the Flock of Christ in Taunton, Grace and Peace.

Most dear Christians:
MY (...) straights of time will now force me to bind my long loves in a few
short lines; yet I could not tell how to leave you unsaluted, nor choose but
write to you in a few words, that you should not be dismayed neither at our
present sufferings, or at the evil tidings that by this time I doubt not are
come unto you. Now, Brethren, is the time when the Lord is like to put you upon
the trial; now is the hour of temptation come. Oh! be faithful to Christ to the
death, and he shall give you a Crown of life: Faithful is he that has called
you, and he will not suffer you upon his faithfulness to be tempted above what
you are able. Give up your selves and your All to the Lord, with resolution to
follow him fully, and two things be sure of, and lay up as sure grounds of
everlasting consolation.

1. If you seek by prayer and study to know the mind of God, and do resolve to
follow it in uprightness, you shall not fail either of direction or pardon;
Either God will show you what his pleasure is, or will certainly forgive you if
you miss your way. Brethren, fix upon your Souls the deep and lively affecting
apprehensions of the most gracious, loving, merciful, sweet, (...), tender
nature of your Heavenly Father, which is so great that you may be sure he will
with all readiness and love accept of his poor Children when they endeavor to
approve themselves in sincerity to him, and would fain know his mind and do it,
if they could but clearly see it, though they should unwillingly mistake.

2. That as sure as God is faithful, if he do see that such or such a
temptation (with the forethought of which you may be apt to disquiet your
selves, lest you should fall away when thus or thus tried) will be too hard for
your Graces, he will never suffer it to come upon you. Let not, my dear
Brethren, let not the present tribulations or those impending move you. This is
the way of the Kingdom: persecution is one of your (...): self-denial and
taking (...) the Cross is your ABC of Religion; you have learnt nothing that
have not begun at Christs-Cross. Brethren, the Cross of Christ is your Crown;
the reproach of Christ is your riches; the shame of Christ is your glory; the
damage attending strict and holy diligence, your greatest advantage: sensible
you should be of what is coming, but not discouraged; humbled, but not
dismayed; having your hearts broken, and yet your spirits unbroken; humble your
selves mightily under the mighty (...) of God; but fear not the face of man:
may you even be (...) in humility, but high in courage; little in your own
apprehensions of your selves, but great in holy fortitude, (...) and holy
magnanimity, lying in the dust before your God, yet triumphing in faith and
hope, and boldness and confidence over all the power of the enemies. Approve
your selver (...) good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, with No Armor, but that of
righteousness; No Weapons, but strong crying and tears; looking for no Victory
but that of Faith; nor hope to overcome, but by patience: now for the faith and
patience of the Saints, now for the harness of your suffering Graces: O gird up
the loins of your mind, and be sober, and hope to the end: Fight not but the
good fight of Faith: here you must contend and that earnestly: Strive not but
against sin, and here you may resist even unto blood: now see that you choose
life, and embrace affliction rather than sin. Strive together mightily, and
frequently by prayer: I know you do, but I would you should abound more and
more: Share my loves among you, and continue your earnest prayers for me, and
be you assured that I am and shall be through Grace, a willing thankful Servant
of your Souls concernments.

From the common Jail May 28. 1663. Joseph Aleine.

LETTER III. [Warning to Professors.]
To my most dearly beloved, my Christian Friends in Taunton, Salvation.

Most loving (...):
I Shall nover forget your old kindnesses, and the entire affections that you
have shed upon me, not by drops, but by floods, would I never so fain forget
them, yet I could not, they are so continually renowned; for there is never a
day but I hear of them; may, more than hear of them, I feel and taste them. The
God that has promised to them that give to a Prophet though but a cup of cold
Water, shall receive a Prophets reward; he will recompense your labor of love,
your servent prayers, and constant cries, your care for my welfare, your
bountiful supplies who have given me, not a cup of cold water, but the Wine of
your loves, with the sense and tidings whereof I am coutinually refreshed. I
must, I do, and will bless the Lord as long as I live, that he hath-cast my lot
in so fair a place, to dwell in your communion; and especially to go in and out
before you, and to be the Messenger of the Lord of Host to you, to proclaim his
Law, and to Preach his Excellencies, to be his Spokesman to you, and to woo
for him, and to espouse you to one Husband, and to present you as a chaste
Virgin unto Christ. Lord! how unworthy am I, everlastingly unworthy of this
glorious Dignity, which I do verily believe the most brightest Angels in Heaven
would be glad of, if the Lord saw it fit to employ them in this work! Well, I
do not, I cannot repent, notwithstanding all the difficulties and
inconveniences that do attend his despised Servants, and hated ways, and that
are like to attend them; for we have but sipped yet of the Cup; but I have set
my hand to his plow; my Ministry I took up with you, and my Testimony I
finished with you, though I thought I had espoused you till death: and when I
was entered into that Sacred Office, which through rich Grace I was employed in,
I told you in the close of what I spoke before the laying of the holy Hands
upon me (most gladly do I take up this Office with all the persecution,
affliction, difficulties an tribulation and inconveniences that do and may
attend it) and blessed be God, I am through his goodness of the same mind
still, and my tribulations for Christ, do (to him be Glory, for to me belongs
nothing but shame and confusion of face) confirm my choice and my resolution to
serve him with much more than my labors. Verily, Brethren, it is a good choice
that I have commended to you: Oh! that there might not one be found among you
that has not made Mary's choice, I mean of that good part which shall never be
taken away from you. Brethren, let them take up with the world that have no
better portion: be content that they should carry the Bell, and bear away the
riches and perferments and glory, and splendour of the World. Alas! you have no
reason to envy them: verlly, they have a lie in their right hand: Ah! how soon
will their hopes fail them: how soon will the crackling blast be out, and leave
them in eternal darkness: they shall go to the generation of their Fathers,
they shall never see light, like sheep they shall be laid in their Graves, and
the upright shall have Dominion over them in the morning. But for my Brethren,
I am jealous that none of you should come short of the Glory of God. I am
ambitious for you that you should be all the heirs of an endless life, the
living hopes of the Saints, the inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that
fades not away.

Ah my Brethren! why should not you be all happy? I am jealous for you with a
Godly jealousy, left a promise being left you of entering into his rest, any of
you should come short of it. O look diligently, left any man fail of the Grace
of God: Alas! how it pities me to see this Rest neglected: How it grieves me
that any of you should fall short of mercy at last! That any of that flock over
which the holy Ghost has made me in part overseer, should perish; when Christ
has done so much for you, and when his under Officers (through his Grace, for
we are not sufficient of our selves) have done somewhat to recover and save
them. Ah dear Brethren! I was in great earnest with you when I besought you out
of the (...), many a time, to give a Bill of Divorce to your sins, and to
accept of the match and the mercy that in the name of God Almighty I did there
offer to you. Alas! how it pitied me to look over so great a Congregation, and
to think that I could not, for my life I could not, persuade them, one quarter
of them, in likelihood to be saved? how it moved me to see your diligence in
flocking, not only to the stated Exercises, but to the Repetitions and to most
hazardous opportunities, for which you are greatly to be commended, since the
Law forbad my public Preaching, and yet to think that many of you that went so
far, were like to perish for ever for want of going further. I must praise your
diligent attendance on all opportunities: Blessed be God that made a willing
ministry and a willing people: for I remember how I have gone furnished with a
Train! How I went with the multitude to the House of God, with the voice of joy
and praises, with the multitude that kept Holy Days. The remembrance of which
moves my soul, but, O my flock, my most dear flock, how fain would I carry you
farther then the external and outward profession; O! how loath am I to leave
you there! How troubled to think that any of you should go far and hazard much
for Religion, and yet miscarry for ever by the hand of some unmortified lust!
as secret pride or untamed passion, or an unbridled tongue, or which I fear
most of all, a predominate love of the World in your hearts. Alas! must it be
so, and is there no remedy but I must carry you to Heavens-gate and leave you
there! Oh, that I should leave the work of your Souls but half done; and bring
you no (...) than the almost of Christianity. Hear, O my people, hear, although
I may command you, upon your utmost peril in the Name of the Lord Jesus that
shall shortly judge you, I beseech you, I warn you as a Father does his
Children, to look to the settling and securing of your everlasting condition;
and for life take heed of your resting in the outter-part of Religion, but to
be restless till you find the through-change of Regeneration within, that you
are quite new in the frame and bent of your hearts: for here is the main of
Religion in the hidden man of the heart: For Christs-sake, for your Soul-sake
look to it, that you build upon the Rock, that you be sure in the
Foundation-work, that you do (...) deliver over your selves to the Lord to be
under his command and at his dispose in all things: see that you make no
exceptions, no reserve, that you cast overboard all your worldly hopes, and
count upon parting with all for Christ: that you take him alone for your whole
happiness. Wonder not that I so often inculcate this: If it be well here, it is
well all; if unfound here, the ertor is in the Foundation, and you are undone.
Brethren, I see great trials coming, when we shall see Professors fall like
leaves in the Autumn, unless they be well settled: therefore is it that I would
so fain have you look to your standing, and to secure the main. And for you
whose Souls are soundly wrought upon, O make sure whatever you do: get and keep
your evidences clear! How dreadful would your temptations be, if you should be
called to part with all for Christ, and not be sure of him neither: get a right
and clear understanding of the terms of life, which I have set before you in
that form of (...) with God in Christ, that I commended to you. I would that
none of you should be without a Copy of it: be much in observing your own
hearts, both in duties and out-crying mightily to God for assurance: If you
cannot discern your estate your selves, go to some body that is able and
faithful, and fully open your Case, your Evidences and doubts, and be
extraordinary strict and watchful in your whole course, and I doubt not but you
will quickly grow up to assurance.

I cannot tell how to make an end, methinks I could write all the day to you,
but my straights of time are great, and my Letter already too long, yet I
cannot conclude till I have given you my unfeigned thanks for your most kind
and gracious Letter. Surely it shall be in store with me, and laid up among my
Treasures; that God is pleased so to unite your hearts to me, and to make use
of me for your edification, is matter of highest joy unto me; as also to see
your (...) in Christ, your unshaken resolutions notwithstanding all the
Tempters wiles. Go on, my dearly Beloved, and the Lord strengthen your hands
and your hearts, and lift you up above the fears of men. My most dear Brother
Norman salutes you with manifold Loves and Respects, earnestly wishing that you
may wear the Crown of perseverance; as also Brother Turner. The Lord
strengthen, establish, settle you, and after you have suffered a while, make
you perfect: I leave my Brethen in the everlasting Arms, and rest,

From the common (...) at Juelchester, June 13th. 1663. Your Ambassador in
bonds, Joseph Alleine.

LETTERS IV. (A Call to the Unconverted.)
To the Beloved People the Inhabitants of the Town of Taunton, Grace, Mercy,
and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

Most endeared and beloved Friends:
I Do most readily acknowledge my self a Debtor to you all, and a Servant of
all, and therefore I have sent these few Lines to salute you all. My Lines did
fall in a fair place when the Lord did cast my Lot among you; for which I
desire to be thankful. God has been pleased to work a mutual affection between
me and you. I remember the Tears and Prayers that you have sent me hither with,
and how I saw your hearts in your eyes; How can I forget how you poured out
your Souls upon me. And truly you are a People much upon my heart, whose
welfare is the matter of my continual prayers, care, and study. And oh! that I
knew how to do you good: Ah? how certainly should never a son of you miscarry
if I knew how to save you. Ah! how it pities me to think how that so many of
you should remain in your sins after so many and so long endeavors to convert
and bring them in. Once more, Oh! my Beloved, once more hear the call of the
most high God unto yon. The Prison Preaches to you, the same Doctrine that the
Pulpit did. Hear, O People, hear; he that has an ear let him hear. The Lord of
Life and of Glory offers you all Mercy, and Peace, and Blessedness: Oh, why
should you die! whosoever will, let him take of the Waters of Life freely; what
miss of life when it is to be had for the taking? God forbid. O my Brethren, my
Soul yerns for you, and my bowels toward you. Ah! that I did but know what
Arguments to use with you: who shall choose my words for me that I may prevail
with sinners not to reject their own Mercy: how shall I get within them? How
shall I reach them? Oh! that I did but know the words that would pierce them?
That I could but get between their sins and them. Beloved Brethren, the Lord
Jesus has made me, most unworthy, his Spokesman, to bespeak your hearts for
him: And oh, that I knew but how to (...) for him, that I might prevail! these
eight years have I been calling, and yet how great a part do remain visibly in
their sins, and how few, alas! how few souls have I gained to Christ by sound
conversion. Once more I desire with all possible earnestness to apply my self
to you, I have thought it may be a Sermon out of a Prison might do that which I
could not do after my long striving with you, but have left undone (...) then,
O Friends, and let us reason together.

Many among you remain under the power of Ignorance: Ah! how often have I told
you the dangerous, yea, damnable estate that such are in. Never make excuses,
nor flatter your selves that you shall be saved though you go on in this; I
have told you often, and now tell you again, God must be false of his Word, if
ever you be saved without being brought out of the state of Ignorance: If ever
you enter in at the door of Heaven, it must be by the Key of Knowledge, you
cannot be saved, except you be brought to the knowledge of the Truth. A people
that remain in gross ignorance, that are without understanding, the Lord that
made them, will not have mercy on them. O why will you flatter your selves, and
wilfully deceive your own selves? when the God of Truth has said you shall
surely die if you go on in this estate: Oh, for the love of God and of your
Souls, I beseech you awake and bestir your selves to get the saving knowledge
of God: you that are capable of learning a Trade to live by, are you not
capable of learning the way to be saved: yea, I doubt not but you are capable
if you would but beat your heads about it, and take pains to get it. And is it
not pity that you should perish for ever for want of a little pains, and study,
and care to get the knowledge of God: Study the Catechism, if possible get it
by heart, if not, read it often, or get it read to you, cry unto God for
knowledge; improve the little you have by living answerable. Search the
Scripture daily, get them read to you if you cannot read them. Improve your
Sabbaths diligently, and I doubt not but in the use of these means you will
sooner arrive to the knowledge of Christ than of a Trade. But for thee, O
hardened sinner, that wilt make thy excuses that thou have not time nor
abilities to get knowledge, and to sit still without it, I pronounce unto thee
that thou shall surely perish: And I challenge thee to tell me, if thou can,
how thou will answer it before the most High God when he shall fit in judgment
upon thee, that thou would be contented to undergo a seven years
Apprentiship to learn how to get thy living, and that thou might have got
the knowledge of the principles of Religion in half the time, but thou would
not beat thy head about it.

Many are swallowed up in mere profaneness: Alas! that there should be any such
in a place of such means and mercies! but it cannot be concealed. Many of them
proclaim their sin like Sodom, and carry their deadly Leprosy in their
foreheads. I am ashamed to think that in Taunton there should be so many
Alehouse-haunters and Tiplers, so many lewd Gamesters, and Rioters and
debauched livers; so many black mouthed Swearers, who have Oaths and Curses for
their common language, so many Raylers at Godliness, and Prosane Scoffers, so
many Liars and deceitful Dealers, and unclean and wanton Wretches. O what a
long list will these and such like make up, if put together: it saddens me to
mention such as these. O how crimsen is their guilt! how often have you been
warned, and yet are still unreformed, yea loose and profane. Yet one warning
more have I sent after you from the Lord, to repent. Return, O finners, what!
will you run into everlasting burnings with your eyes open?

Repent, O Drunkards or else you shall be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven,
(...) Cor. 6. 9, 10. Repent, O Swearers, else you shall fall into condemnation,
(...) 12. Repent, O Liars, put away lying, and speak every one truth to his
neighbor; else you shall have your part in the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone, Rev. 20. 8. Repent, O Company-keepers, forsake the foolish and live,
but a Companion of the wicked shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. 20. Repent you
Deceivers of your unrighteous dealings, or else you shall have no Inheriance in
the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. The Lord that made us, knows my earnest
desire for your conversion and Salvation, and that I speak not this to you out
of any evil will toward you, for I would (...) at your feet to do you good, but
out of a sense of your deplorable estate, while you remain in your sins. I know
there is mercy for you if you do soundly repent and reform, and bow to the
Righteousness and Government of the Lord Christ: but if you go on, and say, you
shall yet have peace, I pronounce unto you, that there is no escape, but the
Lord will make his wrath to smoke against you, he will wound the head of his
enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his Trespasses.

Others have escaped the gross pollutions of the World, but stick in the form
of Godliness, and content themselves with a negative Righreousness, that they
are no Drunkards, nor Swearers, etc. or at best with an outward conformity to
the duties of Religion, or some common workings, instead of a saving. O I am
jealous for you that you should not lose the things that you have wrought, and
miss your reware for want of sincerity: for the Lords sake put on, and beware
of perishing in the Suburbs of the City of Refuge: beg of God to make
through-work with you, and be jealous for your selves; get a right
understanding of the difference between a Hypocripe and a sincere Christian,
and try you estates much, but only with those marks, that you are sure from the
Scripture will abide Gods trial.

But for you that fear the Lord in sincerity, I have nothing but good and
comfortable words: I have proclaimed your happiness in the last Token I sent to
the Town: I mean the abstract of the Covenant of Grace, upon the Privileges,
comforts, mercies there summed up and set before you. May your souls ever live;
what condition can you devise wherein there will not be abundance of comfort,
and matter of joy unspeakable, to you. O Beloved, know your own happiness, and
live in that holy admiring, commending, adoring, praisins of your gracious God,
that becomes the people of his praise. I have been long, yet methinks I have
not emptied half my heart unto you: I trespass much, I fear, upon the Bearer,
therefore in haste I commend you to God. The good will of him that dwelt in the
Bush be with you all. The Lord Create a defense upon you, and Deliverance for
you: the Lord cover you all the day, and make you to dwell between his
shoulders; I desire your constant, instant, earnest Prayers for me, and rest,

A willing Labourer, and thankful Sufferer for you, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the common Goal in Juelchester, July 4th. 1663.
LETTER, V. [Trust God, and be sincere.]
To my most endeared Friends, the Servants of Christ in Taunton, Grace and
Peace.

Most dearly Beloved and longed for, my Joy and Crown:
MY hearts desire and prayer to God for you is, that you may be saved. I know
that you are the But of men's rage and malice: but you may satisfy your selves
as David in his patient sustaining of (...) fury and curses: It may be the Lord
will look upon our affliction, and require good for their cursing this day. But
however it be for that, be sure to hold on your way: your name indeed is cast
forth as evil, and you are hated of all men for Christs-sake, for your
profession of his Gospel, and clearing to his Ways and Servants: but let not
this discourage you, for you are now more than ever blessed: only hold fast,
that no man take your Crown. Let not any that have begun in the Spirit, end in
the flesh. Do not forsake God, till he forsake you; he that endures to the end
shall be saved: The Promise is to him that overcomes; therefore think not of
looking back: Now you have set your hands to Christ's (...), though you labor
hard, and suffer long, the Crop will pay for all: now the Lord is trying what
credit he has in the World, and who they be that will trust him. The
unbelieving World are all for present Pay; they must have ready Money,
something in hand, and will not follow the Lord when there is like to be any
great hazard and hardship in his Service. But now is the time for you, my
Beloved, to prove your selves Believers, when there is nothing visible but
present hazard and expense, and difficulty in your Makers service. Now it will
be seen who can trust the Lord, and who thrusts him not: Now, my Brethren, bear
you up, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like men, be strong: now give glory
to God by believing. If you can trust in his Promises, for your reward now,
when nothing appears but the dispseasure of Rulers, and Bonds, and Losies, and
Tribulations on every side, this will be somewhat like Believer. Brethren, I
beseech you to reckon upon no other but crosses here. Let none of you dream of
an Earthly Paradise, or flatter your selves with Dreams of sleeping in your
ease, and temporal Prosperity, and carrying Heaven too. Think not to keep your
Estates, and liberties and consciences too: Count not upon rest till you come
to the Land of Promise. Not that I would have any of you to run upon hazards
uncalled: No, we shall meet them soon enough in the way of our duty, without we
will balke it, and shamefully (...): but I would have you east overboard you
worldly hopes, and count not upon an Earthly felicity but be content (...) till
you come on the other side the Grave. Is it not enough to have a whole eternity
of Happiness yet behind? If God do throw in the comforts of this life too into
the bargain; I would not have you throw them back again, (...) despite the
goodness of the Lord: But I would, my (...), that you should use this World, as
not (...) it, (...) you should be (...) to the world, and the World (...); that
you should declare plainly that you seek a Country; (...) Country, which is
an Heavenly. Ah! my dear (...), I beseech you carry it like Pilgrims and
strangers, I (...) you abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against (...)
Souls; for what have we to do with the customs and (...) and (...) of this
World, who are strangers in (...) contented with. Travelers Lots: know you not
that you are in a strange Land? all is well as long as it is well at home; I
pray you, Brethren, daily and frequently to consider your condition and
station: Do you not remember that you are in (...); and what though your be but
poorly attended, and (...) accommodated? though you (...), hard, and (...)? Is
this a strange, thing? What should Travelers look for else? Will you set forth
in a Journey, and promise your selves nothing but fair-way and fair weather?
Shall a man put forth to Sea and reckon upon nothing but the calm? If you were
of the World, the World would love his own. But now God has chosen you, and
called you out of the World, therefore the World hates you: But remember, my
Brethren, it is your duty to love them, even while they hate you; and to pray
for mercy for them that will show no mercy, nor do no Justice for us. This I
desire you to observe as a great duty of the present times: And let not any so
far forget their duty and pattern, as to wish evil to them that do evil to us,
or to please themselves with the thoughts of being even with them. Let us
commit our selves to him that judges righteously, and show our selves the
children of the most High, who does good to his Enemies, and is kind to the
unkind and unthankful: And what though they do hate us? Their love, and
good will were much more to be feared, than their hatred, and a far worse sign.
Brethren, keep your selves in the love of God; here is Wisdom. O happy Souls,
that are his Favorites! For the Lords-sake look to this, make sure of
something: look to your sincerity above all things in the World: let not any of
you conclude, that because you are of the suffering-party, therefore all is
well: Look to the Foundation, that your hearts be foundly taken off from every
sin, and set upon God above as your Blessedness: Beware that none of you have
only a name to live, and be no more than almost Christians. For the love of
your Souls, make a diligeht search, and try upon what ground you stand, for it
heartily pities me to think that any of you should be in so deep, and hazard so
much as these must do that will now cleave to the hated ways of people of God,
and yet lose all at last for want of being through and sound in the main work, I
mean conversion and Regeneration. None so miserable in all the World as an
unsound Professor of Religion now is, for he shall be hated and persecured of
the World, because he takes up a Profession, and yet rejected of God too,
because he sticks in a Profession: But when once you bear the marks of Gods
favor, you need not fear the Worlds frowns: Cheer up therefore, Brethren, be
strong in the Lord, and of good courage under the Worlds usage: Fear not, in
our Fathers House there is bread enough, and room enough; this is sufficient to
comfort us under all the inconveniences of the way, that we have so happy a
Home, so worthy a Portion, so ready a Father, so goodly an Heritage, so sure a
Tenure. Oh, comfort one another with these words: let God see that you can
trust in his Word: let the World see that you can live upon a God. I shall
share my Prayers and loves among you all, and commit you to the Almighty God:
the Keeper of Israel that never slumbereth not sleeps, be your Watchman and
Keeper to the end, Farewell. I am

A fervent well-wisher of your Temporal and Eternal Happiness, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the common Gaol at (...), July 24. 1663.
LETTER, VI. [Look out of your Gravos upon the World.]
To my most dearly Beloved Friends, the chosen of God in Taunton, Grace and
Peace.

Most endeared Christians,
MY heart is with you, though I am Absent, as to my Bodlly presence from you,
and therefore as I have often already, so I have now Written to you to stir up
your pureminds by way of Remembrance, and to call upon you for your steadfast
continuing, and vigorous proceeding in the ways of God. Dear Friends, and
fellow Soldiers under Christ the Captain of our Salvation, consider your
Calling and Station, and approve your selves as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ,
as men of resolution and courage, be discouraged with no difficulties of your
present Warsare. As for humane affairs, I would have you to be as you are, Men
of Peace: I would have you Armed not for resisting, God forbid, but for
Suffering only, as the Apostle hints: You should resist, even to the uttermost,
striving against Sin. Here you must give no Quarter, for if you spare but one
Agag, the life of your Souls must go for the life of your Sins: you must make
no Peace, for God will not smile on that Soul that smiles on Sin, nor have any
Peace with him, that is at peace with his Enemy. Other Enemies you must
forgive, and love, and pray for (which I again desire you to mind as one
special duty of the times) but for these Spiritual Enemies, all your
affections, and all yonr Prayers must be engaged against them; yea, you must
admit no Parley: It Is dangerous to dispute with Temptations. Remember what Eve
lost by Parleying with Satan: you must sly from Temptations, and put them off
at first with a Peremptory denial. If you will but hear the Devils Arguments,
and the Fleshes Pleas, and fair Pretenses, it is an hundred to one but you are
ensnared by his Sophistry. And for this present evil World, the Lord deliver
you from its Snares. Surely you had need watch and be sober, and use your
spiritual Weapons dexterously and diligently, or else this World is like to
undo you, and destroy you. I have often warned you not to build upon an
External happiness, and that you should promise your selves nothing but
hardship here: Oh still remember your Station; Soldiers must not count upon
Rest, and Fullness, but Hunger, and Hardness. Labor to get right apprehensions
of the World. Do not think these things necessary; one thing is needful: You
may be happy in the want of all outward comforts. Do not think your selves
undone, if brought to Want or Poverty: study Eternity, and you will see it to
be little material to you, whether you are Poor or Rich; and that you may have
never such an opportunity for your advantage in all your lives, as when you put
all to hazard, and seem to run the Vessel upon the Rocks. Set your enemies one
against the other: Death against the World; no such way to get above the World,
as to put your selves into the possession of Death. Look often upon your Dust
that you shall be Reduced to, and imagine you saw your Bones tumbled out of
your Graces, as they are like shortly to be, and men handling your Skulls, and
enquiring whose is this. Tell me of what account will the World be then, what
good will it do you: put your selves often into your Graves, and look out from
thence upon the World, and see what Judgment you have of it then. Must not you
be shortly forgot among the Dead? your places will know you no more, and your
Memory will be no more among men, and then what will it profit you to have
lived in fashion and repute, and to have been Men of esteem? one serious walk
over a Churchyard, as one speaks, might make a man mortified to the World.
Think upon how many you Tread, but you know them not: no doubt they had their
Estates, their friends, their Trades, their businesses, and kept as much stir
in the World as others do now. But alas, what are they the better for any, for
all this? know you not that this must be your own case very shortly: oh the
unhappiness of deceived man! how miserably is he bewitched, and befooled, that
he should expend himself for that which he knows shall for ever leave him.
Brethren, I beseech you lay no stress upon these perishing things, but labor
to be at a Holy indifferency about them: Is it for one that is in his wits to
sell his God, his conscience, his soul, for things that he is not sure to keep
a week, nor a day, and which he is sure after a few sleepings and wakings more,
to leave behind him for ever? go and talk with dying men, and see what
apprehensions they have of the World? if any should come to such as these, and
tell them here is such and such preferments for you, you shall have such titles
of Honor and delights, if you will now disown Religion, or subscribe to
iniquity; do you think such a motion would be embraced? Brethren, why should we
not be wise in time! why should we not now be of the mind of which we know we
shall be all shortly! woe to them that will not be wise, till it be to no
purpose! woe to them whose eyes nothing but Death and Judgment, will open! woe
to them that though they have been warned by others, and have heard the Worlds
greatest Darlings in Death to cry out of its vanity, worthlesness and
deceitfulness, and have been told where and how it would leave them; yet would
take no warning, but only must serve themselves to, for warnings to others. All
my Beloved, beware there be no worldly Professors among you, that will part
rather with their part in Paradise, than their part in Paris; that will rather
part with their Consciences, than with their Estates; that have secret reserves
in hearts to save themselves whole, when it comes to the pinch; and not to be
of the Religion that will undo them in the World. Beware that none of you have
your hearts where your Feet should be, and love your Mammon before your Maker.
It is time for you to learn with Paul, to be Crucified to the World.

But it is time for me to remember that it is a Letter, and contain my self
within my Limits. The God of all Grace, stablish, strengthen, and settle you in
these shaking times, and raise your hearts above the fears of the Worlds
Threats, and above the Ambition of its favors. My dearest loves to you all,
with my servent desire of your Prayers. May the Lord of Hosts be with you, and
the God of Jacob your refuge. Farewell my dear Brethren, Farewell, and be strong
in the Lord, I am

Yours to serve you in the Gospel, whether by Doing or Suffering. Joseph
Alleine.
From the common Jail at Juelchester, June 31. 1663.
LETTER VII. [First, Christian Marks: 2. Duties.]
To the Beloved, my most endearing, and endeared Friends, the Flock of Christ
in Taunton, Salvation.

Most dearly Beloved and longed for, my Joy and Crown:
I Must say of you as David did of Jonathan, Very pleasant have you been unto
me, and your love to me is wonderful. And as I have formerly taken great
content in that my Lot was cast among you, so through grace I rejoice in my
present Lot, that I am called to approve my love to you by suffering for you;
for you, I say: for you know that I have not sought yours but you; and that for
doing my duty to your souls, I am here in these Bonds, which I do cheerfully
accept through the grace of God that strengthens me. Oh! That your Souls
might be quickened and enlarged by these my Bonds! that your hands might be
strengthened, and your hearts encouraged in the Lord your God by our
sufferings! See to it, my dearly Beloved, that you stand fast in the power of
the Holy Doctrine which we have Preached from the Pulpit; preached at the Bar;
preached from the Prison to you: It is a Gospel worth the suffering for: see
that you follow after Holiness, without which no man shall see God: Oh! the
madness of the blind World, that they should put from them the only Plank upon
which they can escape to Heaven. Surely the Enemies of Holiness are their own
Enemies. Alas for them! they know not what they do. What would not these
foolish Virgins do at last, when it is too late for a little of the Oil of the
Wise; Oh, for one dram of that Grace which they have scorned and despised. But
let not any of you, my dear People, be wise too late: Look diligently lest any
man fail of the Grace of God. Beware that none of you be cheated through the
subtlety of Satan and deceitfulness of your Hearts with counterfeit grace.
There is never a grace but has its counterfeit: and there is nothing in all
the World that is more common or more casie, than to mistake common and
counterseit Grace for true and saving: and remember you are undone for
evermore, if you should die in such a mistake: Not that I would shake the
confidence of any sound Believer, who upon often and through search into the
Scripture and his own heart, and putting himself upon Gods trial, has gotten
good evidence that his Graces are of the right kind: Build your confidence
sure: See that you get the knowledge of the certain and infallible marks of
Salvation, and make sure by great observing your own hearts that these marks be
in you, and then you cannot be too confident. But as you love your souls take
heed of a groundless confidence. Take heed of being confident before you have
tried. Dear Brethren, I would fain have you all secured against the day of
Judgment; I would that the states of your souls were all well settled: Oh how
comfortably might you think of any troubles, if you were but sure of your
pardons! Were your Salvation out of doubt, no matter though other things were
in hazard. I beseech you, whatever you neglect, look to this: I am afraid there
are among you that have not made your peace with God yet; that are not yet
acquainted with that great work of Conversion: such I would warn and charge
before the living God to speed into Christ, and without any more disputes or
delays to put away their iniquities, and to come in and deliver up themselves
to Jesus Christ, that they may be saved. It is not your Profession, nor
performing external duties, nor partaking of external Privileges that will
save you: No, no, you must be converted or condemned. It is not enough that you
have some love and liking to Gods ways and people, and are willing to venture
something for them; All this will not prove you sound Christians: Have your
hearts been changed? Have you been soundly convinced of your sins? of your
damnable and undone condition in your selves? and your utter inability to lick
your selves whole again by your own duties? have you been brought at least to
such a sight and sense of sin, as that there is no sin, though agreeable to
your constitution, though a support to your gain, but you do heartily abhor it,
and utterly disallow of it? are you brought to such a sense of the beauty of
holiness, and of the Laws and ways of God, as that you do desire to know the
whole mind of God, and would not excuse your selves by ignorance from any duty,
and that you do not allow your selves in the ordinary neglect of any thing that
conscience charges upon you as a duty? are your very hearts set upon the
glorifying and enjoying of God, as your greatest happiness, which you desire
more than Corn and Wine and Oil? had you rather be the holiest than the richest
and greatest in the World? and is your greatest delight (ordinarily, and when
you are your selves) in the thoughts of God, and in your conversings with God
in Holy Exercises? Is Christ more precious than all the World to you? and are
you willing upon the through consideration of the strictness, and holiness, and
self-denying Nature of his Laws, yet to take them all for the rule of your
thoughts, words, and actions? and though Religoin may cost you dear, do you
resolve if God will assist you by his Grace, to go through with it, let the
cost be what it will? happy the man that is in such a case. This is a Christian
indeed, and whatever you be and do short of this, all is unsound. But you that
bear in your souls the marks of the Lord Jesus above mentioned, upon you I
should lay no other burden, but to hold fast, and make good your ground, and to
press forward toward the mark. Thankfully acknowledge the distinguishing grace
God to your souls: and live rejoycingly in the hopes of the glory of God, the
hopes that shall never make you ashamed: live daily in the praises of your
Redeemer: be much in admiring God, and study the worthiness, excellency, and
glory of his Attributes: let your souls be much taken up in contemplating and
commending his glorious perfection, and blessing your selves in the goodly
Portion you have in him: live like those that have a God, and then be
disconsolate if you can: If there be not more in an infinite God to comfort
you, than in a Prison, or Poverty, or other affliction to deject you, our
Preaching is vain, and your Faith is vain. Let the thoughts of God be your
daily repast: and never be satisfied till your hearts run out as freely,
naturally, constantly, unweariedly after God, as others do after the World: a
little force upon your hearts for a while to turn them into this holy Channel,
may quickly come so to habituate your minds to holiness, that they may
naturally run that way. But it is time to shut up: Farewell, my dear Brethren,
the Lord God Almighty be a protection to you, and your exceeding great reward:
Farewell in the Lord. I am

Just now I received your meking Letter, to which I am not able now to return
an answer, but shall with speed: your very great affections for me cannot but
move me, and make me ready to repeat again the first words of my Letter above.
The Lord enable me to return something to you for your great loves; I am
sensible I have come very short of my duty to you; but I must needs tell you,
my Bowels are moved with your loves, which I hope I shall greatly prize: once
more Farewell.

My dear Brother Norman remembers you with much love, desiring that you may be
blameless and harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye should shine as lights in the World.

Yours in the Bowels of the Lord Jesus, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, September. 11. 1663.
LETTER, VIII. [How to show love to Ministers, and live joyfully.]
To the most Loving and dearly Beloved, my Christian Friends in Taunton, Grace,
Mercy, and Peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

Most endeared Brethren,
I Have received your moving melting Letter, and could not look over such
tender expressions of your working affections, without some commotions in my
own: I may confidently say, I spent more Tears upon those Lines, than ever you
did Ink: Your deep sense of my labors in the Ministry; I cannot but thankfully
acknowledge, and take notice of: yet withal, heartily and unseingedly
confessing, that all was but the duty which I did owe to your precious and
immortal Souls: which God knows, are very much short of my duty. The omissions,
imperfections, defects, deadness, that accompanied my duties I do own, I must
and will own; and the Lord humble me for them. But all that was of God (and
that was all that was good) be sure that you give to God alone. To him I humbly
ascribe both the Will, and the Deed, to whom alone be Glory for ever.

My dear Brethren, my business as I have often told you, is not to gain your
hearts, or turn your eyes toward me, but to Jesus Christ: his Spokesman I am,
will you give your hearts to him? will you give your hands, your names to him?
will you subscribe to his Laws, and consent to his Offices, and be at through
defiance with all his Enemies? This do, and I have my Errant. Who will follow
Christ's Colors? who will come under his Banner? this shall be the man that
shall be my Friend; this is he that will oblige me for ever. Do these Letters
come to none that are yet unsanctified? to do loose sinner? to no ignorant
sinner? to no unfound professor? Oh that there were none such indeed! oh that I
had left no such behind me! but would they do me a kindness as I believe they
would, oh then let them come away to Jesus Christ at this call! lie no longer O
sinner, in thy swill, be no more in love with darkness! stick no longer in the
skirts and outside of Religion, demure no longer, dispute not and waver no
more, halt no further, but strike in thoroughly with Jesus Christ, except
nothing, reserve nothing, but come off thoroughly to the Lord, and follow him
fully. And then happy man that thou shall be, for thou will be made for ever;
and joyful man that I shall be, for I shall save a Soul from death. The earnest
and pitiful beggings of a poor Prisoner, do use to move some Bowels: hear O
Friends, will you do nothing for a Minister of Christ? Nothing for a Prisoner
of Jesus Christ? methinks I hear you answer, [yea, rather what will we not do,
he shall never want while we have it; he shall need no office of Love, but we
will run and Ride to do it.] Yea, but this is not that I beg of you; will you
gratify me indeed? then come in, kiss the Son, bow to the Name of Jesus; not
in a Complement, with Cap and Knee, but let your Souls bow, let all your Powers
bend Sail, and do him homage. Let that Sacred Name be Graven into the substance
of your hearts, and lie as a bundle of Mirrh between your Breasts. Let me
freely speak for him, for he is worthy for whom you shall do this thing; worthy
to be beloved of you; worthy to have your very hearts, worthy to be admired,
adored, praised, served, glorified to the uttermost by you, and every Creature;
worthy for whom you should lay down all, leave all: Can any thing be too much
for him? can any thing be too good for him? Or too great for him? come give up
all, Resign all, lay it at the Feet of Chrlst Jesus, offer all as a Sacrifice
to him, see that you be universally the Lords; keep nothing from him: I know
through the goodness of God, that with many of you this work is not yet to do:
but this set solemn resignation to the Lord is to be done more than once; and
to be followed with an answerable practice when it is done: See that you walk
worthy of the Lord? but how? in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the
Holy Ghost; let these two go together. So shall you adorn the Doctrine of God
our Savior: and experience, the Heavenly felicity of a Christians life: while
Holiness is made the Butt of others Persecution, do you make it the white, the
mark of your prosecution; that you live it up, as much as others cry it down. O
watch, and keep your Garments about you; the plain, but comely clothing of
humility, the seamless Coat of Christian unity, the strait and close Garment of
strictness, mortification and Self-denial, the warm Winter-garment of love and
charity, this Garment will keep you warm in the Winter: love will not be
quenched by the Waters, nor cooled by the nipping Frosts of persecution and
opposition. Cleave fast to Christ, never let go your hold; cling the faster,
because so many are laboring to knock off your fingers, and loosen your hold.
Hold fast your Profession, hold fast your Integrity, hold fast the beginning of
your confidence steadfast to the end: If you do but keep your hold, and make
good your ground, and keep your way; all that the World can do, and all that
the powers of darkness can do, can never do you harm. Keep your own Vinyard
with constant care and watchfulness, and be sure that there be no Inroad made
upon your consciences, that the Eremy do not get between you and home, between
your souls and God; and then let who or what will assail you without, you need
not fear: let this be your daily exercise, to keep your consciences void of
offense: keep fair weather at home, however it be abroad. But I would not only
that you should walk holily, but that you should walk comfortably: But I need
say the less to this, because the fear of the Lord, and the comfort of the Holy
Ghost, do lie together. Oh the provision God has made for your continual joy
and comfort! dear Brethren, do but understand your own blessedness, happy men
that you are, if you did but know and consider it; who would count himself poor
and miserable that has All the fullness of the Godhead for his: sound in this
deep: can you find any bottom? take the height of the Divine Perfections if
you can, till then you cannot tell your own felicity. Take a servey of
Immensity, tell me the longitude or latitude of infinite goodness and mercy, of
the Eternal Diety: if you can do this, you may guess at your own happiness. Oh
Christians! live like your selves, live worthy of your Portion, of your
Privilege, and your glorious prerogatives. I am in haste, and it is time for
me to end; however, that you may walk worthy of your glorious hopes, and may
live answerably to the mercies you have received from above, is the great
desire of

Your Souls fervent well wisher in the bonds of affliction and tribvlation.
JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, September 18. 1663.
LETTERS IX. [Easie Sufferings.]
To the most Loving and Beloved, my Christian Friends at Taunton, Salvation:

DEarly Beloved and longed for, my Joy and Crown, for whom I am an Ambassador
in Bonds: what thanks to render to God in your behalf, I know not, for your
servent charity toward me, and all the servants of my Lord, for all your
labors of love, for all your diligence, and boldness, and resolution, in
owning the despised ways, and hated servants of the Lord Jesus, in an evil day.
The Lord is not unrighteous to forget this: Is not this upon record with him,
and sealed up among his Treasures? surely the Lord will have mercy upon
Taunton: I have no doubt but that the God of your Mercies has yet a choice
blessing in store for you; be not weakened by my Bonds. Glory be to God in the
Highest, that he has accounted me worthy not only to Preach the Gospel to you,
but also to confirm it by the parting with my much valued liberty, so dear a
People, so sweet Relations, comforts, conveniences, which I enjoyed in all
abundance when I was with you. When I look back upon all the circumstances of
the late Providence, I must say as they of Christ upon his Miracles, He has
done all things well; it is all as I would have it, I am fully satisfied in my
Fathers good pleasure. Verily there is no little honor and happiness, no
little Peace and Privilidge in these Bonds. Verily all is true that I have told
you of the All Sufficiency of God, of the fullness of Christ, of the
satisfactoriness of the promises of the peace, tranquillity, content, and
security, that is to be had in a life of Faith. Surely methinks I should be
content to seal to these things at a much dearer rate than this; but my
gracious Father will not put me to the hardest Lesson at first: oh what reason
have I to speak good of his name! what else should I do all my days, but love,
and fear, and preach, and praise, so good a God? when I look back upon the
gentle dealings of God with me, I often think he has brought me up as
indulgently as David did Adonijah, of whom it is said, His Father had not
displeased him. I have received nothing but good at the hands of the Lord all
my days; and now he does begin to afflict, I see so much Mercy in this very
Gaol, that I must be more thankful for this than for my prosperity. Surely the
name of the place is, The Lord is here: Surely it may be called Peniel. Be
strong in the Lord, my Brethren, be patient, stablish your hearts, for the
coming of the Lord draws nigh. In nothing be terrified by your adversaries. Now
let those that fear the Lord be often speaking one to another. I hear that
Satan is practicing to send more of you after me: I desire and pray for your
liberty: but if any of you be forced hither for the the testimony of the
Gospel, I shall embrace you with both arms. Fare you well, my most dearly
Beloved: be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the
God of Love and Peace shall be with you. My Brethren in Bonds salute you with
much affection, rejoicing to behold your order and the stedfastness of your
Faith in Christ: share my heart among you, and know that I am

The willing Servant of your Faith and Joy, Joseph Aleine.
From the common Gaol at Juelchester, September 28. 1663.
LETTER, X. [The Love of Christ.]
To my Beloved in the Lord, the Flock of Christ in Taunton, Grace and Peace.

Most Loving and best Beloved,
MY heart is with you, my affections are espoused to you. And methinks I could
even say with the Apostle, ( you are in my heart, to live and die with you:)
and who can but love where they have received so much love (and continually do)
as I have from you! the Lord require your love which is great (and if compared
with his, but little) with his which is infinite; this is a love worthy of your
ambition, worthy of your adoration and admiration. This is the Womb that bore
you from eternity, and out of which have burst forth all the Mercies, Spiritual
and Temporal, that you enjoy. This was the love that chose you, when less
Offenders, and those that being converted, might have been a hundred fold more
serviceable to their Makers Glory, are left to perish in their fins: May your
souls be filled with the sense of this love. But it may be you will say, how
shall I know if I am an object of Electing love? least an unbelieving thought
should damp your joy; know in short, that if you have chosen God, he has
certainly chosen you. Have you taken him for your blessedness? and do you more
highly prize, and more diligently seek after conformity to him, and the
fruition of him than any, than all the goods of this World? If so, then away
with doubts, for you could not have loved, and have chosen him, unless he had
loved you first. Now may my Beloved dwell continually in the thoughts, the
views, the tastes of the love. Get you down under its shadows, and taste its
pleasant Fruits. Oh the Provisions that love has made for you, before the
Foundation of the World! Ah silly dust, that ever thou should be thought
upon so long before thou wast: that the contrivances of the infinite Wisdom,
should be taken up about thee! that such a Crawling thing, such a Mire, a Flea,
should have the consultations of the Eternal Diety exercised about thee! verily
his love to thee is wonderful. Lord what is man! thou tellest us he is Dust and
Vanity, a Worm, nothing, less than nothing; how then do thou love him! oh
wonderful! be astonished yea Heavens at this: be moved ye strong foundation of
the Earth. Fall down yea Elders, strike up ye Heavenly Quires, and sing yet
again, Glory to God in the highest: for all our strings would crack to reach
the Notes of love, praise, and admiration that this love does call for. Oh that
ever emptiness and vanity, should be thus prized! that Jehovah should make
account of so worthless, so useless a thing as man! that ever baseness should
be thus preferred! that ever nothing should be thus dignified! that ever
rottenness should be thus advanced, a Clod, a shadow, Potsheard, should be
thus glorified! Oh Brethren, study I beseech you, not to require or retaliate
(there is impossibility, and blaspemy in such a thought) but to admire and
imitate his love. Let love constrain you, let love put you upon doing, and
prepare you for suffering; forget not a love so memorable, undervalue not a
love so unvaluable; I would have you all the captives of love: may the cords of
love draw you toward, and knit you to your Redeemer; may the divided streams
be united in him. Alas, that our souls are so narrow, that the Waters are so
shallow with us! how little, how very little would our love be, it he had it
all, infinitely less than the Glowworm to the Sun, or the Attome to the
Universe? and have we any of this little to spare for him? oh that we might
love him with our little All! that all our little powers were engaged for him!
Brethren, here is no excess: oh love the Lord ye his Saints! he is worthy for
whom you shall do this. Do but think what love has done for you, and think if
you can, what it means to do for you. This is the love that yarned upon you,
when in your Blood no eye pitying you. This is the love that took you up when
you were Robbed, and wounded, and left for dead, and poured in Wine and Oil
into your wounds. This is that love that reprieved, and spared, and pardoned,
when the Law had condemned you, and Justice would have had you delivered up;
and your Self-condemning consciences gave up all for lost, concluding there was
no hope. This is the love, the expensive love that bought you from the power of
darkness, from the eternal burnings, the devouring fire in which you must
otherwise have dwelt. Do you not remember how you were hungry, and it fed you,
naked and it clothed you, strangers and it took you in, sick and it visited
you, in Prison and it came unto you? you were dead and are alive, you were lost
and are found. And me thinks I see how love runs to meet you, and falls upon
your necks, and kisseth the Lips that deserve to be loathed, and rejoices over
you, and makes a Festival, and as it were a Holiday in Heaven for you, inviting
Angels to rejoice. And if the friends do rejoice, how much more does the
father? for says he, These my Sons were dead and are alive, were lost and are
found. Oh melting love! ah Brethren, how strange is this, that our recovery
should be Heavens triumph, the joy of God and Angels. That this love should
feast us, and feast over us, and our Birth day should be kept in Heaven: that
this should be the round at Heavens Table, and the burden of the Songs above: [
For this my Son was dead, and is alive,] and well, what remains but that you
should be another manner of People, than ever yet you have been, more Holy,
more humble, more even, more resolved, more lively, more active? where is your
Zeal for the Lord of Hosts? will slender returns suffice you in answer to such
a love? God forbid. But necessity calls me off from going any further. May the
love that chose you, and redeemed you, for ever dwell in you, and overshaddow
you, and bear you safe to the Kingdom. In the Holy Arms of Divine Love I desire
to leave you. May you live under its daily Influences, and be melted and
overcome with its warming Beams, with its quickening, piercing, powerful Rays.
My most dear love, to you all. See that you live not in a dull, fruitless,
liveless course. Be patient, be watchful, instant in Prayer, servent in Spirit,
serving the Lord: I am very healthful and cheerful through grace. See that none
of these things move you that befall us. Fare you well my dear Brethren, farewell
in the Lord, I am

Yours in the strongest Bonds of Affection, and Affliction. JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Jeulchester, October. 25. 1663.
LETTER, XI. [Remember Christ crucified, and crucify Sin.]
To the Faithful and Well-beloved People, the Servants of Christ in Taunton,
Salvation:

Most dear Christians,
I Am by Office a Remembrancer, the Lords Remembrancer for you and your
Remembrancer in the behalf of Christ-My business is, with the Apostle, to stir
up your pure minds by way of Remembrance. And what or whom should I remember
you of, but your most mindful Friend, your Intercessour with the Father, who
has you always in remembrance, appearing in the presence of God for you? May
his Memory ever live in our Hearts, though mine should die: Oh Remember his
Love more than Wine, Remember in what a Case he found you, and yet nothing
could anihelate his Heart, nor divert the purpose of his Love from you: He
loathed not your Rags nor your Rottenness: He found you in a loathsome Vomit
and filthiness, in a nasty and Verminous Tatters, (think not these expressions
too odious: No Pen can describe, no Heart can imagine the odiousness of sin in
his sight, in which you lay and rolled your selves as the filthy Swine in the
mire) Yet he pitied you, his Bowels were moved, and his Compassions were
kindled, when one would have thought his wrath should have boiled and his
indignation have burned down to Hell against you: he loathed not, but loved
you, and washed you from your sins in his own Blood: Ah monstrous and polluted
Captives? Ah vile and putrid Carkases? that ever the holy Jesus should take the
hands of you, and should his own self wash you, and wrinse you! methinks I see
him weeping over you; and yet it was a wore costly Bath by which he cleansed
you. Ah Sinners! look upon the streaming Blood flowing out wharm from his
blessed Body, to fetch out the ingrained filthiness that you by sin had
contracted. Alas! what a horrid filthiness in sin, that nothing but the blood
of the Covenant could wash away! and what a love is Christ's, than when no Soap
nor Nitre could suffice to cleanse us, when a whole Ocean could not wash nor
purify us, would opon every vein of his heart to do the work! look upon your
crucified Lord: do you not see a sacred stream flowing out of every Member? Ah,
how those Holy Hands, those unerring Feet do run a stream to purge us! Alas,
how that innocent Back does Bleed with cruel scourgings to save ours! how the
great drops of Blood fall to the ground from his sacred Face in his miraculous
sweat, in his bitter and bloody Agony, to wash and beautify ours! how his
wounded hearts and side twice pierced, first with love and pity; and then with
Soldiers cruelly do pour out their healthful and saving Floods upon us? Lord,
how do we make a shift to forget such a love as this! ah mirrors or rather
Monsters of ingratitude, that can be unmindful of such a Friend! do we thus
requite him: is this our kindness to such an obliging friend! Christians, where
are your affections? to what use do you put your faculties? what have you
memories for:but to remember him! What have you the power of loving for, but
that you should love him? wherefore serves joy or desire, but to long for him
and delightfully to embrace him? may your souls and all their Powers be taken
up with him: May all the little Doors of your souls be set open to him. Here
fix your thoughts, here terminate your desires; here you may light your Candle
and kindle your Fire when almost out. Rub and chase your hearts well with the
deep consideration of the love of Christ, and it is a wonder if they do not get
some warmth. The Lord shed abroad his love in your hearts by the Holy Ghost:
Oh! that this love might constrain you! Brethren what will you do now for Jesus
Christ. Have you never a Sacrifice to lay upon his Altar? come, and I will show
you what you shall do, let your hands be in the blood of your sins, fall foul
with them, search them out with diligence, search your hearts and your houses;
whatever iniquities you find there, out with them, put them far from your
Tabernacles; if you crucify them not, you are not Jesus his Friends. Godforbid
that there should be a lying Tongue, or any way of deceit in your Shops. That
his service should give place to the World in your Families. Far be it from any
of you, my Brethren, that you should be careful to teach your children and
servants the way of your Trades and Callings, and neglect to instruct them in
the way of Life. Is weekly Catechizing up in every one of your Families? The
Lord convince any of you that may be guilty of this neglect: Oh! set up God in
your Houses; and see that you be not slovenly in Closet performances: beware of
serving the Lord negligently; serve not the Lord with that which costs you
nothing: look to it that you content not your selves with a cheap and easy
Religion. Put your flesh to it: be well assured that the Religion that costs
you nothing will yield you nothing: keep up the life of Religion in your Family
and Closet duties. Fear nothing like a customary and careless performance of
Gods Service. Judge your own selves whether lazy wishes, idle complaints, and
yawning Prayers are like to carry you through the mighty difficulties that you
must get through if ever you come to Heaven. When you find your selves going on
in a liftless, liveless, heartless course, and have no mind to your work, ask
your selves, is this to take the Kingdom of Heaven by violence, or can I hope
to win it without? see that you sacrifice your selves to the Lord, that you
deliver up your selves to him, that now you live to Christ himself. As Christ
has made over his life and death to you, so let it be your care to live and
die to him: labor to forget your selves and look upon all your enjoyments as
Christ's goods; upon your time, parts, strength, as his Talents: look upon your
selves only in the quality of Servants and Stewards that are to husband all
these for your Lords advantage, and as those that must give an account. And
pray for me that I may take the Counsel that I give. I bless the Lord, I want
nothing but the opportunity of being serviceable unto you, and to enjoy you:
but I hope the Lord will make my bonds for you to be useful to your
edification; that is the White I aim at, if I may glorify God, and serve your
Souls best by being here, I shall never wish to come out, though I confess
liberty of its self is very precious. Finally, Brethren, Farewell: be perfect,
be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of Love and
Peace shall be with you, I am

My dear Brother Norman salutes you tenderly, desiring you to be patient, to
stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.

The ready Servant of your Faith and Joy, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, October. 14. 1663.
LETTER XII. [For daily Self-Examination.]
To the most Beloved People, the Flock of Christ in Taunton, Salvation.

Most dear Brethren:
I Would my time were as long as my heart, that I might open my self to you;
but I was not without some discontent diverted, when I was setting my self to
have Written at large to you. Now I am pinched, however I could not leave my
dear charge altogether unvisited, but must needs salute you in a few Lines.
Brethren, how stands it with you? does the main work go on? do your souls
prosper? This is my care, beware that you Flag not, that you faint not now in
the evil day. I understand that your dangers grow upon you, may your Faith and
courage and resolution grow accordingly, and much more abundantly to overtop
them. Some of your enemies I hear are in great hopes to satisfy their Lusts
upon you: well, be not discouraged my dear Brethren, but bless the Lord who of
his abundant Mercy, hat so remarkably preserved you so long beyond all
expectation. Let it not be a strange thing to you, if the Lord do now call you
to some difficulty: forsake not the Assembling of your selves together, as the
manner of some is. I plainly see the Coal of Religion will soon go out, unless
it have some better helps to cherish it, then a Carnal Ministry, and lifeless
Administration. Dear Brethren, now is the time for you that fear the Lord, to
speak often one to another: manage your duties with what prudence you can, but
away with that Carnal prudence, that will decline duty to avoid danger. Is the
Communion of Saints worth the venturing for? Shut not up your doors against
Godly Meetings. I am told that it is become a hard matter, when a Minister is
willing to take pains with you to get place: Far be this from you my Brethren.
What, shut out the World! suppose there be somewhat more danger to him that
gives the Minister entertainment? Is there not much more advantage accordingly?
did not Obed Edom, and his House, get the blessing by entertaining the Ark
there? or do you think God has never a Blessing for those that shall with much
Self-denial entertain his Messengers, his Saints, his Worship? are you
believers, and yet are afraid you shall be loosers by Christ? do you indeed
not know that he that runs most hazard for Christ, does express most love to
Christ, and shall receive the greatest reward? away with that unbelief, that
prefers the present safety, before the future glory.

I left you some helps for daily Ezamination, I am jealous least you should
grow slack, and slight, and careless in that duty. Let me ask you in the name
of the Lord, does never a day pass you, but you do solemnly and seriously call
your selves to an account, what your carriage has been to God and Men? speak
conscience, Is there never an one within the hearing of this Letter, that is a
neglecter of this duty? does every one of your Consciences acquit you? Oh that
they did! oh that they could! tell me, would not some of you be put shrewdly to
it, if I should ask you when you read or thought over the Questions that were
given you for your help? and would you not be put to a blush, to give me an
answer? And will you not be much more ashamed, that God and Conscience should
find you tardy? not that I would necessarily bind you up to that very Method,
only till you have found a way more profitable: I would desire you, yea,
methinks I cannot but deeply charge you, to make daily use of that. Awake
conscience, and do thou fall upon that Soul that thou find careless in this
work, and never let him be at rest till thou can witness for him, that he is
a daily and strict observer of himself, and does live in the constant practice
of this duty. What shall neither Gods charge, nor your promise, nor profit hold
you to your work? yet I may not doubt, but some of you do daily perform this
duty. The Lord encourage you in it: yet give me leave to ask you what you have
gained? are you grown more universally consciences, more strict, more humble,
and more sensible of your many and great defects, then you were before? If so,
blessed are you of the Lord; if otherwise, this duty has been perform but
slightly by you. What can you say to this question? does your care of your ways
abate, or does it increase, by the constant use of this duty? If it abate,
remember from whence you are fallen, and repent; as good not do it at all, as
not to the purpose.

My Pen is apt to run, when I am writing unto you. I beseech you, that my
Letters may not be as so much waste Paper to you; may they be provocations to
your duty, and Medicines to any corruptions that they meet with; Oh that they
might find out men's sins, and excite their graces! I have run much farther than
I thought I should have done, but now I am called upon, and must shut up. The
Lord God be a Sun and a Shield to you. My most dear Love to you all, fare you
well in the Lord, I am

Your Ambassador in Bonds, JOS. ALLEINE,
From the common Gaol at Juelchester, October 20. 1663.
LETTER, XIII. [Motives and Marks of Growth.]
To the most Loving, and best Beloved, the Servants of Christ in Taunton, Grace
and Peace:

Most dear and tender Friends:
WHose I am, and whom under God I desire to serve; to build you up in Holiness,
and comfort has been through grace my great ambition. This is that which I
labored for; this is that which I suffer for: and in short the end of all my
applications to you, and to God for you. How do your Souls prosper? are they in
a thriving case? what progress do you make in Sanctification? does the house of
Saul grow weaker and weaker, and the house of David stronger and stronger?
beloved, I desire to be jealous of you with a Godly jealousy, lest any of you
should lose your ground in these declining times: and therefore cannot but be
often calling upon you to look to your standing, and to watch and hold fast,
that no man take your Crown. Ah! how surely shall you reap in the end if you
faint not! take heed therefore that you lose not the things you have wrought,
but as you have begun well, so go on in the strength of Christ, and give
diligence to the full assurance of hope to the end, it is your thriving, I tell
you, I drive at.

Do you need Motives?] 1. How much are you behind-hand? Oh, the fair advantages
that we have lost! what time, what Sabboths, Sormons, Sacraments, are upon the
matter lost? how much work have we yet to do? are you sure of Heaven yet? are
you fit to die yet? surely they that are in so much Poverty, under so many
great wants, had need to set upon some more thriving courses.

Secondly, Consider what others have gained, whilst we it may be sit down by
the loss: Have we not met many Veslels richly laden, while our Souls are empty?
Oh, the rich Booties, the golden Prizes that some have won, while we have
solded the hands to sleep! have not many of our own standing in Religion lest
us far behind them?

Thirdly, Consider what a spending time there is coming: Affliction and
Tribulation seem to be not far from you: had you not need to be well stocked
against such a day? go to the Ant thou sluggard, she lays up her meat in the
Summer. Happy man that can say to his Soul on good grounds, what he vainly
spoke, Thou have much goods laid up for many years: Who will not Victual the
Castle against the Siege? and the Ship against the Voyage?

Fourthly, Consider you will find all little enough when you come to die: the
Wise among the Virgins have no Oil to spare at the coming of the Bridegroom:
distress and temptations, and death will put all your Graces to it. How much
ado have many poor Saints had at last to put into this harbor? David cries for
respire till he had recovered a little more strength.

Fifthly, Consider how little it will avail you to thrive in your Estates, and
not thrive in your Souls: Poor Gehazi! what did he get by it when he gained
Naamans Talents, and came off with his Leprofie?

Sixthly, Consider how short your time for gathering in probability is: the
Israelites gathered twice so much Manna against the Sabbath as they did at
other times, because at that time there was no Manna fell. Brethren, you know
not how long you have to lay in for.

Seventhly, Consider Gods expectations are great from you: he has been lopping
and pruning you, and now he looks for more fruit: he has had you for some time
under his more severer Discipline, and therefore expects you should be better
proficient: he has tried new means with you, and is come to you with a Rod;
and he will be angry with a witness if he do not find you now to mend. Times of
Afflictions use to be gaining times to Gods People; God forbid that you alone
should be losers.

Do you ask for marks how you may know your souls be in a thriving case?

First, If your appetites be more strong. Do you thirst after God, and after
grace, more than heretofore? do your cares for and desires after the World
abate? and do you hunger and thirst after righteousness! whereas you were wont
to come with an ill will to holy duties, do you come to them as a hungry
Stomach to its Meats?

Secondly, If your Pulses meat more even. Are you still off and on, hot and
cold. Or is there a more even spun thread of holiness through your whole course?
do you make good the ground from which you were formerly often beaten off?

Thirdly, If your Natural heat do grow more vigorous, and your digestion more
quick. Do you take more notice of God in every thing, than heretofore? and let
none of his works, nor words pass without some careful attention, and
observation? do you ponder upon, and pray over his Word, and his Providence?

Fourthly, If you do look more to the Compass, and latitude of Religion, and
mind more than ever, the carrying on together the duties of both Tables. Do you
not only look to the keeping if your own Vineyards, but do you begin to look
more abroad, and to lay out your selves for the good of others, and are filled
with zealous desires for their conversion, and salvation? do you manage your
talk and your Trade, by the rules of Religion?

Do you eat and sleep by rule? does Religion form, and mould, and direct your
carriage toward Husband, Wife, Parents, Children, Masters, Servants! do you
grow more universally conseiencious? Is piety more diffusive than ever with
you, does it come more abroad with you, out of your Clossets into your Houses,
your Shops, your Fields? does it journey with you, and buy and sell for you?
has it the casting voice in all you do?

Fifthly, If the duties of Religion be more easy, sweet, and delightful to
you. Do you take more delight in the Word than ever? are you more in love with
secret Prayer, and more abundant in it? cannot you be content with your (...)
dinary Seasons, but are ever and anon making extraordinary Visits to Heaven?
and upon all occasions turning aside to talk with God in some short
Ejaculations? are you often darting up your souls Heaven-wards? Is it meat and
drink of you, to do the Will of God? do you come off more freely with God, and
answer his Calls, and open at his knocks, with more Alacrity and readiness of
mind?

Sixthly, If you are more abundant in those duties which are most displeasing
to the Flesh. Are you more earnest upon the duty of Mortification? are you more
strict and severe than ever in the duty of daily Self-examination, and holy
Meditation? do you hold the Reigns harder upon the Flesh than ever? do you keep
a stricter watch upon your Appetites? do you set a stronger guard upon your
Tongues? have you a more jealous eye upon your hearts?

Sevently, If you grow more vile in your own eyes. Pride is such a choking
Weed, that nothing will prosper naer it. Do you grow more out of love with men's
esteem, and set less by it? are you not mavelous tender of being slighted?
can you rejoice to see others preferred before you? can you heartily value, and
love them that think meanly of you?

Eighthly, If you grow more quick of sense, more tender of sinning, more
sensible of Divine influences, or withdrawings. Are you more afraid of sin
than ever? are your sins a greater pain to you than heretofore? are your very
infirmities, your great afflictions? and the daily workings of corruption a
continual grief of mind to you?

Ninthly, If you are acted more by love to God and Faith in these Promises.
Fear is a slavish principle: do you find that you are acted less by fear, and
more by love? do you look more frequently to the things not seen than ever? and
does the World abate in your esteem? do you go more out of your selves? do you
live upon Christ as the Spring of your life, and make more use of him upon all
occasions than ever? do you prize the Promises more, and hug and embrace them
with greater dearness, and live more upon them.

Tenthly, If you grow of a more public Spirit. A selfish Spirit is unworthy of
a Christian: are the common concernments of Gods Glory, and the prosperity of
the Church, much upon your hearts? will it no way content you to dwell in
plenty, peace, and safety your selves, except you may see peace upon Israel? do
the wounds in Gods Name and Glory go deep into you? are the sins of others your
sorrows?

Time, and room, and strength fails to add means too, as I intended. I have
trespassed in length already, may these be helps to you to put you forward, and
to help you in discerning your growth. I must conclude abruply, and commend you
to God with my dear loves to you all, I take leave, and can only tell you that
I am,

Yours in the Lord Jesus, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, October. 31. 1663.
LETTER XV. [Perswasion to Sinners, and comfort to Saints]
To my dearly Beloved, the Inhabitants of the Town of Taunton, Grace, Mercy,
and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Most dearly Beloved:
I Have been through mercy many years with you, and should be willingly so many
years a Prisoner for you, so I might eminently and effectually further your
Salvation. I must again, yea again, and again thank you for your abundant and
entire affections to me, which value as a great mercy, not in order to myself,
if I know my own heart, but in order to your benefit, as I may thereby be a
more likely, Instrument to further your good. Surely, so much as I do value
your love, which is not a little, yet had I rather (if I am not unacquainted
with my self) be forgotten and forsaken of you all, and buried in oblivion, So
that your eyes and hearts might be hereby fixed on Christ, and sincerely
engaged to him. Brethren, I have not bespoken your affections for my self: O
that I might win your hearts universally to Jesus Christ, though I had lost
them for ever! O that I might be instrumental to convert, you to him though you
were diverted from me. I am persuaded that I should much rather choose to be
hated of all, so this might be the means to have Christ honored, and set up
savingly in the hearts of you all. And indeed there is nothing great but in
order to God; nothing is much material or considerable as it is terminated in
us: It matters not whether we are in Riches or poverty, in sickness or Health,
in honor or disgrace, so Christ may be by us, magnified in the condition we
are in. Welcome Prison and Poverty, welcome Scorn and Envy, welcome pains or
contempt, if by these Gods glory may be most promoted. What are we for but for
God? what does the Creature signify separated from his God? why just so much
as the Cipher separated from the Figure, or the letter from the Syllable, we
are nothing or nothing worth, but in reference to God and his ends. Better were
it that we had never been, than that we should not be to him. Better that we
were dead than we should live, and not to him. Better that we had no
understandings than that we should not know him. Better that we were Blocks and
Bruits than that we should not use our Reason for him. What are our Interests
unless as they may be subservient to his Interest? or our esteem or reputation,
unless we may hereby glorify him? do you love me? I know you do: but who is
there that will leave his sins for me? I mean at my requests: with whom shall I
prevail to give up himself in strictness and self denial to the Lord? who will
be entreated by me to set upon neglected duties, or reform accustomed sins? O
wherein may you rejoice me? in this, in this, my Brethren, in this you shall
befriend me, if you obey the voice of God by me, if you be prevailed with to
give your selves up thoroughly to the Lord? would you lighten my burden? would
you loosen my bonds? would you make glad my heart? let me hear of your owning
the ways and servants of the Lord in adversity, of your coming in, of your
abiding and patient continuing in the ways of holiness. O that I could but hear
that the prayerless Souls, the prayerless Families among you, were now given to
prayer! that the prosane sinner would be awakened, and be induced by the
preaching of these Bonds, which heretofore would not be prevailed with, to
leave their drunkenness their loose company, their lying and deceit, and
Wantonness, by all the threatenings of God that could be pronounced against
them, nor all the beseechings, wooings, and entreaties that I was able to use
with them! will you not be made clean? when shall it once be? how long shall
the patience of God wait for you? how long shall the Lord Jesus stretch our his
hands toward you? O sinners, cast your selves into his Arms? Why should you
die? Why will you forsake your own Mercy? will you perish when mercy wooes you?
confess and forsake your sins, and you shall find mercy: will you part with
Christ, and sell your Souls to perdition for a little ease and delight to your
flesh? or a little of the gain of unrighteousness? or a little Ale or vain
mirth, or loose company? why these are the things that part between Sinners and
Christ.

I know many are spun with a finer thread, and are not so far from the Kingdom
of God, as the prayerless, ignorant, Sabbath-breaking, intemperate sort are.
But I must once again warn you of staying in the Suburbs of the City of Refuge.
O what pity is it that any should perish at the Gates! that any should escape
the pollutions of the world and do many things, yea, and suffer it may be too,
and yet should fall short of the glory of God, for want of a through work of
grace! Oh you halting Christians, that halt between Christ and the World, that
are as Ephraim like a Cake not turned, dow-baked, Professors, that have Lamps
without Oil, that cry, Lord, Lord, but do not the will of our Father which is
in Heaven! how long will you stay in the place of the breaking forth of
Children? and stick between the Womb and the World? your Religion will carry
you among the profane despisers of Godliness, but do own the people of the
Lord, and do love the Ministers and Ordinances, therefore all is well. I tell
you, Godliness is a heart-work, it goes deep, and spreads far: unless the frame
of your hearts, and the drists of your course be changed, unless you be
universally conscientious, and unreservedly delivered up to the Lord for all
times, and conditions whatever be the cost, you are none of Christ's, how far
soever you go in common workings and external performances. Hear then, O
people, and let nor profaneness swallow you up: let not an almost Christianity
deceive you, orignorance carry you blindfold to perdition. Oh the thousands,
and ten thousands that have been undone by one of these! Ah how often have you
been warned against them, least you should split against these dangerous Rocks.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, said Christ, and O Taunton, Taunton, may I say from
him, how often? who can tell how often, would Gods servants have gathered you,
and you would not? many, very many of you would not. But will you now? will you
yet come in? I cannot forbear once more, even out of the Prison to call after
poor Sinners, and make one tender of mercy more. O come to the Waters of Life,
wash you, make you clean; read with diligent observation, the melting passages,
Prove. 1. 22. to the end, Isa. 1. 16, 21. Isa. 55. 6, 10. Oh obdurate Sinners,
if none of these things move you!

But for you, whose very hearts are set against every sin, and are deliberately
resolved for God and Holiness before all the Worlds delight; you that have
experience of a through change, and are brought to have respect to all Gods
Commandments, who will have none but God for your happiness, none but Christ
for your Treasure, that must and will have him, come what will come, blessed
are you of the Lord: O happy Souls rejoice in the Lord, and again, I say,
Rejoice: let your Souls magnify the Lord, and your spirits rejoice in God your
Savior. Live you a life of praise, you are highly favored of the Lord, your
Lines are fallen in a pleasant place: only stick you fast to your choice:
Beware lest any man beguile you of your reward: watch and keep your Garments
about you, lest you walk naked, and men see your shame. Many will be plucking
to pull you out of Christ's hands; but the harder they pluck, the harder do you
cling, and cleave to him, and the better hold fast do you take of him: Blessed
is he that overcomes.

And now the God of Heaven fill you all with himself, and make all Grace to
abound in you, and toward you, and that he may be a Sun to comfort you, and a
Shield of protection to you, and shine with his happy Beams of Grace and Glory
on you all: Farewell in the Lord, I am

Yours in the Bonds of the Gospel, JOSEPH ALLEINE.
August, 28. 1663.
LETTER, XVI. [How to live to God.]
To the Beloved People, the Inhabitants of the Town of Taunton, Grace and Peace:

Most endeared Christians,
TO tell you I love and long for you seems somewhat needless. I cannot doubt of
your confidence that you have a deep share in my tenderest affections: for this
let my labors among you, and the hazards for you speak, rather that I (...)
self. Beloved, I am, without a Complement the devoted servant of your souls
prosperity, and the interest of Christ in you: may the Lord Jesus be set up
higher in your hearts; may his name ever live in you, and be magnified by you,
and I have what I ask. If this work be not promoted among you, I shall account
all my letters but waste Paper, and all my pains but last labor. Brethren, I
beseech you, that none of you live to your selves, for this were directly to
cross the very end of Christ's death: for therefore he died that you should not
live to your selves, 2 Cor. 5. 15. Oh live to him that died for you! live to
him that is the God of your life! live to him that bought your lives with the
expense of his own! To him that bought you from destruction; and not only so,
but bought your names into the eternal Inheritance, reserved in the Heavens for
you. Will a man be easily persuaded to lose his life? how infinitely tender are
men here! And yet in the worst sense the most of men do lose their lives, yea,
lose them for nothing. Beloved, consider, I beseech you, that life is lost,
that is not lived unto God. If you would not loss your lives that you live, see
to him who is the end of your lives. Oh remember this, and reckon that day lost
which you have not lived unto God! Brethren, how great a part of our lives have
we really, alas! too too really lost? I beseech you take heed: here you are
careful about many things, but be beware that other things do not put out this
which should be the main of your cares, to wit, the spending your days and
strength for him that made you. Would it not be dreadful for a man to find at
last when he comes to his account with God, that his whole life, or at least
the main of it had been but damnable self-seeking. That a man should have so
many years allowed him by God, and he should at last be found to have been but
a false and wicked servant that had set up for himself with his Masters stock,
and alienated his goods, and turned them to his own use? Well, that you may
thoroughly learn the grand lesson of living unto God, take these Counsels.

First, Settle it upon your heart that it is the sum of all your business and
blessedness to live unto God: It Is your business; for his pleasure you are and
were created: what have you else to do but to serve your Maker in your general
and particular Callings? what was the Candle made for (says one) but to be
burnt? beloved, what else have you strength for, but for God? does he maintain
servants, and shall not he look for their Work? Would you endure it that the
servants that you find with meat and wages should set up for themselves, that
they should eat your bread and all the while do their own work? beloved, Gods
service is your business, and he made you and keeps you for no other end; and
it is your blessedness too. Labor to be under the rooted conviction of this
principle, that your very happiness lies in pleasing and honoring of God. Let
the sense of this live fresh upon your hearts, and it will regulate your whole
course.

Secondly, Remember what a dangerous, yea, damnable thing it is to live your
selves: To make it our main care and business to please and gratify our
selves, or to have applause from and reputation with others, or to grow rich in
the world, and greaten our selves and posterity, is the certain evidence of a
graceless heart. And though the Godly do make God their principle end in
general, yet they must know, that for so much of their lives as is spent
besides, this end (which is too too much) they shall suffer loss.

Thirdly, Labor to keep alive upon your selves a deep sense of your strong
obligations to Good. Often think with your selves what a righteous, what a
reasonable thing it is, that you should with all that you have serve the Lord.
Beloved, shall not the Vessel be for the use of the Porter that made it? Shall
not the servant Trade for his Master with whose goods he is entrusted? do you
not fetch all your bread from Gods door? Is not he the Rock that begat you? the
Author of your being and well-being? is not this he that can crucify you or
release you? can save you or damn you at his pleasure? Is it not from him that
you fetch every breath? your interest obliges you to please him. Why should
Beltshazzars charge be against you? that the God in whose hand your breath is,
and whose are all your ways, you have not glorified, Dan. 5. 23.

Fonrthly, Do not only intend God as the general end of your course, but in
every solemn action actually mind your end. Though a man need not, cannot think
of his Journeys-end at every step, yet with care he might come to this in every
solemn action, particularly and expressy to mind his end: a man cannot (nor
need he) think at every bit that he puts into his mouth, I will eat this for
God: yet he might every time he sits down to his Table, remember to eat and
drink, not to gratify his flesh, but to glorify God, by getting strength for
his work. you cannot think of it in every step in your Journey; but without
intending some glory to God by serving his will in your place and station? and
so in your visits and labors.

Fifthly, Every morning let this be your first and firm resolution, I will set
forth this day in the Name of God. Your first and last thoughts are of greatest
consequence; and therefore I advise you to begin and end with this: when ever
you lie down, say in your selves, I will make use of my Bed as an Ordinance of
God, that a Servant of his may be refreshed and fitted for his work: when ever
you rise up, think I will spend this day for God, and follow the business of my
calling, because I am so appointed by God, Zech. 10. 12. And they shall walk up
and down in his Name, says the Lord, etc.

Beloved, I design the sweetness and comfort, as well as strictness of your
lives. Live to God as you are directed, and you shall marvellously prosper in
both. I am not sure yet, whether or no I shall see you at the Assizes, which I
earnestly desire to do. I leave all things to our Fathers wise disposal, and
commending you to God, I divide my loves among you, and so rest

Yours in the bonds of the Lord Jesus, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Jeulchester, Nov. 14. 1663.
LETTER, XVII. [Motives to set our selves to please God.]
To my most Dearly Beloved, the Servants of Christ in Taunton, Grace and Peace.

Most dear Christians,
YOur Prisoner in the Lord saluteth you with all dearness: you are the care of
my heart, the desire of my Eyes, the joy of my Bonds, and the sweet of my
liberty. I am much satisfied in the wise disposal of our Heavenly Father,
whether he see it good for me to be a Bondman, or a Freeman, so I may but
serve your Souls to the greatest adventage. Methinks I begin to feel in my
self, more than ever the benefit of your Prayers; the influences of Heaven,
through the riches of Free Grace (to which alone be the Praise) being more
fully sensible, and sweet upon me. I hope the Lord will restore us one to
another in his time, much better than we parted; in the mean time, see that you
stand fast in the hope of the Gospel. The Lord takes infinite care for you,
see that it be your care, the care of your very hearts, to please the Lord: Set
your hearts to it as the business of your lives, and the very end of your
beings, to walk worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing. Set home on your
selves such considerations as these.

First, It is the very business you were made for, and sent into the world for,
to please your Maker. For his pleasure you are, and were Created. Why should
the Lord repent that he had made you? Genesis 6. 6. What treacherous and damnable
falsehood is this, that when the Lord has given us Breath and Being, and sent
us into the World on purpose on his service, we should like false and wicked
servants, set up for our selves? why should your Creator say, he has made you
in vain?

Secondly, If you set your hearts to please the Lord, you are sure you shall
please him. It is not so with men, all the care in the World will not suffice
to please some men. How often do Princes forsake their greatest Favorites? so
that if you set to please men, you are not sure to attain your end at last;
yea, rather you are sure not to attain it. But if the Lord does see your very
hearts be set to please him, he will accept you, though you come short, 2 Cor.
8. 12. Read that sweet passage, 2 Chronicles. 6. 75.

Thirdly, It will be a certain sign of your sincerity, when the pleasing of the
Lord is your greatest business, Phil. 1. 20. To such the Promise runs, Isa. 56.
4, 5. It is a distinguishing evidence, truly to seek and prize Gods favor,
more then Corn Wine, Psalm. 4. 6, 7.

Fourthly, This will set all in order, and bring all your business to a Head,
when you have set down this as the one thing necessary, that you are resolved
to please the Lord, this will regulate your whole lives, and bring all your
business into a little compass. A Christian has but one thing to do in all
conditions, and that is to carry it so in his present state, as that he may
please God. A man-pleaser: O how many has he to please! what an endless work
has such an one to do?

Fifthly, Consider but how careful the Man-pleasiing Parasite, and time-serving
Hypocrite is to please men: and shall not we take as much care to please our
God? oh how does the flattering Courtier study the humor of his Prince! be you
as careful to study, and to be acquainted with the mind of God. What will not
men do to screw themselves into the favor of the Mighty? oh that you were but
as diligent, and unwearied, and punctual in your endeavors, to get and to keep
the favor of the Almighty!

Sixthly, Consider whose favor or displeasure is of that consequence to you,
as the Lords is of. What if men should be angry with you, have they the Keys of
Hell, and of Death? no, no, fear them not. Can they undo your souls? can they
send you to Hell? Alas they cannot. See that you dread his displeasure that
can. Alas what will their favor avail you? if they be pleased, can they stand
between the Wrath of God and you? can they pardon your sins? save your souls?
secure your Eternal concernments? where is all there favor or good will, when
they or you come to die? It will not (...) worth a Rush when most needed.
Therefore beloved Brethren, whatever you do keep in with God. Resolve upon it
He must be pleased, though all the World be displeased. Le it be enough to you
to have his good will: let this be (...) One thing that you bend your selves to
seek, and if you set (...) seek it, you may be sure to find it. The Messenger
stay for me, and so I must here shut up my Letter, as Jude (...) his. Ye
Beloved, building up your selves in your most holy Faith Praying in the Holy
Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God looking for the Mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ unto Eternal life Unto his Grace I commend you all, and shall add
nothing but to share my loves among you, and so rest,

Your Ambassador is Bonds, JOS. ALLEINE.
Juelchester, November 22. 1663.
LETTER, XVIII. [The Worth of Holiness,]
To the Beloved People the Flock of God in Taunton, Grace and Peace.

Most dear Friends, and Brethren,
I Am now a Prisoner of the Lord for you Gentiles, and therefore have sent
these few Lines, to beseech you by these Bonds which I gladly endure for your
sakes, to hold forth, and hold fast the Profession of your Faith without
wavering. The Lord make you steadfast in the Holy Doctrine wherein you have been
taught. I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole Counsel of God. O
remember that by the space of eight years, I ceased not to warn you every one,
and kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have taught you
publicly, and from House to House, warning every man, and teaching every man
that I might present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Oh that Impenitent
sinners would yet remember the Invitations, and the obsecrations, and the
obtestations, that they have had! have they not been sought unto? have they not
been entreated? have they not been followed from the Public, to their own
Houses? has not the Word been brought to their Doors? Has not Mercy wooed
them? have they not been called under the Wings of Mercy? And yet they would
not. Oh that they would consider it now in the latter days! Jer. 23. 20. Oh
that they would remember, and repent, that there might be yet an after Harvest!
That they would yet come in and live! Are you yet willing to turn? hear how
Wisdom calls after you, Prove. 11. How long ye simple ones will you love
simplicity, and fools bate knowledge: turn you at my reproof. But if they will
not hear, good were it for them that they had never been born: It shall be
more, and better for Sodom and Gomorah, then for them.

But for you that have taken upon you the Profession of strict Godliness, I
shall only press you to follow on, and press toward the Mark. You have much
work yet to do, and God has given you no time to Loyter in. I beseech you to
put on. That Person that sits down when he has gotten to that pitch that he
thinks will bring him to Heaven, is never like to come thither; Grace is one of
those things that says, It never has enough. Let me urge upon you the
Apostles Counsel, Heb. 12. 14. Follow after Holiness.

First, Holiness is the choicest Ornament: it is and adorning in the sight of
God, of great prize. It is the Glory of God, and will you count it your shame?
Exodus 15: God is glorious in Holiness, and Grace is called Glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
But we may now cry out as the Psalmist, in his complaint, O ye sons of men, how
long will ye turn my glory into shame? Ps. 4. 2. But be of good comfort, the
shame of Holiness is real Glory: how confidently does Paul shake his Chain?
Acts 28. 20. We read of some that did glory in their shame in a sad sense, that
is in that which was real ground of shame, to wit, their sin, Phil. 3. 19. But
we meet with others that in a happy sense, did glory in their shame: that is in
the shame of Religion, which is indeed a Crown of glory. So did Peter and John,
Acts 5. 41.

Secondly, Holiness is the safest Muniment: Grace is not only for Ornament,
but for Use. Righteousness is a Brestplate that keeps the Vitals, and is sure
defense from any mortal wounds, Ephesians. 6. 14. When the Politicians have done
their best with all their politic fetches, it is he that walks uprightly,
that walks surely, Prove. 10. 19. Let integrity and uprightness preserve me,
says David, Psa. 25. last. I desire no other Protection than Innocence. I
desire to be no longer safe than these can preserve me; when I must let go my
Integrety or my sasety, I will chose the danger rather than the fin: and yet
will never doubt but my Integrity will save me harmless, and prevent me for
ever coming off a Loser. Never persuade me that that man does choose wisely or
will consult his own safety, that runs upon the displeasure of the infinite
God, who is a devouring fire, to fly the danger of man's displeasure. Did you
ever read or hear of a man so mad as to run upon the swords point, to avoid the
scratch of a Pin? or to run upon a roaring Canon, rather than endanger his
being wetshod? why this is the best wisdom of the distracted World, who will
sin rather than suffer, and to save themselves harmless in the World, will run
upon God, even upon his neck, and the thick Bosses of his Buckler, Job 15. 25,
26.

Thirdly, Holiness will be found to be your real happiness: Eat of this Tree,
and you shall be indeed as God. Godliness is Gods likewise. The beauty of
Holiness is this very Image; Sin is the disease of which holiness is the Cure.
Pride is the Timpany, passion the Feavour of the mind; how restlesly raging is
the mind where they reign? holiness, humility, meekness, are a present ease, a
present Cure, if the Patient can take but enough. O what peace and tranquillity
does Holiness work in the Mind! Great peace have they that love thy
Commandments, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm 119. 165. Read Isa. 48. 18,
22. and 26. 3. and 32. 17. Holiness will be a Treasure of Riches, Jam. 2. 5.
and a Crown of honor, Acts 17. 11. a Paradise of Pleasure to you, Prove. 3. 17.
In a word, holiness is the perfection of man's nature, Heb. 12. 21. the
Communication of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. the earnest of Glory, Matt. 5.
8. and the very entrance of Heaven, Phil. 3. 20.

Let me say now to every one of you, as our Savior to Martha, John 11. 26.
Believed thou this? If you do, live like Believers, and do you follow after
Holiness as others follow their Trades, or Studies. Let Religion be your
business, and not a thing by the by with you: follow as hard upon the pursuit
of Grace, as if you did indeed believe riches and honor were in it. Count your
selves well, as long as you keep within the line of your duty. Let holiness sit
in your Lips, and season all your Speech with grace. Profess it, own it, plead
stoutly and resolve for it, be you Advocates for Holiness, in an Adulterous and
wicked Generation, wear it as a Robe of honor, when the spightful World cast
the dung of their Reproaches at you for it: let it dwell in your Hearts: Let it
adorn your Houses: Let it be your Companion in your Closets: Let it Travel with
You in your Journies: Let it Lie down and Rise up with You: Let it close your
Eyes in the Evening, and call You out of your Beds in the Morning. Be You the
Votaries of Holiness: Keep Her, and She shall Keep You.

I shall close with my Loves to You all, only because I know You love to hear
of my Welfare: I must tell You that Goodness and Mercy do follow me
perpetually every Day, and every Night, Glory to God in the highest. Dear
Brethren, Fare you well in the Lord, I am

Your Devoted Servant in the Gospel, whether a Bondman, or a Free, JOS.
ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelshester, December. 3. 1663.
Most Dearly Beloved,
This was intended for you a Week sooner then it comes to be Communicated. I
purposely Write in the middle of the Week, that if any Opportunity be suddenly
offered, I may have somewhat ready for You: But last Week I failed of a
Conveyance, I shall not add any thing further now, but that I shall follow my
Counsels with my Prayers, and shall be an humble Intercessor night and day
before God for You: To him I commend You, and to the Word of his Grace,

Remaining Yours while I am, J. A.

LETTER XIX. [1. Try. 2. Rejoice.]
To the most Loving, and best Beloved, the Flock of Christ in Taunton, Grace
and Peace.

Most endeared Friends,
MY heart is solicitous for You: Your Spiritual and Eternal welfare is the
matter of my desires and designs. Let not my Beloved think they were forgotten
by me, because you heard not from me the last Week: sleep departed from my eyes
to write to you at large; but in the morning I concluded it best, to defer the
imparting of it to You for a season, that you might have it a better way. Can a
woman forget her Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her
Womb? Yea, they may forget; but Christ will earnestly remember You still.
Natural Parents may be so far unnatural; spiritual Parents may be so far
carnal, as to forget their own Children: I would have you count nothing as
certain but Christ's love and care. This you may build upon: You need not fear
lest time and distance should wear out the remembrance of you with him: Your
names are enrolled in the everlasting Decrees of Heaven, and a whole Eternity
has not been able to wear them out. Do any of you Question whether you are so
happy as to have your Names recorded above? I shall bring it to a speedy issue:
Do you Question whether Christ has taken your Names? Whether you are upon his
heart? Let me ask you, Is Heaven upon your Hearts? Is the Name of Jesus deeply
engraven upon your Souls? Is his Image and Superscription there? If you can
find that Heaven is the main of your cares, that your hearts are set upon it as
your home and your Country; and that it is your great business to seek it and
to secure it, then never doubt, if your hearts be chiefly upon Heaven, your
Names are unquestionably written in Heaven. Again, has Christ recorded his
Name in your hearts? Is the Name of Jesus the Beloved name with you? precious
above all; next to your Hearts? Is there no other Name under Heaven so dear and
sweet to you? What room has Christ in you? If any thing be deeper in your
hearts than he is, you are unsound. As the Father has given him, so do your
hearts give him a Name above every Name: Is Christ uppermost with you in your
estimations and affections? Then rejoice and leap for joy, for your Names are
most precious with Christ, if his Name be above all dear to You. Once more,
has Christ drawn out his own similitude upon You? Is Christ within You? does
he dwell in your Hearts? Then be sure You have a room in his heart: The Image
of Christ is in holiness. Is this that which your very hearts are set upon? Do
You thirst for Holiness? Do You follow after Holiness? Do you prize it above
all Prosperity and worldly Greatness? Do You hate every sin and long to be rid
of it as your most irksome burden? and use all Gods means against it as far as
you know them? If it be thus with you, Christ has set his stamp upon your
hearts, and so you may be sure he has set You as a Seal upon his heart.

Rejoice then, O Christians, and bless your selves in the happy privilege that
you have, in being under Christ's care. Fear not little Flock; Stronger is he
that is with you, than he that is against you: What though Satan should raise
all his Militia against you, adhere to Christ in a patient doing and suffering
his pleasure, and he shall secure you: The Lord will not forsake you, because
it has pleased the Lord to make you his people: God has entrusted you with
his Son: You are his Care and his Charge: Many will be listing at you, many
will be plucking at you, but fear not, you shall not be moved, none shall pluck
you out of Christ's hand, he has all power, Mat. 28. 8. Can Omnipotence secure
you? He is all Treasures, Col. 2. 3. Can unsearchable Riches suffice you? In a
word, he is all Fullness, Col. 1. 21. Can all Content you? Can Fullness fill you?
if so, you are blessed and shall be blessed.

Beloved, We lose unutterably for want of considering, for want of viewing our
own Privileges, and Blessedness. O Man, is Christ thine, and yet do thou
live at a low rate and Comfort? Is thy name written in Heaven, and yet do
thou not rejoice? Shall the Children of the Kingdom, the Candidates of Glory,
the chosen Generation, the Royal Priesthood, be like other men? O Christians,
Remember who and whence you are, consider your Obligations, put on a better
pace; Bestir your selves, run and wrestle, and be strong for the Lord of Hosts
(and earnestly, yet peaceably) contend for the Faith once delivered to his
Saints; What shall we make nothing of all that God has said and done for us?
Christians, shall he that has gotten an enriching Office boast of his Booty?
or he that has obtained the Kings Patent for an Earldome, glory in his Riches
and Honor? And shall the Grant of Heaven signify little with thee? Or Christ's
Patent for thy Sonship and Partnership with himself be like a Cipher? Shall
Haman come home from the Banquet with a glad heart, and glorying in the
greatness of his Riches, the multitude of his Children, and all the things
wherein the King had promoted him above the Princes? And shall we turn over our
Bibles and read the Promises, and find it under Gods own hand, that he intends
the Kingdom for us, that he will be a Father to us, that he gives and grants
all his infinite perfections to us, and yet not be moved? Beloved Christians,
live like your selves, let the World see that the Promises of God, and
Privileges of the Gospel are not empty sounds, or a mere Crack. Let the
Heavenly cheerfulness and the restless diligence, and the holy raisedness of
your Conversations prove the reallity, excellency, and beauty of your Religion
to the World. Forget not your Prisener. Labor earnestly for me in your
Prayers, who am night and day laboring and suffering for you. I can never
bless God enough for his most tender and indulgent care for you, which appears
so wonderfully in his Fatherly Protection, and his Fatherly Provision. See that
you receive not the Grace of God in vain. Remember with trembling, that of our
Lord, To whom much is given of him much shall be required. With my most Dear
Loves to you all, I commend you to your Father and my Father, your God and my
God, remaining

Yours in all manner of Obligations, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, January 20th. 1663.
LETTER XX. [The Felicity of Believers.]
To the most Beloved People, the Servants of God in Taunton, Salvation:

Most endeared Christians,
I Have longed and waited for a little breathing time, wherein I might write
unto you, but I have been oppressed hitherto with so many cares, and such a
throng of business, that till now (and scarcely now) I have had no time of
respiration, wherein I might sufficiently reflect on you, or my self. But
although so great a part of Taunton be translated to Juelchester with me, yet I
may not, I cannot forget you that are behind.

Alas poor Taunton, how should I bewail thee! did I look upon thee only with
the Eye of sense, Alas! for thy wonted Liberties, for thy former plenty, and
variety wherewith the Lord has blessed thee? He had spread a Table for thee in
the midst of thine Enemies; Bread has been given thee, and thy Waters have
been sure: But now a Famine seems to threaten thee, and the Comforters that
should relieve thy Soul are far from thee. Thy Shepherds are removed. Thou
see not thy Signs, nor thy Prophets, and thy wonted helpers are now disabled
from giving thee supplies, Alas, how do thine Enemies triumph, and thy Teachers
and thine Inhabitants are become their Captives! and how great is the Cry of
thy Poor, and thine oppressed!

Such would be the Language of Sense, if that were suffered to be the Speaker.
But Faith will speak in another Dialect. And therefore amongst my other
Counsels, that I shall send you, this shall be the first.

Judge not of the present Providence, by the conduct of Sense, but by the eye
of Faith. Faith will see that we are then most Honored, when we are most
vilified, and reproached, and set at naught for the sake of Christ; and that we
are then most happy, when the World has done its worst to make us miserable.
Faith will tell you; that GOD is a very present help, when you seem quite to
fail of Help; and will show you the Well of Water, that is near, when the Water
in the Bottle is spent. What though you seem to have lost Ministers, Husbands,
Friends for a Season? Faith will tell you, that they are well bestowed, and
that it will be both your, and their Advantage, in the Day of Retribution.

Brethren, what are you for? Are you for the present World, or for that to
come? Are you for your Temporal enjoyments, or do you seek for Glory, Honor,
and Immortallty? If you are for this World, you have made a very imprudent
choice, in taking up the Profession of Godliness and cleaving to and owning the
hated ways of the Lord; But if you are for Glory, and for Eternity, then be of
good Cheer, all these things do make for us. You are Witnesses how often I have
told you of these things, and I can say with the Apostle, I believed therefore
have I spoken, and therefore I am nothing moved with all these things, nor with
the things that do yet further abide me. I believed, and therefore I told you,
that you should never be losers by Jesus Christ. Nay, do I say I told it you,
You know the Lord Jesus Christ has showed you, that the Persecuted are doubly
blessed; that such should rejoice, and leap for joy, because great is their
Reward in Heaven. Has not God said, that if we suffer with him we shall also
Reign with him; and that these light afflictions work for us a weight of Glory?
And if this be true, I pray you, tell me whether GOD heth not dealt well with
us in counting us worthy of this little Tribulation for his Name? Indeed the
Sufferings is but little; but verily the Reward will not be little. I know whom
I have trusted: I am well assured the Glass is turned up, and ever hour
reckoned of our imprisonment, and every Scorn and Reproach of our Enemies is
kept in Black and White. I believe, therefore do I speak; GOD is infinitely
tender of us, my Brethren, though a Poor and despicable Generation. I value not
the pop-gun threats of a frowning World; it is well with us, we are GODS
Favorites. Come by Beloved, let us sit down under his Shadow: Here is safety,
and rest, if God be for us, who can be against us; Verily he Bottles all our
Tears, and tells all our Wanderings: He numbers all our hairs, whosoever
touches us shall not be Innocent. Know you not that we are the Apple of his
Eye? Has not he reproved the greatest for his Peoples sakes, saying, reproach
not mine anointed? And so we forget how he loved us. Are not we his Jewels?
Does he not own us for his Members, for his Children?

Ah what a Block does Unbelief make of man? What, do you think that all this
does signify nothing? Can you forget your Children? Will you suffer your
Jewels to lie in the Dirt, or make no reckoning of them whether they are lost?

Verily I write not this without shaming reflectious upon my own stupidity.
What, Beloved of God, adopted by God! What, a Member of Christ Jesus! A vessel
of Mercy! An heir of Glory? What, and not yet swallowed up in the sense of Gods
infinite love! Blush, Oh my Soul, and be confounded before the most High, and
cover thy face with shame.

I remember what the Heathen Seneca writes, observing the expressions of Gods
love to man in his common Providence; Verum est, usque in delicias amamur, that
is, it is a very truth, we are beloved of God even as his darlings.

My Brethren, Have Faith in God. Believe his Promises: Walk in the sense of his
love. Comfort your selves in Gods love toward You, under all the hatred and
envy of men, and the contradiction of sinners that You meet with. Be strong and
of a good courage, God is for You. Be assured that he that walks uprightly,
walks surely: Forsake not the assembling of your selves together. Now see
that You speak often to one another, and build up each other in the holy Faith.
God knows I cannot do for you, as I would; I would have been larger to You, but
I cannot. My most dear Loves I desire You to share among you. I am greatly
Yours. The Peace that passes all Understanding keep your Hearts and minds. I am

Yours to serve you and for you with all readiness of mind, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, July 28th. 1665.
LETTER XXI. [What do you more than others?]
To the most Dearly Beloved, the Servants in Taunton, Grace and Peace.

Most loving and entirely Beloved,
YOu are a great Joy to me. I know not what thanks to render to the Lord for
you, when I hear of your Constancy, and Pidelity, and Zeal, in adhering to him,
and his Ways, even in such a time as this, you are highly favored, Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel, that he has regarded the low Estates of his Servants:
That he should ever Indulge you as he has, and Hover over you, even as the
Eagle stirs up her Nest, and fluttereth over her Young, spreads abroad her
Wings, takes them, bears them on her Wings, for so has the Lord your God
dealt with You: He has kept you as the Apple of his Eye, and since the Streams
of Cherith were dried up, yet to this day he has not suffered the handful of
Meal to wast, nor the Oil in the Cruse to fail, but (though you have no
certainty to trust to) has continually provided for you to the full. How
should I love and bless the Lord for this his great Grace toward you, while I
live! Now I beseech you my Brethren, that you consider the Kindness of the
Lord; for the Lord your God is he that cares for you, and that you love the
Lord your God, and fear him for ever, for he is your Life, and the Length of
your Days. And as Job had a holy fear of his Children, least they should have
offended: So my most dearly Beloved, I am jealous of you with a Godly
jealousy, lest any of you should receive this Grace of God in vain. I must not
cease to put you in mind, that God does look for no small matters from You.
Remember my most endeared Charge, that the Lord does look for singular things
from you, that there be not a barren Tree, nor a Dwarf Christian among you;
where the Lord does strew much, he looks to gather much; and where he sows
much, he expects to reap accordingly. Whose account my Beloved, is like to be
so great as yours? O look about you, and think of the Master coming to Reckon
with you for his Talents; when he will expect no small increase. Beloved, what
can you do? How much are you grown? What spoil have you made upon your
Corruptions? What progress in Grace?

Suppose Christ should put that awakening Question to you, What do you more
than others? Beloved, God does expect more of his People, than of any others in
the World besides: And well he may. For

First, He has bestowed more on them than on others: Now where much is given,
much shall be required; Can you think of that without trembling? He has
bestowed on them singular Love more than on others; You only have I known of
all the Families on Earth. He has a distinguishing Love and Favor for his
People, and he looks that his Love should be a constraining Argument to
Obedience. Again he has laid out a singular care on his People, more than on
others: He cares for no man, for nothing in all the World, in comparison of
them. He reproves Kings for their sakes. He will give Nations, and Kingdoms
for their Ransom. So precious are they in his sight, and so dearly Beloved,
that he will give men for them, and People for their Life. He withdraws not
his Eyes from the Righteous, he will not endure them out of his sight. The Eyes
of the Lord are upon the Righteous, and first the Eye of his more accurate
Observation: God can wink at others as it were, and overlook what they do with
little notice, but he has a most curious eye upon his People, he marketh their
steps, and booketh their words, he weighs their Actions, and pondereth all
their goings. And should not they walk more cautiously, and charily, than any
alive, that are under so exact and curious an Eye? Secondly the Eye of special
Care, and Protection. Behold the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him. I
will guide thee with mine Eye: And should not they be infinitely tender and
careful how to please the Lord, who have his singular Care laid out on them? In
short, God has bestowed on them singular Privileges more than others: These
are a peculiar Treasure to him above all People, a Kingdom of Priests, an Holy
Nation, a singular separated People, they dwell alone, they are diverse from
all People: When the whole World lies in wickedness, these are Called and
Chosen, and Faithful, Washed and justified, and Sanctified in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. The rest are the Refuse: These the
Jewels: These are taken, and they are left. Shall not Gods Priests be Clothed
with Righteousness, and shall not Princes Live above the rate of Peasants?

Secondly. He has entrusted them with more than others: Not only with the
Talents of his Grace (for the increase whereof they must give a strict account)
but also with the Jewel of his Glory. How tenderly should they walk, that are
entrusted with such a Jewel? Remember, your Makers Glory is bound up in your
fruitful walking.

Thirdly, He has qualified them more than others. He has put into them a
Principle of Life, having quickened them together with Christ. He has set up a
Light in their Minds, when others lie in Darkness. He has given them other
Aids, than others have, even his Spirit to help their Infirmities, when others
lie like Vessels that are Windbound, and cannot stir.

Fourthly, He has provided for them other manner of things than for others.
These are the little Flock to whom it is his good pleasure to give the Kingdom;
great are the preparations for them. The Father has prepared the Kingdom for
them from the Foundations of the World: The Son is gone to Heaven on purpose to
prepare a place for them: The Spirit is preparing them, and making them meet to
be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light: And should these be
like other People?

Brethren beloved, God and Men do expect you should do more than others, see
that that you be indeed singular. For

1. If you do no more for God than others, he will do more against you then
others: You only have I known, therefore will I punish you. The barren Tree in
the Vineyard must down, whereas had he been in the Common he might have stood
much longer. God looked for Grapes from his Vineyard, on which he had bestowed
such Care and Cost more than ordinary, but when they bring forth wild Grapes,
he will lay them waste in a worse manner than the Forest. When Christ came to
the Fig Tree seeking Fruit, and met with none, he Cursed it from the Root,
whereas had it been a Thorn or Bramble, it might have stood as before.

2. If you do no more than others, you must look for no more than others: If
you should put off God with a common Obedience, you must expect to be put off
with common Mercies.

3. Except you do more than others, God will be dishonored more by you than
others.

I have been too long with you, but I am earnestly desirous you should be
sensible of Gods extraordinary Expectations from you. And truly, as God looks
for more from his own than others, so he looks for more from you than others,
even of his own, because that he has done more: See that you be shining
Christians, that you be strong in the Grace of God; that you press toward the
Mark. But I must conclude; I give my Loves among you all, being able to add no
more, but that I am

Yours in servent Loves and Longings, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, January 2. 1663.
LETTER XXII. [Christian Care, Faith, Self-denial.]
To the most Beloved People, the Servants of God in Taunton, Salvation:

Most endeared Christians,
THe reason why my Letters have not of late come so thick as formerly to you,
is not because I forget to love you, and to care for you; but because I have
been busily taken up in other Labors of sundry kinds for you. I am yours, and
love to be so, being ambitious not to have dominion over your faith, but to be
a helper of your Joy. Christ's Officers are so your Rulers in the Lord, as yet
to Preach not themselves, but the Lord Jesus Christ, and themselves your
Servants for Jesus sake. I have no greater felicity under God, than to serve
the good of Souls. Brethren beloved, How fares it with your Souls? Are they in
Health? Do they prosper? I wish your Temporal prosperity. It is a joy to me to
hear when your Trade does flourish: But these are but very little things if we
look into Eternity. Brethren, my ambition for you is, that you should be Cedars
among the Shrubs, that from you should found out the Word of the Lord, and that
in every place your Faith to Godward should be spread abroad. That Taunton
should be as a Field that the Lord has blessed: That you should not only have
the Name, but the Spirit, Life, Power, Heat, Growth, Vigor of Christianity
among you. Let not Taunton only have the Name to live, and be noted for the
Profession of Religion, but see to it my Brethren, that the Kingdom of God be
with you: Oh that every one of your Souls might be a Temple of God! Oh that
every one of your Families might be a Church of God! Beloved, look to it, that
every one that names the Name of Christ among You do depart from Iniquity,
secret as well as open, of the Heart as well as of the Life. Let no man think
that to make an outcry upon the Wickedness of the Times, and to be of the
Professing Party; will serve his turn; many go to Hell in the company of the
wise Virgins. That no man may be a Self-deceiver, let every man be a
Self-Searcher. He that keeps no Day-Book in his Shop, and no Account, no Record
in his Conscience, his Estate and his Soul will thrive both alike. Beloved, I
would that You should remember whither You are a going. If a man be after a few
Months to be Transported into another Country, never to Return more, he will
send over whatever he can, and make the best Provision that he may against he
comes into another Country. Dear Brethren, You are Strangers and Pilgrims
here, and have but a few Months abode in this Country, see that you Traffic
much with Heaven. Christ is our Common Factor, O send over to him what possible
you can. Give Alms plentifully, Pray continually, be much in Meditation and
Consideration; Reckon with your selves daily: Walk with God in Your Callings:
Do all the Duties of your Relations as unto God: Live not one day to your
selves, but unto Christ: Set forth continually in his Name, so shall you be
continually Transporting into another World, and laying up Treasure in Heaven:
And O the blessed Store that You shall find there after a few Years diligence
in such a holy Course! Beloved, while You are here in this World, You are but
like a Merchants Ship in a strange Port, the day for your Return is set, and
You are to stay no longer then till your Freight is ready. Be wise, know your
season, improve your time, You are made or marred for ever, as You speed in this
one Voyage. There is no returning again to this Country to mend a bad Market,
God will call in all his Talents, Time shall be no longer. Oh? come in, come
and buy now while the Market is open, that You that want may have Grace, and
You that have may have it more abundantly. Go and plead with the Lord Jesus,
that he has bid You come, buy and eat without Money, and without Price; that he
has counseled You to come buy of him Gold, Raiment, and Eye Salve; tell Him
You are come according to his call, and wait upon him for Grace; for
Righteousness, for Light and Instruction: Lay hold on his Word, plead it, live
upon it; he is worthy to be Believed, worthy to be Trusted, go out of your
selves to him, unlearn your selves. There is a threefoold Foot that Carnal-self
stands upon, our own Wisdom, our own Righteousness, our own Strength, these
three Feet must be Cut off, and we must learn to have no subsistence in our
selves but only in Christ, and to stand only on his bottom. Study the excellent
Lesson of Self-denial, Self-annihilation, A true Christian is like a Vine that
cannot stand of it self, but is wholly supported by the Prop it leans on. It is
no small thing to know our selves to be nothing, of no might, of no worth, of
no understanding, nor reality; to look upon our selves as helpless, worthless,
foolish empty shadows. This holy Littleness is a great matter; when we find
that all our Inventory amounts to nothing but Folly, Weakness, and Beggary;
when we set down our Selves for Ciphers, our Gain for loss, our Excellencies
for very Vanities, then we shall learn to live like Believers. A true Saint is
like a Glass without a Foot, that set him where you will, is ready to fall
every way till you set him to a Prop: Let Christ be the only Support you lean
unto. When you are thoroughly Emptied and Nullified, and see all comeliness to
be but as a withered Flower, dead, dried, and past Recovery, then You will be
put upon the happy necessity of going out to Christ for all.

The Messengers haste forces me Abruptly to end here: I can add no more, by my
Prayers to my Counsels, and so commending you to God, and the Word of his
Grace, I rest

The fervent Well-willer of your Souls, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juel-Chester, April 16. 1663.
LETTER XXIII. [Right Reasons in Suffering.]
To my dearly Beloved, the Flock of Christ in Taunton, Grace and Peace:

Most loving and dearly Beloved,
I Know not what thanks to render to you, nor to God for You, for all the
unexpressable love which I have found in you toward me; and not terminatively
to me, but to Christ in me; for I believe it is for his sake, as I am a
Messenger and Ambassador of his to You, that you have loved me and done so much
every way for me; and I think I may say of Taunton as the Psalmist of
Jerusalem, If I forget thee, let my right hand forget her cunning, if I do not
remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. I would not, my
dear Brethren, that You should be dejected or discouraged at the Late
disappointments: For through the goodness of God I am not, but rather more
satisfied than before: and this I can truly say, nothing does sadden me more
than to see so much sadness in your faces. As on the contrary nothing does
comfort me so much, as to see your Cheer and Courage. Therefore I beseech you,
Brethren, faint not because of my Tribulation, nor of Gods delays, but
strengthen the hands, and the feeble knees. And the Lord bolster up your hands,
as they did the hands of Moses, that they may not fall down till Israel do
prevail. Let us fear lest there be some evil among us, that God being angry
with us, does send this farther trial upon us. Pray earnestly for me lest the
eye of the most jealous God should discern that in me which should render me
unfit for the mercy You desire. And let every one of you search his heart, and
search his house to see if there be not (...) there: Let not these
disappointments make you to be nevertheless in love with Prayers, but the more
out of love with sin. Let us humble our selves under the mighty hand of God,
and he shall exalt us in due time. And for the Enemies of God, you must know
also that their foot shall slide in due time. Let the Servants of God encourage
themselves in their God: for in the things wherein they deal proudly, he is
above them: Therefore fret not your selves because of evildoers; commit your
Cause to him that judges righteously. Remember that you are bid if you see
oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of Judgment and Justice in a
Province, not to marvel at the matter: Verily, there is a God that Judges in
the Earth: And you have the liberty of Appeals: Rest in the Lord, and wait
patiently for him, and fret not your selves, because of the men that bring
wicked devises to pass: take heed that none of you do with Peter begin to sink,
now you see the waters rough, and the winds boisterous: these things must not
weaken your Faith, nor cool your Zeal: for they are great Arguments for the
strengthening of it. What clearer evidence can there be for the future Judgment
and Perdition of the ungodly, and Coronation of the Just in another life, than
the most unjust proceedings that are here upon Earth: Shall not the Judge of
all the Earth see right to be done? We see here nothing but confusion and
disorder, the wicked receives according to the work of the Righteous, and the
Innocent according to the work of the Wicked. The Godly perish and the Wicked
flourish; these do prosper, and they do suffer. What! Can it be ever thus! No
doubtless, there must be a day when God will Judge the World in Righteousness,
and rectify the present disorders, and reverse the unrighteous Sentences that
have been passed against his Servants. And this evidence is so clear, that many
of the Heathen Philosophers have from this very Argument (I mean the
unrighteous usage of the Good) concluded that there must certainly be Rewards
and Punishments adjudged by God in mother World.

Nor yet lose your Zeal: Now is the time that the love of many does wax cold:
but I bless God it is not so with you: I am sure your love to me is, as true
Friends should be, like the Chimneys, warmest in the Winter of Adversity: and I
hope your love to God is much more, and I would that You should abound yet more
and more. Where else should you bestow your Loves? Love ye the Lord, ye his
Saints, and cling about him the faster now ye see the World is striving to
separate you from him. How many are they that go to knock off your fingers! O
methinks, I see what tugging there is. The World is plucking, and the Devil is
plucking: Oh, hold fast, I beseech you; hold fast, that no man take your Crown.
Let the Water that is sprinkled, yea, rather poured upon your Love, make it to
flame up the more. Are you not betrothed unto Christ? Oh Remember, Remember
your Marriage-Covenant: Did you not take him for Richer for Poorer, for better
for worse: Now prove your love to Christ to have been a true Conjugal love, in
that you can love him when most slighted, despised, undervalued, blasphemed
among men. Now acquit your selves, not to have followed Christ for the Loaves,
Now confute the Accuser of the Brethren, who may be ready to suggest of the
best of You, as he did of Job, Does he serve the Lord for naught? And let it be
seen that You loved Christ and Holiness purely for their own sakes, that You
can love a naked Christ when there is no hopes of worldly advantage, or
promoting of self-interest in following him.

Yet beware that none of you do stick to the ways of Christ and Religion upon
so carnal an Account as this, because this is the Way that you have already
taken up, and you count it a shame to recede from your Principles: I am very
jealous lest some Professors should miss of their Reward for this: Least they
should be accounted Turn-coats and Hypocrites; therefore they will show a (...)
of spirit in going on, since they have once begun, and cannot with honor
retreat. Would you chose holiness and strictness, if it were to do again? Would
you enter yourselves among Gods poor people, if it were now first to do. Would
you have taken up the Profession of Christ, though you had foreseen all this
that is come and coming? This will do much to evidence your sincerity. But I
forget that I am writing a Letter, being prone to pass all bounds when I have
thus to do with you. The Lord God remember and reward you and your Labors of
Love. The Eternal God be your Refuge, and put under you his everlasting Arms.
The Peace of God that passes all understanding Keep your Hearts. Christ's
Legacy of Peace I leave with you, and Rest, with my dear affections to You all:

Your Ambassador in Bonds, JOS. ALLEINE.

LETTER XXIV. [Councel for Salvation.]
To the most Beloved, the Servants of Christ in Taunton, Salvation.

Most endeared Christians,
MY continual Solicitude for your State, will not suffer me to pass in quiet
one week without Writing to you, unless I am extraordinarily hindered. Your
Sincerity, Stedfastness, and Proficiency in the Grace of God, is the matter of
my earnest desire, and that which I should account my self happy in. I have a
longing desire to see the Faces of you all, and (besides mine Expectation)
shall (I trust) speedily have the opportunity to see you at the approaching
Assizes, which I shall greatly rejoice in, notwithstanding our coming may be
otherwise attended with many Inconveniences. In the mean time I send you a few
Prison Counsels. As,

1. To improve for Eternity the Advantages of your present State. Though you
are at many disadvantages with respect to the public Ordinances, yet you have
many wondrous and most happy Privileges, which Spiritual Wisdom would make no
small improvement of. Oh what a Mercy have you that you may serve God while you
will in your Families! That you may be as much as you will with God in secret
Prayer, and holy Meditation, and Self-examination! I beseech You consider what
a Blessing You have above others, that have your Health, and a Competency of
the Comforts of this Life, and are free from those continual pains, or
Heart-eating Cares, that others are disabled by, from looking after God and
their Souls, as You may do. Oh consider what a blessed Seed-time You have for
Eternity! Now be wise and improve your happy Season, your day of Grace. Prepare
for Death, make all sure: Press on toward the Mark, lay up in store for your
selves a good Foundation against the time to come. In the Morning sow your
Seed, and in the Evening withdraw not your Hand. Treasure up much in Heaven:
What profit is it that you have more than others? more Liberty, more Comfort,
more Health, more Wealth, than others? except You love God more, and serve him
better than others. Now ply your Work, and dispatch your Business, so as that
you may have nothing to trouble You upon your Deathbeds.

2. To Consider also the Temptations, and Disadvantages of your State. Study to
know your own weaknesses, and where your danger lies, that you may obviate
Satan, and prevent your Miscarrying: There is no Condition but has its Snares.
See that You acquaint your selves with his Devices, least You be beguiled by
him, and caught in his Trap through your own unwariness. You that are well
provided for in the World, had need to watch your selves, least You fall in
love with present things, least you be lifted up, least You trust in those
Carnal props, and put confidence in the Creatures, least You warp, and decline,
and baulk your duties through Carnal fear, and the desire of preserving your
Estates. You that have little in the World, are not without your temptations
neither: Oh take heed of envying others prosperity, of murmurring and
discontent, of diffidence and distrustfulness, of using indirect means to help
your selves: Be sure You make not the Worlds pressures upon you, an excuse from
your daily serving of God in your Families, and in secret. Set this down as
your Rule, and unchangeeble Resolution, that God and your Souls and your
Families shall be looked duly and continually after, go the world which way it
will. Consider what sins your Tempers, Relations, Callings, do most expose you
to. Be not strangers to your selves. Prove your selves upright in keeping from
your Iniquities.

3. To converse often with your Dust. Brethren we are going, we are going, the
Grave waits for us: Oh forget not that Corruption is your Father, and the
Worm your Mother, and your Sister. These are your poor Kindred that you must
shortly dwell with, when you come to your long Home: Remember the days of
Darkness which shall be many. Take every day some serious turns with Death.
Think where you shall be a few days and nights hence, happy he that knew what
to morrow meant for 20. Years together. Believe it, you will find it no little
thing to die. Think often how you are provided, how you should receive the
Sentence of Death. Were you never within sight of Death? How did it look? What
did you wish for most at that time? What did then trouble you most? Oh mark
those things, and live accordingly. Often ask your Hearts, What if God should
this night require my Soul?

4. To serve your Generation with your might while you have time. You have but
a very little time to bring God any Glory here, or to do your Friends any good;
now up and be doing. Now or never live in the deep and and constant sense of
the very little time that You have for this World, and the great work You have
to do. You are going whence You shall not return. There Is no After-Game to be
Played. What! But one cast for Eternity, and will You not be careful to throw
that well?

Most dearly Beloved, I covet after your furtherance in Mortification, and
Growth in Grace. And Oh that I could but represent Death to You, as shortly it
will show it self: Or could but open a Window into Eternity to You: How
effectually would this do the work. Then the Cripple would fling away his
Crutches, and betake himself to his Legs: Then the Slothful would pluck his
Hand out of his Bosom, and shake off his Excuses, and be Night and Day at his
work. Then the Laodicean would be recovered from his benumed frame; then we
should have no Halving in Religion, no Lazy wishing and complaining; but men
would ply the Oars to purpose, and sweat at their work.

But Oh unhappy man, how powerfully has the World bewitched thee! How
miserably has Sin unmanned thee, that thou should look no farther than thou
can see, and to be taken up with present things, and forget so momentous
Concernments as are before thee?

But You my Brethren, lift up your selves above the Objects of Sense: May You
be men for Eternity, and carry it like those that seek for Glory, Honor, and
Immortality. I am apt to be too long with You: I commend You to Divine Grace:
my dearest Loves among You, I am

Yours in the Bonds of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juel-Chester, March 5. 1665.
LETTER XXV.
To the loving and most Beloved People, the Servants of God in Taunton, Grace
and Peace.

Most dearly Beloved,
ALthough I am forced at the present, to be at a distance from You; yet I would
not have you ignorant, that the dear remembrance of you is always fresh with
me, and the care of your eternal Welfare is always living upon my heart.
Therefore as my Beloved Friends I warn you, and cease not to stir you up by way
of remembrance, being jealous for you with a Godly jealousy, that no man take
your Crown. My dearly Beloved, I know you have many Enemies, and above all, I
fear your bosom Enemies: and as the Watchman of the Lord, I give you careful
warning, and exhort you all not to be high-minded, but fear. Blessed is the man
that fears always. Look diligently, lest any of you fail of the Grace of God.
You have made much and long Profession of the Name of Jesus Christ: Oh, look to
your Foundations, see upon what Ground you stand. Look to your sincerity. You
must every one of you stand shortly before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and be
tried for your lives: Oh, try your selves thoroughly first. It Is easy to
mistake Education for Regeneration, and common Conviction and Illumination for
Conversion, and a partial Reformation and external Obedience, for true
Sanctification. Therefore I beseech you every one, to examine whether you are
in the Faith. Prove your own selves. Tell not me, you hope you are sincere, you
hope you shall go to Heaven: Never put it off with Hopes, but pray, and try,
and search, till you are able to say, yea, and know you are passed from Death
to Life, and that you know you have a Building, not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens.

Suppose I should ask you one by one, Where are your Evidences for Heaven?
Could you make out your Claim? Can you bring me Scripture Proof? Can you show
me the Marks of the Lord Jesus? What mean you to live at Uncertainties?
Brethren, it is an intolerable Ignorance for any of you in these days of
glorious Light, not to be able to tell the distinguishing Marks of a sound
Believer. And it is intolerable carelessness of your everlasting Welfare, if
you do not bring your selves to the Trial by these Marks. What are your hands
filled with Books, and your ears filled with Sermons, that tell you so plainly
from the word of God, how you shall know whether you are in Christ, and are you
still to seek? Oh, stir up your own selves. Take heed, lest a Promise being
left of entering into his Rest, any of you fall short of it at last by Unbelief.
You are a Professing People, you pray, and you hear, and you run upon some
Adventures for Jesus Christ: But, O look to your sincerity. Look to your
Principles, look to your Ends, else you may lose all at last. Examine, not
only what is done, but whence it is done, look to the Root, as well as to the
Fruit. Eye, not only your Actions, but your Aims. Remember what a strict and
severe Eye you are under. The Lord Jesus makes strict observation upon all your
works and ways. He observes who of you be fruitful, and who be barren and
unprofitable. He knows who of you be thriving and who be declining. He
observes, who be warm, and who lukewarm: who be sound Christians, and who of
you have only a name to live.

Return, O backsliding Christians: You have lost your former Convictions, and
lost your former Affections. You are grown remiss in your watch, and your Zeal
is turned into a kind of indifferency, and your diligence into negligence.
Your Care is turned into Security, and your tenderness into senslessness. Oh,
your case is dangerous. The Lord Jesus has a great Controversy with you. Oh,
remember whence you are fallen, and repent, and do your first works. Strengthen
the things that remain, and are ready to die. Oh, rub and chafe your swooning
Souls, and ply them with warm applications, and rousing considerations, till
they recover their former heat. And know ye from the Lord, that the backsliders
in heart shall be filled with his own ways.

O ye barren and fruitless trees: Behold the Axe is lifted up to fell you to
the ground, except you bring forth fruits, and those worthy of Repentance. May
not Christ say to some among you, Behold these three years have I come, seeking
fruit, and finding none? How is it then that you read not the Sentence passed
on the fruitless Tree? O sleepy Professors, how long will you drive on in this
heavy course? How long will you continue in an unprofitable and customary
Profession? Would you be the joy of our Lord, why know ye, that the thriving
Plant is the Masters praise, and his hearts delight. Christians, put on, press
toward the Mark, be adding to your Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge,
etc. See that you grow extensively, in being abundant in all forts of good
works. Be pitiful, be courteous, gentle, easily to be entreated. Be slow to
anger, soon reconciled. Be patient, be ye temperate, be ye cheerful. Study not
every one only his own things, but the good of his Neighbor. Think it not
enough to look to your own Souls, but watch for others Souls. Pray for them,
warn them, be kind to them, study to oblige them, that by any means you may win
them, and gain their Souls.

Labor to grow intensively, to do better the things that you did before, to be
more fervent in Prayer, more free and willing in all the ways of the Lord, to
hear with more profit, to examine your selves more thoroughly, to mind Heaven
more frequently than heretofore.

And you, O carnal and unsound Professors, that reckon your selves to be in
Christ, but are not new Creatures; that because you have the good opinion of
the Godly, and are outwardly conformable to the ways of God, persuade your
selves you are in a good condition, although your hearts have not yet to this
day been renewed: O Repent speedily. Repent, and be converted. What though we
cannot distinguish the Tares from the Wheat? Yet the Lord of the Harvest can.
Christ will find you out, and condemn you for rotten and unsound, unless you be
soundly renewed by repentance, and effectually changed by converting Grace.

Brethren, I fervently wish your Salvation, and to this, while I am able, I
shall bend my ardent endeavors, I am now taking advice for my health, and hope
in some few Weeks to be restored to you. In the mean time I commend me to Your
Prayers, and you to the Grace of God, remaining.

Yours in the Lord Jesus, JOS. ALLEINE.
Dorchester, July 7th. 1666.
LETTER XXVI. [The Character and Privileges of true Believers.]
To the Loving and Beloved People, the Servants of God in Taunton, Salvation.

Most dearly Beloved,
I Longed to hear of your Welfare, but by reason of the Carryers intermitting
his Journeys, could not till now obtain my desires, neither had I Opportunity
till the last Week of writing to you. I rejoice to hear by Mr. Ford, of Gods
continual goodness toward you; he is your Shepherd, and therefore it is that
you do not want. Me you have not always, but he is ever with you, his Rod and
his Staff shall comfort you; Nay, more then all this, you may hence conclude
comfortably for all times, yea, for the whole Eternity to come. Surely Goodness
and Mercy shall follow you all the days of your Lives, and you shall dwell in
the House of the Lord for ever.

In this, my dear Brethren, in this rejoice, and again I say rejoice, that God
is engaged in so near and so sweet relation to you. Doubtless your Souls shall
Lodge in goodness, and be provided for carefully, and lie down in everlasting
safety, that have the Almighty for our Shepherd. Blessed are the Flock of his
Hands, and the Sheep of his Pasture, happy is the People that is in such a Case.

But who are Christ's Sheep?

Not all Professers, I beseech you take heed how you rest in Profession. It is
not Profession, but Converson that turns a man from a Swine to a Sheep. Let
none of you be deceived, nor flatter your selves, that because you beat the
Name of Christians, and do many things, and have escaped the open gross
pollutions of the World, therefore you are surely among the number of Christ's
true Sheep. All this you may attain to, and yet be but washed Swine; here must
be an inward deep and through and universal Change upon your Natures,
Dispositions, Inclinations, or else you are not Christ's Sheep.

In a word, If you will be put out of doubt whether you are his Sheep or not,
you must try it by this certain Mark that Christ sets upon all his Sheep, even
your Sanctification, you that will stand to the trial, answer me truly and
deliberately to these Questions. Do you hate every sin as the Sheep does the
Mire? Do you regard no Iniquity in your Hearts? Do you strive against, and
oppose all Sin, though it may seem never so necessary, never so natural to you,
or have you not you secret Haunts of evil? For every Swine will have his swill.
Do you abstain from sin out of fear, or out of dislike? Are You at peace with
no sin, or do you not hide some Iniquity as a sweet morsel under your Tongue?
Is there not some practice that You are not willing to know is a sin for fear
you should be forced to leave it? Do you love the Commandment that forbids your
sin, or do you not wish it out of the Bible, as that evil man wished God had
never made the Seventh Commandment? Again, how do You stand affected toward
Holiness? Do you love it? Do you choose it? Do You hunger and thirst after it,
and desire it more than any Temporal good? Have You chosen the way of Gods
Precepts, and had rather live Holily than be allowed to live in your sins? Do
You in your very Hearts, prefer a Godly strict Life in communion with and
conformity to God, before the greatest prosperity of the World? Do You chose
Holiness, not out of bare necessity, because You cannot go to Heaven without
it, but out of love to it, and from a deep sense that You have of the
surpassing Excellency, and Loveliness, and Beauty of it? If it be thus with
You, You are the Persons that the Lord Jesus has marked for his Sheep.

And now, Come ye Blessed, all that have this Mark upon You, come and
understand your happiness; You are marked out for preservation, and let it go
how it will with the rest; this I know, it shall go well with you that fear the
Lord, that fear before him. You are the separated Ones, the sealed Ones, Upon
whom the Angel has set the Seal of the Living God; and so you are redeemed
unto God from among men, being the First Fruits unto God, and unto the Lamb,
and have your Fathers Name written in your Foreheads.

Hear, O beloved Flock, I may give you the Salutation of the Angels, Hail, You
are highly favored of the Lord, Blessed are you among men; though you are but
poor and despised, and like little Benjamin among the thousands of Judah; You
carry away the the Blessing and the Privilege from all the rest. God has done
more for the least of you than for the whole World of Mankind besides, put all
their mercies together. Fear not little Flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure
to give you the Kingdom. Blessed are you of the Lord for yours is the Kingdom
of Heaven. All that the Scripture speaks of that Kingdom of Glory, that
Kingdom of Peace, of Righteousness, that Everlasting Kingdom, It speaks it
all to you. Behold your Inheritance, See that you believe. What know you not
your own selves? You are the Sons of God, Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven,
Joint Heirs with Christ the Lord of Glory. Do you believe this? Take heed you
make not God a Liar: His Word is nigh you: Have you not the Writings in your
hands? Do I speak any thing but what God has spoken? Shall I tell you of the
thing which shall be hereafter? Why thus it shall be. The Son of man shall come
in his Glory, and all his holy Angels with him: Then shall he sit upon the
Throne of his Glory, and he shall separate you as a Shepherd divides the Sheep
from the Goats, and he shall set you at his own right hand, Then shall the King
say, Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you.

Do you believe yet? Do you thoroughly believe? If so, then my work is done,
then I need not bid you Rejoice, nor bid you be Thankful, only believe. Do
this and do all Believe and you will rejoice with Joy unspeakeable, and full of
Glory. Believe and you will be Fruitful, and show your Faith by your works.
Believe and you will Love, for Faith works by love. In a word, keep these
things upon your Hearts by daily and lively Consideration, and this will bring
Heaven into your Souls, and engage you to all manner of holy Conversation, and
Godliness. This will mortify you to the World, the grand Enemy which I advise,
nay, I charge you to beware of. When Saul had gotten his Kingdom, he left off
taking Care for the Asses. O Remember yours is the Kingdom: What are You the
better that You have all this in your Bibles, if you do not weigh it by
frequent and serious Consideration, and ponder these sayings in your Hearts.
Beloved, I have written these things to you that your joy may be full. And now
Peace I leave with you, I am Christ's Ambassador to you, an Ambassador of Peace;
his Peace I pronounce unto you: In his Name I bless you. Farewell in the Lord,
I am

The fervent Well-willer of your Souls, JOS. ALLEINE.
Devises, June 29. 1666.
LETTER XXVII. [Of the Second coming of Christ.]
To the Faithful, and Beloved, the Servants of God in Taunton, Grace and Peace.

Loving and most dearly Beloved,
THough I trust my Bonds do preach to You, yet methinks that does not suffice
me, but the Conscience of my Duty, and the workings of my Heart toward You,
are still calling upon me to stir You up by way of Remembrance, notwithstanding
You know and be established in the present Truth. And if Paul do call upon so
great an Evangelist as Timothy, to Remember that Jesus was raised from the dead
according to the Gospel, why should not I be often calling upon my self, and
upon you, my dearly Beloved, to remember and meditate upon, and closely apply
the great and weighty Truths of the Gospel, which You have already received?
And in truth, I perceive in my self and you another manner of heat and warmth
in the insisting upon the plainest Principles of Christianity, and the setting
them home upon mine own heart and yours, than in dwelling upon any more
abstruse Speculations, in the clearest handling of which, the Preacher may seem
to be too much like the Winter nights, very bright, but very cold.

But now, my Brethren, I shall not with Paul call upon You so much to remember
the Resurrection of Christ, as the (...) of Christ: Behold, He comes in the
Clouds, and every Eye shall see him; Your Eyes and mine Eyes: and all the
Tribes of the Earth shall mourn because of him: But we shall lift up our heads,
because the Day of our Redemption draws nigh: This is the Day I look for, and
wait for, and have laid up all my hopes in. If the Lord return not, I (...), my
self undone, my Preaching is vain; and my suffering is vain, and the Bottom in
which I have entrusted all my hopes is for ever miscarried. But I know whom I
have trusted: We are built upon the Foundations of that sure Word, we are not
built upon the sand of Mortality. Nor do we run so as uncertainly, but the Word
of the Lord abides for ever, upon which word do we hope; How fully does this
word assure us that this same Jesus that is gone up into Heaven shall so
return, and that he shall appear the Second time unto Salvation, to them that
look for him. Oh, how sure is the thing! How near is the time! How Glorious
will his Appearing be!

The thing is sure, the Day is set, God has appointed 2 Day wherein he will
judge the World by that man whom he has (...); The manner of it is revealed,
Behold the Lord (...) with ten thousand of his Saints: The Attendants are
appointed and nominated. The Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all his
holy Angels with him. The thing You see is established, and every circumstance
is determined. How sweet are the words that dropped from the precious Lips of
our departing Lord! What generous Cordials has he left us in his parting
Sermons, and his last Prayer! And yet of all the rest those are the sweetest, I
will come again and receive you to my self, that where I am, there you may be
also. What need you any further witness: You have heard him your selves,
assuring you of his Return. Doubtless he cannot deceive you, you have not only
known, but seen and felt the Truth of his promises.

And will he come? Tremble then ye Sinners, Triumph ye Saints, Clap your hands
all ye that look for the Confolation of Israel. O Sinners, where will you then
appear? How will you look upon him whom you have pierced? Whom you have
persecuted? Whose great Salvation you have neglected and despised? Woe unto you
that ever you were born, unless you should then be found to be Newborn.

But you, O Children of the most high, how will you forget your travel, and be
melted into Joy. This is he in whom you have believed; whom having not seen
(...) loved. But how will Love and Joy be working (if I may so speak) with
pangs unutterable when you shall see him, and hear his sweet Voice commending,
applauding, approving of you, and owning you by Name before all the World.
Brethren, thus it must be, the Lord has spoken it. See that you stagger not at
the Promise, but give Glory to God by Believing.

Again, The Time is near, Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come.
Behold, I come quickly, says he: And again, The Lord is at hand: Sure You are,
that death cannot be far off. O Christian, thou do not know but the next
year, nay, possibly the next week, thou may be in Heaven. Christ will not
long endure thine absence, but will have thee up to him till the time of his
General appearing; when he will take us up altogether, and so we shall be ever
with the Lord.

Soul, believe thou this? If thou do indeed, what remains but that thou
should live a Life of Love and Praise; studying to do all the good thou
(...) till thou come to Heaven; and waiting all the days of thine appointed
time till thy change shall come. O my Soul. look out and long. O my Brethren,
be you as the Mother of (...) looking out at the Windows, and watching at the
Latices, saying, why are his Chariot-wheels so long a coming. Though the time
till you shall see him be but very short, yet love and longing make it seem
tedious.

My Beloved, comfort your hearts with these Words Look upon these things as the
greatest reallities, and let your affections be answerable to your
expectations. I would not have told you these things, unless I had believed
them; for it is for this hope that I am bound with this Chain. The Blessing of
the Holy Trinity be upon You, I am yours and will be. The God of Peace be with
you, I Rest,

Your Ambassador in Bonds, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, August. 5. 1666.
LETTER XXVIII. [Of the Love of Christ.]
To his most endeared Friends, the Servants of God in Taunton, Salvation:

Most dearly Beloved,
MEthinks my Breasts are not easy, unless I do let them forth unto you.
Methings there is somethink still to do, and my Weeks work is not ended, unless
I have given my Soul vent, and imparted something to the Beloved flock that I
have left behind. And Oh, that my Letters in my absence might be useful to you!
Assuredly it is my joy to serve You, and my Love to you is without
dissimulation: witness my twice lost Liberties, and my impaired Health, all
which I might have preserved, had it not been for my readiness to minister to
you.

But what do I speak of my Love? It is the Sense of the infinite Love of God
your Father that I would have to dwell upon you. Forget me, so you remember
him. Let me be very little, so he be very lovely in your Eyes. Let him be as
the Bucket that goes up, though I be as the Bucket that goes down. Bury me, so
that you do but set the Lord always before you. Let my name be written in the
dust, so his Name be written deep upon all your Souls.

O Lord, I am thy Servant, truly I am thy servant, Glorify thine own Name by
me, and thou shall have my hand to (...), that I will be content to be hid in
obscurity, and to disappear through the overcoming luster and brightness of thy
Glory.

Brethren, understand mine Office, I Preach not my self, but the Lord Jesus
Christ, and my self your Servant for Jesus sake. Give him your hearts, and I
have my Errand. I am but the Friend of the Bridegroom, and my Business is, but
to give you to understand his Love, and to gain your hearts unto him. He is an
Object worthy of my Commendations, and of your affections. His Love is worth
the writing of, and worth the thinking of, and worth the speaking of. O my
Brethren, never forget, I beseech you, how he loves You. He is in heaven, and
You are on earth; he is in Glory and you in Rags; he is in the shining Throne,
and you in dirty Flesh, and yet he loves you. His heart is infinitely tender
of you, even now while he is at the right hand of the Majesty on High. How
feelingly does he cry out at the hurt of his poor Members on Earth? Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me! Oh, of what quick Sense is the Sense of our dear Lord
unto us! when we are touched on Earth he feels it in Heaven.

Brethren, Christ is real in all that he speaks unto you: He is not like a
flourishing Lover, who fills up his Letters with Rhetoric, and has more care
of the dress of his Speech, than of the Truth. Who ever gave Demonstration of
the reallity of his Love at so dear a rate as Christ has done? Men do not use
to die in jest: Who will impoverish himself to enrich his Friend? and divest
himself of his honor to advance him? and debase himself to admiration below
his own degree to contract affinity with him? and all this but to make him
believe that he loves him.

Brethren, possess your very hearts with this, that Christ's love does go out
with infinite dearness toward you. Even now while he is in all his Glory, he
earnestly remembers you still. This is the High Priest that now is entered into
the Holy of Holies, does bear your names particularly, remembering every poor
believer by name. He bears your names, but where? upon his Breast Plate, upon
his Heart, says the Text, Exodus 28. 29. Ah Christians, I may salute you as the
Angel did Mary, Hail you that are highly favored: Blessed are you among men.
Sure your Lot is fallen in an happy place; What in the Bosom of Christ? yea,
and verily you may believe, and doubt not. I may apply that of Gabriel, O
Daniel, thou art greatly beloved, unto you; you are beloved indeed, to have
your Names written upon the very heart of Christ now he is in Glory.

Oh, let his Name be written then on your hearts. Do not write his Name in the
Sand, when he has written yours upon his own Breast! Do not forget him who has
taken such care, that while he is, he may never forget you, having recorded
your Names not only on his Book, but on his Flesh, and set you as a Seal upon
his Heart. He has you upon his heart, but why? For a memorial before the Lord
continually, so says the Text. Beloved, your Lord is so far from forgetting
you in all his Greatness and Glory, that he is gone into heaven on purpose,
there to present you before the Lord, that you may be always in remembrance
before him. O Beloved, Glory, yea, and Triumph in his Love. Doubtless it must
go well with us. Who shall condemn? It is Christ that died, and rose again, and
is now making Intercession. His Interest is potent. He is always present. Our
Advocate is never out of Court. Never did Cause miscarry in his hand. Trust you
safely in him. Happy is that man for whom he shall undertake to speak.

Oh, the Riches of Christ's Love! He did not think it enough to die for You. His
Love and care does not end with his natural Life on Earth, but he ever lives
to make Intercession for us. His Love is like his Life, ever, ever: Knowing no
remission in degree, nor intermission of time, no cessation of working, but is
ever, ever, in motion toward us.

But when shall I end, if I suffer my Soul to run out its length, and my
running Pen to enlarge according to the demensions of this boundless Field of
Divine Love? If the Pens of all the World were employed to write Volumes of
Love, if the Tongues of all the living were exercised in nothing else but
talking of this love; If all the Hearts that be were made up of Love; and all
the Powers and affections of the mind were turned into one, to wit the power of
Love, yet this were no less than infinitely too little, either to conceive, or
to express the greatness of Christ's Love.

O my dearly Beloved, may your Souls be swallowed up in this Love. Think, and
think while you will, you can never think how much You are beloved. See that ye
love again by way of Gratitude, though not of Requital: What though your Souls
be but narrow, and your powers but little, yet love him with all you have. Love
him with all your hearts, and all your strength. To the Meditations, and to the
Embraces of Divine Love I leave you, thinking it now not worth while to tell
You of my Love, Remaining

Yours in the Bonds of your most dear Lord Jesus, JOS. ALLEINE.
August 11. 1665.
LETTER XXIX. [Warning to Professors of their Danger.]
To the most Beloved People, the Servants of God in Taunton, Salvation:

Most dear Friends
MY top Joy is, that my Beloved is mine and I am his: but next to that I have
no Joy so great as that You are mine and I am yours, and You are Christ's. My
Relation to Christ is above all; He is my Life and my Peace, my Riches, and my
Righteousness: He is my Hope and my Strength, and mine Inheritance, and my
Rejoicing: In him will I please my self for ever, and in him will I glory. I
esteem my self most Happy and Rich, and safe in him, though of my self I am
nothing. In him I may boast without Pride, and glory without Vanity. Here is no
danger of being overmuch pleased; neither can the Christian exceed his Bounds
in overvaluing his own Riches, and Happiness in Christ. I am greatly pleased
with the Lot that is fallen to me: The Lord has dealt bountifully with me, and
none shall stop this my confidence of boasting in Christ. But as my Lot in him
is above all, so I will assure You, it is no small content to me, that my Lot
is fallen with You. And though many difficulties have fallen to my Lot among
You (for I have broken my health and lost my Liberty once and again, for Your
sakes) yet none of these things move me. I wish nothing more then to spend and
to be spent upon the service of your Faith. I bless the Lord for it as an
invaluable Mercy, that ever he called me to be an Ambassador of the Lord Jesus
Christ to You-wards. In this station I desire to approve my self to him, and
that I am withdrawn from my Work for a season, it is but that I may return to
you refreshed, and enabled for my Work among You. You may not think that I have
forgotten You, and consulted my own ease and pleasure: but if God prosper my
Intentions, I shall be found to have been daily serving You in this Retirement.
I will assure You, I am very tender of preserving all that little strength that
God does add to me entirely for Your sakes: being resolved not so much as once
to broach the Vessel till I draw forth to You. I bless the Lord, I am in great
tranquillity here in this Town, and walk up and down the Corporation without any
Questioning me. Only it has pleased the Lord to add to my Affliction since my
coming, by taking away my dear Father, the day of whose glorious Translation
was the day after my arriving here. But I bless the Lord, I do believe and
expect the return of the Redeemer with all his Saints, and the most glorious
Resurrection of my own dead Body with all Believers: and this makes me to rest
in Hope, and fills me with unspeakable more Joy than the death of my self or
any other Saint can with grief. And now I make it my business to be rendered
serviceable to you; and do by this, return You my hearty thanks for your
earnest Prayers and Intercessiors to God in my behalf, for it is he that must
do the Cure: I seem to my self to be ritired to this place, as a Vessel rent
and shattered and torn in the Service, that is come to recruit in the Harbor:
And here I am as it were rigging, and repairing, and Victualling to put forth
again in the Service: which I shall do with the first Wind, as soon as I am
ready. What is my life unless I am serviceable? And though I must for the
present forbear my wonted Labor, yet I shall not cease to exhort You, and call
upon you while I am absent from You, to stand fast, and to grow up in your holy
Faith.

Be warned, my dearly Beloved, that You fall not upon these dangerous Rocks
upon which so many Professors have been split.

There are three Things which I beseech you carefully to beware of.

First, Lest while Christ is in your mouths, the world run away with your
hearts: There is many a seeming Professor that will be found a mere Idolater?
Many a Soul goes down to Hell in this sin, in the midst of his Profession, and
never (...) it till it be too late. Remember, I beseech You, that the Oxen, the
Farm, Wife, Merchandise, all of them lawful Comforts, did as effectually keep
men from a sound and saving closing with Christ, as the vilest lufts of the
worst of men. Whatever You find your hearts very much pleased in, and in love
with, among these earthly Comforts, set a mark upon that thing, and remember
that there lies your greatest danger. What you love most, you must fear most;
and think often with your selves, This, if any thing, is like to be my ruin.
Oh, the multitudes of Professors that perish for ever, by the secret hand of
this mortal Enemy, I mean the overvaluing of Earthly things. The hearers
compared to the thorny Ground, did not openly fall away and cast off their
Profession, as the stony ground did; but while others withered away, the blade
of Profession was as green and fresh as ever; and yet their inordinate
affection to the things of this life, did secretly undo all at last. Little do
most Professors think of this, while they please themselves in their estates,
while they delight themselves so freely in their Children, in their Wives, in
their habitations and possessions; that these be the things that are like to
undo them for ever. How little is that Scripture thought of, which speaks so
dreadfully to worldly Professors; Love not the world, for if any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. Are there not many among us, who
though they do keep up Prayer, and other holy Duties; yet the strength and
vigor of their hearts goes out after earthly things? And those are their
chief Care and their chief Joy. Such must know, and they are none of Christ's,
and they were better to understand it now, and seek to be renewed by
Repentance, then hereafter when there shall be no place for Repentance.

Secondly, Lest while iniquity does abound, your love to Christ does wax cold.
Remember what an Abomination Laodicoa was to Christ, because she grow so
lukewarm; and what a controversy he had with Ephesus, a sound Church, because
she did but slacken and grow more remiss in her love. A Friend is born for
Adversity; and now is the time, if you will prove the sincerity of your love
and friendship to Jesus Christ, by following him zealously, resolvedly, fully,
now he is most rejected and opposed.

Thirdly, Lest you keep up a (...) and fruitless Profession, without
Progression: See to it my Brethren, that You be not only Professors, but
proficients: Many Professors think all is well because they keep on in the
Exercises of Religion; but alas! You may keep on Praying, and hearing all the
Week long, and yet be not one jot the further. Many there are that keep going,
but it is like the Horse in the Mill, that is going all day, but yet is no
further than when he first began. Nay, it often times happens in the Trade of
Religion, as it does in Trading in the World, where many keep on in Trading
still, till for want of care and caution, and examining their accounts whether
they go forward or backward, they Trade themselves out of all. Oh, look to it
my Brethren, that none of You rest in the doing of Duties, but examine what
comes of them. Otherwise as You may Trade your selves into Poverty, so you may
hear and pray your selves into hardness of heart, and desperate security, and
formality. This was the very Case of wretched Laodicea, who kept up the Trade
of Religious Duties, and verily thought that all was well, because the Trade
still went on, and that she was increased in spiritual Goods, and in a gaining
way: but when her accounts were cast up at last, all comes to nothing, and ends
in wretchedness, poverty, and nakedness. Most dear Brethren, I wish and pray
for the prosperity of you all: but above all, I wish your Souls prosperity,
with which, after my most dear Loves to You all, having already exceeded the
bounds of an Epistle, I commend You to the living God, Remaining

Your fervent well wisher and Ambassador in Christ. JOS. ALLEINE.
Devises, June 22. 1666.
LETTER XXX. [An Admiration of the Love of God.]
To the loving and most Dearly Beloved, the Servants of God in Taunton,
Salvation.

My most dear Friends,
I Love you, and long for you in the Lord, and I am weary with forbearing that
good and blessed Work that the Lord has committed to me, for the furtherance
of your Salvation. How long Lord, how long shall I dwell in silence! How long
shall my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth! When will God open my Lips,
that I may stand up and praise him? But it is my Fathers good pleasure yet to
keep me in a total disability of publishing his Name among you; unto him my
soul shall patiently subscribe. I may not, I cannot complain that he is hard to
me, or uses me with Rigor: I am full of the Mercies of the Lord, yea, Brimful
and running over, And shall I complain? Far be it from me.

But though I may not murmur, methinks I may mourn a little, and sit down and
wish, O if I may not have a Tongue to speak, would I had but Hands to Write,
that I might from my Pen drop some heavenly Councels to my Beloved People.
Methinks my feeble Fingers do even Itch to Write unto you, but it cannot be,
alas my Right Hand seems to have forgot her cunning, and has much ado with
trembling to lift the Bread unto my Mouth. Do you think you should have had so
little to show under my Hand, to bear witness of my Care for you, and Love to
you if God had not shook my Pen as it were out of my Hand? But all that he does
is done well, and wisely, and therefore I submit. I have purposed to borrow
Hands wherewith to Write unto my Beloved rather then to be silent any longer.

But where shall I begin, or when should I end? If I think to speak of the
Mercies of God toward me, or mine enlarged affections toward you, methinks I
feel already how strait this Paper is like to be, and how insignificant my
Expressions will be found, and how insufficient all that I can say will prove
at last to utter what I have to tell you; but shall I say nothing because I
cannot utter all, this must not be neither.

Come then all ye that fear the Lord, come and I will tell you what he has
done for my Soul. O help me to love that precious Name of his, which is above
all my Praises. O love the Lord all ye his Saints, and fear before him!
magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together! he has
remembered my low estate, because his Mercy endures for ever. O blessed be you
of the Lord, my dearly Beloved, O thrice blessed may you be for all your
Remembrances of me before the Lord, you have wrestled with the Lord for me, you
have wrestled me out of the very Jaws of Death it self: O the strength of
Prayer! Surely it is stronger than Death. See that You even honor the power
and prevalency of Prayer: Oh be in Love with Prayer, and have high and
venerable thoughts of it. What Distresses, Diseases. Deaths can stand before
it? Surely I live by Prayer, Prayer has given a Resurrection to this Body of
mine, when Physicians, and Friends had given up their hopes.

Ah my dearly Beloved, methinks it delights me to tell the Story of your Love,
how much more of the Love of God toward me. I have not forgotten, O my dearly
Beloved, I have not forgotten your tender Love in all my Distresses. I remember
your kindness to me in my Bonds, when once and again I was delivered up to a
Prison for your sakes. I remember with much delight, how You refreshed and
comforted me in my Tribulations, how open your hearts were, and your hands were
not straightned neither, for I was in want of nothing. I may not, I must not
forget what painful Journies you took to visit me, when in places Remote the
hand of the Lord had touched me, and though my long Sickness was almost
incredible Expensive to me, yet your supplies did not a little lighten my
Burden.

And though I put it last, yet I do not mind it least, that You have been so
ready in returning Praises to God in my behalf, your Thanksgiving to God, my
dear Brethren, do administer abundant cause to me of my giving thanks unto You.

And now my Heart methinks is big to tell You a little of my Love to You,
surely You are dear unto me; but though it be sweet to tell the Story of Love,
yet in this I will restrain my self. For I fear least as the Wise man says of
the beginning of strife, so I should find of the beginning of Love, that it is
like the letting forth of the Water; and the rather I do forbear, because I
hope you have better Testimonies than Words, to bear Witness herein unto You.

But if I sing the Song of Love, O let Divine Love overcarry the Praise; I
found my self in straights when I began to speak of the natural Love between my
dear People, and an unworthy Minister of Christ to them; and it seemed that all
that I have said was much too little, but now I have to speak of the Love God,
it seems to be by far too much.

O infinite Love never to be Comprehended, but ever to be Admired, Magnified,
and Adored by every Creature! O let my Heart be filled, let my Mouth be filled,
let my Papers be filled, ever ever filled with the thankful Commemoration of
this matchless Love. O turn your Eyes from other Objects! O Bury me in
Forgetfulness, and let my Love be no more mentioned nor had in remembrance
among You, so that You may be thoroughly possessed and inflamed with the Love of
God. This, my Beloved, this is that Love which is ever to be Commended, and
Extolled by You. See that You study this Love, fill your Souls with wonder,
and feast your Souls with joy, and be ravished with rich contentment in this
Divine Love: Take your daily walk, and lose your selves in the Field of Love:
Drink, O Friends, yea drink abundantly, O Beloyed, fear no excess. O that your
Souls may be drencht and drowned in the Love of Christ, till You can every one
say with the ravished Spouse, I am sick of Love. Marvel not that I wander here,
and seem to forget the bounds of a Letter, this Love obliges me, Yea, rather
constrains me. Who in all the Earth should admire and commend this Love if I
should not? I feel it, I taste it, the sweet Savor thereof Reviveth my Soul,
it is Light to mine Eyes, and Life co mine Heart; the warm Beams of this
blessed Sun, O how have they Comforted me, Ravished, and Refreshed me both in
Body and Soul! My benumbed Limbs, my withered Hands, my feeble Knees, my Bones
quite naked of Flesh do yet again Revive through the Quickening, Healing, and
Raising influence of Divine Grace and Love. Now my own Hands can feed me, and
my own feet can bear me, my Appetlte is quick, my Sleep comfortable, and God is
pleased to give some increase continually though by insensible Degrees; And
shall not I praise that Love and Grace that has done all this for me? Yea,
what is this to all I have to tell You? My Heart is enlarged, but I told You
Paper could not hold what I have to speak of the Goodness of the All-Gracious
God, in which I live. I am forced to end, least you should not bear my length.
My dearly Beloved, I send my Heart unto You, divide my Love amongst you all,
and particularly tender it to your Reverend and Faithful Pastor, whose
Presence with you, and Painfulness, and Watchfulness over you, and Zeal and
Courage for you in so dangerous a time, is matter of my great Joy and
Thanksgivings unto God. The Grace of our Lord Jesus be with you all. Fare you
well in the Lord, I remain

Your unworthy Minister and servent Well wisher in the Lord, JOS. ALLEINE.

LETTER XXXI.
To the most endeared People, the Inhabitants of Taunton, Salvation:

Most dearly Beloved and longed for, my Joy and Crown,
MY Hearts desire and Prayer for you is, that you may be saved. This is that
which I have been Praying and Studying, and Preaching for these many Years; and
this is the end of my Venturing, and Suffering, and Writing at this present
time. God that knows all things, he knows that this is my (...), Oh that I
could but come (...) Souls! And that this is the Pride and the Gain that I
(...) I might (...) Souls. I seek (...) other Gifts, give (...) your Hearts,
let me but part between your sins and You (...) me but to save You; give me
(...) to carry you (...) Jesus Christ, and I will not ask you any more. I will
(...) You (...), I will suffer for You thankfully, so I may but save You. Do
not wonder why I follow you (...) I call upon you so frequently (...); not my
(...) be grievous to You, all this is but to save You. Christ did not bethink
his Blood, and shall I bethink my Breath, or Ink, too (...) in order to your
Salvation (...) is it, that any of You should miscarry (...), under the power
of Ignorance, (...) a profane Negligence, or a formal and (...) Profession of
strict God liness.

Beloved, I am afraid of You lest (as to many of You) I have run in vain. I
cannot but most thankfully acknowledge, that (considering the Paucity of those
that are saved) there are not a few of You who are the Joy of your Ministers,
and the Glory of Christ. But it cannot be dissembled, that far the greater
number give little ground to Hope, that they are in the state of Salvation. And
must not this be a pinching thought to a compassionate Teacher, to think, that
he cannot for his heart persuade men, but that the most of them will wilfully
throw away themselves? Is it not a woeful sight, to behold the Devils driving a
great part of our miserable Flocks (as they did once the Herd of Swine, the
Keepers themselves amazed looking on.) I say, driving them violently down the
hill, till they be choked in the Water, and drowned irrecoverably in the Gulf
of endless Perdition? Ah miserable spectacle! What through the wilful blindness
of some, what through the (...) and sensuality of others, what through the
halving, and Cold, and customary Religion of others, how great a number of our
poor Flocks, is (...) like to carry utterly away from us, after all that has
been done to save (...)?

(...) I (...) but call after them. Hearken unto me, Oye Children. How long
will (...), and follow (...) Leasing, and trust in lying Words? As the Lord
(...) You are lost, except you turn: Wherefore turn your (...) and live ye. Ah
how (...) you! How it (...) to (...) to you? Hear, O Sinners, hear. See (...)
the merciful Savior of the World (...) forth his hands all the day long, and
(...) Wings, and (...) you as a Hen does her (...)! hear you not the (...) of
his Bowels? He has (...) of You; Yet How do his) Compassions melt over
perishing Sinners? his he (...) is (...) within him, And shall not this (...)
your (...)? his (...) are kindled together; and that not this (...) You (...)?
(...), (...) at the Door and (...) O man will thou keep (...) the (...), and
lodge (...) as in ^ 42. He cries to them, Prove. 1. 21, 22, 23. How long ye
simple ones, will you love (...)? Will you not be made clean? When shall it
once be? Why will you die? Turn you at my Reproof Behold, I wll pour out my
Spirit upon you. Sinner, art thou not yet melted? Oh come in at his loving
Calls, Come out from thy (...): Touch the Scepter of Grace and live: Why
should thou (...) dashed in (...) by his Iron Rod? Kiss the Son: Why
should thou (...) in the way? Set up Jesus as thy King, lest he count thee
for his Enemy, because thou would not that he should Reign (...) thee, and so
thou be called forth and slain before him. Oh how dreadful will this Case be,
to perish under the pitiful Eyes of his Mercy, and to (...) by the hand of a
(...)! Oh double hell, to have thy Redeemer become thine (...)! And the hand
that was so long stretched forth to save thee, to be now stretched forth to
slay thee! (...) the merciful heart of Christ himself hardened against thee, so
as that he should call thee forth, and with his own hand hew thee in pieces,
(as Samuel did Agag before the Lord.)

But I have been too too long in prefacing to what I intended forthwith to have
fallen upon: Indeed I am apt to run out in matters that do so nearly touch upon
your greatest (...).

Beloved, I despair of ever bringing You to Salvation, (...) Sanctification: Or
possessing You with Happiness, without perfwading You to holiness. God knows I
have not the least hope ever to see one of your Faces in Heaven, except You be
Converted and Sanctified, and Exercise your selves (...) Godliness. This is
that I drive at. (...) You study to further (...), and Family Godliness.!

1. Personal Godliness. Let it be your (...) care to set up Christ in your
Hearts. See that you make all your worldly Interests to stoop to him, that You
be (...) and (...) devoted unto him. If you wilfully, and deliberately, and
ordinarily harbor any sin, You are undone. See that You unfeignedly take the
Laws of Christ, as the rule of your words, thoughts, and actions; and subject
your (...), man, members and mind faithfully to him. If You have a true respect
to all Gods Commandments, you are (...) at heart. Oh study to get the image and
impress of Christ upon you within. Begin with your hearts, (...) you build
without a foundation. Labor to get a saving change within, or else all
external performances will be to no purpose. And then study to show forth the
power of (...) in the life. Let piety be your first and great business, (...)
the highest point of Justice, to give God his due. Beware that none of you be a
Prayerless person: for that is a most certain discovery of a Christless, and a
graceless person, of one that is a very stranger to the fear of God. Suffer not
your Bibles to gather dust. See that you converse daily with the Word. That man
can never lay claim to Blessedness, whose delight is not in the law of the
Lord. Let meditation and self-examination be your daily exercise, else the
Papists, yea the Pagans, will condemn us. That the short questions, which I
have given you as a help to self-examination, may be daily perused by you, is
the matter of my passionate request unto you. If ever you come to any growth in
holiness, without the constant use of this practice, I am grossly deceived. And
therefore I would beseech, yea, even charge you, by the Lord, that you would
daily examine your selves by these questions, till you have found a better help
to this duty.

But Piety, without Charity, is but the half of christianity, or rather impious
hypocrisy, We may not divide the Tables. See therefore that you do justly, and
love mercy, and let Equity, and Charity run like an even thread, throughout all
your dealings. Be you temperate in all things, and let Chastity, and Sobriety,
be your undivided companions. Let truth and Purity, Seriousness and modesty,
Heavenliness and gravity be the constant ornaments of your speech. Let patience
and humility, simplicity and sincerity shine out in all the parts of your
conversations. See that you forget and forgive wrongs, and requite them with
kindness as you would be found children of the most high. Be merciful in your
(...), and put the most favorable construction upon our Brethrens carriage
that their actions will reasonably bear. Be slow in promising, punctual in
fulfilling. Let meekness and innocence, Affableness, Yieldingness, and
Courtesy, commend your conversations to all men. Let none of your Relations
want that love and loyalty, that reverence and duty, that tenderness, care, and
vigilance, which their several places and capacities call for. This is
throughout godliness. I charge you before the most high God, that none of you
be found a swearer, or a liar, a lover of evil company, or a scoffer, or
malicious, or covetous, or a drunkard, or a (...), unrighteous in his dealing,
unclean in his living, or a quareller, or a thief, or backbiter, or a railer:
for I denounce unto you from the living God, that (...) and damnation is the
end of all such, Prove. 13. 20. Jam. 5. 12. Rev. 21. 8. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Gal. 5.
19, 20, 21.

2. Family Godliness. He that has set up Christ in his heart, will be sure to
study to set him up in his house. Let every family with you be a Christian
Church; every house, a house of Prayer; every household, a household of faith.
Let every householder say, with Joshua, I, and my house will serve the Lord, and
resolve with David, Psalm. 121. 2. I will walk within my house, with a perfect
heart. Let me press upon you a few duties, which I have been long harping upon,
but Alas (I speak it to your shame) with many (too too many) of you, to little
purpose in general.

First, Let Religion be in your families, not as a matter by the by, (to be
minded at leisure, when the world will give you leave) but the standing
business of the house. Let them have your prayers as duly as their meals, is
there any of your families, but have time for their taking food? wretched man!
can thou find time to eat in, and not time to Pray in?

Secondly, Settle it upon your Hearts, that your Souls are bound up in the
Souls of your Family. They are committed unto you, and (if they be lost through
your (...)) will be required at your hands; Sirs, if you do not, you shall know
that the charge of Souls is a heavy charge, and that the Blood of Souls is a
heavy guilt. O man, have thou a charge of Souls to answer for, and do thou
not yet bestir thy self for them, that their Blood be not found in thy Skirts?
Will thou do no more for immortal Souls, than thou will do for thy Beasts that
perish? What do thou do for thy children, and Servants? Thou providest Meat
and Drink for (...) agreeable to their Natures, and do thou not the (...) thy
Beasts? Thou give them Medicines, and (...) them when they be Sick, and do
thou not so much (...) Swine? More particularly.

1. Let the solemn Reading of the Word, Isa. 34. 16. Joh. 5. 31 and singing of
Psalms, be your Family Exercises, Psalm. 118. 15, See Christ singing with his
Family, viz. his Disciples, Mat. 26. 30, Tuke 9. 18.

2. Let every person in your Families be duly called to an account of their
profiting by the word heard or read, as they be about doing your own
Businesses. This is a Duty of consequence unspeakable, and would be a means to
bring those under your charge, to remember and profit by what they recive. See
Christ's Example in calling his Family to an account. Mat. 16. 11, 13, 15.

33. Often take and account of the Souls under your care concerning their
Spiritual estates. Herein you must be Followers of Christ, Mat. 13. 10, 36, 51.
Mark. 4. 10, 11. Make enquiry into their conditions, insist much upon the
sinfulness and misery of their natural estate, and upon the necessity of
Regeneration and Conversion in order to their Salvation. Admonish them gravely
of their sins, encourage beginnings. Follow them earnestly, and let them have
no quiet for You, till You see them in a saving change. This is a duty of high
consequence. but (I am afraid) fearfully neglected by some that are Godly. Does
not Conscience say, Thou art the man?

4. Look to the strict sanctisying of the Sabbath, by all of your Households,
Exodus 20. 10. Lev. 23. 3. Many poor Families have little time else. O improve
but your Sabbath Days as diligently in laboring for knowledge, and doing your
Makers work, as You do the other days in doing your own work, and I doubt not,
but you may come to some proficiencie.

5. Let the Morning and Evening Sacrifice of solemn Prayer, be daily offered up
in all your Families. Psalm. 92. 1, 2. Exodus 30. 7, 8. Luke 1. 9, 10. Beware
they be not found among the Families that call not upon Gods Name; for why
should there be wrath from the Lord upon your Families? Jer. 10. 25, O
miserable Families without God in the World, that are without Family Prayer!
What have You so many Family (...), Family wants, Family Mercies, what and yet
no Family Prayers? How do You pray with all Prayer and Supplication, if You do
not with Family Prayer? Say not, I have no time. What have thou all thy time on
purpose to serve God, and save thy Soul, and is this that for which (...) find
no time. Find but a heart, and I will find time. Pinch out of your meals and
sleep, rather then want for Prayer. Say no my business will not give leave.
This is thy greatest business, to save thy self, and the Souls committed to
thee. Besides a (...) will be no let. In a word, the Blessing of all is to be
got by Prayer, Jer. 29. 11, 12. 2 (...). 29. And what is thy business without
Gods Blessing? Say not, I am not able. Use thy one Talent, and God will
increase it, Mat. 25 24, etc. Helps are to be had till thou art better able.
But if there be no other remedy, thou (...) join with thine (...) Neighbor.
God has special regard to joint Prayer, Jam. 5. 14. to 19. Acts 12. 5. to 12.
(...) Cor. 1. 11. and therefore You must improve Family advantages for the
performing of it.

6. Put every one in your Families upon private Prayer. Observe whether they do
perform it. Get them the help of a form, if they need it, till they are able to
go without. Direct them how to Pray, by minding them of their sins, wants, and
mercies, the materials of Prayer. This was the practice of John, and of Jesus,
Luke 11. 1, 2.

7. Set up Catechizing in your Families, at the least once every week. It was
my parting; dying request, that you would set up and maintain this duty in your
families. Have you done it all accordingly? Cannot your consciences witness,
cannot your families (...) you have not? Well, I thought my parting words would
have done something with you: I hoped the fervent request of a dying Minister,
would have prevailed for such a small matter with you. What, to this day
without solemn catechizing in your houses? (...), what a discouragement to your
teacher is this? Brethren, shall I yet prevail with you? Will you reject me now
also? O let me persuade you, before you take off your eyes from (...) lines, to
resolve to set upon the constant exerise of this duty. Surely I have done and
suffered more for you then this comes to: will you deny me? I (...) you, let me
find, if ever God do bring me again to visit your houses, that the words of a
suffering Minister have some power with you. I have sent you an help on
purpose: what shall all my persuasions be but speaking in the wind? and all my
pains but laboring in the fire? Beloved you have no dread of the Almighties
charge, That you should teach these things diligently to your children, and
talk of them as you sit in your houses, etc. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8. 9. and 4. 9, 10.
and 11. 18, 19, 20. and train them up in the way they should go, Prove. 22. 6.
the Margin. Has God so commended Abraham, that he would teach his children and
household, Genesis 18. 19. and that he had so many instructed servants, Genesis 14.
14. the Margin and given such a promise to him thereupon, and will not you put
in for a share, neither in the praise, nor the promise? Has Christ honored
catechizing with his presence, Luke 2. 46. and will not you own it with your
practice? Say not, they are careless, and will not learn. What have you your
Authority for, if not to use it for God, and the good of their souls? You will
call them up, and force them to do your work; and should you not, at least be
as zealous in putting them upon Gods work? Say not, they are dull and are not
capable. If they be dull, God requires of you the more pains and patience, but
so dull as they are, you will make them learn how to work; and can they not
learn as well how to live! Are they capable of the mysteries of your trade, and
are they not capable of the plain principles of Religion? well as ever you
would see the growth of Religion, the cure of ignorance, the remedy of
profaneness, the downfall of error, fulfill you my joy in going through with this
duty.

I have been too long already, and yet I am afraid my letter will be ended
before my work be done, how loath am I to leave you, before I have prevailed
with you to set to the work, to which you are here directed, will you pass your
promise, will you give me your hands? Oh that you would! you cannot do me a
greater pleasure. Ask what you will of me; See if I will not do as much for
you. Oh that your Families might be a joy to me, as that twice noble Ladies to
John; who professes he had no greater joy, then to find her children walking in
the truth Beloved why should you hot give the hand one to another, and mutually
engage each to other, for more vigorous and diligent endeavors, in promoting
family godliness. I must tell you, God looks for more than ordinary from you,
in such a day as this. He expects that you should do, both in your hearts, and
in your houses, somewhat more than ever, under these his Extraordinary
dispensations. My most dearly beloved mine own howels in the Lord, will you
satisfy the longings of a traveling Minister? Will you answer the Calls of
Divine Providence? Would you remove the Incumbent, or prevent the impending
Calamities? Would you plant Nurseries for the Church of God? Would you that God
should build your Houses, and bless your Substance? would you that your
Children should bless you? that Your Father should bless You? Oh, then set up
Piety in your Families as ever you would be blessed, or be a blessing, let your
Hearts and your Houses be the Temples of the living God, in which his worship
(according to all the forementioned directions) may be, with constancy
reverently performed. Pardon my prolixity, and importunity in so earnest
pursuing of You; I am yet afraid I have done too soon, and shall end without my
Erranil. The Lord God persuade you. To him I turn me, for I am well assured, he
can prevail with you:

O Father of Spirits, that has set me over thy Flock to watch for their Souls,
as one that must give an account. I have long studied thy Will, and taught in
thy Name, and do unfeiguedly bless thee; that any have believed my Report. I
have given unto them the Words which thou gave me, and they have received
them. I have manifested thy Name unto them, and they have kept thy Word. And
now I am no more with them, but I come unto thee: Holy Father keep them through
thine own Name; for they are thine. As they have kept the Word of thy Patience,
so keep thou them in the hour of Temptation. They are but a flock, a little and
a helpless flock: but thou art their Shepherd, suffer them not to want. Do
thou feed them, and fold them. Let thy Rod and thy Staff comfort them, and let
not the Beasts of prey fall upon them, to the spoiling of their Souls.

But what shall I do for them that will not be gathered. I have called after
them, but they would not answer, I have charged them in thy Name, but they
would not hear; I have studied to speak perswasively to them, but I cannot
prevail. Then I said, I have labored in vain; I have spent my strength for
naught, and in vain, yet I cannot give them over, much less may I give thee
over. Lord persuade Japhet, to dwell in the Tents of Shem. Lord, compel them to
come in, and lay the hands of mercy upon them, as thou did on lingering Lot,
and bring them forth, that they may escape for their lives and not be consumed.
Lord, I pray thee open their eyes that they may see, and lay hold upon their
hearts by thy Omnipotent Grace. Do thou turn them, and they shall be turned: O
bring back the miserable (...) and suffer not the Enemy of Mankind to drive
away the most of the flock before mine eyes, and to (...) the fruitless
endeavors of thy Laborers, and boast over them, that he can do more with them,
though he seek to ruin them, than all the beseechings, counsels, (...) charges
of thy Servants that seek to save them. Lord, if I could find out any thing
that would pierce them, that would make its way into their hearts, thou (...)
if would (...) it. But I have been many years pleading thy Cause in vain. O let
not these endeavors also be lost. O God, find out every ignorant, every
profane (...), every prayerless Soul, and every prayerless family, and
convince them of their miserable condition, while without thee in the world.
Set thy Image upon their Souls, set up thy Worship in their Families. Let not
pride, ignorance, or slothfulness, keep them in neglect of the means of
Knowledge. Let thine eyes be over the place of my desires for good, from one
end of the year to the other end thereof. Let every House therein be a Seminary
of Religion, and let those that cast their eyes upon these lines, find thee
sliding in by the secret influence of thy Grace into their hearts, and
irresistably engaging them to do thy pleasure. Amen.

Amen.
LETTER XXXII. [He that endures to the end shall be saved.]
To the Loving and Well-Beloved, the Servants of Christ in Huntington, Grace
and Peace:

Most dear Christians,
I Do thankfully acknowledge, both to God, and You, that I am many ways obliged
to love, and serve you: and surely, when the Lord shall turn our Captivity, I
will (through his Grace) endeavor to show my self thankful, wherein I may,
unto You. I am the more sensible of your great love, because I cannot be
insensible, how little I have deserved such a Mercy, and how little I have been
able to do, to oblige You. Able, I say, for I am sure. I have been willing to
be much more serviceable to you: But now, Letters and Prayers are all that I
have for you; of these I shall be ready to be prodigal. Your love to me has
been very bountiful: I may not forget the liberal Supplies that you have sent,
many of you, even out of your poverty to me; and not to me only, but to the
whole Family of my Brethren, and Fellow Prisoners, who do all bless you, and
send by these with me, their thankful respects unto you. I servently pray, and
do not doubt to speed, that you may reap in Grace and Glory, what you have sown
to us in bounty. Verily, there is a reward for the Righteous. Ah, how sure is
it! And how great and how near is it? Come on, my dear Brethren, and
Fellow-Travellers. Stir up your selves, and set to your race. See that you
loiter not, but speed apace in your holy Course. What tire by the way, or think
of looking back, when Heaven is the prize? God forbid. To him that sows
righteousness there shall be a sure reward. What though it should seem slow? As
long as it is so sure, and so great, never be discouraged: In the end you shall
reap, if you faint not. Wait but a while, and you shall have a blessed Harvest.
The Lord speaks to the Christian, as he to his Creditor in another Case. Have
patience with me, and I will pay thee all. Oh now for Faith and Patience! How
safely, how sweetly would these carry us to our Home and Harbor, through all
difficulties. Brethren beloved, be ye followers of them, who through Faith and
Patience inherit the Promises. It is want of Patience that undoes the world.
Patience, I mean, not so much in the bearing the inflicted evil, as in waiting
for the deferred good. If the Reward of Religion would be presently in hand,
who would not be Religious? Who but the deceitful world count it doubtful and
distant; and they are all for something in hand, and so take up with a present
felicity. The Lord deals all upon trust, and upon that account is but little
dealt with. You must have Patience, and be content to plow and sow, and wait
for the return of all at the Harvest, when this life is ended. They that like
not Religion upon these terms, may see where they can mend their Markets. But
you, my Brethren, be steadfast, unmovable, abounding in the work of the Lord,
for as much as you know your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. Wait a
little, there is but a short life between you, and the blessed inheritance of
the endless Glory. Ah wretched unbelievers! How worthy are you to be shut for
ever out of the Kingdom, that did so undervalue all the Glory, that God had
promised, as not to count it sufficient to pay them for a little waiting?
Beloved, lift up your Eyes and behold your Inheritance, the good Land that is
beyond the Jordan, and that goodly Mountain. The Promises are a Map of Heaven.
Do but view it believingly and considerately, as it is darkly drawn there, and
tell me, what think you of that worthy portion, that goodly Heritage? Will not
all this make you (...), for your stay? Why then act like Believers. Never
bethink the pains, nor expenses of Religion. (...) he shall come off a loser.
What though You are much upon the spending (...)? I might tell you, God ^ but I
would have you ^ that God has [laid out] upon You; but who can tell what he
has [laid up] for them that fear him? And will you miss of all, for want of
Patience? God forbid. Behold the Husbandman waits for the precious fruits of
the Earth, and has long patience, till he receive the early and later rain. Be
ye also patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.
What, shall the Husbandman have more patience for the Fruits of the Earth, than
you for the precious fruits of your Faith? The Husbandman has no such
certainty is (...) he has but a probability of an harvest, and yet he has
(...), he is content to venture. He is at great pains, and much cost, he is
still laying out, and has nothing coming in, and yet he is content to wait for
his reimbursement, till the Corn be grown. But your harvest is must sure, as
sure as the irrevocable Decree, the infallible Promise, the immutable Oath of a
God, a God that cannot lie, that knows no place for Repentance, can make it.
Again, the Husbandman has no such increase to look for as you. Oh, if he were
but sure, that every Corn would bear a Crown, with what exultation and joy,
rather than patience, would he go through all his cost and labor. Why,
Brethren, such is a Believers increase. Every Grain shall produce a Crown, and
every Tear shall bring forth a Pearl; and every minute in pains or Prayers, an
age of Joy and Glory. Besides, the Husbandman has long patience, and will not
you have a little patience? It is not long patience that God does expect of
you: for behold, the coming of the Lord draws nigh. Will the Garrison yield
when relief is at hand? Or the Merchant sit down and give up his hopes, when
within sight of the Harbor? Or will the Husbandman (...), and give up all for
lost, when he sees the fields even white for the Harvest? Or shall he do more
for a crop of Corn, than you will do for a crop of Glory? Far be it. Behold the
Judge is even at Door. The Lord is at hand. He comes quickly, and his reward
is with him. He comes with the Crown in his hand, to (...) upon the head of
patience. Therefore cast not away your confidence, which has great recompense
of reward. The Prisoners of the Lord, your Brethren in the Patience of Jesus,
can tell you, it is good suffering for such a Master. We must tell you, as they
said to our Lord in another case, He is worthy for whom you should do this. God
is beyond measure gracious to us here. He shines bright into our prison,
blessed be his Name. He waters us from heaven, and earth. As, we trust, you
forgot not the poor Prisoners, when you pray, so we would that many
thanksgivings should abound in our behalf. And Prayer being the only Key that
can open our Prisons. we trust that you will not slack, nor let your hands be
heavy, but pray and not faint: and doubtless Prayer will do it. But I am apt to
pass the bounds of a Letter, yet I promise my self now (...) pardon for lo
loving a trespass. With my dear Loves to you all, I commend you to God, and the
word of his Grace. Though I have done writing, yet not praying. I will promise,
where my Letter ends, my Prayers shall begin. Farewell, dear Brethren: Fare you
well in the Lord, I am

An unworthy Ambassador of Jesus in Bonds, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, October. (...). 1663.
LETTER XXXIII. [For Perseverance.]
To my dear Friends the Servants of Christ in Luppit, Salvation.

Beloved Christians,
HAving taken up a Resolution to Write to, and to endeavor to confirm all the
Places, where I have gone up and down Preaching the Kingdom of God, You were by
no means to be omitted. You were the People that were last upon my Heart,
before my taking up, and had I not been made a Prisoner, I think I had in a few
hours after the time of my Apprehension been with you. Now I can no way but by
Prayers, Letters, and Councels visit you; and so have sent these, to let you
know, that you are upon my Heart, and that your Welfare is dear unto me. I
bless the Lord to hear that his Work does not cease among you. It is the Joy of
our Bonds, Beloved, to hear that the Word is not bound, and that Satan has not
his design upon the People of God, who doubtless intended by these Sufferings
to have struck Terror into them, and to have made their Hands weak. Know, dear
Christians, that the Bonds of the Gospel are not tedious through Grace unto us,
that Christ is a Master worth a suffering for, that there is really enough in
Religion to desray all our Charges, and to quit all the Cost and Expense You
can be at in or upon it; That you may Build upon it that you can never be
losers by Jesus Christ, that Christ's Prison is better than the Worlds Paradise,
that the Divine Attributes are alone an All-sufficient Livelihood, that the
Influences of Heaven, and Shines of Gods Countenance are sufficient to lighten
the (...) Dungeon, and to Perfume and Sweeten the noisomest Prison to a poor
Believer; that if You can bring Faith and Patience, and the Assurance of the
Divine Favor with You to a Prison, you will live comfortable in spite of
Earth and Hell. These are Truths that the Prisoners of Christ can in a measure
Seal unto; and I would have you to be more soundly assured of, and established
in. Brethren, we are of the same mind in a Prison, that we were of in the
Pulpit; that there is no Life to a Life of Holiness; that Christ, and his Yoke,
and his Cross, are worthy of all acceptance; that it is the best, and wisest,
and safest and gainfullest course in the World to stick close to Christ and his
Ways, and to adhere to them in all hazards Come on, Beloved Christians, come
on, slack not your pace, but give diligence to the full assurance of Hope unto
the end, and be ye followers of them who through Faith and Patience inherit the
Promises. Strengthen the Hands that hang down, and the feeble Knees. If you
faint in the day of Adversity, your strength is small. Cheer up, my Brethren,
look what a Crown, what a Kingdom here is; What say you? Is not here a worthy
Portion, a goodly Heritage? Were it not pity to lose all this for want of
Diligence and Patience? Come, dear Christians, and fellow Travelers, I pray
You, let us put on: Pluck up the weary Limbs, our Home is within sight. Lift up
your Eyes from the Pisga of the Promises: You may see the Land of Rest. Will
any of you think of returning into Egypt? God forbid: A little patience, and
Christ will come. Behold, the Husbandman (...) for (...) precious fruits of the
Earth, and has long patience till he receive the early and later Rain: Be ye
allo patient, stablish your Hearts, for the Coming of the Lord draws nigh. He
is not a Christian indeed, that cannot be content to tarry for his Preferment
in another World. Cast upon it, my Brethren, that your Kingdom is not of this
World; that here you must have Tribulations, and that all is well as long as we
are secured for Eternity. Exhort one another daily: (...) together in Prayer,
unite your strength therein, and pull a main: Mercy will come sooner or later,
however we will be content to wait till the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ah
how surely will he come! He will render Tribulation to them that trouble us,
and to us that are troubled, rest with him. Only believe and wait: What not
watch with him one hour? Why the Judge is even at the door! And how blessed will
you be if you do but continue and hold fast till he come! Watch therefore, and
stand fast, quit you like men, be Zealous, and let your hearts be strong: God
is your Friend, and you may trust him. He is able to bear you out, and bear you
up: Faint not therefore, but be steadfast, unmovable, abounding in the works of
the Lord, Speak often one to another, provoke to Love, and to good Works. Let
the Bay of Opposition against Godliness, make the Torrent of your Zeal break
over with the more violence. But it is time to end, I have been bold to call
upon you, you see; and to stir you up by way of Remembrance. May the Spirit of
the most high God excite you, encourage you, inflame you: May these poor Lines
be some quickening to you: may the Good Will of him that dwelt in the Bush dwell
with you. My dear Loves to you all, Pray for the Prisoners. Farewell dear
Brethren, farewell in the Lord, I am

Yours in the Bonds of the Lord Jesus, JOS. ALLEINE.
October. 11. 1665.
LETTER XXXIV.
To a Back-stiding Fellow-Student.

Sir,
WHom this will find you, or when, or where, I know not; but I have shot this
arrow at a venture. Once you were an Associate with me in Corpus Christi, where
I remember your blameless Conversation, and your zealous affection for, and
adhesion to the ways and people of God. May you be still found in the same
paths of Holiness, without which no man shall see God. The vows of God are upon
me (which, I confess, I have been too slack to pay) that I would put you in
remembrance, and in all Brotherly tenderness advise you, to remember from
whence you are fallen. I was informed, before your leaving of England, of many
unhappy miscarriages, which the great reproach of your holy profession, you had
been too manifestly guilty of. I am not without some hope, that the Lord may
have since recalled you, and brought you back to himself: and yet not without
more fear, lest, if the power of corruption were so strong, as to precipitate
you with such violence, at such a time as that was, and in such a place as
England, as Oxon where you had so many encouragements, and inducements,
examples, and faithful friendly, watchful observes, you may now much more be
carried away, in such a place, and among such Company, as now you may be likely
to be in. Sir, I beseech you to be assured, that nothing but the conscience of
my duty has engaged me, now you have been so many years a stranger to me, and
are at so many thousand miles distance from me, to write notwithstanding to
you. And I beseech you, bear a little with me. Is it wisdom after you have
begun in the Spirit, to end in the flesh? you did run well, who has hindered
you? I remember your strict walkings, your holy converse, your many tears: will
you lose the things that you have wrought? have you found out another a nearer
way to Heaven? do you hope to get in at the wide Gate, in the broad way? need I
to mind you, that it had been better for you never to have known the way of
life, then after you have known it, to turn aside from the Holy Commandment?
can you ever enter into Gods Hill, without you be of clean hands, and a pure
heart? I know, you are not ignorant, That strait is the gate, and narrow is the
way that leads unto life, and few there be that find it: and will you yet do
as the most, and decline the way of strictness, and holy self-denial, and give
the flesh the reins? what, when God, that cannot lie, has said, If you live
after the flesh, you shall die? Do you not know that you do in vain name the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, except you depart from iniquity? I am sure you
know it: Oh Sir, consider it, improve it. Oh! have you for learnt Christ, as to
think, that the way of Carnal liberty and looseness, the way of evil company and
fleshliness, is the way to eternal life? I am not for tying up Salvation to
this, or that Opinion: but certainly, let men be of what opinion they will,
without strictness, self-denial, and holy diligence, they cannot be saved, Mat.
16. 42. Mat. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. Once you could say with David, I am a
companion to all them that fear thee: is it so now? O Sir, let not the wicked
entice you. Has not God said, A Companion of fools shall be destroyed, Prove.
13. 20. That you must forsake the foolish, if you desire to live, Prove. 9. 6.
Sir, I have no more hopes ever to meet you more on Earth: O that I might meet
you in Heaven! let us tread the same path of Holiness, and then we shall
doubtless meet there. But surely you must deeply, and timely repent of, and
return from your grievous backslidings, or else I desire never to meet in your
Heaven. But why should not we, that have so often met in serious and holy
Prayer together, we that have so often met at the Lords Table together, we that
have so often eat together, and fasted together, meet in glory together? I
beseech you dear Sir, if the Lord has not already smitten you to the dust, and
broken you, and reduced to the ways of holiness, now consider your ways, and
turn your feet to his Testimonies. Oh remember that, The back-slider in heart
shall be filled with his own ways. God has said it, and who shall reverse it?
If any man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. And once again,
when the righteous turueth away from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, shall be live? In his trespass that he has trespassed, shall he not
die? I know Prayers can reach you, though at so vast a distance; I shall add to
them these Counsels, and commit you to God, remaining

Your real Friend in Crist, Joseph Alleine.
Juelchaster, May 18th. 1664.
LETTER XXXV. [Good Counsel to his Wife.]
My most dear Theodosia,
THou seem to have been long from me: Let nothing any longer detain thee,
but my Sisters necessity, or Fathers Authority. I am very sorry that thou
should lose two Sacraments. I am in a comfortable state of health, through
Divine goodness, to which be glory for ever. See that thou love and admire that
Fountain of our life, and peace: and be ever mindful that it is all thy business
to love, and save, and praise thy Creator and Redeemer. I have no (...) but
this to write to thee about: But this is all our (...). What be use to call
business is but vanity and (...), and some by matter in comparison of this.
Remember and forget not that it is thy chief end to glorify God, and enjoy him
for ever. Learn well that Leston, and know that it is the one thing necessary.
Every morning remember that thy serving and pleasing of God, is the whole
business of that day, and therefore set out accordingly with an express design
and intention to please God in thy eating, drinking, visiting, conversing,
calling, and duties of thy Relations throughout the day. My most dear heart, I
have nothing in the world that does concern thee, or me so much to write of to
thee, as this is. Oh that thou may be still be laying up in Heaven! still
furthering thy account; still adding to the heap, and increasing thy glorious
reward! nothing is done for God, but thou shall hear of it again. Whatever is
not done for God, is but so much lost. Those things which others do being led
by their natural affections and desires, those things do thou do with holy
Aims, for spiritual ends, and then God will put it on the account, as so much
done for him. So it is my dearest, God keeps a true account. See that thou
believe it, and so plow in hope, and sow in hope, pray and hear with an eye to
the sure reward. Let thy hopes be strong and lively, and then thy hands will be
strong, and thy resolutions and affections will be strong. My time is very
precious, and I would not lose any inch of it. See thou to it, that mytime in
writing this Letter be not lost time. Love God the more, and set thine heart
the straighter toward him, and do but practice this one thing, in every solemn
action to look to thy ends, and then I have got well, and thou better by these
Counsels. My dearest, I love thee in truth and tenderness, but my love
signifies little, unless it serve thine Eternal good,

I rest thine own, JOSEPH ALLEINE.

LETTER, XXXVI. [To his Wife, Desires after Heaven.]
My Dear Heart,
MY heart is now a little at rest to write to thee. I have been these three
days much disturbed, and set out of frame. Strong solicitations I have had from
several hands, to accept very honorable preferment in several kinds, some
friends making a Journey on purpose to propound it, but I have not found the
invitations (though I confess very honourble, and such as are or will be
suddenly embraced by men of far greater worth and eminency) to suit with the
inclinations of my own heart, as I was confident they would not with thine. I
have sent away my friends satisfied with the reasons of my refusal, and am now
ready with joy to say with David. Soul return unto thy rest. But alas, that
such things should disturb me, I would live above this lower region, that no
passages or providence whatsoever might put me out of frame, nor disquiet my
soul, and unsettle me from my desired rest. I would have my heart fixed upon
God, so as no occurrences might disturb my tranquillity, but I might be still in
the same quiet and even frame. Well, though I am apt to be unsettled, and
quickly set off the hinges, yet methinks I am like a Bird out of the nest, I am
never quiet till I am in my old way of Communion with God, like the needle in
the Compass that is restless, till it be turned toward the the Pole. I can say
through grace with the Church, with my soul have I desired thee in the night,
and with my Spirit within me have I sought thee early, my heart is early and
late with God, and it is the business and delight of my life to seek him. But
alas, how long shall I be a seeking? how long shall I spend my days in wishing
and desiring, when my glorified Brethren spend theirs in rejoicing and
enjoying? look as the poor imprisoned captive fighs under the burdensome clog
of his Irons, and can only pear through the Grace, and think of, and long for
the sweetness of that liberty which he sees others enjoy: such methinks is my
condition: I can only look through the Grate of this Prison my flesh, I see
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, sitting down in the Kingdom of God, but alas, I
my self must stand without longing, striving, fighting, running, praying,
waiting, for what they are enjoying. Oh happy, thrice happy pouls! when shall
these Fetters of mine be knocked off? when shall I be set at liberty from this
Prison of my body? you are cloted with glory, when I am clothed with dust. I
dwell in flesh, in a House of Clay, when you dwell with God in a House not made
with hands, eternal in the Heavens. I must be continually clogged with the
cumbersome burden of this Dunghill Body, that had it not a soul dwelling in it
like Salt as it were to preserve, it would soon turn to putrefaction and
corruption, and be as odious and loathsome as the filthiest Carrion, when you
have put on incorruption and immortaliey. What continual molestation am I
subject to by reason of this flesh? what pains does it cost me to keep this
earthen Vessel from breaking, it must be fed, it must be clothed, it must be
exercised, recreated, and which is worst of all cherished with time-devouring
sleep, so that I live but little of the short time I have allotted me here: but
oh blessed souls, you are swallowed up of immortality and life, your race is
run, and you have received your Crown. How cautious must I be to keep me from
dangers, how apt am I to be troubled with the cares and fears of this life,
molesting my self with the thoughts of what I shall eat, and what I shall put
on, and wherewithal I shall provide for my self and mine; when your souls are
taken with nothing but God, and Christ, and it is your work to be still
contemplating, and admiring that love that redeemed you from all this. Alas,
how am I encompast with infirmities, and still carry about me Death in my
bosom, what pains and cost must I be at to repair the rotten and ruinous
building of this earthly Tabernacle, which when I have done I am sure will
shortly fall about my ears; when you are got far above mortality, and are made
equal with the Angels. Oh I groan earnestly to be clothed upon with my house
which is from Heaven, being willing rather to be absent from the Body, and
present with the Lord: Oh, when shall I come and appear before him. When shall
I receive the Purchase of my Savior, the fruit of my prayers, the harvest of
my labors, the end of my Faith, the Salvation of my soul? Alas, what do I
here? this is not my resting place. My treasure is in Heaven, and my heart is
in Heaven. Oh when shall I be where my heart is? woe is me that I sojour in
(...), and dwell in the Tents of Kedar. Oh that I had wings (...) a Dove, that
I might fly away and be at rest. Then would I hasten my escape from the windy
storm and tempest, and be out of the reach of fears, disturbances, and
distractions. How long shall I live at such a distance from my God, at such a
distance from my Country? Alas, how can I be merry, how can I sing the Lords
Song in a strange Land; no, I will hang my Harp upon the Willows, and sit down
and weep when I remember Sion. But yet my flesh shall rest in hope, and I will
daily bathe my soul in the sweet thoughts of my blessed home. I will rejoice in
hopes of what I do not yet enjoy, and content my self with the taste of what I
shall shortly have my fill of. But stay this Pen run not beyond thy Commission.
Alas, now I receive what I have gotten, I perceive I have set down what I would
be rather than what I am, and wrote more of my dears heart than my own penning,
rather a Copy for my self, than a Copy of my self. Well, I thank God I have got
some heat by it for all, the Lord grant thou may get a thousand times more.
The Lord grant the request I daily pour out before him, and make us helps and
furtherances to each others soul, that we may quicken and promote and forward
one another in his ways. Help me by thy Prayers as thou do always. The God of
all peace and comfort be with thee my sweet love, Farewell,

Thine beyond Expression, Joseph Aleine.

LETTER, XXXVII. [God is a satisfying Portion.]
My most dear Pylades,
HAd not my right hand long since forgot her cunning, and the Almighty shook
the Pen out of my hand, I should long ere this have been writing to thee: but
it is a wonder of Divine Power and goodness that my soul had not before this
time dwelt in silence, and that death had not put the long period to all my
Writing and Converse.

O my Pylades, what shall I say unto thee now I begin to write, where shall I
begin, when shall I end? methinks I am as a full Bottle quite inverted, where
the forward pressing of the overhasty Liquor makes the evacuation more flow,
and my thoughts are like a thronging crowd sticking in the door.

Long is the Song of Love that I have to tell thee, I rejoice in the constancy
of thy Love, that the waters of so long a silence, and so great a distance have
not yet quenched it, but thy desires are toward me, and thy heart is with me,
though Providence has hindered me from thy much desired Company. I will assure
thee it has been a pleasure to my heart a good part of this summer to hope
that I should come one half of the way to give thee a meeting; but such is my
weakness hitherto, that I am forced to put off those hopes till the Spring,
when, if God give me strength to ride, I intend to see thee before mine own
Home. I thank thee for all the dear expressions of thy servent love: Methinks I
see it, and feel how it runs through all the Veins of every Letter, nay, every
Line; I needed not so chargeable a Testimony as thy golden Token, with which I
was something displeased, because I thought thou need more than my self: but
the love there-by expressed is most dearly welcome to me. What thou talkest of
Retribution, and of Justice does not so well relish with me, because the
Phrases seem improper to the love professed between us, I never looked for any
return from thee but love, which is the paying of all thy Debts: my expenses
have indeed been vast and almost incredible; but surely goodness and mercy has
followed me, and do follow me in every place, and in every change of my
condition; so that as to temporals I have lack of nothing, and as for
spirituals I abound and superabound, and the streams of my comforts have been
full and ruuning over; the joy of the Lord has been my strength at weakest,
and in the multitude of my thoughts within me, his comforts have refreshed my
Soul, I have found God a satisfying portion to me, and have sat down under his
shadow with full delights, and his fruit is most sweet to my taste: he is my
strength and my Song, for I will take of him, and write of him with perpetual
pleasure. Through grace, I can say, methinks I am now in my Element, fince I
have begun to make mention of him, I am rich in him, and happy in him, and my
soul says unto him with David, Thou have made me most blessed for evermore,
and happy is the hour that ever I was born to be made partaker of so blissful a
Treasure, so endless a felicity, so Angelical Prerogatives, as I have in him; O
sweet are his converses, how delightful it is to triumph in his Love!

Suffer me to be free with thee, where should I pour out my Soul, if not into
thy bosom? did the poor woman call upon her friends and neighbors to rejoice
together with her at the finding of a lost Groat? and shall not I tell to thee
the keeper of the sacrets of my Soul, and the friend of my inmost bosom, what a
friend is the Lord to me, though an unworthy sinner, shall not I run and tell
thee what a treasure I have found. And here methinks the story of the Lepers
comes not unaptly to my mind, who said one to another when they had eat and
drunk, and carried away silver and gold, and raiment, and went and hid it, we
do not well, this day is a day of good tidings and we hold our peace. It is fit
that I should be clothed with shame; I acknowledge before God, who tries the
hearts, I am unworthy, everlastingly unworthy, but it is not fit that he should
lose his praise, nay rather, let him be the more adored, and magnified, and
admired for ever and ever, and let my Secrets say, Amen. Bless the Lord, O my
soul bless the Lord, O my Friend, let us exalt his Name together, he is my
solace in my solitude, he is my standing comforter, my tried friend my sure
refuge, my safe retreat, he is my Paradise, he is my Heaven; and my heart is at
rest in him: and I will sit and sing under his shadow, as a Bird among the
Branches; and whither should I go but unto him? Shall I leave the fatness of
the Olive, and sweetness of the Fig Tree, and of the Vine, and go and put my
trust under the shadow of the Bramble? No, I have made my everlasting choice:
this is my rest for ever, he is my Well-beloved in whom I am well pleased.
Suffer me to boast a little here, I may Glory without vanity, and I can praise
him without end or measure, but I have nothing to say of my self: I find thou
do overvalue me, and magnify me above my measure; set the Crown upon the
head of Christ, let nothing be great with thee but him, give him the glory: but
thy love pleases me, only I have this exception, that thou art in love with
thine own Idol, as Austin somewhere speaks to a friend of his that did too much
magnify him, and magnifiest a Creature of thine own sancie, and not thy poor
Orestes: God that knows all things, knows my poverty, how little, how low,
and how mean I am, and how short I come of the seize of the Saints, who
yet do themselves come so exceedingly short of the Rule that God has set
before us: I often think of the Complaint of the devout Monsier [I feel my self
very poor this week, and very defective in the love of God; if you would know
wherein you may pleasure me, love God more; that what is wanting in me, may be
made up in the abundance of your love:] in this, my Pylades, in this thou
may most highly pleasure me; love God a little the better, praise him a
little the more for my sake; let me have this to please my self in, that God is
a little the better loved for me, and that I have blowed up, if it be but one
flash, nay, but one spark of Divine Love in the bosom of my dearest friend
toward him.

But why, my Pylades, why is thy style toward me changed? why have thou lost
the old and wonted strain of our former pleasing familiarity? this I could not
but observe with some disgust, is it because thy heart is changed; but this is
a question in which I cannot ask any resolution; I am satisfied and at rest in
thy love, but what this alterations means, I know not; art thou willing by
degrees to grow strange; it cannot be, thou see however that I cannot change
my voice.

Busides, I find some jealous passages in thy last lines unto us; but cast thou
think that (...) can be put into the balance against my old Friend, my own, my
Covenant Pylades, or can a friend of words come into any competition or
comparison with thine experienced love? I cannot entertain the thoughts of this
without some disdain.

But thy needful cautions are acceptable to me, I desire to foresee and provide
for manifold changes and storms; I know I am not yet in the Harbor; O pray with
me that I enter not into Temptation, for I am very weak in Spirit, as well as
in body, God knows. But there is no end with me, somewhere or other I must
break off, and thou will say it is time to shut up; for once only know, that I
am thy daily Orator, and will be whilst I am: and yet once more I must have
room to add my thankful acknowledgement of thine and thy costly kindness; and
so with our most dear affections to you both, I commend you to the God of love,
still abiding.

Thy fast and sure Orestes.
Bath, October. 13. 1668.
LETTER XXXVII. [To a person of Quality to be constant.]
Most Honored Sir,
MAny charges have passed over both you and my self, since my last Writing to
you, but I am glad to hear that in that great change of your condition, you
have made so wise and happy a choice. Mine unfeigned desire to God is for your
Temporal and Spiritual prosperity; and that the blessings of both Worlds may be
heaped up upon you. Yet I should desire you not to expect too much here, nor to
count it a strange thing, if you meet with disappointments. It is enough if you
have the Lord for your portion, and Heaven for your Inheritance, though the
World should not answer your expectations. I doubt not but you will be likely,
as well we, to meet with manifold temptations: the Lord make you, when you have
done all to stand. Hold out a while in faith, patience, and self-denial, and
you shall be as sure as God can make you of the Crown. Now arise and shine, and
hold forth the power of holiness in all your converse. We have lived in times
when Religion was the way to credit and esteem, and then it was more difficult
to discern the sincerity of ones profession, because men might be drawn to it
upon worldly ends. But now is the time when God will prove us, if we will
appear for him, and own his ways, when they are the common scorn of the World.
Oh Sir, think it not hard if God do call you forth to own him in such a time as
this, when few of your rank and quality will bear you company: but look upon it
as a special advantage to prove your sincerity, and your fidelity to the Lord
your Maker. The holy and blessed life of that noble Marquess Galeacius, I
should much commend to your reading and Imitation. Court not the world nor its
preferments, Moses his self-denying choice, which the World would have branded
for unparalled folly, when he voluntarily left all the Court-preferments and
pleasures, the wisest Judge commends for the greatest Wisdom. If Religion will
make you vile, resolve with that Royal Worthy, that you will be yet more vile.
Remember who accounted the reproaches of Christ greater riches, than the
Treasures of Egypt. Verily it is a greater honor to you to be vilified for
Christ, than to be dignified with the highest Titles that the greatest on Earth
can confer: and to be called Puritan, or Phanatique, for the bold and constant
owning of the power of Christianity, than to have whole Pages filled up with
the honorable offices and marks of Dignity, that earthly Princes can bestow.
Now then is your time to get the true honor. Few of your places and dignity,
will take this way to get it: But he that can but use the prospective of Faith,
and look as far as the approaching Judgment, will easily see the vanity of the
worlds riches and slattering preferments, and the everlasting glory and honor
wherewith the despised Saints shall surely be Crowned. Fix your eyes and
Meditations here, and that will set you above the worlds temptations, when by
its offers or threatenings it would make you to warp, and to let go your
hold-fast of Eternal life. Now is the time for you to make Heaven sure, and
when that is done, you are prepared for the worst that can come. I desire you
to accept of my service and respects, and my Wives, which I do hereby present
unto you, and to your most deserving yoak-fellow, whom I unfeignedly honor
though I never saw her, not so much for her noble blood, which yet calls for
great respects, as for her far more noble qualifications, and privileges of
her second birth. Pardon my boldness with you in troubling you so long, I am
Sir,

Your most Oblidged Friend, and Servant, JOS. ALLEINE.
Feb. 26. 1661.
LETTER, XXXVII.
Dear Couzin,
THough I have been in the valley of the shadow of death, though I have had
more than one foot in the Grave, and have been in deaths often, yet the love
and remembrance of you, ever lives on my heart: I have long had neither feet
to walk nor hands to write, yet I have borrowed hands as you see, rather than I
would stay any longer from warning and admonishing of you. Dear Couzin, that
soul of yours, that precious immortal soul is of no light value with me! I pray
hard for its Salvation: I have a Godly fear for you, lest your soul should
miscarry in a crowd of worldly business, and of earthly cares. Ah, my dear
Niece, it comforts me that you are so settled for this world, and are in want of
nothing, I bless the Lord for this, but me thinks this does not satisfy me.
Oh, that I could be sure that you were once safe settled in Christ; though you
are, I trust comfortably furnished with earthly things, yet in this you are but
half provided for: have you a Treasure in Heaven? have you laid hold on eternal
life? have you made sure work for everlasting? have you past the straits of the
New Birth? do your bear upon you the marks of the Lord Jesus?

If you shall pass by a sumptuous Fabric, and a great Lordship, and should lay
claim to all as your inheritance, and please your self with the hopes of
enjoying all this, when you had nothing to show, no Writing, no Evidence to
produce, as a ground for any such hope, would not every one say, this were a
piece of strange vanity and imprudence; much greater folly is it to promise our
selves a part in Paradise, and rest satisfied in a mere persuasion that we are
the Heirs of Heaven, when we cannot prove our Title from the Book of God, nor
produce from within our selves, the sure and certain marks of the children of
God.

Ah, Dear Couzin, Rouse up your self make conscience, to deal plainly and
freely with your soul, say within your self, I have hopes for Heaven; but where
are my grounds and my Evidences? do I not build without a foundation? do I
venture my Salvation upon mere uncertainties? What have I, what do I more than
others? I pray, I hear, I read, but may not a mere Hypocrite do all this? I run
not with others into the wretched practice of Lying, and Couzening, Whoredom,
and the like; but what is this more than a Pharisee may have to say for
himself? can I prove by Scripture my claim to Heaven? can I produce Chapter and
Verse to justify my self?

Oh Couzin, fear, least a Promise being lest of entering into rest, you should
by any mistakes, or self-deceits fall short through unbelief; fear lest you
should take Counters of gold, or some common workings for saving Grace. Oh,
there is a world of counterfeit Coin going, multitudes perish by mistake, and
wake in Hell, whilst they dreamt they were in Heaven: the tempter is very
subtle, and will sure deceive if he can: your heart is deceitful above all
things, and is willing to cheat you if it can. Therefore am I engaged so
earnestly to call upon you, as one that watches for your soul, to arise
speedily and to set roundly to your Work. Oh, consider your danger, and work
out your Salvation with fear and trembling: away with these lazy Prayers, away
with these cold and heartless Professions, away with this drowsy, liveless,
liftless Religion; bestir your self to purpose for your Soul before it be too
late. Search your Conscience as with Candles, be jealous of your self;
consider, now is your time, what you do you must do quickly, the patience of
God is waiting, Christ is knocking, the Spirit of God is striving, and death is
at the door: Oh now take your opportunity, and take heed lest a slothful heart,
and the cares of this world, or a presumptuous confidence that all is well and
safe already, should at last shut you out of the Kingdom of God.

I cannot write distinctly to your Husband, but I beseech you to call upon him
to set his heart to these Counsels which I have written to you; I earnestly
entreat him to make Religion his business, and to look heedfully to it, that
the gain of the world prove not the loss of his soul. I desire him that Closet
and Family Prayers, and weekly Catechesing of his Household, and strict
sanctifying of the Sabbath, and reading of the Scriptures, singing of Psalms,
repeating of Sermons, and diligent attendance upon powerful Preaching may be
his continual exercises; that so his house may be a little Church, and God may
delight to dwell in his Family: pray give me to understand what is done of
these things, for I have a zeal for your welfare, and that you and your
Household should serve the Lord, that you may enter into his rest, and carry
children, and servants, and friends, and all to Heaven with you. As to my own
estate, I have lost all my Limbs, and about this twelve Months useless, and
been again and again under the sentence of death; but was brought in a
Horse-litter to Bath, where God has wonderfully restored me, so that I can
seed my self, and go alone, and speak with a little more freedom. Oh, love the
Lord, praise the Lord for me; notwithstanding I continue weak, and have not
strength to write, yet I could not tell how to die in silence from you; but
have made use of a friendly hand to send these counsels and calls after you,
which I beseech you to accept in the fear of God, for it is not unlike that
they may be my last to you that ever you may receive: I now commend you to the
Lord, and with mine own and my dear Wives love to you both, Rest,

Your loving and careful uncle, JOS. ALLEINE.
October. 21. 1668.
FINIS.
LETTER XXXV. [The Concernments of our Souls especially to be regarded.]
Dear Cousin,
YOU may think you are forgotten with me, because you have not heard so long a
time from me; but this may let you know, That though God has taken away your
Father, and suffered your Mother to be helpless to you; yet you have one friend
on earth that cares for you. The welfare of your immortal soul is dear to me,
and is the matter of my sollicitous care and prayer. Dear Cousin, Methinks I
feel a godly jealousy of you within my heart, lest you should lose your soul
amongst a crowd of worldly cares and business. Oh remember the story of him in
the Book of the Kings, who relates that he had a Soldier committed to his
keeping, upon condition that he should lose his life if he did let him go: But
while thy servant went hither and thither, the man escaped. But the King
replies presently, Even so shall thy judgment be; thy life shall go for his
life. Ah Cousin, take earnest heed, lest while you are going hither and
thither, minding many things, tossed in a hurry of worldly affairs, the enemy
run not away with your soul. Oh beware that the world does not secretly steal
away your heart. Consider, that whatever your business be, you must and will
have an eating time, and a sleeping time. Oh be as sollicitous every day to
keep your praying times, which are a thousand times more necessary than a time
to eat in, or sleep. Be sure that there does not a morning or evening pass over
your head, in which you have not perfumed your closet with solemn and fervent
prayer: And take heed, if you love your salvation, lest Satan beguile you with
the bare outward performance of duties, and outward acts of Religion. See to
it, that you do not rest in a worldly Religion; to give God your knee, while
the World carries away your heart. You may pray, hear, and read, and all to no
purpose, excep your very Soul be employed and engaged in these duties; and the
life, vigor, and strength of your affections be found to go after God in them.
If therefore you will have Christ and Heaven, see that you renounce the world.
You must cast overboard your worldly hopes, and take up with God, with a naked
Christ, as your whole happiness, both for this life, and that which is to come.
There is no hopes of your salvation, without a sound mortification to the
world; you must be mortified to your worldly expectations: look not for much
from the world; promise not your self much from the world; seek not great
things for your self: say unto God, So I may have thee for my portion, and thy
Kingdom for my inheritance, give or deny me what thou will, poverty or riches,
any thing or nothing, I will be contented with my Lot. Say unto your soul, So I
may but have Christ, so I may but carry it for the other world, let this world
go which way it will: I must be converted or condemned; I must be born again,
or else would I had never been born: but of this present world there is no such
necessity; I may be poor, and yet happy: but woe to me if I remain unsanctified:
I must have grace, or perish for ever. Dear Cousin, if I live, you shall find
me a friend to your worldly prosperity; but whether I live or die, I charge you
by the Lord, that you be infinitely tender of your immortal Souls everlasting
concernments. Will you not spin a fair thread of it, if while you are pursuing
after earthly things, you lose your soul in the (...)? While I live, I shall
pray and care for you. Farewell in the Lord. I am

Your truly loving and careful Uncle, JOSEPH ALLEINE.

LETTER XXXVI. [Godly Counsels.]
Dear Cousin,
THE welcome tidings of your safe arrival at Barbados, is come to my ears; as
also the news of your escape from a perilous sickness, for which I bless the
Lord, and desire to be thankful with you: for I am not without a care for your
well-being, but do look upon my self as really concerned in you. I have
considered, that God has bereft you of a careful Father, and that your Mother
takes but little care for you; so that you have none nearer than my self to
watch for your soul, and to charge and admonish you in the Lord, and to take
care of you. But yet, Dear Cousin, be not discouraged by these things, but look
to Heaven, fly unto Jesus, put away every known sin, set upon the
conscientious performance of every known duty; make Christ your choice, embrace
him upon his own terms; deliver up your self, body and soul, to him; see that
you have no reserves nor limitations in your choice of him; give him your very
heart; cast away your worldly hopes and expectations, make Religion your very
business. O Cousin, these things do, and you shall be sure of a Friend in
Heaven to take the care of you; and, if I may be any comfort to you, you shall
not fail, while I live, to have one friend on earth to take care for you. You
are gone far from me, even to the uttermost parts of the earth; but I have sent
these Letters to call even thither after you; yea, not only to call, but to
cry in your ears, O what is like to become of your soul! Where is that immortal
soul of yours like to be lodged for ever? amongst Devils, or amongst Angels?
upon a bed of Flames, or in the joys of Paradise? Dear Cousin, go aside by your
self in secret, retire from the noise of the world, and say to your self, Oh my
soul! whether art thou going? do not I know in my very heart that I must be
converted or condemned? that I must be sanctified, or can never be saved? Oh my
soul! what seek thou? what designs do I drive at? what is my chief care?
which way do I bend my course? Is it for this world, or for the world to come?
Do I first seek the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof? Do I
think Heaven will drop into my mouth? that glory and immortality will be gotten
with a wet finger, with cold prayers, and heartless wishes, while the world
carries the main of my heart? Do I think to be crowned, and yet never fight? to
get the race, and never run? to enter at the strait gate, and never strive? to
overcome Principalities and Powers, and never wrestle? No, no; say within your
self, Oh my soul, either lay by the hopes of Heaven for ever, or else rouse up
thy self, put forth thy strength in seeking after God and glory; either lay by
thy worldly hopes, or thy hopes of immortality; away with thy sins, or thou
must let Christ go for ever; think not to have Chrst and the world too, to
serve God and Mammon, it cannot be: If thou follow the world as thy chief
desire and delight; if thou live after the flesh, thou must die, count upon it,
the Lord has spoken it, and all the world can never reverse it. Thus reason
the case with your own soul, and give not rest to your self night nor day, till
you are gotten off from the world, broken off from the wilful practice of every
known sin, and gotten safe into Christ. Dear Cousin, I charge you by the Lord,
to observe these things; pray over them, weep over them, read them again and
again; do not pass them over as slight and ordinary things: your soul is at
stake, it is your salvation is concerned in them; think not I am in jest with
you. Ah Cousin, I travel in birth with you, till Christ be formed in you. Why
should you die? Oh repent and live, lay hold on eternel life, win Christ, and
you win all. O be thankful to the Lord, that now you are fatherless and
friendless, yet you have one Remembrancer to warn you to fly from the wrath to
come. God forbid that I should find you at last in the place of Torments, for
your not embracing the godly Counsels. To conclude, in short, I charge you as a
Minister, as a Friend, as a Father to you, Take heed of these three things:

1. Left the gain of the world prove the loss of your soul:

2. Left the snare of evil company withdraw you from God, and so prove your
final ruin.

3. Left a lofty and a worldly heart should thrust you out of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

God abhors that the proud should come near him: Oh labor, whatever you do,
for an humble heart; be little, be vile in your own eyes; seek not after great
things; be poor in spirit; without this, Heaven will be no place for you, God
will be no friend to you. Dear Cousin, your lot is fallen, as I fear, in a
place of great wickedness, where your soul is in much danger, where your
temptations are many, and your helps for Heaven but few; where godly examples
are rare, and many will entice you to sin and vanity. O! if you love me, or
love your soul, look about you, consider your danger, fear lest you should
miscarry for ever by worldly loss and vain company, which proves to so many the
fearful cause of their eternal perdition. I can but warn you, and pray for you:
but though you have none to oversee you, remember the strict and severe eye of
God is upon you, to observe all your actions, and that he will surely bring all
your practices into his Judgment. Your Aunt, with my self, commend our dear
love to you; and I commend you to the Lord, and remain,

Your loving and careful uncle, JOSEPH ALLEINE.
August 19. 1668.
LETTER XXXVII.
Dear Cousins,
THough you are removed far from me, out of my sight, and the Seas as a great
gulf are fixed betwixt you and me; yet my prayers follow you, and my good
wishes for your present and everlasting welfare, like the wings of a Dove, take
speedy flight. I look upon my self, now God has removed my Brother, to be as
in the room of a Father to you, yea and of a Mother too; for I know you have
but little help from her.

My dear Neeces, my heart is careful for you; and therefore I cannot cease,
while I am in being in this world, to warn and admonish you, as my children,
and to call upon you in the name of the Eternal God, to awaken your selves with
all godly fear and holy diligence, lest by any means you should come short of
the glory of God.

Let me mind you, dear Cousins, of the dangerous place you stand in, and look
about you with trembling. Methinks I see Satan watching for your souls, as the
Dragon did for the seed of the Woman, waiting to devour it as soon as she
should be delivered. Know you not, that you must wrestle with Principalities
and Powers? Methinks I see temptations surrounding you, and beleaguering you,
as the enemy about the walls of the treacherous party within you, I mean carnal
affections and corruptions, complotting how to deliver up the castle. Know you
not, that your fleshly lusts do war against your souls? and that your own
hearts are not true to you, but deceitful above all things? Lord, what need
have you to bestir your selves, and to fly unto Jesus! to distrust your
selves, and to trust only in him and his righteousness! Oh work out your
salvation with fear and trembling: Do you ever think to escape these mighty
enemies, to conquer the power, and (...) the plots and snares of those potent
adversaries, without most painful diligence? O cry to heaven for help; watch
and pray; fear, left a promise being left of entering into rest, either of you
should come short of it.

My dear Neeces, you have many do watch for your souls, to devour them; but I
doubt too few, except my self, do watch for your souls, to save them: therefore
I look upon my self, who am now upon the matter your only Monitor, to be the
more concerned to awaken my self to your help, and to look after you, and to
watch for you, left by any means you should miscarry by the deceits and
temprations wherewith you are encompassed. I would not have you over-careful
for the things of this life, though I commend your laudable care and diligence,
that you may not be burdensome to any man; but I commend to you a better and
more necessary care, and that is that which the Apostle speaks of, the Virgins
care; The unmarried (says he) cares for the things of the Lord. Ah, let this
be your care; seek first the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, and
then all these things shall be added; you have Gods sure promise for it: If the
Lord give me to live and prosper, you shall see and know, that I am not a
friend only in words to you; but however that shall be, see that you embrace
the Counsels of God from me. Oh make sure of Heaven betimes, walk humbly with
God, beware of a proud heart and a lofty spirit; abhor your selves, else God
will not accept you? be displeased with your selves, else God will not be
pleased with you; condemn your selves, that God may acquit you. The leven of
pride will sour the whole lump, and mar all your Profession and Religion, and
render your Persons, and Prayers, and all, an abomination to the Lord, if it
prevail in you. Oh therefore be not high minded, but fear; and by prayer and
watchfulness restrain and root up this wretched corruption of pride, which is a
sin so natural to you, that you had need to use an infinite care and caution to
keep it under.

As to my self, these may acquaint you, That I have been often at the very
gates of death: I have lost all my limbs; but prayer has redeemed me from my
extremities, and God has blessed the use of the Bath to me. Oh praise the
Lord, praise him for my sake, and give glory to the God of my life. Love him,
honor and glorify him, whose favor and friendship has filled my soul with
comfort, and given a resutrection to my body. I can now walk alone, and feed my
self, but am altogether unable to write, which is the reason why these come to
you in another hand. Dear Cousins, you may think me too tedious; but you must
pardon me, if I err in my love and zeal for your welfare: And now I shall
(...) no more, but with my own and dear Wifes love to you, I commend you to
God, and rest,

Your loving and careful uncle, JOSEPH ALLEINE.

LETTER XXXVIII. [Do all in reference to God and his glory.]
Dear Friend,
I Have received yours of the 19th of September, but it came to me in the time
of my sickness, in which I was much a stranger to writing; it continued upon me
five Months, and to this day so much weakness remains in my arms, that I am not
able to put off or on my own clothes. Your Letter was exceeding welcome to me,
not only as reviving the remembrance of our old friendship, but also, as
bringing me news of some spiritual good that you received by me, which is the
best tidings that I can receive: for what do I live for, but to be useful to
souls in my generation? I desire to know no other business than to please and
honor my God, and serve my generation in that short allowance of time that I
have here, before I go hence, and be seen no more. Shall I commend to you the
Lesson that I am about to learn? But why should I doubt of your acceptance, who
have so readily embraced me in all our converses?

The Lesson is, To be entirely devoted unto the Lord, that I may be able to say
after the Apostle, To me to live is Christ. I would not be serving God only
for a day in the week, or an hour or two in the day; but every day, and all the
day: I am ambitious to come up toward that of our Lord and Master, To do
always those things that please God. I plainly see, that self-seeking is
self-undoing; and that then we do promote our selves best, when we please God
most. I find, that when I have done all, if God be not pleased, I have done
nothing; and if I can but approve my self to God, my work is done: I reckon I
do not live that time I do not live unto God.

I am fain to cut off so many hours from my days, and so many years from my
life (so short as it is) as I have lived unto my self. I find no enemy so
dangerous as self; and O that others might take warning by my hurt! O that I
had lived wholly unto God! then had every day and every hour that I have spent,
been found upon my account at that great day of our appearing before God: then
I had been rich indeed, in treasure laid up there, whither I am apace removing;
then I had been every day and hour adding to the heap, and increasing the
reward which God of his mere grace has promised, even to the meanest work that
is done to him, Col. 4. 24. I verily perceive I am an eternal loser by acting
no more as for God; for what is done to my self, is lost; but what is done for
God, is done for ever, and shall receive an everlasting reward. Verily, if
there be another world to come, and an eternal state after this short life, it
is our only wisdom to be removing, and, as it were, transplanting and
transporting what we can, from hence, into that Country to which we are
shortly to be removed, that what we are now doing, we may be reaping the fruit
of for ever more. The world think themselves wise; but I will pawn my soul upon
it, that this is the true wisdom.

Well, let us be wholly swallowed up in the concerns of Religion, and know no
other interest but Jesus Christ's. I cannot say, I have already attained; but
this is that my heart is set to learn, That in all that I do, whether sacred or
civil actions, still I may be doing but one work, and driving on one design,
That God may be pleased by me, and be glorified in me; that not only my
praying, preaching, alms, etc. may be found upon my account; but even my
eating, drinking, sleeping, visits, discourses, because they are all don't as
unto God. Too often do I take a wrong aim, and miss my mark; but I will tell
you what be the Rules I set my self, and do strictly impose upon my self from
day to day: Never to lie down, but in the Name of God, not barely for natural
refreshment, but that a wearied servant of Christ may be (...), and fitted to
serve him better the next day. Never to rise up but with this resolution, Well,
I will go forth this day in the Name of God, and will make Religion my
business, and spend the day for Eternity. Never to enter upon my calling, but
first thinking, I will do these things as unto God, because he requires these
things at my hands in the place and station he has put me into. Never to sit
down to the Table, but resolving, I Will not eat merely to please my appetite,
but to strengthen my self for my Masters work. Never to make a Visit, but upon
some holy design, resolving to leave something of God where I go; and in every
company to leave some good savor behind. This is that which I have been for
some time a learning, and am pressing hard after; and if I strive not to walk
by these Rules, let this Paper be a witness against me.

I am not now in my former Public Capacity, such things being required of me
to say and subscribe, as I could by no means yield to, without open lying and
dissembling with God and Men: Yet, that I am unuseful, I cannot say; but rather
think, that possibly I may be of more use than heretofore. I thank the Lord, I
have not known what it is to want a Tongue to speak, but in my sickness; nor a
People to hear; but so, as that we both follow the things that make for peace.

I perceive you are otherwise persuaded in some things, than I am: but however,
I trust we meet in our end. Since you are in, may it be your whole study to
gain souls, and to build them up in holiness, which is with too many the least
of their cares. One duty (miserably neglected) I shall be bold to commend to
you from my own experience, and that is, the visiting your whole Flock from
house to house, and enquiring into their spiritual estates particularly, and
dealing plainly and truly with them about their (...) to God: to the usefulness
of this great work, I can set my Probatum est.

I hear you have two Parsonages: O tremble to think how many precious souls you
have to look to! And let it be seen, however others aim at the Fleoce, you aim
at the Flock; and that you have indeed Curam animarum.

You see how free I am with you; but I know your candor.

I rejoice in your happy Yoke Fellow: salute her from your old Friend; and
accept the unseigned Respects of him who is,

SIR, Your real and faithful Friend, JOSEPH ALLEINE.

LETTER XXXIX. PRISON-COMFORTS. [To a Minister in Prison.]
Worthy Sir,
I Owe you a Letter, and more than a Letter, for your particular respects to
me, your brotherly sympathy, your multiplied and earnest prayers, your
tenderness of my health, your welcome Jewel in M. Ruths Letters, from which I
trust my soul and others may reap no small benefit. Much more do I owe you for
your common respects to the people of my desires; and not only to them, but to
the whole Church of God; in all whose concernments, I see, you are concerned.
Your indefatigable labors with us, we do with all thankfulness accept, as the
undoubted evidence of your great love: For all which, may he requite you, who
will shortly say, Inasmuch as thou did it unto the least of these my
Brethren, thou did it unto me.

It was but a little after my release from my own confinement, but I heard of
yours; and now write to you, as one that has taken a higher degree than ever,
and more truly honorable, being commenced Prisoner of Christ. I was once
affected with the Picture of a devout man, to whom a voice came down from
Heaven, saying, Quid vis fieri prote? To which he answered, Nihil domine nisi
pati ac contemni prote. Undoubtedly, Sir, it is our real glory to be throughout
conformed to Jesus Christ, not only in his sanctity, but in his sufferings.
Paul counted all things but dung for this, that he might win Christ, etc. and
know the fellowship of his sufferings, and be made conformable to his death. I
doubt not but your consolations in Christ do much more then superabound in all
your tribulations for him: Yet let me add this one Cordial, That now you have a
whole shoal of Promises come in to you, which you had not before; I mean, all
the Promises to suffering Saints, in which they have not so immediate, but
only a remoter right, unless in a suffering state: And doubtless he has
gotten well, that has gotten such a number of exceeding great and precious
Promises: If the men of the world do so rejoice when such or such an Estate is
fallen to them; should not you much more, that have such a Treasure of Promises
fallen to you?

I can tell you little good of my self; but this I'can tell you, That the
Promises of God were never so sweet in this world to me, as in and since my
imprisoned state. Oh the bottomless Riches of the Covenanr of Grace! It shames
me that I have let such a Treasure lie by so long, and have made so little use
of it. Never did my soul know the Heaven of a Believers life, till I learnt to
live a life of praise, and by more frequent consideration to set home the
unspeakable riches of the Divine Promises, to which, I trust, through grace, I
am made an heir. I verily perceive, that all our work were done at once, if we
could but prevail with our selves and others to live like Believers; to tell
all the world by our course and carriage, that there is such pleasantness in
Christ's wars, such beauty in holiness, such reward to obedience, as we prosess
to believe. May ours and our peoples conversations but preach this aloud to the
world, That there is a reality in what God has promised; That Heaven is worth
the venturing for; That the sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us!

Verily, Sir, it is but a very little while that Prisons shall hold us, or that
we shall dwell in dirty flesh. (...) tells us of (...), that he was ashamed to
see himself in the Body; to see a divine and immortal Soul in a (...) of Flesh,
(for so they held the body to be;) but the worst shackles are those of sin.
Well, they must shortly off all together; our Lord does not long intend us for
this lower Region: Surely he is gone to prepare a place for us: Doubtless it is
so; yea, and he will come again, and receive us to himself, that where he is,
we may be also. And what have we to do, but to believe, and wait, and love, and
long, and look out for his coming, in which is all our hope? 'T will be time
enough for us to be preferred then. We know before hand who shall then be
uppermost. Our Lord has showed us where our place shall be, even at his own
right hand; and what he will say to us, Come ye blessed, etc. Surely we shall
stand in his Judgment: He has promised to stand our Friend: Let us look for
the joyful day: As sure as there is a God, this day will come, and then it
shall go well with us. What if Bonds and Banishments abide us for a season?
This is nothing but what our Lord has told us, The world shall rejoice, but ye
shall weep and lament: You shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy. Oh how reviving are his words! I will see you again, and your heart
shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you.

If that miserable wretch leapt cheerfully off the Ladder, saying, I shall be a
Queen in Hell: With what joy should we do and suffer for God, who have his
Truth in pawn, that we shall be Crowned in Heaven? Verily, they are wonderful
Preparations that are making for us: The Lord prepare us apace, and make us
meet to be Partakers, It was the highest Commendation that ever that Worthy R.
Baxter received, which fell from the Pen of his scoffing Adversary Tilenus, who
says of him, Totum Puritanismum totus spirat. Oh that this may be true of us
and ours.

Let your true yoke fellow, and my Christian Friends with you in the Bonds of
the Gospel, have my hearty Commendations: And these Counsels, I pray you, give
them from me, for the improving of their present state.

1. To habituate themselves, both as to their thoughts and discourses, more
thoroughly than ever unto Holiness. Brethren, I would teach you the Lesson that
I resolve to learn with you, That your minds and tongues may as naturally run
on the things of Heaven, as others on the things of this world. Why should it
not be thus? I am sure God and Heaven do as well deserve to be thought on, and
talked of by us, as froth and vanity can deserve of the world. There are many
that have in a great measure learnt this lesson, and why should not we be some
of them? What if it be hard at first? Every thing is so to a beginner. Besides,
is not ours a Religion of self-denial? Further, if we do but force our selves a
while to holy Thoughts, and Heavenly Discourse, it will grow habitual to us,
and then it will be most natural, familiar, and heavenly sweet. Oh what gainers
will you be, if you do but learn this Lesson!

Verily, it is the shame of Religion, that Christians are so unlike themselves,
unless upon their knees. Sirs, our lives and language should tell the world
what we are, and whither we are going. Christians, let little things content
you in the world, but aspire after great things in the grace of God. Many real
Christians do little think what high frames of Holiness they might grow up to,
even in this life, with pains and diligence. Sirs, be you men of great designs:
Think it not enough if you have wherewith to bear your charges to Heaven; but
aspire with an holy ambition to be great in the Court of Heaven, Favorites of
the most High, of (...) growth, great experience, singular communion, that you
may burn and shine in your places, and convince the world; that you may savor
of Heaven where ever you come, and that there may be an even-spun thread of
Holiness running through your whole course. It Is the disgrace of Profession,
that there is so little difference to be seen in the ordinary coversation of
Believers from other men: Is it not a shame, that when we are in company with
others, this should be all the difference that is to be seen, only that we
will not curse and swear, as do the worst of men? Christians, if you will
honor the Gospel, bring forth your Religion out of your Closets (the world
cannot see what you do there) into your Shops, Trades, Visits, etc. and
exemplify the rules of Religion in the management of all your Relations, and
in your ordinary converse. Let there be no Place or Company that you come into,
in which you do not drop something of God: This will be the glory of Religion,
and we shall never convince the World till we come to this. May you come my
Brethren, out of your Prisons with your faces shining, having your minds
seasoned, and your tongues (...) with Holiness: May your mouths be as a Well of
Life, from whence may flow the Holy Streams of Edifying Discourse: May you ever
remember, as you are sitting in your Houses, going by the Way, lying down,
rising up, what the Lord does then require of you, Deuteronomy 6. 7.

2. To improve their present retirements from the World, for the settling of
their spiritual estates. It Is a common complaint amongst Christians, That they
want Assurance. Oh, if any of you that wanted Assurance when you came to
Prison, may carry that blessing out, what happy gainers would you be! Now you
are called more than ever to self-searching. Now bring your Graces to the
Touchstone. Be much in Self Observation. See what your hearts do with most love
and delight, go out unto: what are your greatest hopes, and your chief designs.
See whether God's Intrest be uppermost in you: prove this, and prove all. Rest
not in probable hopes. Think not that is enough that you can say, you hope it is
well. God looks for extraordinary things from you under such great helps, such
extraordinary Dispensations. Be restless till you can say, that You know. it is
well? that you know you are passed from Death to Life

Think not that this is a privilege that only a few may expect. Observe but
these three things:

1. To acquaint your selves thoroughly with the conditions of Life, and take
heed of laying the marks of Solvation cither too high or too low.

2. To be much in observing the frame, and bent, and workings of your own
hearts.

3. To universally conscientious, and to be constant in even and close
walkings, and then I doubt not but you will grow up speedily to a settled
assurance, and know and feel that peace of God that passes all understanding:
and this will be somewhat worth your carrying out of Prison.

But I return to your self. But what shall I say? I have more need to receive
from you, than ability to give; only I will tell you my wishes for you: I wish
that your body may prosper, as your soul also prospers. I wish, That you may
see the travel of your Soul; that you may find your People thriving under your
hands in all manner of holy conversation and godliness, that whosoever
converses with them, may see and hear by them, that God is in them of a Truth.
I wish your enlargement from your bonds, and your enlargement in them: That
your Prison may be but the Lanthorn through which your Graces, Experiences,
Communion, and Prison-attainments, may shine most brightly to all beholders. I
wish your Prison may be a Paradise of Peace, and a Patmos of Divine
discoveries. Lord Jesus set to thy Amen. I am

SIR, Your unworthy Brother and Companion in the Kingdom and Patience of JESUS:
JOS. ALLEINE.
Jan. 10. 1664.
LETTER. XL. [Directions to the Ministers of Somersetshire and Wistshire, for
the instructing of Families by way of Catechizing.]
SIR,
THIS Letter comes to you, like the men of Macedonia, to Paul, crying to you,
Come and help us. O how insufficient do we find our selves for the Praises of
GOD! What Reason have we to call upon our selves, and to call upon all our
Friends! and yet we foresee that all will be too little a Sacrifice at last,
and too slender a return to the most High God, who has made us such wonders of
Mercy, and such signal instances of his Divine Power and Rich Grace. You are
not ignorant of our Estate, how the Sentence of Death had passed upon us; how
our Flesh and our Hearts failed, and Friends and Physicians gave up their
Hopes: But God, that raised the Dead, was pleased to make us the Monuments of
his wondrous Mercy. O that the same God would make us the special instruments
of his Praise and Glory. Of a Truth Sir, we perceive our Hearts are too little,
our Tongues are too shore, our Expressions are too low, either to conceive or
utter what we owe to the Great God. O help! help! Bless the Lord, O our Souls:
Bless the Lord, O our Friends: O that all that have Wrestled with God for us,
might join Hand in Hand to make some suitable returns to the God of our lives,
and may bring in every one his Sacrifice, and all contribute to make one common
stock of Praises, that many Thanksgivings may abound to God on our behalfs. O
what has Prayer done for us! while we live we must Honor Prayer, and admire
the Power of Prayer, we owe our limbs and our lives to Prayer. O that a goodly
crop of praise may grow up unto God as a return for his Mercies: that the seed
of Prayers, and showers of tears, may procure sheaves of joy, and Songs of
deliverauce.

But O what shall we render? wherewithal shall we come before the Lord, or bow
our selves to the Most High God? O where shall we find a sitting sacrifice?
Verily we will give our selves and our All to him. But alas, what are we, and
what is this little that we call our All? Therefore have we found in our hearts
to write to you and others, that we might excite you to the Divine Praises with
us. And O that the Lord might be loved the better, and glorified the more for
our sakes: Will you tell us wherein we may show our love to Him? wherein we may
best please and serve Him? O that you would! Herein assuredly you would most
highly gratify us. O that we might do some singular thing for God; for
certainly they are not common things that he has done for us. We pray you call
upon those that fear the Lord, to help us in celebrating his loving kindness. O
how it pleases our very Hearts to think that God should be Loved and Honored
the better for us: That we may be instruments, if it be but for the blowing up
of one flash, nay, the kindling of one spark of Divine Love in the Hearts of
his Children toward him! Sir, You cannot pleasure us in any thing so much as
in this, To love and admire God, and spread his Praise more and more; that what
is wanting through our weakness, may be made up in your abundance. But we have
need to crave your (...) for our length; but the love of Christ constrains
us, (...) we hope you will pass by an error of Love.

While we have been deyifing what to do for our God, we thought we could no way
better serve him, than by provoking such as you are to set up his great Name
with us. We love and Honor you, not only as you are a Member, but a Minister
of Christ Jesus our LORD, and therefore deserve to be doubly dear unto us: And
because we could think of no more pleasing a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, we have
stirred up our selves and Friends with us, to send to you a Prophet in the Name
of a Prophet, this poor Token of Love, which though but small, yet we trust
will be a sweet savor unto God, and will be accepted with you, being our two
Mites cast into God's Treasury. But look not upon your self as obliged to us
hereby: but put it upon the Account of Christ, to whose precious Name we
dedicate it, and from whom (although he be so much already before hand with us,
yet) we expect a recompense at the Resurrection of the just.

And being further desirous to promote the work of God in our low and slender
Capacities, we have been bold to provoke your self, with other our Fathers and
Brethren in the Ministry, to set about that necessary and much neglected work
of Catechizing; not a little pleasing our selves in the sweet hope, that by
your means we may be instrumental to spread the sweet savor of the knowledge of
our God, in every place: and being well persuaded of your readiness to forward
so blessed a work, we have stirred up our selves and our Friends to expend a
considerable Sum of Money to furnish Ministers with Catechisms, a hundred
whereof we have sent unto you, beseeching you to use your best prudence and
utmost diligence, for the spreading of them, and for others improvement by
them, that our labor and charge in so good a work, prove not at last of no
effect.

Sir, we shall humbly propose unto you, but not impose upon you. But let us be
bold with you in Ghrist, to lay our requests before you as touching this
concernment, they being indeed what judicious friends and brethren have thought
fit to propound.

1. That the People be publicly and privately instructed about the high
necessity and great usefulness of this Duty.

2. That these Catechisms be freely given to all that will promise to use them.

3. That you would be pleased to acquaint your self with all the Schools that
are within your Verge; and that you would do your utmost to engage the Teachers
thereof to teach their Scholars this Catechism; and that you would furnish all
their Scholars that are capable and willing to learn.

4. That you will endeavor from house to house to engage the Master or Mistress
of every Family, for the forwarding of this work.

5. That you will appoint set-times wherein to take an Account of the
proficiency of all such as have promised to Learn; and that, if it may be, they
may be engaged to Learn weekly a proportion, according to their Capacities.

6. That you would favor us so far, as to let us know as speedily as you may,
of the receipt of these Lines; and, if we may presume so far upon you, we pray
you to indulge us some assurance under your Hand, That you will to your Power
promote this happy design, and that by our Ladyday next you will acquaint Mr.
Bernard what progress is made.

Sir, our Sou's will even travel in Birth for the success of this undertaking;
and therefore we request you for the love of God, and by the respect which we
are persuaded you bare to us, that you will labor to comfort and encourage us
in our endeavors for God, which you can no way in the World do so well, as by
letting us see, that there is some Blessed Fruit of our cost and pains; and
that we have not run in vain, nor labored in vain. If there be any of these
Catechsims remaining in your hands that you cannot dispose of by our Lady Day,
be pleased to send them to Mr. Barnard, or to Mr. Rositer in Taunton. If you
should need any more, give us speedy notice, and you shall not fail to be
furnished with what number you desire.

Thus upon the bended knees of our thankful souls, we commend our poor
sacrifices, together with your self, to the eternal God, and remain,

Christ's devoted Sevants, and your Friends JOS. BERNARD, and JOS. ALLIENE.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
SAcrilegious Desertion of the Holy Ministry rebuked, And Tolerated Preaching
of the Gospel Vindicated, against the Reasoning of a Confident Queftionist, in
a Book called [ Toleration not to be abused.] With Counsel to the
Nonconformest, and Petition to the Pious Conformist.

By one that is Consecrated to the Sacred Ministry, and is resolved not to be
a wilful Deserter of it, in trust that any undertakers, cau justify him for
such desertion at the Judgment of God; till he know better how those can come
off themselves; who are unfaithful Pastors. or unjust Silencers of others.

Printed for, and sold by Nevil Simmons, at the Princes Arms in
Pauls-Church-yard

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr. JOSEPHALLEINE, BY Mr. GEORGE NEWTON,
late Minister of Taunton in Sommersetshire.

Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea,
says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their works do
follow them.

LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by Nevil Simmons, at the Princes-Arms in
St. Paul's Churchyard.

1672.

Luke 23. 28. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your
Selves, and for your Children.
WHat Subject fitter for this sad Occasion, then a Theme of Weeping? what
Language can we better speak, or more agreeable to the dark Providence that we
are under, then Sighs, and Cries and Lamentations? How merciful was God to him,
whom he has taken to himself, and how severe to us, in this Stroke? And Oh
what hard and stupid hearts have we? Should we be so insensible of Gods heavy
Indignation, and our irreparable Loss, as to give him just Occasion to
complain, as in Jeremiah, 5. 3. I have smitten them and they have not grieved.
You of this Congregation have reason to fit down in bitterness, because the
Almighty has dealt very bitterly with you. And to cry out as sometimes Joash
did, over Elisha, 2 Kings 13. 14. My Father, my Father, the Chariots of Israel
and the Horsemen thereof: And as Rachel, once to weep, and hardly to be
comforted, because he is not: And for my part I shall take up David's
Lamentation over Jonathan, with David's Affections, 2 Samuel 1. 26. I am
distressed for thee, my Brother, very pleasant have thou been unto me.

But me thinks I over-hear him who being dead, yet speaks, calling upon us in
our Saviors Words, weep not for me. As for my own part, I have rest for
Labor, Joy for Sorrow, Peace for Trouble, Ease for Pain; I feel no aching
Bones, no falling Fits, no strained Sinews, no Distortions, no Convulsions in
the Grave. And for what I find in Heaven you shall know when you come thither.
My refreshing time is come, God has now wiped clean away every Tear from my
Eyes; and every drop of Sweat from my Face, and every sadt thought from my
heart; And therefore I forbid your tears for me, Weep not for me. But if you
swelling Passions must have vent, Consider whose the Loss is. Alas, it is not
mine, but yours; and therefore, turn the Stream into the right Channel, Weep
not for me, but weep for your selves and for your Children.

These were our Saviors words sometimes, in which he puts a stop upon the
sorrow and the (...) of those, who wept too much even at the Death of Christ
himself. Dead he was in Law already, condemned by Pilate, delivered to the
Roman Band, to guard (...) to the Place of Execution. Such tragical appearances
are (...) attended with a Multitude of Lookers on, and by how (...) the
greater, and more remarkable the person is who is to (...), so much the greater
is the Concourse. And hence it was that such a heap of people followed Christ,
on whom the eyes of the (...) Nation of the Jews were fixed, though with
different affections; Some to secure him from a rescue, some to mock him and
deride him; some to gaze upon the (...) and observe his carriage in his dead
(...), and some to see the Execution. Among the rest, there were a sort of
People that bewailed his Death, of whom it is observed that they expressed their
grief in tears. I make no (...) there were men that wept, but because women
usually have moister brains, and less command upon their passions, and so are
more inclinable to vent their sorrow in a flood of tears then men, especially,
because their passions are not much regarded neither; so that there was no fear
or (...) though they were free and open in their sorrow. Hence it is that there
is no notice taken of any other (...) but theirs, in the Verse before the Text,
and that our Savior (...), and directs his Speech to them in the words that
have been read, Daughters of Jerusolem weep not for me, but for your selves,
and for your Children.

Now in this Speech of Jesus Christ we have especially to be considered two
things, a prohibition, and a permission. In the first place we have the
prohibition of our Savior, in which he forbids them to weep, Daughters of
Jerusalem, weep not for me. And in the second place we have his permission in
which he allows them to weep; but weep for your selves, and for your
Children. And yet you see he does not here command and forbid the same things
in the same respect, but in relation to a diverse object. In relation to
himself he forbids them to weep, Weep not for me. In relation to themselves,
he allows them to weep, but weep for your selves, and for your Children.

The total final and irreparable (...) of Jerusalem was near at hand, our
Savior had it in his eye when he spoke these words. He wept apace for this
himself but a little while before, as you may see, Luke 19. 41. He behold the
city and wept over it. First he beholds it with his eye, and then his eye
affects his heart, Woe and alas! says he, (while in a pang of holy pity and
compassion, the tears come flowing down his cheeks) If thou had known even
thou at least in this thy day the things which belong unto thy peace, but now
they are hid from thine eyes. And therefore he allows them to weep for this,
who are to have a share and portion in that dreadful desolation. But for
himself, who willingly submitted to the death which he was leading to, and all
the other circumstances of his passion; who was beloved of him who had
appointed and designed him to it, who was God as well as Man; and therefore
able to endure it, and to overcome it too; and who was shortly to be rescued
from the jaws of death, and so triumphantly to enter into Glory: He forbids
them to weep, weep not so me, but weep for your selves, and for, etc.

So that the purpose of our Savior is not wholly to suppress, but to rectify
their sorrow. They wept for him out of a childish kind of pity, but they wept
not for their sins, nor the unseen calamities that were about to come upon
them. And therefore Christ endeavors to withdraw their sorrow from the wrong,
and fix it on the right object. And to this end he shows them why they should
not weep, and why they should. Weep not for me, but for your selves, and for
your Children. Two Observations lie before us in the Text. The first, That it
is not unlawful nor unfit sometimes to express our grief in tears. The second,
That we are very oubject to misplace our grief, and to mistake the ground and
object of our sorrow. I shall speak to these in order, beginning with the first.

Doct. That it is not unlawful nor unfit sometimes to express our grief in
tears.

We have our Saviors warrant for it in the Text, weep for your selves, and for
your children. There weep and weep on. How often are we called upon to weep in
Scripture? Oh what a cloud of weepers shall we find there, who are all
witnesses to this great truth. And some of them the wisest and the holiest
mentioned in the Book of God, without exception. Our Savior Christ himself,
the holy One, and the Wisdom of God, was a very great Weeper. He was a man of
sorrows, not of a few, but many sorrows, Isa. 53. 3. You never read he laughed
in all his Story, but you find he wept often. In the days of his flesh he
offered up strong cries and tears to God, Heb. 5. 7. He wept for his beloved
Lazarus, John 11. 35. And if we do the like on this occasion, we have a great
Example in our eye. He melted over poor undone Jerusalem with many tears, who
had over-pass'd the day of her gracious Visitation.

Look up and down among the poor afflicted and distressed People of the Lord,
and you shall find that tears have been as ordinary with them, as their daily
food. Thou feedest them, says Asaph, Psalm. 80. 5. With the bread of tears, and
give them tears to drink. Tears were both their Meat and Drink, and it seems
they had their fill of this Diet This was the Legacy our Savior lest to his
Diseiples, ye shall (...), John 16. 22. It is observed of the Saints, they sow
in tears, they go forth weeping, bearing precious Seed Psalm. 126. 5. (...) time
of sowing, is a time of weeping They sow in showry weather, in a rainy time,
the Seed they sow most commonly is steeped in tears. Mine eye (says holy
David) is consumed with grief, Psalm. 6. 7. He wept so much that he was
shriveled up to nothing like a bottle in a smoke, as his own expression is,
Plal. 119 83.

You see then it is not unlawful, nor unfit sometimes to express our grief in
tears. But you will ask me what these times are; I will tell you in a word.
Sinning times, and Suffering times, are weeping times. A word or two of these in
order.

1. Sinning times, are weeping times. And that whether they be sinning times
with others, or our selves.

1. Sinning times with others, must be sorrowing times, with us. Our Saviors
Bowels rolled within him, when he looked about, and saw the hardness of the
Peoples hearts, Mark 3. 5. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes (says holy
David to the Lord, Psalm. 119. 136.) because men keep not thy Law. If they will
not hear says Jeremiah, Chap. 13. 17. My soul shall weep in secret places for
their pride, and mine eyes shall weep sore and run down with tears. My Soul and
Eye shall weep together. You shall observe that those whom God appointed to be
marked and singled out for preservation, in a common desolation, were such as
sighed and cried for the abominations of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 9. 4. They did not
only keep themselves from the abominations of the time and place on which the
Providence of God had cast them, but they mourned for them in others. They were
not mere abstainers, but they were mourners, weepers too, and so were snatched
as firebrarnds out of the burnings, and set as monuments of the Mercy of God.

Brethren, if you define to be preserved in times of common desolation, when
the judgments of the Lord are abroad upon the earth, and on the places of your
habitation, and to be safe in the day of his anger, work your hearts to this
temper, while other men are sinning, be you mourning; While others are
committing horrible abominations; be you lamenting and bewailing them, sighing
and crying for those abominations. That when God comes to visit, he may find
the sighs breathing from your hearts, the drops running down your cheeks, and
all about you wet with tears.

2. And as sinning times with others, so our own sinning times especially, must
be our weeping times. Though David were a good man, yet he was a great sinner,
and so he was a great weeper. In Psalm. 6. 6. We find him even drowned in tears.
All the night long (faith he) I make my Bed to swim, and water my Couch with my
tears. An Hyperbolical expression of unmeasurable weping. So, Mary Magdalon had
much forgiven her, and thereupon she loved much, and wept much Yea she made a
bath of tears, in which she washed the feet of Christ, Luke 7. 37. It is
observed of the people of the Jews, that when they had surveyed their monstious
sins, they drew forth water (out of the Fountains of their guilty eyes) and
poured it before the Lord, 1 Samuel 7. 6. When once their hard and rockie hearts
were smitten with remorse, they melted into tears. They wept by Buckets, not by
Drops. It is a woeful frame of heart, when men can sin, but cannot sorrow.

2. As sinning times are weeping times, so suffering times are weeping times.
And that whether they be suffering times with others or our selves.

1. Suffering times with others, must be sorrowing times with us. We must weep
with them that weep. The Holy Ghost himself takes notice of it, as remarkable,
in Nehemiah, Chap. 1. 4. that when he heard of the distresses, of his Brethren,
he sat down (as one astonished) and wept and mourned certain dates. And Jeremiah
cries out in such a ease, Oh that my head were waters (nothing else) and mine
eyes a fountain of tears, (both eyes one fountain) that I might weep day and
night (without cessation) for the slain of the Daughters of my People. It is
our duty, to remember them that are in Bonds, as bound with them, and them that
are Distressed, and broken and undone, as if we our selves were broken and
undone with them. Oh let not it be said of any of us, that we swim in
pleasures, while our Brethren swim in tears. That we have lain upon our costly
Beds, and stretched our selves upon our Couches, that we have (...) the Lambs
out of the Flock, and the Calves out of the Stall, that we have chanted to the
Viol and invented Instruments of Music to our selves, that we drink Wine in
bowls, but are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6. 4, 5, 6.

2. And as when others are afflicted, so when we our selves are so, it is a
proper time to weep. The poor distressed Church draws up a Catalogue of all her
troubles, Lamentations 1. 12, etc. And then concludes at the 16. Verse, for
these things I weep, mine eye, mine eye, runs down with water. Yea, she
complains that she had wept so much, that her eyes did fail with tears, Lam. 2.
11. I might give other Scriptures, where you shall find them flowing abundantly
on such occasions. But this may satisfy to show you, that it is not unlawful,
nor unfit, sometimes to express our grief in tears. And what those weeping
times are: Times of sinning, and times of suffering, either with others, or
with our selves.

Use 1. They are mistaken then, who think it an unworthy and unmanly thing to
weep, to drop a rear at any time, as if it argued feebleness of mind, and
imbecility of spirit. How many daring Gallants are there in the world, who
despise Gods mourners, and look on such as weep, for the abominatious, or the
desolations of the times, as a company of poor weak low Souls. And yet Hezekiah
wept, and David wept, even till he (...) himself in tears; who notwithstanding
was as gallant and as brave a man as ever lived. The wise man tells us; that
there is a time to weep, Ecles. 3. 4. And where says he of mourning thou art
mad, and of sorrow, What is it that thou do? As he does of joy and laughter,
Where do you find a blessing poured out on laughter, as you do on tears and
mourning? There are but nine Beatitudes and this is one, Blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted, Mar. 5. 4. And therefore they deceive
themselves who scorn mourners, and labor to put on that Apathie and Idolence,
which is so much commended by the Stoics: Who think it is their Patience, and
insuperable Fortitude of mind, to be disquiered with nothing, neither sins,
(...) sufferings, so far at least, as to shed tears. Their Patience is it? No,
it is their senslesness. I have smitten them and they have not grieved, says
God, of hardened Israel, Jer. 5. 3. It is not Patience but Stupidity, that he
bewaileth there in that people.

Use 2. What shall we think of those who have no time for tears, or sorrows:
They spend their days in mirth, and pleasure, and chase away all thoughts from
their hearts, be the occasion what it will, or what it can: These are merry men
indeed, I wish they would but sadly lay to heart these few Considerations, and
I shall pass on to the third Use.

1. It is a foolish thing, to melt away in mirth and laughter, especially at
such a time, when there is nothing upon every side but cause of sorrow. No
question they conceive, it is their wisdom to be lively still, however matters
go, and to drive away sorrow from their hearts. But what says Solomon, the
wisest man that ever lived, Ecc'es. 7. 4. The wise man's heart is in the house
of (...) If his body be not there, yet his heart at least, is there. But on the
other side, the heart of Fools is in the house of mirth. You know they use to
paint Fools laughing, and wise men, with a serious grave composed look, And
surely there is something in it, but the Fool has not the wit to pick it out.

2. As it is a foolish thing, so it is a sinful thing, to give our selves to
mitch and laughter, when God calls us to sorrow. It is a sin which God does
hardly (if at all forgive) we find that he has sealed the Committers of it up
to wrath, and bound the guilt of this Iniquity upon their souls never to be
removed again. That is a damning sentence which we find, Isa. 22. 12. They were
formidable Judgments which the Lord had threatened, and actually inflicted on
the Jews. And thereupon he looked they should have carried and demeaned
themselves like Mourners, like men that were extremely sensible of his
displeasure, and much affected with his hand upon them. But they despised and
slighted all, and gave themselves to mirth and pleasure, and (...) in a braving
way. And what was the event and issue of it; Surely this iniquity shall not be
purged from you till you die.

3. And as it is a foolish, and a sinful thing, so it is a dangerous thing.
There, is a fearful woe denounced to such as laugh; for they shall mourn. The
Lord will one day turn their vain and foolish mirth, to weeping and
lamentation. It will be Gall and Wormwood in the latter end. They that are
always making mercy, and never grieve at the distress of the church, they
shall go captive with the first, as God denounces, Amos 6. 7. Whoever escape
they shall be sure to have their portion. The Lord will set them in the Front
to undergo the sharpest brunt, and the most fierce encounter of his Vengeance.
And though they bear it out a while, the Lord will surely meet with them
another day, when they shall have their portion there, where there is nothing
else but Weeping and wailing, and (...) of teeth. They that do nothing else but
laugh in this world, shall do nothing else but weep in that to come. And all
their carnal joy will prove crackling of thorns under a pot, soon in and soon
out, and flashes of Lightning before Eternal fire.

Use 3. And therefore in the third place, since there are times to grieve, and
to express our grief in tears, let this be a Caveat to us not to look for too
much joy in this world. Let us not cast too much upon it, lest we be
disappointed and deceived. It Is that we are very apt to cozen and delude our
selves about, when we are on a merry pin, and flourish in a prosperous estate,
it is our manner to conclude that we shall never have a storm again, and that
this happy time will never end. And so we run upon a double inconvenience, we
grow remiss in making preparations for a time of sorrow; and when it comes upon
us unexpected it cuts the deeper, and disquiets us the more. How often shall
you hear it from the mouths of some, when any heavy Cross befalls them, alas
they never dreamed of this, they never looked to see this doleful day; The
weaker and unwiser they. Did they not know what they are, born to trouble, as
the sparks fly upward, so that they have a natural tendency to it? That they
are wandering in a vale of tears; in which they must look out for many storms:
It was a pretty Speech of Seneca, Dolor and voluptas inhicem cedunt, brevior
voluptas; Joy and sorrow have still their turns and entercourses here, but Joy
(most commonly) has the speediest dispatch. And therefore in the midst of Joy,
let us be wisely casting upon times of sorrow, and making preparation and
provision for them. And that you may not saint either in the sense and feeling,
or in the apprehension and expectation of them; I shall drop down a few
Cordials.

1. The times of tears and sorrow, are better for us then the times of mirth
and laughter. And hence says Solomon, in the fore-alledged Scriptures, Eceles.
7. 2. It is better to go to the house of mourning then to the house of feasting
Is it not a more pleasing good, but is it a more profitable good; though it be
not more delightful, yet it is more beneficial to be where there are tears and
lamentations, then to be where there is nothing else but laughter. And that
upon these two Accounts.

1. Times of grief and tears, prepare for grace, They fit us for the work of
holiness upon our souls. They settle us, and fix us, and make us capable of
good impressions. When there is nothing else but mirth, we have light and (...)
spirits, our fancies rove, our thoughts and our imaginations wander: But when
the Lord presents nothing else before our eyes but tears and lamentations,
this calls home our thoughts, It renders us unto our selves, and makes us fit
for holy motions. We see it by experience, that the very men, who when they are
upon a merry pin, are senseless and incapable of any good, they have such vain
and foolish hearts: when they are brought into a melting frame, then they are
mild and time as Lambs, then they are pliable and flexible, and tractable; so
that a little child may lead them. If you visit them; if you counsel and advise
them for their good, then you shall have their ears, and hearts too.

2. And as the times of grief and tears prepare for grace, so they increase and
further grace. Grace will spring and grow the more for such showers as these
are. It prospers better in a (...) and watered then in a dry and barren soil,
And if you search the sacred Story, you will find the greatest weepers to have
been the greatest Saints. As David, Peter, yea, our Savior Christ himself.
Indeed this precious Seed delights to have such dews as these; the Seed of
Prayer, of Repentance, yea, that Immortal Seed, the Word of God, does best when
it is sown in tears. When we repent in tears, our hearts relent and melt most.
When we preach and pray in tears, we move our selves and others most; -- Si vts
me flere, dolendum est Primum ipsi tibi. This Seed when it is watered thus
springs up the faster, and brings forth the more plentiful increase.

2. These times of grief and tears will end at last, and end in joy. You shall
weep (says Christ to his Apostles,) but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.
They that sow in tears shall reap in joy; and he that goes forth weeping,
bearing precious Seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his
sheaves with him. There is no doubt, no question to be made of that, and
therefore it is bound with an Asseveration, which takes away all scruple from
it, he shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with
him. It is the custom every where to have good cheer, and to be merry when
they reap. So it was among the Jews, as you may see Deuteronomy. 16. 13, 14. And
therefore this is used in Scripture to express the greatest joy, Isa. 9. 3.
They shall rejoice before thee according to the joy of harvest. So, though the
Christian, sows in rainy weather, in a weeping time, all shall be sweet, and
calm, and fair, when the reaping time comes. He shall fit down with Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven, feeding on the hidden Manna,
and drinking of the pure and Crystal River of Water of Life, proceeding from
the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, and there they shall be merry all together.
When once he comes to God's immediate presence, he shall have joy, full joy;
yea, the fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. last. In his presence is fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore.

3. The joy that is to come will pay for all. It will be such, so plentiful and
overflowing, that it will make a full amends for all your present tears and
sorrow; It will quite overcome the sense, and the remembrance of them. Alas,
our trouble here is nothing, in comparison, it is a light and easy Burden.
Our affliction is but short, it continues but a moment, but the time is drawing
nigh, when this little light sorrow, shall be wholly swallowed up in endless
and unutterable joy, This short affliction which lasts but a moment, shall
end in everlasting and unmixed pleasures, 2 Cor. 4. 17. It works for us, a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: Oh what transporting comfort is
there many times, in reaping the first fruits of the Spirit! that we are ready
to cry out, if the first fruits be so sweet, what will the Harvest be? If the
earnest be so great, what will the Possession be? When we shall be filled and
satisfied, with the delights that heaven yields to all eternity. I could say as
Peter once, It is good to be here, let us build Tabernacles here. But I must
hasten to another Observation.

Doct. 2. That we are very subject to misplace our grief, and to mistake the
Ground and Object of our sorrow.

So did these Daughters of Jerusalem you see, they wept where they should not,
and they wept not where they should. And therefore Christ Corrects their Sorrow
in the Text; Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves,
and for your Children. A great part of the sin, and corruption that has
invaded humane nature, consists in the disorder and distemper of our passions
and affections; and lies especially in two things, either when we miss the
right object, or transgress the just measure: When they are either ill placed,
or ill proportioned: When we mistake in either of them, When we are troubled
where we should not, or too much troubled where we should; we are much to be
condemned: And both of these we are very subject to. The first is pertinent to
our purpose, we are extremely apt to grieve and to be troubled where we should
not. It is no wonder that we find Esau faulty here, mistaken in the object of
his sorrow: He sought Repentance, and sought it carefully with tears; as you
may see, Heb. 12. 17. But what Repentance did he seek with tears? Alas he
missed his mark, he sought not his own, but his Fathers Repentance; feign he
would have his Father to Repent of his pouring out the blessing on his younger
brother Jacob, and consequently to revoke it, and to call it back again: But
when he saw that was not to be done, and heard his Father say, I have blessed
him, and he shall be blessed, he lifted up his voice and wept, Genesis 27. 38. Yea
the Apostles and Disciples of our Savior Christ himself mistook in this, that
they misapplyed their sorrow. They were extremely grieved and troubled that
Christ was ready to depart, and to withdraw his fleshly presence from them:
Whereas he tells them plainly, It is expedient for you that I go away, John.
16. 7. It is not only expedient for me, but it is expedient for you? so that
here was no real cause of grief and sorrow. And hence our Savior puts a stop
upon it, John 14. 1. Let not your hearts be troubled, q d. I see that you
misplace your grief, Come it must not be so; I will not have it to be so; lot
not your hearts be troubled.

Poor Mary was greatly at a loss in this particular, she stood besides the
sepulcher of Christ Weeping, John 11. 20. Why what is the matter? The Body of
the Lord is gone. Had she found him dead there, it seems she had been very well
content: So that her grief and sorrow was in deed (although she did not
understand it, and intend it so) that Christ was Risen. She should have wept
over an unbelieving heart, (that doubted of the Resurrection of her Savior)
and not over an empty Grave, from which his Body was delivered; God having
loosed the pains of Death, because it was not possible that he should be holden
of it, Acts 2. 24.

I might add other instances, but these may satisfy to clear the point; That
we are very subject to misplace our grief, and to mistake the ground and object
of our sorrow: And there are two especial causes of it. viz. Either because our
understanding is (...), or our Affections are mislaid.

Reas. 1: Sometimes we are very subject to misplace our grief, because our
understanding is misled. We do not Judge aright of that, which is indeed the
only, or the greatest cause of trouble. Some apprehend their tears are fitter
to be spent on their Afflictions, then their sins: They see no great hurt in
sin, but they feel much in Affliction; Affliction is a grievous thing to them;
but corruption is not so. There is a principle in Nature which makes a man
averse from penal evil, but there is none at all, that makes him averse from
sinful evil: so that a man needs nothing else but Nature to make him sensible
of penal evils of Afflictions, but he needs more then Nature, to make him
sensible of sin: And hence it is, because the greater part of men have nothing
else but Nature in them, that they are so exceedingly affected with the one,
and so regardless of the other.

Now these affections follow apprehensions, as they always do; They are
mistaken in their judgments, and so they misapply their passions: They look
upon their sins as small matters, but they amplify their troubles and
afflictions, as he in the Poet, I am ten times, twenty times, an hundred times
miserable; And hence they weep for their afflictions and will not be comforted;
while they have not a tear to spend upon their sins; And this in probability
was Isreal's case, Ier. 30. 15. They were extremely troubled at the miseries
that were upon them, but they were little troubled at their sins; They cried
because of their Afflictions; they did not only sigh and mourn and grieve and
weep, but more then so they cried aloud; which shows extremity of sorrow: But
we hear nothing of any sorrow for their sins. And therefore God comes in and
interrupts them, why what is the matter with you, can you tell why you take on
in this fashion? Why criest thou for (...)? thy sorrow is incurable, for the
multitude of thine Iniquity: because thy sins are increased

And so for penal evils, they mistake there too; They think that Temporal
Judgments, are greater and heavier then spiritual judgments: They take the
bodily plague, to be worse then the plague of the heart: a famine of Corn, then
the famine of the word; and so they grieve more for the one, then for the
other; and they had rather lose their Savior; then their (...): That is the
first reason then, why we misplace our grief, Because our understanding is
misled.

2. The second is, Because our Affection is misled, I mean our love; for love
is the commander of our other passions: It is the first and great wheel of the
soul, that carries all the rest about, and governs them as it pleases. Love is
the strongest of the passions and Affections, and therefore all the rest yield
to it, and are greatly swayed by it: And by this means it comes to pass, that
if we misplace our Love, we are in danger to misplace our sorrow: For we shall
surely grieve for that most, which we love best, whether it be best or not. Oh
what a deal of vain unnecessary sorrow, do many throw themselves into, by
misapplying this Affection! Their love is settled where it should not be, or it
is stronger then it ought to be, to such a friend, to such a comfort, to such a
relation, and when they find a disappointment by the removal, or the change of
that which they have set their hearts too much upon, their grief is answerable
to their love. Strong affections (especially when they miscarry in the object
of them) do cast men into strong Afflictions.

Oh how was David overcome with the death of Absalom! though yet indeed, the
cutting of him off, was a great and signal mercy, to himself, and to his
people. And therefore Joab even rates him for it, 2 Samuel 19. 5 and following
verses. Says he, Thou have shamed this day the faces of all thy servants who
have saved thy life, and the life of thy Sons, and of thy Daughters, and thy
Wives: Since thou have (...) thine Enemies, and hated thy Friends, and have
declared this day, that thou regardest neither Princes nor Servants: And I
perceive that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died this day, it would have
pleased thee well. You see the reason of his immoderate and overflowing sorrow
for him, was his inordinate Affection to him: Which was so out of measure
great, that when he heard the news, his passion wrought, and he was hasting to
a room to give it vent. But alas, he cannot hold till he come thither, but
discharges at the stairs as he is going up, 2 Samuel 18. 33. He wept as he went
and said, O my Son Absalom, my Son Absalom, would God I had died for thee, O
Absalom, my Son, my Son. You see then both that, and why, we are so ready to
misplace our grief, and to misapply our sorrow.

Use. The application of the point shall be for Caution, and Direction, both
together; To watch our hearts against it, that so we lay not out our tears
amiss: Be circumspect that you do not misplace your grief, and that you do not
mistake the ground and object of your sorrow; like these poor Daughters of
Jerusalem, who wept where they should not, and wept not where they should. Oh
what a deal of grief do some men waste away, when there is no cause at all! How
do many men take on, when they are crossed in prosecution of their lusts, and
hindered in their sins, which is in deed a great mercy? Oh what floods of tears
do some men pour (...) upon a petty flight occasion, at a trifling accident!

Beloved, tears if they be shed aright, are precious things; God puts them up
into his Bottle, as if they were of great value: And yet some lay them out on
nothing: How will they weep, and grieve, at any disappointment in their small
affairs, any miscarriage in their business, any little petty loss, any
unkindness from their friends, or neighbors, any affront or provocation in the
least degree; nay if they be but crossed in their wills, though it be best
indeed they should: All their sorrow is bestowed on little trifling
inconsiderable things. Why, my beloved, have ye not other manner of things then
these to grieve for? what think you of your own sias, with all their bloody
aggravations? what think you of the horrible Abominations, and woeful
desolations of the Land? And of all the wrath of God, that has been lately
manitested and revealed from Heaven against us, more ways then I am able to
express? I might be very large in showing you particularly and distinctly, both
what you should, and what you should not grieve for; and giving you directions
from the word of God about it. But because the time spends, and I would not be
prevented of that which I have principally in my eye, I shall pass over many
other things that so I may apply my self to the occasion.

Methinks I see the clouds gather, and return after the Rain: And out of
question many of you are come hither with a sufficient (...) of sorrow: your
hearts are full of grief, and your souls full of trouble, and your bottles full
of tears, brim full. You have drawn water, and are ready to pour it our before
the Lord this day. My work shall be to guide you, and direct you (with our
Savior in the Text) how to bestow these tears, and how to spend this sorrow,
that you may not weep in vain, I say to you as Christ does to the Daughters of
Jerusalem (with a little alteration) weep not for him, whom the Lord has taken
from you, but weep for your selves, and for your Children.

1. Weep not for him. I know the loss of such an Able, Faithful, Painful,
zealous Minister of Christ as he was, ought to be very much bewailed; Men of
such hidden worth as he had in him, and of such public use and service in the
Church, should not be raked up in their Graves, without tear, and lamentations:
Joash a wicked King wept for a good Prophet, and that with very great
affection, 2 Kings 13. 14. He wept over his face and said, My Father, my Father
the Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof. And if you mark the carriage
of the Saints, when such as he (I mean our dear and worthy Brother) have been
taken from them, it would warrant all the tears you have to spend on this
occasion. In the first of Kings 13. 30. You find a Prophet burying a Prophet,
and melting over him when he Interred him; He laid his Carcass in the Grave and
mourned over him, and said alas my Brother! How solemnly did Israel lament the
death of Samuel, and made their grief as remarkable and public as their loss,
1 Samuel 25. 1. It is observed of Stephen that he was carried by devout men to
his burial with great lamentation, Acts 8. 2. And God forbid that such an one
as we have lost, should die away, as if he were not desired; that he would
steal into his Grave, as if there were no notice taken of his Death. No my
Beloved, weep, and weep on; sit down and weep till you can weep no more; yet
still I say, weep not for him.

Your loss is unaccomptable indeed, and time perhaps will show it to be greater
then as yet you see. But tell me my Beloved, is he a loser any way? Nay, is he
not an infinite gainer? Is not this best of all for him? Indeed to have
continued in the flesh was better for you; as the Apostle states the case, when
he was (...), Phil. 1. 24. But for him it was far better to be dissolved and to
be with Christ. Now he enjoys a (...) deliverance from all Corruptions, all
Temptations, all Afflict (...): A full return of all his Prayers, and
Breathings after God and Christ, in which he was transported, when he was
drawing near his Glory: A full reward of all his tiring and incessent Labors.
Oh blessed soul! You know a Voice from Heaven has said, Blessed are the dead
that die in the Lord, for they rest from their Labors, and their works follow
them. Therefore I say weep not for him.

There is one thing I must confess that makes this Providence the sadder to us:
You know it is the Prophet David's Prayer, Psalm. 102. 24. O my God take me not
away in the midst of my days. The Lord indeed has taken him away in the midst
of his days, and in the midst of his Ministry. But is he gone to Heaven too
soon? Too soon indeed for you, but not for him. Is he got home to his Fathers
house too soon? Is he with God, and Christ, and Angels, and glorified Saints
too soon? What, does he wish that he were back again with you? Has he his
everlasting Rest too soon? His glorious Recompense too soon? Brethren, he
wrought a pace you know, while he had strength, and finished the work that God
had given him to do betime. So that it is no wonder though he has his wages
early, sooner then such dull heavy Slugs as we are. His life was short indeed,
though filled up with Grace and Duty, and God has made but an exchange of an
Eternal one for it. He was a burning and a shining light; burning with enflamed
Affections, till the Oil was spent, and shining in an exemplary Conversation.
But this Lamp is not extinguished, but only lighted up, to flame and shine in a
more glorious place. And there he shall shine forth as the Sun, for ever and
ever. So that I may say still, weep not for him.

2. But you will ask me, For whom shall we weep then? I answer, for your
selves, and for your Children.

1. Weep for your selves. The Lord you see has made a woeful breach upon you,
as it is said of (...), 1 Samuel 6. 8. And that your hearts remain unbroken, they
are unsuitable to this heavy dispensation. God has removed his holy faithful
servant, not into a blind corner, but into a dark pit. The Grave has newly
shut her mouth upon him, he is gone hence to be no more in this world: You
shall behold him now no more in the Land of the Living: Your eyes shall see
your Teacher here no more for ever: You shall now be no more enlightened with
his clear instructions: No more enlivened with his zealous Exhortations: No
more quickened with his fervent Prayers: No more warmed with his heavenly
Discourses: No more cheered with his sweet Consolations: No more guided by his
holy Example. The Lord has made him up among his Jewels, because indeed we
were not worthy of such a precious Gemme as he was: He has in anger and
displeasure plucked away one of our Pillars, as if he meant the House should
fall. And shall we be insensible of such a stroke? Shall we have tears enough
to waste upon our petty Losses, and not to have a tear to spend on this
Inestimable and Irreparable one? Brethren, you are allowed to weep here, though
not for him, yet for your selves: And that especially in two respects

1. For the sins that you have done, for they have made this sad work. They are
the true and real cause of all your Losses. They are your sins that binder good
things that they come not to you; or take them quite away when they are come.
If God carry you a side into a Wilderness and strip you naked there of any
mercy; as if he meant to (...) you to the purpose; Your ways and your doing I
have procured you these things; such is your wickedness. Believe it, you have
sinned some way or other, against the Mercy which the Lord takes from you: They
are our sins against the Ordinances of the Lord, that cause the Lord to take
away our Ordinances from us. They are our sins against the Ministers of Christ
(in that capacity as Ministers) that provoke him to remove our Ministers from
us; yea many times to take away the Candlestick and Light together. You may
take up the Lamentation of the Church this day; The Crown is fallen from our
heads; woe to us for we have sinned. They are our sins that (...) and Impair and
Kill our Ministers, who are indeed the Churches Crown, and the glory of Christ.

Sometimes we overvalue them, and then we kill them with kindness. Sometimes we
undervalue them, and then we kill them with neglect, and (...) them do their
work with grief: Sometimes we are (...), and unthankful, and unfruitful; and
God calls away his Workmen out of the Vineyard that will yield no better Fruit.
Nay sometimes we decline, and grow remiss, and cold, and slat, we lose our love
to God and Christ, and then he takes away our Beloved comforts from us. And let
me tell you, some of you have backslidden grievously, and sensibly abated of
your former Zeal and Holiness, and strictness in the Ways of God: Yea, sinned
scandalously to the dishonor of Religion and the Gospel: This grieved our dear
Brother, who will grieve no more now; I had it from his Mouth and Pen, how
tenderly he took some late miscarriages, and how near they went to him: These
things brought him low among you, who was low enough before; and made him to
bewail many who have manifestly sinned, and have not repented, as the Apostle
speaks, 2 Cor. 12. 21. Oh how it wounded him, after so many Labors and so many
Sufferings, for your establishment and confirmation; to see such declinations
and backslidings. He might have said with the Apostle, 1 These. 3. 8. Now I live
if you stand fast in the Lord, if not I die; and dead he is.

Oh my dear Friends, What have your sins done? What has your barrenness, and
your unfruitfulness, and your backsliding done? I know you loved him with a
very high affection, and have made it to appear in many outward declarations to
your great praise: But the best way to show your love to the true Ministers of
Christ, Who seek not yours, but you; who seek not profit and applause, but
Fruit; is to bear their just reproofs and to be amended by them; to hear and
obey them in their regular directions; to follow all their good Examples: For
the Ministers of Christ are Samplers to the flock, and Samplers must be wrought
after. And in a word, to bring them in the return of all their Labors, in
Holiness and holy Walking; that they may see the travel of their souls and be
satisfied. Nothing but this will satisfy them, and make them do their work
with Joy. I know you loved him, as there was cause enough you should; but say
in truth, have you Improved him? I am assured that many of you (a considerable
number) have Improved him to the utmost of your power. That you have made the
most you could, of his Indefatigable and Incessant pains among you: That you
have gathered up the very Fragments of the Bread of Life, and picked up the
very Crumbs, that nothing might be lost. That you have eyed his exemplary
Conversation, and walked according to your pattern. And this I make no question
is no small comfort to you in this doleful day. But have you all done this? Are
there no secret Stitches at the Hearts of any of you, upon this consideration?
He spent his strength indeed among you, he wasted and consumed himself, that
you might flourish: But tell me, have there been answerable Fruits among you,
of Holiness and Obedience? When he Fed you, have you prosper'd? He got a poor
lean withered Body, that you might have fat Souls. And are you all fat and well
liking? Oh what lean Souls have some of you, who have attended on his Ministry,
even to his dying day: How has your rich and fat Pasture been cast away upon
you? So that our Brother might have said (in reference to many) as the Prophet
did, I have spent my strength in vain. However he is glorious with his God. But
I am very much afraid that many of you will find this holy witness who is now
ascended, Witnessing against you, when the day of trial comes.

Dear Friends: Be not offended if I tell you, that your sins have had a stroke
in the Sickness, and the Weakness, and the death of your deservedly beloved
Minister. They were our sins that killed Christ; He was bruised for our
iniquities, and broken for our sins. He bare our sins in his Body on the Tree.
And so they are our sins that kill the Ministers of Christ. You have often seen
your Savior slain before you, by and for your sins. Now you have seen a holy
Minister of his, slain by the same hands. And yet your sins live still to do
more such work, and the Lord knows where it will end. There is no Execution
done upon them, who have done such dreadful Execution in our view. Oh let your
hearts break, and your Tears run down, till your Lusts be broken, mortified,
and destroyed; or else they will break you, and destroy you. If you have any
love to Christ, to the Ministers of Christ, or to your Selves, you may see
cause enough to weep, though not for our deceased Brother; yet for your selves,
and for your sins. That Is the first thing then, weep for the sins that you have
done.

2. For the Judgments that now you may be like to suffer. To this our Savior
refers in the Text, weep for your selves and for your children, That is, for
the extremity of Wrath and (...) V engeance, that is about to come on you and
them. Even so say I to you my Brethren, with the Apostle, James 5. 1. Go to
now, weep and howl, for your miseries that shall come upon you. Oh let not that
complaint of the Prophet, Isaiah 57. 1. Be renewed against you, The Righteous
perishes and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the Righteous is taken away from the evil to come. Our dear
Brother now deceased was a Righteous man, yea a Preacher of Righteousness. The
Lord you see has taken him away; Oh what evil is to come! When such as he are
housed, what dreadful storms may there be like to fall? Brethren, the holy
Ministers of God, are the peoples Lifeguard, The Chariots of Israel and the
Horsemen thereof, 2 Kings 13. 14. They are anointed Cherubs that Cover. They
are a Shelter and a Covering from the Storm, and from the Rain. Sometimes they
are called Shepherds; and the business of a Shepherd is to keep and save the
Flock. Sometimes they are called Angels; and Angels are the Guardians of the
Lords people: They Guard, and Cover, and Protect a People.

Now this they do while they instruct them so to walk, that wrath may not come
upon them while they Intercede with God, and stand up in the breach, to keep
out the Indignation that is flowing in upon it. A praying Minister (and such a
one have you lost) one that bare you on his Heart continually before the Lord
(as Aaron did the names of Israel on his Breast Plate) I say a praying
Minister, is a Protection to the People. Its true, the fervent Prayers of the
meanest Saint, are an Incredible defense to any place, to save it from the
shokes of God. And therefore even they are styled Intercessors, Isa. 59. 16.
Because they mediate with God when he is Angry, and by their zealous
Supplications hold his hands. But yet however, though it be a certain truth
that God has much respect to the Petitions of his weakest Servants, yea though
perhaps some private Christians may Excel a holy Minister in Prayer; yet God
has more regard to the Entreaties of his faithful Ministers, who have a
special Charge, and commission to be his Remembrancers for the good of that
People, which he (...) to their charge; and their Petitions are of more avail
and power with God both to Procure his Blessings, and avert his Judgments.
Moses and Aaron among the Priests, and Samuel among them that call on his Name:
They called upon the Lord, and he answered them, Psalm. 99. 6. Why doubtless, so
he heard the Prayers of his other Saints. But these his holy Priests and
Prophets had the Ear of God (as special Favorites have their Princes Ears) and
could be Heard and Answered, when others were denied Access and Audience. And
this is not obseurely Intimated in that Protestation of the Lord to Israel,
concerning their approaching Desolation, Ezekiel. 14. 14. Though these three men,
Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they should deliver but their own souls. By
which, he insinuates, that when the absolute Decree is once gone forth, it can
by no means be revoked; so he suggests withal, that if it had been feasible,
these holy (...) would have done it; ( q. d.) were those three men in Israel,
they would put me to it hard, and try me shrewdly to forbear the Land, I should
be hardly able to deny them. He said he would destroy them, had not Moses stood
before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, Psalm. 106. 23. Oh how did
Moses stand against him, and bind the Hands of the Almighty, when he was about
to strike. So that the Lord entreats and flatters with him to let him alone,
Exodus 32. 10. While such as Moses are Intercessors for a People, God forbears,
he holds his Hands, and restrains his Indignation; as he that means to strike,
observes what strength there will be likely to oppose him: And when he looks
and sees, that there is no Intercessor, then he goes on with his design, Isa.
59. 16. Then his Arm brings Salvation to him, and he puts on the Garments of
Vengeance.

Brethren, you are in greater danger then you are aware, by the removal of your
Praying Minister: For you have lost one Intercessor, if any breach should
happen between God and you. Yea, you have lost your Covering, if a storm of
Wrath should fall. So that it may be said of you, as it was once of Israel when
Moses was a way, that you are naked; And what, are you in Laodicea's case
indeed? Do you not know that you are naked? Are you naked and are you not
afraid? Are you naked and not ashamed? This would become a state of Innocence
indeed; in which it was observed of Adam and his Wife, that they were both
naked, and were not (...), Genesis 2. 5. But will it suit with such a state of sin
and danger, as the best of you are in? Do you not find your selves uncovered?
Have you no sense and feeling of it? Especially at such a time as this, when
the Judgments of the Lord are abroad upon the Earth, upon the Land, upon this
very place in which you live, more ways then I am able to express. Alas, alas,
you are uncovered, whether you know it yea or no. And it is perhaps some mercy,
that you are not quite uncovered. Here spend your Tears, and you shall not
misplace your sorrow. That is the first branch of Direction; weep for your
selves: For the sins that you have done, and for the Judgments that you may be
like to suffer.

2. There is a second yet behind, and I have done. Weep for your Children. Weep
not for me, says Christ, but weep for your selves, and for your Children. And
why for them? Because their Children were to bear a share, and suffer with them
in the wrath that was about to come upon them, as you may see, Luke 19. 43. For
the days shall come upon thee (says our Savior) that thine enemies shall cast
(...) Trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every
side, and shall lay thee eaven with the ground, and thy Children with thee.
Brethren, if you have any Tears left, drop a few upon your Children: You are
not able to foresee what miseries your little ones may be reserved for: And
verily their danger is increased as well as yours, by this stroke: For you have
lost a (...), as well as a Preacher; you know what care and pains he took, and
what a Gift and Faculty he had in instilling holy Knowledge into your Children,
and your little ones, while he had liberty in Public, and strength with
opportunity in Private. He took a very great delight to tamper with them, and
to role them on to the holy Ways of God by all the means that he was able to
devise. It was his very last design (As he was always full of holy Projects)
to take some Course, that Children might be more general Principled in the
Grounds and Fundamentals of Religiony then they are. And I am very well
assured, that many of your Children, have such Liquor poured into them by his
means, that they will relish of it as long as they have a day to live, and it
may be bless the Lord and him for it, to all Eternity. And therefore you have
cause enough to (...) that you have lost a Minister that was (...) and apt to
Teach, not your selves only, but your Children too, and (...) them know the way
of the Lord. Not to feed the Sheep only, but to lead the (...) too, and to
(...) them in his Bosom, as the expression is, Isa 40. 11. I have done with the
Directions, Weep for your selves, and for your Children.

And now for the close of all, (...) again, Weep not for him, his sorrow
certainly, is turned (...) Joy, and therefore so let yours be also. He has
received that Blessed Sentence, Welt done good and faithful Servant, enter into
thy Masters Joy. And let me tell you (I speak it upon good assurance) he went
Triumphantly to Glory: An Entrance was (...) to him abundantly into the
Heavenly Kingdom. As he drew nearer Heaven (till his disease prevailed against
his reason) he grew still more Heavenly. When Grace and Glory were about to
Join, Grace in him was most Glorious. Oh with what Ecstasy, and Ravishments of
Spirit did he fly away into the Bosom of his Savior!

I have but one word to add, and it is that of the Apostle, Heb. 13. Remember
him that had sometimes the Rule over you, who has spoken to you the word of
the Lord, whose Faith follow, considering the end of his conversation. And that
was a blessed end indeed. Remember him; to follow him in all that was exemplary
in him, whether concerning Faith, or Life, that walking in the holy way that he
did, you may at last come to the happy End and Place where he is.

FINIS.

