Imprimatur.

Geo. Thorp, Rever. in Christo P. and D. Dne. Gulielmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr.
Dom.

Febr. 18. 1678/9.
A DISCOURSE OF Divine Assistance, AND THE METHOD thereof: Showing what
Assistance Men receive from God in performing the Condition of the Promise of
pardon of Sin and Eternal Life.

By W. A.

Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling: for it is
God which works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.

Mat. 13.12. Whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance.

LONDON, Printed by M. C. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-head in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1679.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
MVch indeed has been written of the Divine Assistance in parts, and upon
occasion of handling other doctrines, such as Repentance, Faith, Regeneration,
etc. But yet I cannot say that much has been done by any entire and set
Discourse upon this Subject, especially not upon Gods preventing grace and
preparatory assistance; which yet is one branch of the whole, and hugely
necessary to be well understood and considered. Upon which account I cannot but
think that something further of this nature, though but vulgarly done, may be
of good use to Vulgar capacities, who can better understand this great Doctrine
when they see the parts put together, and how they relate to, and depend one
upon another, than otherwise they can.

And therefore the better to prepare the Reader for the ensuing Discourse, I
shall instance in some few things, to show the usefulness of a clear and
distinct understanding of the Nature and Method of Divine Assistance, and the
terms on which it may be expected.

And first touching the Method of Gods assistance. It is endeavored in the
following Discourse to show, that God by his preventing grace usually begins
with men, in assisting them toward performance of the condition of the
promise, by raising in them a sense of their guilt and danger, and by awakening
their fear; and all to stir them up to apply themselves to the remedy. For Fear
being a most powerful principle and spring of Action, when any thing strong,
will, if any thing will, put them upon endeavors to provide for their own
safety. But if men be ignorant and unacquainted with this Method of Gods
assistance, they will be in much danger of taking these first operations of God
upon their minds, to be but like other thoughts which come and go there,
without being much taken notice of: or else but for a fit of Melancholy, to be
withstood and striven against; and so unawares they may quench the Spirit under
the notion of removing Melancholy thoughts. Whereas if they were made sensible
of the Nature of Gods Preparatory Assistance, they would probably be more
afraid to slight such working of their thoughts, lest in doing so they should
slight the warning of God himself, and the safety of their own souls.

The knowledge of this Method of Gods Assistance, serves also to direct those
who labor the conversion of souls, and to help on the Work of Repentance in
men, frequently to inculcate upon the minds of Unreformed Sinners, such
arguments and considerations as are apt and proper to make them sensible of
their guilt and danger, and to awaken their fears. For when by their doing so,
these applications from without by the Word, meet with Gods applications to the
mind by his Spirit within, the operation will be so much the more powerful, and
the more likely to prevail.

And because men are too apt to discharge themselves of such fears as much as
they can, by some vain and delusive reasonings in their minds: and because a
resolution to become new men hereafter, though they delay it for the present,
is one of them; therefore to prevent this, the greatness of the folly, and the
greatness of the danger of such a delay, should be strenuously urged upon them,
as a Folly so great, that the folly of those that see their whole Estates, or
their Lives in apparent danger, and yet do not make all the haste they can to
secure them, is no folly in comparison of this. For they are not only in
danger thereby of being eternally lost, by being snatched away under such a
delay, but also of being deprived of all Divine Assistance for the future,
although they should live never so long. For from him that has not (i. e. has
not used that which he first had) shall be taken away that which he has, says
our Savior.

Bad men are apt to flatter and deceive themselves with this opinion also, viz.
that they have no power to be better, or to perform the condition of the
promise, nor never had, and that they cannot be better till God give them of
his grace to be so, by giving them more power to that end, than ever yet he
gave them: and that it is not consistent with his Mercy, nor with his Justice,
neither to destroy men for not doing that which he never gave them power to do:
from both which together, they are apt to conclude themselves in a safe
condition, especially considering that Christ died for them, though otherwise
they are apparently vicious in their lives.

But if they would but understand the Method and Order of Divine Assistance,
and the Nature and Terms of it, they would find themselves under a great and
dangerous mistake. For the very Reason which they urge as part of the ground of
their confidence of the safeness of their condition, viz. that it is not
consistent with the Mercy, nor with the Justice of God to destroy men for not
doing that which he never gave them power to do, is a strong Argument to prove
that he does give such men whom he destroys before he destroys them, power to
do that for the not doing of which he does destroy them; and consequently that
he has given such bad men, as reason, as aforesaid, power to have been better,
and that therefore the mercifulness of God can be no security to them of not
being destroyed, until they become better. If this were not so, it would
follow, that either none should perish, or that it is inconsistent with the
Mercy and Justice of God that they do, according to the tenor of these men's
reasoning. Both which are equally false, and the latter blasphemous also. And
therefore it is a deceitful and absurd way of reasoning, for such men to
conclude that the reason why they are no better, is, because God has not given
them power to be so.

It is true indeed God has not given power unto men that are bad, to have been
better necessarily and unavoidably; for if he had, they could not have been so
bad as now they are. Nor do I say that God has given such men an immediate
power to do all that which belongs unto a complete performance of the condition
of the promise, but he gives them a remote power to do it, by giving them an
immediate power to begin it. And if they do but make use of this power by an
actual beginning to perform this condition, as they may, God will then give
them so much more of it, as whereby they may finish it, unless they refuse to
make use of it. So that if men do not perform the condition of the promise, it
is not for want of power, but for want of making use of that power which God
has already given them by his preventing grace; otherwise their destruction
would not be of themselves, which yet it is, as all grant.

There are none but upon that awakening which they have had from God one way,
and one time or other, might out of a dread of him, and of his wrath revealed
from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men, have begun to
reform and to become less sinful by leaving off some ill practices; and they
would have found they could have done so, in case they had been sure they
should have lost their Lives or Estates presently if they had not. Though they
had not power all on a sudden to become good, yet they had power through Gods
preventing grace not to have been so bad. The worst of men doubtless had power
before such time as by their obstinacy and opposition against God and his
dealing with them they sinned it away, to have reformed in part: which to have
done out of a dread of God, would have been a beginning to repent, and so a
beginning to perform the condition of the promise of pardon. The men of Nineveh
by the awakening of their fears by the preaching of Jonah, could we see turn
from their evil ways, and in particular, from the violence that was in their
hands, Jonah 3.8, 10. And by the same assistance and power by which men may
become less bad, they may be able also to make more use than they have done of
the means of Grace, and to become positively better thereby to a degree. Which
if they do, and do not by seeking out vain reasonings and evasions, obliterate
that sense by which they began to be better, God will supply them with more
power to proceed in the Work of Reformation, until it come to a Work of
Renovation of the whole man, both in heart and life, and therein unto a
performance of the condition of the promise.

And as it is we see, matter of great moment that the people be made to
understand the Method of Divine Assistance, so is it of no less concernment for
them to understand upon what terms it may be expected; as whether upon previous
conditions or without. For if it be not to be expected but upon conditions to
be performed on our part, and yet we think otherwise, we shall be in extreme
great danger of depriving our selves of that assistance, by neglecting what
belongs to us, to make our selves capable of it.

And therefore for a right understanding of this matter, we must distinguish
between such an assistance as is only preparatory to a farther assistance, and
that by means of which, the condition of the Promise is completely performed.
And if we do, we shall find that the preparatory assistance is indeed afforded
unto men without any condition at all, save what our Savior has performed by
his Mediatorial obedience to obtain it for us. And this Preparatory Assistance
is that which we call Gods Preventing Grace, because by it he prevents all
endeavors on our part to make our selves capable of it. For he is aforehand
with us in giving us the Gospel, and the Ministry of it, who live where it is;
and so he is by his secret operations upon our minds to make us sensible of our
danger, thereby to stir us up to bethink our selves how we may escape it: and
all this before we do any thing our selves with an intent to raise such a sense
or consideration in our selves.

But although Gods Preparatory Assistance and Preventing Grace is vouchsafed
unto men without any condition, yet his farther Assistance is promised but upon
condition of making use of his former. When God has been at work in men's minds
to make them sensible of the danger of their sinful state and bad tendency of
their evil ways, and has laid before them how they may escape it; if yet they
will not make so much use of all this, as thereupon to concern themselves more
than they had done about the affairs of their Souls and another World, they can
have no reason to promise themselves any further assistance from God; nor can
they be sure to have any repetition of the first. For our Savior has told us,
saying, What measure ye mete, it shall be measured unto you: and to you that
hear more shall be given. Mark 4.24. According to what measure we mete in the
attendance, or nonattendance of our minds to make use of those aids and
assistances which God affords us, it will be measured to us in affording, or
not affording us more And when he says, that unto you tha hear, more shall be
given, we cannot understand more thereby, than that the promise of more
assistance is made, but only to such as do attend to what God has already
admonished them of, and who have so far taken into consideration what he has
said or done to them by his Word, and by his Works of Providence without, and
by the awakening operations of his Spirit within, as not to slight them, but to
be inclined thereby to be more mindful and solicitous about their Salvation,
than ever they were before.

And that our Saviors words aforesaid, To you that hear, more shall be given,
are to be understood in a conditional sense; that is, that more shall be given
upon condition of attending to what had been done before, is evident by his
next words, verse 25. For he that has, to him more shall be given, and he that
has not, from him shall be taken away even that which he has: that is, (as
will be showed in the following Discourse) from him that has not used and
improved that which was first given him, shall be taken away that which he
already had, rather than have any more given him. By which assertion of our
Savior, it appears that this is a Law of Heaven, a rule which Almighty God is
resolved ordinarily to observe in dispensing his assistances unto men, that
those who do not make some good use of his preventing grace, his former
assistance, shall after some time of trial have that suspended, and the current
of it stopped. As on the other hand they that do, shall have more of it given
them. And if they make a good use of that more also, they shall have more added
to that other more, a second degree of assistance added to the first, and a
third to the second, and so on. For God is and will be leading the way, he will
be aforehand with us in his assistances; and if we do but follow him in our
endeavors to make use of them, he will still afford us more and more, until he
has carried us up to a good degree toward perfection. He is still working in
us to will and to do; that is, to will better and to do better by assisting us
so to do: and if we do but work too, as he expects we should, by making use of
his assistances to work out our own salvation, the great business of of our
Salvation will go on prosperously.

This, I doubt not, is the truth which lies in the middle way, between the two
contrary extremes of Pelagianism on the one hand, and the opinion of
Irresistible Grace on the other; into one of which, men will be in great danger
to fall, if they do not understand the Nature and Terms of Divine Assistance.

The right understanding and due consideration of this Doctrine of Divine
Assistance, is very necessary also to make us all thoroughly sensible how much
the work of grace from the beginning to its greatest growth and perfection,
depends upon the Divine aids. Though it is not Gods Method to convert men
without their own endeavors and use of the means appointed and vouchsafed by
him, yet the success of such endeavors depends upon the concurrent operation
and influence of the Spirit of God. Paul may plant, and Apollos water, and We
likewise use our endeavors, but yet it is God that gives the increase, and
causes them to prosper. Nay it is God, who by his Preventing Grace does first
excite in us that, from which all our endeavors of this nature do spring: for
it is God that works in us to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13.

Whatever therefore our endeavors may be, and how excellent soever the
External means are which are vouchsafed us for the begetting or increasing of
Grace, yet it is not safe to depend upon these for either (otherwise than as
they are means by which God conveys his Grace to us) but upon the gracious and
powerful operation of God by those means. And that is the reason why in the use
of all means, we are to seek unto God by Prayer, for somewhat beyond what he
has put into the means or instruments of Grace only as such. Hence building
up our selves in our most Holy Faith, and praying in the Holy Ghost, are joined
together, Jude 20. What made the Gospel to make so strange an alteration in the
World on a sudden as it did in the minds and manners of men upon its first
setting forth after our Saviors ascension? but that mighty presence of the
Spirit that accompanied it unto the minds of men. We cannot say it was only
because of the Miracles that kept pace with it, which yet were wrought by the
power of the Spirit. For how little did the numerous and marvelous Miracles of
our Savior prevail, (though he spoke also as never man spoke) until the time
came that the Spirit was poured out in greater abundance as well on the Hearers
as on the Preachers of the Gospel. The Apostles in their spiritual Warfare did
indeed pluck down strong holds, cast down imaginations, and every high thing
that exalted it self against the knowledge of God; but it was because the
Weapons of their Warfare were mighty through God; that is, through the
mightiness of his operation that went along with them, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.

And as the sense of how much the Work of Grace depends upon the Divine
Assistance, proceeds from the knowledge and consideration of the nature of it;
so our Application to God, and Dependence upon him for it, depends upon the
same knowledge and sense also. For unless men have some knowledge and sense, as
of their need of Grace, and of the necessity of their performing the condition
of the Promise in order to their obtaining the benefits promised, so unless
they have some sense also of the necessity of Divine Assistance to perform that
condition, and of the terms on which they may have it, they will neither desire
these things, nor use Gods appointed means to obtain them, nor depend upon him
for them in the use of means. But by how much the more sense they have of their
need of these things, and of Gods willingness to assist them in the use of
means for the obtaining them, and of his willingness to confer them upon such
terms, by so much will they apply themselves to God for them, and to the use of
the means by which he conveys them, and in doing so depend upon him for them.
And by how much they do thus, by so much they are likely to be filled with the
Spirit, and to be taken out of the spirit of the World, and to be acted by
another Spirit, and to have their hearts lifted up in the way of the Lord. For
the Holy Spirit will most certainly be given unto such who out of a sense of
their great need of it, and of its excellency and usefulness, do earnestly, beg
it of God, and depend upon him for it, in a conscientious use of that
assistance they have already received. For our blessed Savior has assured us
that the Heavenly Father will much more, and much sooner give the Holy Spirit
to those that ask it, than earthly parents will give good gifts unto their
children, Luke 11.13. I love them that love me, and they that seek me early
shall find me, says the Wisdom of God, and is truly applicable unto the Spirit
of God, Prove. 8.17.

And by how much we are made sensible that all our Christian performances
depend upon the Divine Assistance, by so much the less we are in danger of
trusting in our own strength, or of attributing them to our selves: and by so
much we are likely also to ascribe them all to God, and to say with David, of
thine own we have given thee, and with the other Prophet, Thou Lord have
wrought all our works in us; and accordingly to love and to praise him for all
his aids.

And lastly, The knowledge of the Doctrine of Divine Assistance, is of great
use likewise to animate and hearten us in the way of our duty, against the
discouragements we meet with in it, from the difficulties of performing it, and
oppositions against us in it. For by the Doctrine of the Scriptures concerning
Divine Assistance, we are assured, that if we do but in good earnest set about
our duty in performing the condition of the Promise, our ability to perform it
will increase upon our hands, They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their
strength; and to him that has more shall be given, and he shall have
abundance. And by how much our strength does increase through the Divine
Assistance, by so much the work will grow more and more easy, and the
difficulty wear off. That which is with difficulty done by one, while he has
but the strength of a child, will be done with ease and pleasure when he grows
toward the strength of a man. And although we meet with opposition and
temptation to turn us back again after we have set out, (and usually the
greatest difficulty is found in our entrance upon the work, while we are
unaccustomed to it, while our corruptions are yet strong, and our strength but
little) yet if we do but hold on our way, and rally again as often as we we
receive any foils, we shall be sure to overcome at last, and come off with
complete Victory; Because, as S. John says, greater is he that is in us, than
he that is in the World. And though our beginning be but small, yet our latter
end shall greatly increase. It is said of our blessed Savior, that a bruised
Reed he shall not break, and smoking Flax he shall not quench, until he send
forth judgment unto victory.

And thus we see how very much depends upon the due knowledge and understanding
of the nature and method of Divine Assistance, and of the terms on which we may
expect it.

The better understanding, and practical use of all which by such whose
abilities do not set them above it, is the design of the following Discourse.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. HOw God prepares men toward performing the Condition of the Promise,
by causing Principles of Natural Religion to operate on the mind. page 1. CHAP.
II. How God by adding Revealed Religion to that which is Natural, prepared the
Jews for the performance of the Condition of the Promise. p. 36. CHAP. III. Of
the necessity of those effects on the Mind, which God sometimes works by
Principles of Natural Religion, to prepare all those for the performance of the
Condition of the Promise, which do at all perform it, p. 54. CHAP. IV. How by
the very nature of the Gospel, God does assist men in performing the Condition
of the Promise. p. 71. CHAP. V. How by the Holy Spirits operation upon the Mind
and Will, men are assisted in performing the Condition of the Promise. p. 91.
CHAP. VI. Of Gods assisting those that perish, toward their performing the
Condition of the Promise of Salvation: and of their refusing to make use of
that assistance; and of their perishing for that reason. Of Gods not hindering
men from refusing his assistance, and of the reason why. p. 130. CHAP. VII. Of
the After-Assistance of the Holy Spirit which those receive, who have been
assisted already to perform the Condition of the Promise, as new beginners in
doing so. p. 177. CHAP. VIII. Cautions against men's depriving themselves of
Divine Assistance, by running into two contrary extremes. p. 206. CHAP. IX.
Something of the grounds of encouragement which such have to expect assistance
fully to perform the Condition of the Promise, as have not refused to make use
of Gods preparatory assistance toward it. p. 225.
ERRATA.
Page 101. l. 17. for stony ground, r. highway side.

A DISCOURSE OF Divine Assistance.
CHAP. I. How God prepares men toward performing the condition of the Promise,
by causing Principles of Natural Religion to operate on the Mind.
ALmighty God and our Savior have thus far prevented all endeavors of ours
toward the bringing about our Salvation: The Father has given his Son to be
the Savior of the World, and the Son has given himself a Ransom for all, and
tasted Death for every man: and upon account of his Death and Passion, a
Promise is made to all men of pardon of Sin and eternal Life, upon condition of
Repentance, Faith, and sincere Obedience. And God the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, are not only ready, willing and desirous to assist us to perform this
condition, but do actually assist even those toward it to a degree, and until
that assistance is refused, opposed, and rejected, who yet perish for want
only of performing that condition.

Now this Divine Assistance which men receive in performing the condition on
which Pardon and Life are promised, is intended to be the subject matter of
this Discourse. In the entrance upon which I shall suppose and take for
granted, that the promise of the pardon of Sin and eternal Life, is
conditional; and that Faith, Repentance, and sincere Obedience, make up the
whole of this condition.

And that we may the better come to understand the nature, manner, and method
of this Divine Assistance, I shall endeavor two things.

1. To show what is done by God by way of Preparation, to prepare and dispose
the minds of men to perform the condition of the Promise, in Repenting,
Believing, and in sincerely obeying the Gospel.

2. To show what is done by God to assist them in that performance being so
prepared.

That something is done by God by way of Preparation, without which no man does
savingly believe in Christ, I gather from our Saviors own words in John 6.44.
No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw him. And
again, Ver. 65. Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come to me, except
it were given unto him of my Father. And in Verse 45. thus, Every man therefore
that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me. These sayings of our
Savior show that something must be done upon men by God the Father, before
they can repair to Christ, as to the great Master that has the words of
eternal life, as resolving to be ruled and governed by his Doctrine and
Precepts in seeking Salvation; or which is the same, before they can become his
real and true Disciples or Scholars in learning practically of him the way to
eternal life: for that is it I understand by coming to Christ. And this,
according to our Saviors doctrine, no man can do, that is not first prepared
for it by the Father, by hearing and learning of him, and by being drawn by him.

Now what effect upon the Soul that is, or what temper of mind it is which is
caused by the Fathers teaching, and which does prepare men so as that they come
to Christ thereupon, is not here said in the forecited words of our Savior.
But we may be able to make some judgment of it, after two or three things are
considered, which our Saviors words direct us to.

1. It is not Faith it self, as having Christ for its object. For coming to
Christ, or believing in him, is the effect of that temper of mind which is
wrought by the Fathers teaching and drawing here spoken of, or at least is
consequent to it.

2. This temper of mind wrought by the Fathers teaching or operation, is such
in the nature of it, as does incline and dispose men to come to Christ, and to
believe in him, though it be not that coming to him it self, nor that believing
in him. For every man that has heard and learned of the Father, does come to
the Son.

3. This temper of mind is such an effect, and that by which it is wrought such
an act, as is most properly attributed unto God the Father. It is that which
comes by men's learning of the Father, it is that by which the Father draws them.

These things considered, that temper of mind then which does most incline and
dispose men to come to Christ and to believe in him, to embrace the grace
offered through him and by him, and to submit to the terms on which it is
offered, must needs be that effect upon the Soul which our Savior here speaks
of, without which no man can come to him.

And this I conceive we shall find to be a strong sense upon the mind of the
guilt of sin, and of a liableness to Gods wrath thereby, accompanied with a
fear of it, and with anxiety of mind, about ones future state after death, and
likewise a sense of the different tendency of moral righteousness and goodness,
and a teachable frame of spirit as the effect and consequence of such a sense.

For that uneasiness of mind which the foresaid sense causes, begets a
teachable frame of Spirit, makes men willing to hearken to those terms which
are offered in the Gospel, to free them from the foresaid fears, pain, and
anxiety of mind. The sense I speak of, and the pain caused thereby, prevails
against those prejudices by outweighing them, which men before and till then,
had against those terms, without submitting to which, Pardon and Salvation are
not to be had, and makes them willing to accept of them. Though while they are
but in the way of preparation to perform the condition of the Promise, they are
not come so far as to choose to submit to that condition out of love to those
things of which it does consist, yet their sense of danger, and the pain of
fear of falling under it, may incline them to think their submitting to the
condition of the Promise much more tolerable and supportable than their sense
of danger, and pain of fear is, which is upon them; and that will dispose them
to take such things into consideration, as will in a little time reconcile
their minds and wills to those things in which the condition of the Promise
does consist: and if it do but that, yet it is preparatory to that performance.

Now this sense of guilt and danger, and of the better tendency of moral
righteousness and goodness, may be raised in the mind by the operation of
principles of natural religion, when God is pleased to set them home, and to
make the force and power of them to be felt, as I shall after show. And that
may be the reason why all this preparatory work upon the mind, is ascribed unto
God the Father, as we see it is by our Savior. For natural Religion and the
essects of it upon the mind, are most properly ascribed unto God the Father;
and the reason is, because natural Religion was planted by him in the nature of
man before the Fall, while supernatural Religion by the Mediator had not yet
any being in men. And preparation for Religion supernaturally revealed (as the
Religion of believing in Christ is) may well be ascribed unto our being taught
by natural Religion, because Religion supernatural, is founded in that which is
natural. Men must first believe the Being of God and his Attributes, before
they can believe supernatural revelations to be from him, and so to be
undoubtedly true. He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is
a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Heb. 11.6.

Men may indeed be prepared by the Father to come to Christ, by some of the
same doctrines which our Savior himself taught, when powerfully impressed upon
the mind, and yet this be done by principles of natural Religion, because a
great part of his doctrine is the same with natural Religion; only natural
religion is more perceptible by his doctrine, than while only in the dark
minds of men. He came, as he himself says, not to destroy, but to fill up the
Law; to make a more complete discovery of the latitude and spirituality of the
natural Law, than Moses and all the Prophets had done, Mat. 5.17. But the
Fathers teaching and drawing, mentioned by our Savior, being but to prepare
men to receive principles purely evangelical, it cannot reasonably be thought
to be done by such, but by those which are natural.

To believe then the being of God and his Attributes, the Immortality of the
Soul, and a future state, the different tendency of moral good and evil, and
the Rewards and Punishments in another World, are principles of natural
Religion. And a powerful impression of these Principles upon the minds of
guilty persons by Almighty God, has a great tendency in it to prepare and
dispose them for a belief of the Gospel, when made known to them with the
evidence of its divinity; and that in a double respect.

1. As they come to be convinced thereby of the guilt of sin and of their
obnoxiousness by that to the wrath of Almighty God, and to be anxiously
concerned in their own minds about their future state after death.

2. As they come thereby to a sensible discerning of the nature and tendency of
moral righteousness and goodness.

1. Such a powerful impression upon the mind, of principles of natural Religion
as I have said, prepares men for a belief in Christ, as they come thereby to be
convinced of their guiltiness and of their obnoxiousness by that unto the wrath
of Almighty God, and to be anxiously concerned in their own minds about their
future state after death.

The natural operation of natural conscience, does something to make men
sensible of the guilt of sin and of their liableness to divine displeasure
thereby. St. Paul speaking of the Heathen that had not the Law, says that
their thoughts did accuse them, when sin was committed against the dictates of
the light and law of Nature; and that their conscience did bear them witness
that such accusations were true, they knew the judgment of God that those who
did such things were worthy of death, Romans 2.15. and 1.32. The consequence of
all which, when set home upon the mind by God by a vigorous operation, must
needs be disquietness, fear, and anxiety of mind, and doubtful apprehensions
touching Gods displeasure and the future state.

And that the very Heathen were upon this account in an uneasy condition, and
under disquieting apprehensions of the divine displeasure, appears by the many
sacrifices which they offered to atone God, and to appease the clamor of
their own consciences. And well might their condition be very uneasy to their
minds, while they were certain of their liableness to the divine displeasure,
but ignorant and uncertain of any remedy against it. S. Paul describes their
condition to be such as that they were without hope, Ephesians. 2.12. that they were
darkness, not knowing whither they were going, or what would become of them at
last. They had nothing of revealed Religion whereby to know with any certainty
that God would pardon them upon repentance. And therefore their future state
must needs have hung in doubt before them, and have caused fear day and night.

From this fear and doubtfulness of mind doubtless it was, that besides their
Sacrifices, they ran into so many other superstitions as they did, as hoping by
them to appease the displeasure of God, and to make some compensation for their
offenses against him, as by punishing themselves for them by severities which
they exercised upon their own bodies, and sometimes upon their own children.

I mention these things, to show in what anxiety of mind the very Heathen were,
by reason of the operation of natural conscience under the sense of their guilt
of sin, and of their obnoxiousness to God thereby. And this sense, and these
fears, as the effect of natural conscience, were increased and heightened, as it
pleased God by his secret operation upon the mind, to give weight unto them; as
we may easily conceive by what befell Cain and Judas in that case, when they
were so unable as they were, to bear the lashings of their own consciences.

Nor could their Sacrifices give that case to their guilty consciences which
they sought for by them, unless they could have discerned more of proportion in
them to the nature of the Immortal God which made Heaven and Earth, than they
could with any great confidence fancy there was, to make compensation to him
for their offenses. Those Sacrifices which the Jews offered from time to time,
though by Gods own appointment, could never make those for whom they were
offered perfect as pertaining to the conscience, as the Apostle speaks Heb. 10.
They could not purge the conscience from those fears and troublesome
apprehensions which the sense of the guilt of sin raised in them. For which cause
they, and not only sinners of the Gentiles, were through fear of death, all
their life time subject unto bondage, as not knowing for all those Sacrifices,
what the event and consequence of death might be unto guilty persons obnoxious
to God, Heb. 2.15.

It is true indeed, these impressions of natural Religion, are not made by God
on all men alike, and consequently all are not alike awakened by them: though
none I presume are without fears and doubts more or less, about their future
state, until they are cured of them, by living up to principles of revealed
religion, or else by a desperate course of sinning, have sinned themselves into
a kind of reprobate mind, and become past feeling. And then indeed they may
through searedness of conscience, come to have little or no feeling of those
disquieting effects of the guilt of sin, where of I speak.

But men do not come to this until they have greatly neglected, and not
attended to this teaching of the Father by impressions of natural Religion; not
until they have been laboring to put all thoughts about their future state,
and their liableness to Gods displeasure out of their minds, that they might be
no more troubled with them.

But when men will needs deal thus from time to time with God and themselves,
and bid God himself and all serious thoughts about another World, depart from
them; then indeed God many times withdraws his secret way of working upon their
minds by powerful impressions of natural Religion, (yea and of revealed
Religion too in like case) and leaves them to fall into that spiritual slumber
or sleep St. Paul speaks of, Romans 11.8. By which sleep the inward senses of
their souls are bound up, as the bodily senses in bodily sleep are; so that
they no more hear, see feel or perceive in a spiritual sense what God says or
does to them, than a man in a natural sleep does perceive, what is spoken or
done to him.

But this is not the case of those whom the Father by his teaching draws to
Christ: he keeps their conscience waking, and makes sin uneasy to them by the
fears it raises in their minds, of what may be the event of all at last.

Now such an operation of God upon the mind, as I have been speaking of, has
certainly a tendency in it to draw men to Christ, when sufficiently revealed,
and to make them willing to receive the Gospel, and to become his Disciples.

And the reason hereof is taken from the suilableness that is between the minds
of men so affected, and the Gospel. Men so prepared by the Fathers teaching,
are sensible of the troublesome and dangerous condition into which Sin has
brought them. And nothing can be more acceptable to such than a discovery and
offer of that which will give ease unto their troubled thoughts and doubtful
minds; and this the Gospel of Christ is exactly fitted and provided to do.

This Gospel discovers unto them that the guilt of sin, as to the penal part,
is taken away by the Son of God, and by his suffering for them. This Gospel
contains a Proclamation from Heaven, publishing and declaring Gods willingness
upon the account of his Sons suffering for them, to be reconciled to, and to
pardon all sinners whatsoever, that will but cease from their wilful rebellion
against him, and come under his Sons most gentle and gracious government, his
easy yoke, and light burden.

Such good news as this, was a suitable good to such as were before under
doubts and fears whether God would not prove an enemy to them at last, who had
carried it as enemies to him all along, and avenge himself on them for their
opposition against him. This is a good so suitable to such, that nothing could
give ease to their minds like it. All the things this World affords, can no
more do it, than silver and gold can ease the pain of hunger and thirst, when
food is denied. It is the suitableness of the Gospel, and a mind so prepared as
I have showed, that draws men to Christ, when the Gospel reveals him for such a
Savior as he is.

This is that which makes the very Messengers which bring the glad tidings of
the Gospel, acceptable to such for their message sake. How beautiful, says St.
Paul, are thee feet of them which preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad
tidings of good things? Romans 10.15. And how beautiful were his feet in the eyes
of the Galatian Gentiles, when he first brought the Gospel among them? who
before were in fear and doubt about their future state and without hope: I say,
how beautiful were his feet upon this account, when they received him as an
Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus, as he himself says, and counted the
blessedness so great, that as he says, they could, if it had been possible,
have plucked out their own eyes and have given them unto him, Gal. 4.14, 15.

The news of such a Savior as the Gospel declares him to be, is to such as are
in darkness and anxiety of mind concerning their future state after death, like
the Day Star and Rising Sun to such as have been in the uncomfortableness of a
gloomy and dark night. Hence he is styled the bright and morning Star, the
Dayspring from on high, the Sun of Righteousness that does arise with healing
in his wings.

The Angel which first published the Birth of Christ to the Shepherds, said,
Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all People,
Luke 2.10. And so the Gospel has proved to be, especially to those who have
been prepared to receive it, by being concerned in their own minds how they
should do to be saved. Thus when our Savior preached the Gospel first in
Galilee, it is said that then the People saw a great light, and to them who
sat in the region of the shadow of death, light was sprung up, Mat. 4. So such
as were pricked in their hearts through a sense of guilt and danger, gladly
received the Word, which brought them tidings of remission of sin through
Christ upon Repentance, Act. 2.37, 42. Thus again, when the Gospel was first
preached in Samaria, it is said there was great joy in that City, Act. 8. The
Gentiles also when they had the Gospel first preached unto them at Antioch,
they were glad and glorified the Word of the Lord, Act. 13.47.

The Gospel was not so welcome to all where it came; and what was the reason it
was not as well as to others? The reason was, because they had not learned by
the Fathers teaching, as some had done, but stifled the operations of natural
light in their minds, and had labored to lay their Consciences asleep again,
after at any time they had been awakened by God. They labored to put thoughts
about their future state out of their minds because they found them troublesome
unto them. They closed their eyes and stopped their ears against any thing that
tended to awaken them.

But all did not so, but remained thoughtful about their future state after
death, when God once had awakened them by strong impressions of natural
Religion to be concerned in their own minds about it. And they were such as
these who were wont to receive the Gospel, and believe it when it came among
them. As we see for instance in those Gentiles to whom Paul and Barnabas
preached, Acts 13.48. For it is said of them, As many as were ordained to
eternal life, believed. Or, as others from the Greek read it, As many as were
disposed to, or for eternal life, believed: that is, as I, after others,
understand it, As many as were ordered, or whose thoughts were ordered, and
minds disposed for eternal life; that is, to look after eternal life, these
were the People that believed.

And indeed the Gospel was designed in chief, as it should seem, for those
whose hearts and minds are bruised or broken with fears and cares about their
Salvation. For thus run the words of that Prophecy which was fulfilled in the
Publication of the Gospel by Christ. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because
he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the Poor, he has sent me to heal
the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovery of
sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the
acceptable year of the Lord, Luke 4.18, 19. Which is true, not only in respect
of those that are bruised and broken in heart with godly sorrow for sin, but
also in respect of such whose hearts and minds are bruised and battered with
fears and terrors, in reference to that misery to which they stand exposed for
sin.

And it is further considerable to our purpose, that those which our Savior
invites to come to him, and promises them rest if they do, are such as labor
and are heavy laden; that labor under, and are laden with anxious thoughts and
cares about their future state; for they are a wearisom burden to the mind,
Mat. 11.28. And again, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink, says
our Savior, John 7.37. and let him that is athirst come, Rev. 22.17. to wit,
such as lack and long for some cooling and refreshing to their minds and
spirits which are heated and inflamed with anxious thoughts and cares about the
condition of their souls for the future, when they shall leave the body. For
this Invitation is made to such as were not yet come to Christ, had not yet
truly believed in him: For a true belief in him quenches this kind of thirst.
And therefore our Savior says, he that believes in me, shall never thirst,
John 6.35. And again, Whosoever drinks of the water which I shall give him,
shall never thirst, John 4.14. This water when once well drunk of, quenches
that flame which before burnt up the spirits.

Again, to show what preparation of mind is necessary to make us prize Christ
when offered, and willing to be governed by him in order to our cure and ease,
consider that saying of our Savior, Mat. 9.12. The Whole need not the
Physician, but the Sick; to wit, such as are ill at ease in their own minds,
for that is the meaning of the Metaphor, I conceive. Other than such have not a
sense of their need of a Physician, nor will care to be governed by his Methods
of Physic. Which was the reason why our Savior chose rather to be among
Publicans and Sinners than Pharisees: for those being more sensible of their
obnoxiousness to Gods displeasure than the Pharisees were, who trusted in
themselves that they were righteous, were better prepared to receive the Gospel
than the Pharisees were. Which appears by that saying of Christ to them, Mat.
21.31. Verily I say unto you, that the Publicans and Harlots go into the
Kingdom of Heaven before you.

Thus we see how the teaching of the Father by impressions of natural Religion
upon the mind, prepares men for a belief in Christ, and a receiving his Gospel,
as they come thereby to be convinced of their guiltiness, and of their
obnoxiousness to the displeasure of God thereby, and to be concerned in their
own minds about their future state after death.

2. I am now in the second place to show how the teaching of the Father by
natural Religion prepares Men for a belief of the Gospel, as they come thereby
to a sensible discerning of the nature and tendency of moral righteousness and
goodness. Men are taught by natural Religion, that it is a thing good in it
self, and well becoming them to adore and worship God the author of their
Being, and to seek unto him in all their needs; to be just and faithful, and
kind one to another. And they know and find by experience that when they most
observe to do so, they have most ease in their own minds. Their Consciences
never trouble them for any thing of this nature: these things when they do
them, do not make them afraid of God, as things of a contrary nature do. Such
as these are things about which men's thoughts do excuse them, as the Apostles
phrase is, Romans 2.15. And men find a vast difference between excusing and
accusing thoughts. These do not draw men before the Judgment Seat of God before
the Judgment Day does come, as accusing thoughts do.

Now the stronger sense men have of the excellent nature of moral righteousness
and goodness, and of its peaceable and comfortable effects upon the mind, the
better prepared they must needs be to put on the yoke of Christ, and to submit
to his government and precepts of life; because those precepts of his, are
almost, and in a manner all of them of a moral nature. The things which he
enjoins his Disciples, are generally good in themselves, and rather to be
chosen than their contrary, in case there were no other reward attending them,
but only their suitableness to humane nature. The minds of men are better
appaid and satisfied in doing those things which Christ enjoins, whether they
know he enjoins them or no, than they would or can be in doing the contrary. To
do to all men as we would they should do to us under like circumstances, brings
more satisfaction to the mind than the contrary. Humility brings more ease to
the mind than Pride; and so does Love than Envy and Malice: and so does
Meekness than Wrath and Rage; and so does Mercy than Cruelty, and so do
moderate desires to the accommodations of this life, than those which are
excessive. And Temperance and Chastity contribute more to the ease and health
of the body than Intemperance; and so of the rest.

The consequence of all which is, That the more men are by powerful impressions
of natural Religion upon the mind, made sensible of the excellency of moral
righteousness and goodness, and of the peaceable and comfortable effects of the
practice of it, the sooner and the more easily they will be induced to embrace
the doctrine of our Savior, which in reference to practice, consists mostly
of matters of that nature.

For we must know that here the matter sticks most with men. They are well
enough content to hear of Christ's having expiated sin by the sacrifice of his
death, and that forgiveness is preached in his name. But to men that are wedded
to their several Lusts of immorality, the Precepts of Christ which are quite
contrary to those Lusts, are to them so many hard sayings, and they say within
themselves, Who can hear them?

But by how much men are taught by natural Religion to discern the difference
between Morality and Immorality, both in the nature and effects of them, as to
the peace of the mind on the one hand, and to the disquiet thereof on the
other, as to the honor of their nature and name on the one hand, and to the
shame thereof on the other; as to the ease and health of their bodies on the
one hand, and to the contrary on the other; by so much are they in a fit
preparation of mind to receive the Laws of Christ, which enjoin morality with
promise of great reward, but prohibit and condemn all immorality under the
severest penalties.

The condition on which the pardon of fin and eternal life were promised
through Christ, consists mostly in a sincere performance of moral duties
toward God and men: it consists of such a Faith as works by love to God
and men; which love is an evangelical fulfilling of the Moral Law, as we are
taught, Mat. 22.40. Romans 13.8, 10. Gal. 5.14. From which it still follows, that
by how much men are improved in morality by the teaching of God, by so much is
their belief of the doctrine of Christ, and the fulfilling of his great and
precious promises facilitated.

And the reason hereof is, because his rules and precepts of living, agree with
those sentiments and notions of righteousness and goodness, which are planted
in the nature of man; and therefore the consent of their minds to them as just,
reasonable, and good, and fit to be observed, must needs be the more easily
obtained. And not only so, but by means of this congruity between the Precepts
of Christ without, and the notions of moral righteousness within us, planted in
the nature of man, way is made also to gain belief of the other doctrines of
Christ, which depend wholly upon supernatural revelation; such as are his being
the Son of God, and the forgiveness of sin, and the like. For when they find
our Savior in his doctrine pressing and inculcating upon the minds of men such
precepts of moral righteousness and goodness, as they by their own natural
light know to be good, and therefore from God, but never any thing to the
contrary, they will be the more easily induced to believe him to be no
Impostor, but one sent from God, as he affirmed he was, and consequently to
believe all his other doctrines.

Now as concerning the manner how Almighty God does raise such a sense in men
of the true nature and effects of moral righteousness and goodness, as by which
they are prepared to believe the Gospel, I do not think he does it only by
assisting their faculties to act according to their natural liberty, for so he
does assist them when they abuse their liberty in acting sinfully: but God does
it by engaging their minds more to consider their ways than they had done
before; to consider the nature and tendency of those good ways which they had
refused to walk in, and the like concerning those evil ways which they had
chosen. And by a frequent representation of these things to their thoughts, and
by drawing their minds to look more narrowly into them, they come better to
discern the nature and tendency both of the one and of the other, and so to
make a better judgment of them. And by that means their former aversation from
that which is good, and strong and violent inclination to that which is evil,
comes to be weakened and something broken. And this prepares them to be quite
overcome by the powerful motives of the Gospel, when they come to be
considered, and to be turned quite about. This we see in David for an instance,
Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways and I turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
And again, Ezekiel. 18.28. Because he considers and turns away from all his
transgressions which he has committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die.
In these Scriptures we see consideration takes place first with men before they
turn, and by that means they are brought to turn: that which is consequent upon
consideration of ones ways, is turning from transgression and to Gods
testimonies.

Now God can and does when he pleases, pitch men's minds and thoughts upon such
things as he would have seriously considered, and in some sort terminate and
hold them to them. David knew this when he prayed thus unto God: Keep this for
ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the hearts of thy People, and
prepare their heart unto thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.18.

To exemplify this whole matter of Gods preparing men for the belief of the
Gospel; let it be considered how it came to pass that those few uncircumcised
Proselytes from among the multitude of those of the Nations of the Gentiles, at
first came to be such. How came such as the Ethiopian Eunuch and Cornelius to
be such devout persons as they and other such Proselytes are described to be,
when the generality of those Nations remained still in gross Gentilism?
Doubtless it came to pass by the awakening of their minds by God, to consider
things more than their Neighbors did, to consider the nature and tendency of
morality and immorality, and what was like to be the issue of both at last, in
respect of rewards and punishments in another World. And the innate light and
reason of their minds would dictate to them, that Vice could not possibly tend
to their happiness, nor Virtue to their infelicity in the next World. And this
made them, before they were Proselytes, so far as the light of nature assisted
by God did lead them, to choose to do what was most likely to end in happiness,
and to avoid what was most likely to make them miserable at last. This no doubt
made them betake themselves to the worship of the true God only, when others
of their Neighbors did not; and in this to join with the People of Israel,
though not entirely in the same Institutions of Worship, because they were not
given them in command as they were to the Jews. This difference between them
and other of their Countrymen, did first spring, as I say from their taking
important things more into consideration than others did. And by this they came
to be prepared to receive the Gospel, so that they fell in with it readily when
it was preached unto them, sometimes at the first hearing. Those Proselytes we
read of Acts 13.48. were such as were ordered and disposed in their own minds
toward eternal life, to wit, to look after it, and to be thoughtful about it;
and as many as were so, did as we there see, believe.

Such as these Proselytes, were those other sheep (I doubt not) of which our
Savior spoke, John 10.16. which as he said, are not of this fold, them also I
must bring, and they shall hear my voice. They were made tractable aforehand,
ready to follow the Shepherd when they should hear his voice. Such also we may
well suppose the good Ground hearers to be, who were of good and honest hearts,
as they are described, Luke 8.15. of honest minds, not willing to represent
things to themselves better than they are, nor to put a cheat upon themselves
and their own souls, by flattering them into a better opinion of themselves,
and of their good condition Godward than there is cause. Like him of whom the
Psalmist speaks, Who flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be
found to be hateful, Psalm. 36.2. They are not of such partial and dishonest
minds as to be thoughtful and careful about the outward Man, and things of this
present World, and to be altogether regardless and careless of their souls the
better part, and of the concerns for Eternity, nor treacherously to betray them.

Thus far to show how God has prepared men for the belief of the Gospel, only
by making principles and notions of natural religion operative in them by a
powerful impression of them upon their minds.

CHAP. II. How God by adding Revealed Religion to that which is Natural,
prepared the Jews for the performance of the condition of the Promise.
IN times under the Law, and before the appearance of Christ in the World,
Almighty God prepared the People of the Jews for the Faith in Christ, by adding
Revealed Religion to that which is Natural, and by making that which was
Natural, more powerful and operative to such an end, by that which was revealed.

After the Original Law which is implanted in the Nature of all men, became
much blurred and defaced in the minds of men, a fair Copy of it was delivered
to that People by God, written in two Tables of Stone. And this was done, as
for other ends, so for this, to wit, to awaken in them a greater sense of the
guilt of sin, and their liableness thereby to the wrath of Almighty God, and to
condemnation. The Law works wrath, says S. Paul, Romans 4.15. that is, it
makes the Transgressor of it the more punishable, and exposes him the more to
wrath. For the strength of sin is the Law, as the same Apostle says in another
place, 1 Cor. 15.56. it is that which armeth those actions against a man, which
would not have been punishable if there had been no Law against them. For where
there is no Law, there is no transgression, as he says in the former Text. And
where there is no transgression, there can be no punishment due. And by parity
of reason, where the Law is more obscure and less discernable, the
transgression of it must be the less punishable: and the more manifest and
express the Law is, by which men are left without all excuse of ignorance
touching the evil prohibited, the greater and more criminal must the offense
needs be, as when committed against a Law promulgate and fully known. This is
that which stops the mouths of men against all excuse and plea of ignorance,
and lays them naked and open to the penalty of the Law. What the Law says, it
says to them that are under the Law, that every mouth might be stopped, and all
the World found guilty before God, or subject to his judgment, Romans 3.19. And
as the offense against the Law is aggravated and enhansed, by how much the more
the Law is known to be expressly against it, by so much may the punishment be
expected to be increased by that means. He that knew his Masters will and yet
did it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, above what he shall suffer,
whose opportunity of knowing his duty has been less.

Now this was the case with the Jews: they were under the natural Law before it
was promulgated to them, as well as all other Nations. But that Law of Nature
was grown so blurred and illegible through the pravity and degeneracy of men,
that they could hardly discern that to be sin in many cases, which was sin by
the Law of Nature. As for instance, I had not known Lust to be sin, says S.
Paul, unless the Law had said, thou shall not covet. They could hardly discern
inward concupiscence in this or that particular to be sin, unless it brake out
into open act. But now by the promulgation of the natural Law, this came to be
known to be sin, which indeed was so before, but not so certainly known to be
so; and the like in other cases. But when this and other things were by a
promulgate Law more clearly known to be sin, it was then at their greater
peril, if they fell into them: and consequently they must needs be the more
apprehensive of their danger, and their fear the greater in case they did. S.
Paul personating a Jew both before and after the promulgation of the Law,
says, I once was alive without the Law, but when the commandment came, then
sin revived, and I died. He did not know himself to be in so ill a case, as the
Law when it came discovered him to be. And therefore he says again, that sin
taking occasion by the commandment, deceived him, and by it slew him, Romans 7.
By all this we may understand what S. Paul meant, when he said, that the Law
entered, that the offense might abound, Romans 5.20. that is, that the offense in
the evil nature and mischievous effects of it, might be more abundantly known,
and men made more sensible of their sad condition by reason of it: and that for
this reason among others, that grace might so much the more abound in the sight
of men, when the way and means of escaping that condition should be made known
to them. Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound. This state of theirs
under the Law, was that state of the spirit of bondage to fear, whereof S. Paul
speaks, Romans 8.15.

But then this prepared the way of the Gospel, by making that which tended to
remove those fears the more acceptable. To you that fear my name shall the Sun
of Righteousness arise with healing in his wings, says the Lord, speaking of
his sending Christ among them, Mal. 4.2. he came with healing to those souls
which had been bruised and made sore before by fears and terrors that did
arise in their minds out of that darker state of the Church, wherein the way of
salvation by Christ, was more obscurely revealed.

But besides this, by the promise they had of the Messiah, and by the types and
shadows of him in the Law, and by the many predictions of the Prophets
concerning him, the Lord prepared them for the reception of him when he was
come. The Law in these respects, was a Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ, as
the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3.24.

The many precepts of moral righteousness and goodness also wherein they were
instructed out of the Law and the Prophets, prepared them likewise to receive
Christ for the true Messiah when he was come indeed, for this reason, viz.
because of that harmony and good agreement that was between our Saviors
precepts of living, and what they had been taught before, both by natural
light, and by revealed Religion superadded to it. By this former teaching of
the Father, some of them became such Sheep as our Savior said his Father had
given him, John 10.27, 29. It was by virtue of this preparatory teaching of the
Father that they knew the Shepherds voice when they heard it. By this they
could distinguish between the voice of the true Shepherd or Messiah, and the
voice of Strangers, the voice of hirelings. Because the doctrine of our Savior
agreed with that way of righteousness which they had learned by the teaching of
the Father, as none others did that were but pretenders. It was this that made
such of them as had heard and learned of the Father, to come to Christ, to
follow this Shepherd when they heard his voice, that is, to become his
Disciples.

And yet more particularly, John the Baptist was sent by the Almighty Father,
to prepare them by his Ministry for their reception of Christ, and believing in
him. It was foretold by the Angel before his birth, that he should make ready a
People prepared for the Lord, Luke 1.17. and by a spirit of Prophecy at his
birth, that he should go before the face of the Lord to prepare his way, Verse.
76. which he did by two things especially; by awakening them to repentance, and
by giving them notice of the near approach and appearance of the Messiah. He
came into all the Country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance
for the remission of sins, Luke 3.3.

The People of the Jews were in great part become such a generation as Solomon
speaks of, that were pure in their own eyes, and yet not washed from their
filthiness, Prove. 30.12. strict observers of the Ritual part of the Law, but
very immoral in their temper and in their lives: full of a self-chosen
righteousness, their fear toward God, taught by the precepts of men, to wit,
the tradidition their Elders. They were not sensible of the badness of their
state, their obnoxiousness to the wrath of God, nor of their need of repentance
in amending their lives. And under these circumstances a Christ that should
come to save them from their sins, was not like to be very welcome unto them,
nor to answer their expectation who looked to be saved from the Roman Yoke by
the Messiah, but not from their sins.

Now that our Savior might not lose the end of his coming amongst them, John
the Baptist was sent before him to convince them of their bad condition, of
their guilt of sin before God, and of their liableness to his wrath. That
whereas thitherto the judgments upon their Nation, even the worst that had
befallen them, had been but like the lopping of branches from off the trees
that would grow again. But now the Axe was laid to the root of the trees, to
cut them quite down, never to grow again; that the utter ruin of their State,
Nation, and Temple was not far off, if not prevented. And that nothing could
prevent it but confession of sin, and bringing forth fruit meet for repentance.

Now this raised a spirit of fear in them of the wrath of Almighty God which
hung over them for their sins; which made such multitudes to come to his
Baptism, to confess their sins, and by his Baptism to list themselves as
Penitents. And by this teaching of the Father, they were the better prepared to
receive Christ when he came, especially when pointing to him, he told them,
this is the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the World, that sin of
theirs which exposed them to such danger, and that put them in such fear as
aforesaid.

And who were the Ring leaders in opposing Christ when he was come, but the
Pharisees, Lawyers, and Scribes, such as rejected the counsel of God against
themselves, and would not be baptized of John? They were such as were never
prepared by a sense of their sin, and of the danger they were in thereby, but
trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised others. They were
such as thought themselves so whole as to need no such soul-physician as
Christ. They did not believe as the Publicans and Harlots did, that they were
in any such danger by reason of sin as John told them they were; and that was
the reason why they kept themselves out of the Kingdom of God, whilst the
others entered in, as our Savior told them, Mat. 21.31, 32. Verily I say unto
you, that the Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you. And
he gives the reason of it in the next words; For John came to you in the way of
righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the Publicans and the Harlots
believed him. Those who did believe John, and were awakened with a sense of
their danger because of sin, they crowded, as it were, into the Kingdom of God
while that impression lasted. From the days of John the Baptist until now, the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, says
our Savior, Mat. 11.12.

If enquiry be here made, that since some of the Jews in our Saviors time,
were by the Fathers teaching in those several ways before mentioned, so
prepared as that they followed Christ the good Shepherd when they heard his
voice, and so became his Disciples. Then how came it to pass that all of them
did not do the like, who had the same means of learning and of being prepared?

To satisfy us in this enquiry, it is necessary in the first place to take
notice that there is a great difference between God the Fathers teaching of
men, and their learning of him: he teaches all, when yet but few learn of him.
Our Savior says, every man that has heard and learned of the Father, comes
unto me, John 6.45. Not every one that has heard him, but every man that has
heard him so, as to learn of him, by receiving instruction from him in a way of
preparation. For these are two things, and the one alas, too frequently found
without the other. Though I taught them rising up early and teaching them, yet
they have not hearkened to receive instruction, says the Lord by his Prophet,
Jer. 32, 33. there is a Teaching without a Learning.

Now the reason why they did not learn when they had the same teaching as
others had; and so the reason why it was not afterward given to them, as it
was to the Disciples of Christ, to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven,
is given by our Savior, Mat. 13. Because they seeing see not, and hearing they
hear not, neither do they understand. This peoples heart is waxed gross, and
their ears are dull of hearing; and they have closed their eyes; lest at any
time they should see with their eyes and hear with their ears, and should
understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them.
Which words signify their refusing, and more than a bare refusing of that
assistance which God for some time vouchsafed them to prepare them for that
farther grace and mercy which comes by Jesus Christ: they signify opposition
and striving against their being helped and healed, their endeavoring to throw
off, and to defend themselves against the means used by God to awaken them, and
to bring them to consider things in order to their cure and amendment of
manners. When God called they refused, when he stretched out his hands to them
they regarded not, they set at naught all his counsel, and despised all his
reproof, and hated knowledge, as Solomon expresses the ill carriage of such as
would not in the least be prevailed with, or wrought upon by such applications
as God made to them, with promise of further assistance of his Spirit and his
Word if they would. Turn ye at my reproof: behold I will pour out my Spirit
unto you, I will make known my words unto you. Prove. 1.23, and following Verses.

Our Savior by the foresaid words in Mat. 13. does not, I conceive, so much
intend to set forth the then present ill carriage of the Unbelieving Jews in
not entertaining the Gospel, as their obstinacy and untractableness under Gods
former applications to them in a lower way of teaching, than that of the
Gospel. For their carriage signified by those words of our Savior, is alleged
by him as the reason why it was not given to them to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven, as it was to his Disciples. For they had opposed and
withstood those lower beginnings of God with them, by which he would have
prepared them for higher vouchsafements. And accordingly our Savior applies
that saying to their case, Whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away,
even that which he has.

God had been representing to them by his Prophets, and by the Ministry of John
the Baptist, besides his secret operations upon their minds, the danger they
were in by reason of their immorality, notwithstanding their outward
Church Priviledges, and notwithstanding their numerous Sacrifices, and other
ceremonial observances. But they labored to silence the clamor of their
consciences, when God had any whit awakened them, and to lay their souls
asleep, and to persuade themselves there was no such danger did attend them,
since they were a People with whom God had entered into Covenant to be their
God, that they had Abraham to their Father, to whom God had said, I will be thy
God, and the God of thy Seed. Though they were proud and covetous, unjust,
unfaithful, cruel, envious, and malicious, Yet they leaned upon the Lord,
saying, Is not the Lord among us? None evil can come upon us, as the Prophet
speaks, Micah 3.11.

These things considered, the reason appears plainly why all the Jews, who at
first enjoyed much-what the same means, the same assistance from God to prepare
them for a belief of the Gospel, yet were not prepared for it as others of them
were. They refused, nay they resisted Gods first assisting grace, whereby he
would have prepared them to receive farther assistance from him. And when men
do so, and continue to do so, God after some time of striving with them,
suspends that application which he formerly made to their minds to prepare them
for farther assistance. After which, though they may see the Works of God, and
hear his Word, and be found in the use of some external acts of Religion for
fashion sake, and to do as others do, yet then they do not perceive,
understand, or consider to any good effect upon themselves, the end and design
of them, and so are not one jot the better for them, but rather more stupid and
senseless, which the Scripture calls Gods hardening or blinding of men. Not that
I suppose the holy and good God infuseth any malignant or obstinate quality
into their minds or wills; for God does not tempt any man to evil, James 1.13.
but his hardening of them, is either his withholding that assistance by which
his Spirit did strive with them to make them better, Genesis 6.3. or permitting
the evil Spirit more freely to tempt them, the consequence of which is their
growing worse and worse. And thus he dealt with such like untractable and
obstinate Jews in Ages long before the coming of our Savior, Psalm. 81.11, 12.
My People would not hearken to my voice, Israel would none of me. So I gave
them up to their own hearts lusts; not restraining them as sometime he had
done. And again, Ezekiel. 24.13. Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not
purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, Isa. 6.9, 10.

CHAP. III. Of the necessity of those effects on the mind, which God sometimes
works by Principles of Natural Religion, to prepare all those for the
performance of the condition of the promise, which do at all perform it.
AFter all this which has past, you will say perhaps, What does all this
discourse concern us, who live after Christ is come, or any who call themselves
Christians, and which do own Christ to be the true Messiah and Savior of the
World? The Jews indeed they were prepared for their receiving of Christ against
he should come, by principles of natural and revealed Religion, and some of the
Gentiles by principles of natural Religion only. But how can this concern us
Christians who have prevented the need of any such preparation for receiving
Christ, by having received him already, as having been taught by our Parents
from our Childhood to do so, when they taught us all the Articles of the
Christian Faith?

Yet we who live now after Christ is come, are as much concerned to be prepared
for a saving reception of Christ, by the same temper of mind, as they were who
lived before his coming. Our Savior has said it, That no man can come to me,
except it be given unto him of my Father, John 6.65. And again, No man can come
to me, except the Father which has sent me draw him, ver. 44. And if this be
true with respect to all men, then of us who live in these days, as well as of
those who lived when Christ first appeared in the World. For our Saviors
words, we see, contain an universal proposition; No man to whom it is not given
of my Father; No man whom the Father which has sent me draws not, can come
unto me. He does no more limit his assertion to those who did precede, than to
those who do succeed his coming.

There is no doubt but a sense of our obnoxiousness to the displeasure of God,
and the sad effects of it in another World, upon the account of sin, is as
necessary now as ever it was, to prepare and dispose men heartily to receive
Christ: because it is by this sense on our minds, that Christ is looked upon as
the most suitable good, and consequently as the most desirable good, as I
showed before. It is by means of this sense when any thing strong and
affecting, that Christ becomes precious unto men, as he is to every one that
believes. To you that believe he is precious, says S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.7. A
true sense of the danger we are in, by having provoked the great God against
us, gives great disquietness to the mind, until we come to know that that
displeasure is taken off, and the danger we were in thereby removed. And it is
the sense of this danger that makes Christ precious to us, when we come to
understand that we cannot escape this danger but by him; and when we find that
pain removed by believing in him, which the sense of danger before put us to.

And it is this sense that prepares the soul to receive Christ as Lord as well
as Savior, by that time the Gospel is well opened to men. And the reason is,
because they understand thereby, that none can have the benefit of that
Atonement and satisfaction made by his death, but such as are content to be
governed by him in their lives, and to yield obedience to his precepts: that
none can be saved by him, that refuse to become sincere Disciples to him. And
they will find it no unreasonable thing for them to obey his Precepts and to
imitate his Example, when they understand that to do so, is in effect but to
abandon those sins which created so much trouble in their mind before, by
making them liable to and by putting them in fear of the eternal wrath of
Almighty God. The sense of that danger their sins had exposed them to, and of
that anxiety of mind they were brought into thereby, will prepare the mind and
dispose the will to receive Christ as Lord, and to obey him in forsaking those
sins, so long as they are well assured, that then and not till then they shall
be pardoned through his blood, and so be discharged from those fears of the
wrath of God which had given them such uneasiness of mind before.

And when they have found the difference between the ease of mind and peace in
the Spirit which they have by their knowledge of Christ so long as they obey
him; and the sad thoughts, dark and doubtful apprehensions, misgivings of mind
and storms in the spirit, which sin had wrought and raised in the soul before,
it will then make them out of love with sin, and afraid to have any more to do
with it.

And thus you see according to the reason and nature of the thing, how useful
and necessary such a sense is, as I have often mentioned, to prepare and dispose
men to go to, or to receive Christ, when he is made known to them by the
Gospel, and that as well now under the Gospel, as before; if by receiving
Christ we understand such a receiving as is saving. But otherwise men may, and
doubtless do, without any such sense as is effectual to its end, not only
profess belief in Christ, but also really believe in him with an inoperative,
ineffectual and dead Faith.

And to the end we may yet farther see how necessary such a sense in men of
their danger, as I have been speaking of is, to prepare and dispose them to
come to Christ in good earnest, and to believe in him with all their heart, I
shall show it you by the method which our Savior and his Apostles used in
their preaching. Both he and they insisted mainly in the first place in order
to men's conversion, upon such doctrines as tended to beget in them a great
sense of their danger by reason of guilt upon them. And this they did by
preaching Repentance; by which as I shall presently show, they labored to
beget such a sense in men.

Our Savior began his Preaching with this, Mat. 4.17. From that time Jesus
began to preach and to say, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And
so did his twelve Apostles when he sent them out by two and two: They went out
and preached that men should repent, says S. Mark 6.12. When the Author to the
Hebrews gives a summary account of the first Principles or beginning Doctrines
of Christ, Repentance from Dead Works is not only one of them, but is the
first of all in order, Heb. 6.1. S. Paul gave this account to the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus, both of the method and substance of his preaching publicly
and from house to house, when he told them that he had testified both to the
Jews and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ: First Repentance, then Faith: Repentance for sin, and from sin;
and then Remission of it through faith in Christ.

Now in thus preaching Repentance in the first place they labored to possess
men with a strong sense of the danger they were in until they did repent. For
that was the great Argument or motive by which they persuaded them to it. We
knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, says S. Paul 2 Cor. 5.11.
Thus our Savior taught the People, that so long as they did not repent and
reform, though it should cost them the cutting off their right hand, and
plucknig out their right eye to do it, they were in danger of being cast into
Hell, where their Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched, Mark 9.43. That
they were condemned already, and that the wrath of God did abide on them, so
long as they continued in unbelief, John 3.18, 36. When S. Paul preached
Repentance at Athens, his argument to persuade to it was, because God has
appointed a day in the which he will judge the World in righteousness, Acts
17.30, 31. And no greater argument can be used to awaken men's fears, and to
hasten them out of an impenitent state, than to set before them the terror of
that day, and the danger they are in every hour of falling under it, so long as
they remain unreformed. The consideration of which, while the impression was
upon him, made Felix the Roman Governor on the Bench to tremble, when Paul at
the Bar reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and the judgment to come, Acts
24.25.

And generally men's Repentance takes its first rise from their fears of falling
under the wrath of Almighty God. Which does very well accord with what was said
by David in the Psalms, and twice by Solomon in his Proverbs: The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, Psalm. 111.10. Prove. 1.7. and 9.10. The
beginning of Wisdom, that is, of becoming truly wise, as men are when they
become truly religious, and never till then. And this usually begins as I say,
in those fears which are raised in men, out of a sense of their obnoxiousness
to the wrath and displeasure of God for sin past. And from thence indeed it
proceeds to a fear of displeasing him any farther for time to come, in hope of
obtaining pardon for what is past: and this is wisdom indeed ( there is
forgiveness with thee that thou may be seared, Psalm. 130.4.) But fear in
this latter sense, has its rise and beginning from fear in the former.

The principle of Self-preservation, which is deeply rooted in every man's
nature, does naturally cause a fear of God, as armed with Almighty power to
destroy them that have provoked him. But in man's degenerate state, we cannot
say it is so natural to fear displeasing him, nor is attained to without some
hope of pardon for what is past. Fear in the former sense goes before fear in
the latter, as the needle does before the thread. It has indeed as godly sorrow
has, a tendency in it to work Repentance, though neither of them amount to
saving repentance it self. Fear of wrath has torment in it, and that prepares
a man to hearken to that which will give him ease, to wit, the doctrine of
pardon through Christ, and to the doctrine of Repentance as the condition of
obtaining it. As rain and moisture are to the ground on which Weeds or Thorns
grow, to prepare the way of tearing them up by the root, so is the fear of Gods
wrath to make way for the plucking up men's lusts by the root: it makes the
heart more soft and tender. For by how much sin has disquieted and perplexed
the mind with fears of the wrath of God (provided it be not to excess, as in
case of despair) by so much the less grievous it will be to part with it, in
hope of obtaining both ease and pardon thereby.

But here to prevent all mis use of this Doctrine touching the necessity of a
sense in each sinner of his obnoxiousness to the wrath of God, to prepare him
for such a Repentance, Faith, and Obedience as is saving; let this be observed
and remembered by way of caution, to wit, That no greater a sense hereof is
necessary to this end, than that which issues and ends in such a Repentance,
Faith, and Obedience. We must not measure the truth and sincerity of our
Repentance, Faith, and Obedience, by the measure or degree of the sense we have
of our liableness to Gods wrath, or our fears of it; but on the contrary, the
dueness or sufficiency of such a sense to prepare us, by the truth and
sincerity of our Repentance, Faith, and Obedience. It is not unlikely but that
Cain and Judas might have a greater sense of their obnoxiousness to the wrath
and displeasure of God, than most of those who through a due sense of their
liableness to wrath, have been prepared for a saving Repentance, Faith, and
Obedience: but yet we cannot judge by that, that they had any such Repentance
or Faith.

So much sense therefore of men's danger by reason of their guilt of sin is
sufficient, be it more or less, as does prevail with them sincerely to repent
of sin past, to receive Christ Jesus as Savior, Lord, and Governor for time
to come, to save them from sin by his death and to be governed by his precepts
and example for all times to come, whether peaceful and prosperous, or however
adverse or hazardous they may be. And the reason why such a sense is
sufficient, be it more or less, is because it reaches its end, it has done
its work for which it was raised by God, when once it has thus drawn men to
Christ to become his true Disciples, to believe in him, and to learn of him the
Christian life. All means whatsoever are sufficient in their kind, when they
attain their end for which they were appointed, and so this of which we now
speak. This is a truth seen by its own light.

By this the great mistake of some good people appears, who have been afraid to
apply Christ unto themselves as a Savior, and to lay hold of the gracious
promises of the Gospel, as being in doubt with themselves, whether they had
been sufficiently humbled, broken, and prepared by legal terrors; when yet they
have been zealously desirous and industrious to approve themselves to him in a
good life. When once men are made willing to receive Christ as Lord and
Savior, and to walk in him as they have received him, there is no place left
to question whether their humiliation has been sufficient or no. For our
Saviors invitation of coming to him, is made to him that is athirst, and his
promise to him that does come in good earnest, is, that he will by no means
cast him out. The promise of being received if they do come to Christ, is not
made upon condition of being thus or thus humbled, but upon condition of their
coming to him. Nor does any degree of that humiliation which consists in fear
or terror, avail any man further than it is an occasion of his applying himself
to the remedy prepared by God against his danger.

By what has been said to show what sense of ones spiritual danger is
sufficient in its kind, and for the end for which it serves, it may appear
also, That such persons as have by the advantage of a pious education, drunk in
operative principles of godliness in the early days of their lives, so that
like Ohadiah they have feared God from their youth; or as Timothy, have known
the holy Scriptures from a child, need not be in doubt of their own good estate
Godward, though they have not found in themselves so tormenting a sense of
their spiritual danger as some others have done, to prepare and dispose them to
repent and believe the Gospel, if they can but find and feel in themselves
Repentance and Faith in the true nature and genuine effects of them. No man
need much to be concerned about the nature of the means, as whether it be
proportionate to the end, after he once sees the end effected in himself. His
sense of danger is sufficient, which causes him to fly in due time to the
place of refuge.

There needs a greater sense of danger, and more affecting fears, to make one
willing to part with those sins and evil ways he has been long accustomed to,
and has had a strong affection for, than there is to make another willing to
forego those evils he never had much to do with, nor much affection for. An
ordinary blast may throw down a Plant before it has taken rooting, when no
less than a great tempest and strong blast will tear up a Tree of long standing
and deep rooting.

Yet I must say, that the greater sense men have of the greatness of the danger
they were in, and the more that sense has afflicted their soul with fear and
grief, by so much the more they are likely to value and prize, to love and
honor that Savior by whom they find themselves delivered from it. Hence it is
that such as have been greater sinners than others before conversion, have many
times proved more eminent Saints than others after; fuller of love to Christ,
and zeal for him. Thus it was with Mary Magdalen, who loved much because much
was forgiven her, as our Savior said. Whereas, as he observes likewise, that
he to whom but little is forgiven, the same loves but little, Luke 27.47.

And thus I have dispatched the first of the two things I proposed to insist
on, and to explain, to wit, what is done by God by way of preparation to
dispose the minds of men to perform the condition of the promise. I shall now
proceed to the second, which is to show what is done by God to assist men in
the actual performance of that condition on which pardon of sin and eternal
life are promised.

CHAP. IV. How by the very Nature of the Gospel, God does assist men in
performing the condition of the Promise.
IN showing what God does in assisting men in the performance of the condition
of the promise of Pardon and Life, two things will come under consideration;

I. What assistance is given by God, by his very giving us the Gospel to this
end; and

II. What by the influence and operation of his Spirit.

1. That men are assisted by the Gospel in their performing the condition of
the promise of pardon and life, is very evident. S. Paul says, it is the power
of God to salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1.16. That he had
begotten the Christian Corinthians through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. And S.
James, that God of his own will begat the Christians by the word of truth, Jam.
1.18. And S. Peter, that they were born again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the word of God which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet.
1.23.

Supposing men to be prepared by such teaching of God the Father, as has been
before described, the Gospel it self is of such a nature as makes it very apt
to attract and draw such men to the belief of it, and obedience to it, when
attended to, in which the performance of the condition of the promise does
consist: and this in a double respect.

I. In respect of the subject matter of it, or things contained in it.

II. In respect of the evidence by which it is confirmed to be from God and
undoubtedly true.

1. In respect of the subject matter of it, or things contained in it. As for
instance; it contains a Declaration, who, and what an one Jesus Christ is, viz.
the Son of God and Savior of the World, and what he has suffered to make
atonement for the sin of the World, and to obtain reconciliation between God
and men, after their rebellion against him. And the Gospel as such, cannot but
facilitate its own way into the minds of such men as are burdened and pained
with the sense of their own guilt, and liableness to Gods displeasure. It being
suited to their case, and contrived on purpose to give to such ease and relief,
it cannot but render it self acceptable to them.

This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the World to save Sinners, says S. Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. It is indeed a
saying, a doctrine worthy of acceptance, if any thing is so which the World
ever knew, yea worthy of all acceptance to the highest degree. And its being
so, makes sinners which are sensible of their very great need of a Savior, the
more ready and willing to believe it, and to hearken to any thing that tends to
strengthen their belief of it. We have a saying which is found true upon common
observation, That men are willing to believe that to be true, which they would
fain have to prove so, and are inquisitive after the evidence of its truth,
that they may confidently believe it, and rejoice in it. I have showed before
with what joy the Gospel was entertained at its first going forth into the
World, by such as were to any considerable degree made sensible of the danger
they were in by reason of sin, and therefore I do not need to enlarge upon it
farther here.

Again, the Gospel contains great and precious promises of pardon of sin and
eternal life, upon condition of Repentance, Faith, and new Obedience, and most
dreadful threatenings against such as reject those terms. Now the Gospel in
these respects, is of a persuasive nature, and has an aptness and fitness in
it to prevail with men to use their endeavors of performing the condition of
escaping the damnation of Hell, and of obtaining the glory of Heaven.

First, the terrible threatenings denounced against such as continue unreformed
in their lives, when these fall into minds already disquieted with fears for
what is past, are very apt to alienate men's minds from sin, and so to help on
the performance of that part of the condition of the promise, which consists
in Repentance or amendment of life. The stronger sense men have of their danger
by reason of sin formerly committed, and also of running into greater danger,
if they continue in sin, after pardon is offered upon condition of amendment,
the more easily will they be persuaded and prevailed upon to accept of the
condition of pardon, and to put forth their endeavor to perform it. The sense
of danger which divine threatenings do awake in men when any thing strong, will
cause them to enquire how they may escape it, to the end they may speedily fall
upon the use of such means by which such an escape may be obtained.

Thus those pricked in their hearts, Acts 2. cried out, Men and brethren, what
shall we do? And the Jailer when once in a trembling posture, Sirs, what shall
I do to be saved? Acts 16.30. These affectionate enquiries caused by a sense of
their danger, argued their willingness to do any thing they could to escape it;
of which they gave proof by setting immediately, and without any delay, upon
what they were directed to do to that end.

This sense of danger awakened by divine threatenings, so long as it lasts,
will take off that pleasure which men before were wont to find in ways of sin
and wickedness, and make the taste of them bitter, and by that means estrange
their minds from them. What is it that makes men at any time to fall out with
their sins and turn them off, but an awakened sense in themselves, by which thy
feel they have been betrayed by them into the snare of death, into such danger
as that the very sense and fear of it, quite swallows up that pleasure which
they were wont to take in those sins. And under these circumstances, it will be
a matter of far less difficulty for men to perform the condition of the
promise, so far as that stands in forsaking of sin, than it would be to
continue in it. For in this case they find the fear and trouble which still is
at the heels of sin, is far greater than any pleasure they can then find in it.
In vain is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird, says Solomon, Prove. 1.17.
Even so, while men have their eye upon the present fear and future danger sin
exposes them to, it disarms the temptation to it of its power, and renders it
too weak to prevail with them to run themselves into the torments of present
fears, and into eternal destruction for the future. A Dog will forbear his
otherwise desired morsel, while his eye is upon the Cudgel which is held over
him.

Secondly, the promise through Christ of such inestimable benefits as the
pardon of sin, and the eternal glory of Heaven are, upon condition as of Faith,
so of sincere Obedience, has a great tendency in it to reconcile our minds to
our duty in particular acts of obedience. It is inseparable from the nature of
men to desire the happiness of their own Being, in the general notion of it,
and for perpetuity also. And the more desirable any object is, and the more
there is in it to make our happiness great, the more powerfully are we drawn
thereby to comply with the condition, and to use the means of obtaining it,
when we hope it to be attainable. The greater and more attractive the object of
desire is, by so much will the difficulty of the condition and means of
obtaining it, seem the less. Jacobs serving seven years for Rachel, seemed to
him but a few days, for the love wherewith he loved her.

All which shows that the immense greatness of the benefits promised in the
Gospel, does tend greatly to reconcile our minds to the condition of obtaining
them, notwithstanding some present difficulties do attend it. Just as we see in
other things: Men would not cark and care, moil and toil as they do, nor
undertake such wearisom journies and hazardous voyages as men commonly do, were
it not that the benefit they expect to obtain thereby, does reconcile their
minds to these difficulties. What enabled Moses to forsake the treasures of
Egypt, and the honors of Pharaohs Court, and to unite himself with an
oppressed People, when he could not otherwise avoid sin and serve his God as he
had a mind to do? Why, it was the eye, the respect he had therein unto the
recompense of the reward, Heb. 11.25, 26. The hope of the recompense of reward,
made the difficulties of Gods service, the reproach of Christ, and suffering
with the People of God, more eligible and desirable than the pleasures of sin,
which were but for a season.

Hope of benefit we see then is a great and powerful principle of action in
men: and if the promise of the great things of the Gospel does but affect, stir
up and quicken our hope, this will be enough to put those endeavors into
motion, by which the condition of obtaining them will be performed. It is by
the exceeding great and precious promises of the Gospel that men are made
partakers of a divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. And the reason is, because these
promises do affect their hope; this hope changes the thoughts and purposes of
men, in order to the obtaining of the things promised and hoped for; by all
which they become new men, restored to the image of God which had been lost by
sin, which is the divine nature.

The difficult part of performing the condition of the promise of pardon and
life, lies in men's forsaking the sins to which they had been accustomed, and in
practicing the contrary Virtues from which they have been estranged. But the
Gospel we see enables men to do both by working upon their fears and hopes. For
when two such powerful principles of action concur and conspire together to
promote the same end, to produce the same effect, as they do in this, though in
different respects, the operation must needs be very great, powerful, and
prevalent, and the work like to go on with good success. Fear and hope are the
two handles of the Soul, by which it is taken hold of and drawn.

2. Having thus showed, how apt and fit the Gospel is in respect of the subject
matter of it, to draw men to such a belief of it, and obedience to it, as in
which the performance of the condition of the promise of pardon and life does
consist: I am now to show in the next place its farther aptitude this way, in
respect of that evidence it has of its Divinity, Truth, and Infallibility.

For indeed all the power it has to work upon men's fears and hopes by its
menaces and promises, to the producing of their effects in men's lives and
actions, depends wholly upon the supposition of its truth and certainty. Men
would not be moved neither by the threatenings nor promises of the Gospel, how
great soever they be, did they believe the Gospel to be but fabulous. And
therefore the All-wise God has as much concerned himself to give sufficient
attestation to the truth of the Gospel, as he has, to acquaint men with the
things reported in it.

To this end the Almighty Father has by a voice from Heaven testified that
Jesus Christ is his beloved Son, and that his doctrine is to be attended to, as
to one whom he had sent into the World to declare his whole mind touching men's
salvation, Mat. 3.17. and 17.5. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased; hear ye him. To the same purpose also served those numerous miracles
which he wrought. For these were signs to assure us that he was what he
affirmed himself to be, viz. the Son of God, and consequently that his doctrine
is of divine authority. Many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
Disciples, which are not written in this Book. But these are written that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye
might have life through his name, John 29.30, 31.

These miracles in conjunction with the nature of our Saviors doctrine in
nothing contrary to natural Religion, had certainly a very great tendency in
them to beget a belief in him and of his doctrine, or else he would never have
marvelled as he did at the unbelief of those which saw them and heard him,
Mark. 6.6. He marvelled at their unbelief. Their unbelief under such
circumstances, is mentioned again as matter of wonder, John 12.37. But though
he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him. But
this would have been no matter of marvel to our Savior, or wonder to his
Disciples, if there had not been a mighty power in those miracles to convirce
men and to persuade them to believe. To this end also served the resurrection
of Christ from the dead: for by that he was mightily declared to be the Son of
God, Romans 1.4.

And when the Apostles of our Lord were after his Resurrection sent forth to
convert the World to Christianity by preaching the Gospel to them; as a means
to make it efficacious to this end, and to procure it credit and authority in
the minds of men, they were endued by the Lord with a power of working
miracles, and of speaking with new tongues, Mark 16.20. They went forth and
preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with
signs following, Heb. 2.4. God also bearing them witness both with signs and
wonders, and diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own
will.

And it was in respect of these powerful confirmations of the Gospel, I doubt
not, that S. Paul says his preaching was in demonstration of the spirit and of
power, and not with enticing or persuasible words of man's wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.4.
It was by reason of this kind of demonstration of the Gospel to be from God,
which was made by the miraculous operation of the Spirit by the Apostles, that
the Gospel was received as the Word of God, and not as the Word of Man; as all
those Discourses of Philosophers were, which had no other confirmation, than
what the Wit and Oratory of men could derive from principles of natural and
humane Wisdom. But the Apostles doctrine, as it was in the nature of it above
humane pitch to find out, so their way of confirming of it was above all humane
power and wisdom also. As their doctrine was known only by the Holy Spirits
revealing, so the arguments, motives, and reasons by which they persuaded men
to believe it to be from God, were fetched from the Spirits own mighty
operations, which were visible to men, as well those that did not, as those
which did believe. They compared and suited spiritual things with spiritual,
ver. 13. The nature of their arguments by which they persuaded men to believe
their doctrine, were suited to the nature of their doctrine; both being from
the Holy Spirit. The one by the Spirits revelation to the Apostles, the other
by the Spirits miraculous operations by the Apostles. They proved their
doctrine was revealed to them by God, by the testimony which he gave, that he
had sent them to preach what they did preach, by enabling them to do such
things which none could do but by virtue of a divine power, which put forth it
self in them. God (as was said) did bear them witness by signs, wonders, and by
diverse miracles which he enabled them to do and to show.

And being the Gospel was upon the account of this confirmation, received as
the Word of God, and not of Man, as the Author of it; therefore it was that it
did operate so powerfully as it did in the hearts and lives of them that
received it, to the transforming them in their minds and spirits, and in the
tenor of their lives and actions, into other manner of men than they were
before. By reason of which transformation, the Scripture styles them New
Creatures, and the man thus altered, the New Man. When ye received the Word of
God, which ye heard of us, says S. Paul, ye received it not as the word of
man, but as it is in truth, the Word of God, which effectually works also in
you that believe, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.

The Gospel then thus confirmed, as has been represented, was and is so
glorious an object of Faith, and so every way sitted and prepared to command
men's belief of it, that S. Paul supposes it impossible but that men should
believe it, unless the Devil has strangely blinded their minds. And therefore
he says, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost:
in whom the God of this World has blinded the minds of them which believe not,
lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God,
should shine unto them.

And thus we see what great assistance God has vouchsafed us for our
performing the condition of the promise, by giving us his Gospel.

The Lord by his Prophet, speaking of how much he had done for his People of
old, to enable them to be what he expected they should be, in order to the
happiness he designed them, says, Isa. 5.4. What could have been done more to
my Vineyard that I have not done in it? that is, What in reason could they
expect he should have done more to make them become obedient and fruitful, than
he had done? And yet he has done much more for us who live under the Gospel
than he did for them. For he has sent his own Son to reconcile us to himself,
and himself to us by his death. He has sent his own Son to persuade men, which
is more than all the Prophets which he sent before. And as he is greater
himself, so he persuades by greater arguments than the Prophets were wont to
do, both in respect of what has been done for us already to oblige us, and in
respect of what he will do, in rewarding if obedient, and in punishing if
disobedient. And all this lies fair before us in the Gospel, by which life and
immortality is brought to light; and which comes to us more gloriously attested
also, than the doctrine of Moses and the Prophets did to them. And therefore
the Lord may much more appeal to us than he did to them, and say, What could
have been done more to engage you to believe and obey the Gospel, and so to
perform the condition of the promise, which I have not done? And if so, How
then shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first
began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard
him? And yet behold he has done and does more for us in another respect under
the Gospel, than he did in times past for his own peculiar People. For
according to the various predictions of the Prophets of old, we under the
Gospel have a more plentiful effusion of the Spirit to enable us to perform the
condition of the promise of pardon and life, than ever they ordinarily had.
Which brings me to the second thing I proposed to insist on, which is, to show
what assistance men receive in performing the condition of the promise by the
influence and operation of the Spirit of God.

CHAP. V. How by the Holy Spirits operation upon the Mind and Will, men are
assisted in performing the condition of the Promise.
BUt before I proceed to show this, to prevent misunderstanding in this matter,
I must premise thus much by way of caution, to wit, That when I propose the
influence and operation of the Holy Spirit to be considered as an aid distinct
from that which is vouchsafed by the Gospel it self, I would not be understood
thereby to deny that assistance which we receive by the Gospel it self in
performing the condition of the promise, to be the aid and assistance of the
Spirit, at least in some respect. I only suppose that there is an influence
and operation of the Holy Spirit upon the hearts of men by which they are
enabled to perform the condition of the promise, over and above what the Gospel
in its own nature abstractedly considered, does contribute thereunto.
Otherwise, as I have been now showing, the operations of the Gospel it self is
of, and from the Holy Spirit, both in respect of its revelation and
consirmation. So that what is said and done by the Gospel, is in a sense said
and done by the Holy Spirit. And they are led by the Spirt, and walk in the
Spirit, that make the Gospel their Guide.

All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. and holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1.21. And the things spoken
by the Prophets in the Old Testament, are said in the New to be spoken by the
Holy Ghost, Acts 1.16. and 28.25. Heb. 3.7. and 10.15. And it is seven times
said in Revel. c. 2, and 3. He that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit
says unto the Churches; meaning what he said to them in and by those Epistles
which S. John sent to the seven Churches in Asia. And God is said to have
testified against the People of the Jews by his Spirit in his Prophets, Neh.
9.30. And S. Stephen said to those in his time for opposing the Gospel; Ye do
always resist the Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do ye. And S. Paul said
touching such as should despise their doctrine and commands, He that despises,
despises not man, but God, who also has given unto us his Holy Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 48. By all this it appears, that what is done by the doctrine of men
divinely inspired, is done by the Spirit of God; and what is done against it,
or against them for the sake of it, is done against the Spirit of God. He that
hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; says our
Savior also, Luke 10.16.

But yet though the assistance men receive by the Gospel in performing the
condition of the promise, be the assistance of the Holy Spirit, yet it is not
all the assistance they receive from the Holy Spirit therein. For when the holy
Scripture speaks of the Gospels coming unto men, not in word only, but also in
power, and in the Holy Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. of their being born of the Spirit,
John 1.13. and 3.5. of the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, Tit. 3.5. of their obeying the truth through the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.22. of
a being built together for an habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians.
2.22. of the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, and of Gods working in them
to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. and the like, there is no
reason to restrain the sense of such sayings, unto the alone operation of the
doctrine of the Gospel, as having God or the Spirit of God for its Author, and
no more. The Prayers which our Savior made and taught his Disciples to make
for the success of the Gospel, and which the Apostles made and taught the
Christians to make for the like; do all of them imply likewise something more
to be done by God for the renewing of men unto himself, than only by his bare
sending his Gospel among them.

Although men can consider matters discovered by the Gospel when they hear
them, as well as they can any other things set forth by Discourses of another
nature; (and indeed God expects they should do so, at the peril of their own
destruction, if they do not) yet such is the zeal of the Lord to promote and
set forward the business of our salvation, that he is not willing to trust the
work only in our hands, though he has brought it to our hands by such
preparations wherein he has prevented all endeavors of ours. He does not
only bring the Gospel and our minds together, and then leave them to operate
upon each other in the strength of their own nature only; but is graciously
pleased to accompany his word more or less, as he sees good, with a secret
operation of his spirit upon our minds, both to incline and dispose the
internal faculties to exercise and employ themselves about matters of this high
nature, and likewise to assist them in it.

There is doubtless a secret power and efficacy of the divine Spirit goes along
with the Gospel into the mind and will, by means whereof the Gospel does the
more readily and effectually work upon the mind and will, to the renewing of
them. When the Disciples scattered by occasion of the Persecution by Saul,
preached the Gospel to the Grecians, it is said, The hand of the Lord was with
them, and that a great number believed and turned to the Lord, Acts 11.21.
Their believing and turning to the Lord, was the effect of the Lords hand being
with them in preaching, as well as it was the effect of what was preached. The
Gospel is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1.16.
Believing and Salvation are the effects of Gods power going along with the
Gospel, as well as of the Gospel it self. By that the Gospel becomes more quick
and powerful, and sharper than a two-edged sword. It is the sword of the
Spirit, as it is called, as well in respect of its being managed by the Spirit,
as it is by being provided by the Spirit for Christians to manage. The whole
success of the Gospel in producing those happy effects in men, by which they
become other manner of men than they were before, is ascribed unto the grace
and blessing of God that goes along with the Gospel. I have planted and Apollos
watered, but God gave the increase, says S. Paul. So then neither is he that
planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the increase,
1 Cor. 3.6, 7. Upon this account all that appearance of the Virtues of Christ
which is in true Christians, by which they give some good account unto the
World what an one Christ is, and what manner of thing his Gospel is, is
ascribed unto the operation of his holy Spirit upon their hearts, in that
metaphorical way, used by S. Paul when he told the Christians at Corinth, That
they were the Epistle of Christ written by the Spirit of the living God, upon
the fleshly Tables of their hearts, 2 Cor. 3.3.

Thus much in general to show that there is an assistance by the operation of
Gods Spirit vouchsafed unto men in performing the condition of the promise,
over and besides what assistance they receive therein from the nature of the
Gospel. I shall now proceed to show a little more particularly how men are
assisted by the operation and influence of the Holy Spirit in performing the
condition of the promise of pardon and life. Not to undertake to describe all
those ways by which God communicates his aids unto men in performing the
condition of the promise, but only so much of those divine methods as may give
some light in the thing, and some satisfaction to our minds touching this great
affair of our souls.

1. One of the first things is a procuring from men, or Gods working in them a
fixedness of thoughts upon the things which concern their salvation or
damnation, a keeping their minds upon them. Before this is done, men may have
many fluctuating thoughts about God and Christ, Heaven and Hell, and about the
way of escaping the one, and of obtaining the other, and yet be little or
nothing the better for them. For these being things out of sight, and remote
from the senses, there are a multitude of other thoughts which throng into the
mind, from external objects that lie open to the senses, which scatter and
divide, yea, and which in a great measure exclude and thrust out of the mind,
those other more necessary thoughts. The thoughts and cares about the Farm, the
Merchandise, the Oxen, and the marrying of a Wife, spoken of in the Parable;
yea, and worse than these, about unlawful pleasures and undue seeking of
honors; these so entertain and take up men's minds, that thoughts of God and
another World, and the great concerns of Religion, which have not the advantage
of making their way into the mind by the senses, have little or no room there.
Hence comes the sin of forgetting God, so much spoken of in Scripture, which
carries in it a forgetting our accountableness to him, and consequently a
forgetfulness of all those things which depend upon ourminding of these.

Now while thoughts of this nature rule and bear sway in the mind, and other
thoughts are only now and then floating there without any settled abode, these
latter can have no powerful influence to alter the standing temper of the mind,
or to change the motions and operations of the will, which yet are necessary to
the performing of the condition of the Promise. And therefore one of the first
things, as I say, which God does in assisting men in the performance of the
condition of the promise, is to stay and six their thoughts upon the things
which concern their salvation. Though their thoughts are and must be exercised
about the things of this present life; yet their thoughts about their souls and
another World, are so fixed by God in their minds, when thus assisted by him,
that they are continually intermingling themselves with their other thoughts,
and correcting their extravagancy, and exercising a power over them. Here now
they dwell; though they must give some place to other necessary thoughts, yet
so as that they are never long absent, but still return into the mind. Thus the
good Ground hearers which bring forth fruit with patience, are said to be such
as having heard the Word, keep it, (Luke 8.15.) that is, they keep it on their
minds, so as that it is not stolen out of their hearts by the evil one, by
filling the mind with other things, as it befalls the Stony ground hearers: nor
choked, or stifled in its operation by an overpowering multitude of other
thoughts about things grateful to the flesh, as about riches and pleasures, and
lusts of other things, as it is in the Thorny ground hearers. Not as if where
God thus sixeth the thoughts upon their principal objects, that there he gives
memories to retain all they hear, that is not meant by their keeping the word,
but that such keep upon their minds the scope and substance of those points of
the Christian Religion as are necessary to their salvation, as the fruit of all
their Hearing. It is the ingrafted Word which is able to save the soul, Jam^^
(...). 21. that is, as it is ingrafted upon the mind by settled thoughts and
sixed consideration, without which men may hear all the days of their life, and
yet be but as the silly women S. Paul speaks of, laden with sins, and led away
with diverse lusts, who were always learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7. The Lord made David wise through his
Word, but it was by keeping it and his mind together. Thou, says he, through
thy commandments, have made me wiser than mine enemies: for they are ever with
me. I have more understanding than all my Teachers: for thy testimonies are my
meditation, Psalm. 119.98, 99. Thus when the Lord assisted Lydia in the business
of her believing, he opened her heart so that she attended to the things which
were spoken by Paul. She held her self to them; so the Dutch Translators render
it: she kept her mind staid upon them by serious consideration. And this we see
was the effect of Gods operation upon her mind; he opened her heart so that
sheattended, Acts 16.14. It is God that thus puts his Law into men's minds, that
pitcheth and terminateth their thoughts upon the things contained in it,
according to the tenor of the New Covenant, Heb. 8.10. This is one thing
wherein the Divine Assistance does consist.

2. Another thing is, the Holy Spirits operation upon the mind, enabling it by
the light of the Gospel, to discern the nature, tendency, and usefulness of the
things discovered and revealed by the Gospel. By man's Apostasy from God, and
customary sinning, the mind is darkened, the eye of the understanding
corrupted, and thereby to a great degree rendered impotent, and unable to
discern things discovered by the Gospel to be what they are, though set before
it. Like the man in the Gospel, who while imperfectly cured of his blindness,
saw men walking as Trees: they have and can have in that state but confused and
indistinct notions of spiritual things: if the eye be evil, the whole body is
full of darkness. This being man's case, there is need of a Divine Power to work
some cure upon the Eye of the mind to discern aright concerning the things of
the Gospel. David had some sense of this upon his mind when he prayed thus unto
God: Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold the wondrous things of thy Law,
Psalm. 119.18. The Disciples had not right notions of things revealed by the
Scriptures concerning Christ, until our Savior opened their understandings to
understand the Scriptures, Luke 24.45. When the Veil is taken away, so that men
with open face behold the glorious things of the Lord in the Gospel, it is by
the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. Though the hope of the Christians calling,
and the riches of the glory of Gods inheritance in the Saints are revealed in
the Gospel, yet S. Paul knew for all that, that there was need of having the
eyes of the understanding enlightened, to know and discern what those are; and
therefore prayed unto the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ for it, in
the behalf of the Ephesians, c. 1.17, 18. And if these Christians after they
believed, stood in need to have the eyes of their understanding further
enlightened by God, in order to a more clear and full prospect of the
gloriousness of the Hope set before them, for the strengthening and encouraging
them to persevere and hold out in their obedience to the Gospel, then doubtless
they much more stood in need of some enlightening by God in this kind to enable
them at first to begin to be sincerely obedient.

In the dark men are apt to mistake one thing for another; so before this
illumination of the mind by the Spirit of God, they are apt to call evil good,
and good evil; to put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; to choose evil
under the notion of good, and to refuse good under the notion of evil. But when
the light of the Law and Gospel are let into the mind, by which every thing is
discovered and discerned in its true shape and color, then Sin and Virtue
appear to be what they are in their own nature, sin to be sin indeed, and
virtue and goodness to be virtue and goodness indeed. Then sin appears in the
turpitude, deformity and malignity of its nature, and in its tendency to the
ruin of the subject in which it dwells: and righteousness, virtue, and
goodness appear in their beauty and usefulness, and in their tendency to the
happiness of such in whom they dwell. For instance; Before this illumination,
men are apt to mistake the doctrine of the grace of God which brings salvation,
and to think they shall be saved because Christ died for sinners, and because
they believe he did so; especially if they be but now and then troubled in
their minds, and sorry for their sins, and do pray God to pardon them, though
they still continue in them. But when the eyes of their understanding are
opened to see things as they are, and are represented in the Gospel; then they
perceive none shall be saved by the death of Christ, what ever their belief may
be, but such as shall be persuaded by the great motives of the Gospel, to be
reconciled to God by being reconciled to their Duty, throwing down the weapons
of their rebellion, and becoming universally sincerely obedient to his
government, according to the Laws of Jesus Christ.

This illumination of the mind by God, contributes so much toward men's
performing the condition of the promise, that the whole of their conversion is
sometimes meant in Scripture, when but this only is mentioned, Heb. 10.32.

3. Another part of the Divine Assistance afforded unto men in performing the
condition of the promise, is the Holy Spirits operation upon the will to assist
it in what is proper to it in performing of the condition of the promise. For
what ever sense there is begot in men of the danger they are in by reason of
sin: or whatever illumination is wrought in the mind touching the way and
method laid down by God of escaping that danger; yet until the will be changed
and wrought to a firm resotion of complying with the terms on which the promise
of pardon and life through Christ is made, the work is not done, the person is
not regenerate, nor in a regular capacity of enjoying what is conditionally
obtained by Christ, and conditionally promised through him. Men are not
begotten of God, nor born of God, as the Scripture speaks of some that are;
they are not begotten by the word of truth, nor born again of the immortal seed
of the Word, until the change be made in the will as well as in the
understanding: and when ever it is made, it is the effect of a divine
operation. It is God that works in you both to will and to do of his good
pleasure, Phil. 2.13.

Now in that assistance which is vouchsafed unto men in renewing them in their
wills, in working in them to will, several things are to be considered.

1. The Holy Spirit disposes the Will to be passive, in reference to those
notices given by the enlightened mind and understanding touching those things
which have been discovered to it, by the Gospel through the illuminating
operation of the Spirit upon it. The Will having been accustomed to busy and
exercise it self about other objects, such as the senses have presented to it,
things that concern only this present world and life, it will hardly suffer
any passage for heavenly and divine things which are strangers to it, without
some divine operation of the Spirit to incline the will thereto, or to open a
passage for them. Which is done (I conceive) by suspending the evil influence
which the will had upon the understanding, in keeping or withholding it from
considering with any seriousness and frequency, the things that concern the
soul and another life. And if the understanding be but at liberty seriously and
frequently to consider such things as well as those that concern only this
present life, the will then cannot but see and taste them to be better, because
the mind and judgment in such case, cannot but represent them to the will as
much better, and as things wherein the happiness of our nature is much more
concerned, than in any, than in all the things of this world.

God in taking off the will from the foresaid bad influence it had upon the
considerative faculty, takes away the heart of stone the Scripture speaks of.
For the heart of stone which God said he would take away, signifies the
inflexible temper of the will, and the resistance it makes against the
understandings taking those things into serious consideration which tend to
persuade the will to alter its purposes, and to alter its choice of objects.

Men's not considering things that concern their souls and another life, when
yet they can and do consider things that relate to the animal life, is justly
imputed to the faultiness of their wills; they do not consider them, because
they will not, not because they cannot; it is because they have no propension
of will to engage their considerative faculties about those things. They turn
back from God, and why? but because they will not consider any of his ways,
John 34.27. So that until God do take off this strong Bias which is upon men's
will, they will not consider those things, which if they did seriously
consider, would certainly change the bent and motion of their wills.

Now how Almighty God does take off this strong influence which the will has
upon the mind to keep it from considering things of greatest importance, I have
showed, at least, in great part in Chap. 1. of this Discourse; to wit, by
raising in the mind such sense of guilt and danger in reference to the soul, as
does counterpoise the prejudices which proceed from the will against such
consideration. For when the will cannot give ease to the mind by putting it
upon the consideration of any thing else than those which concern the soul and
a future state, then in reference to the man's own relief, it becomes content
that the mind should seek its ease, by considerations of another nature than
what it had been before accustomed to. And thus the will becomes at the least
passive as to those considerations and notices which proceed from an awakened
and enlightened mind.

2. By the wills being made thus passive, it comes, together with the
understanding, to taste and feel the goodness and sweetness of those things
whereof the great motives of the Gospel are made, the usefulness of them to
make a man happy, beyond any thing it ever tasted before. The ear tries words,
as the mouth tastes meat, as Elihu speaks, Job 34.3. The outward sense of the
body being put for the internal sense of the mind touching those things that
come into it by the ear. The mind by considering what a man hears, tastes
whether it be good or bad, as he does his meat by his palate. Thus the
superlative goodness of the great things of the Gospel come to be tasted both
by the understanding and the will, by a diligent and due consideration of them,
which is the minds chewing them. We read of men's tasting the heavenly gift,
their tasting the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come,
Heb. 6.4, 5. of the tasting that the Lord is gracious, 1 Pet. 2.3. of holy
David's saying, that Gods Word was sweeter to his taste than honey to his mouth;
and of Jobs saying how he esteemed it more than his necessary food; and of the
Prophet Jeremiahs eating of it, and of his finding it thereupon the joy, and
the rejoicing of his heart. However these, or some of these sayings may be
meant of a higher degree of this taste, than men meet with upon the first
change that is made upon their mind and will, yet doubtless, something of this
spiritual relish is found upon the mind and will of every true Convert, upon
his first effectual turning, and does contribute to the forming of those good
resolutions which are taken hereupon; which brings me to the next thing:

3. The will by having received some taste of the superlative goodness of the
great and precious promises of the Gospel touching pardon of sin and eternal
life, comes thereby to be reconciled to the terms or condition on which those
great benefits are promised, and to take up a resolution of endeavoring to
perform those terms or that condition. Though it be a great thing for a man to
resolve upon such a thing as to turn his back upon his formerly beloved
vanities, and to betake himself to the study and practice of other kind of
things, from which he has been willingly and wilfully estranged, yet the sense
of the danger of refusing to do so, and the hope of the greatness of the
benefits he shall receive if he does, prevails with the will to resolve upon it
against all that which would draw it another way, God also strengthening him
thereunto, with might by his Spirit in the inner man. And this he does, at
least in great part, by making the great motives of the Gospel present to his
mind, and by keeping them under his consideration, and drawing his thoughts
frequently upon them.

4. That which is yet more difficult, and wherein the Divine Assistance is
greatly needful, is to do as well as to will, and to put in execution those
good purposes when they have been raised and formed in the will. To will is
present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not, Rom 7.18.
The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak, Mat. 26.41. Such sayings
as these show it to be a harder matter to do indeed, than it is to purpose to
do.

There are many good purposes in men which stick in the birth, prove abortive,
and never come into act for want of strength in the will [in which they were
conceived] to bring them forth. Few are so bad but that at some times and in
some good mood they resolve to amend and become better, when the Spirit of God
is at work on their minds and consciences to awaken them: but these purposes
wear off and die within most men, and never come to effect for want of strength
and firmness. Many would be better that yet remain bad, if they could be so
with wishing and desiring, without resolving to put themselves to the trouble
of crossing their own corrupt humor, and of denying the unreasonable cravings
of the flesh. And those that do resolve upon those labors and endeavors which
are necessary to through conversion of soul, yet many times find a great strife
within themselves, between the taking up of such resolutions, and the putting
them in execution; they meet with great and strong solicitations from the flesh
from the sensitive appetites, to let fall such resolutions, and great
discouragements set before them also to hedge up the way with thorns. The Flesh
lusieth against the Spirit, and the Devil assisteth the Flesh all he can with
his suggestions: so that it becomes a matter of great difficulty for men's
purposes and resolutions in this kind, to hold out, and to make their way
through all this opposition. And when ever this difficulty is overcome, and men's
resolutions become so strong as to carry them through all this opposition, it
is to be attributed to God, it is because God works in them to will and to do
of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13.

The Spirit of God then we see works in men to do, by working in them
strength of resolution in willing to do, thereby drawing that out into actual
performance which had been resolved on. But I do not say that the Spirit of God
does enable such men's performance to answer their resolutions to the height
presently, and at the first. That which the Spirit of God does enable men at
first to do in this case, is honestly, really, and sincerely to set upon the
work resolved on; that is, sincerely to endeavor to reform, amend, and to
become new men; to strive against all known sin, and to endeavor to do all
known duty as well as they can; but the victory is got but by degrees.

There is a great difference between a man's getting the victory over those
oppositions of Flesh, World, and Devil, which withstood him in his beginning,
when he was setting upon the work of amendment of life, and his destroying
those enemies of his soul so as that they shall no more annoy him, or endanger
his falling short of the happiness he seeks: (which to be sure they will,
notwithstanding his first victory, unless he pursue that victory by seeking the
utter ruin and destruction of them, by keeping up a continual war against
them. The former victory I reckon is perfectly obtained when men are not
prevailed upon by any opposition whatsoever, but that they will and do
seriously, and sincerely, and actually engage in a conscientious observation of
the several duties of Christianity, enjoined by our Savior both in abstaining
from evil, and in doing good.

But the latter victory is obtained but by degrees, as the new man grows
stronger and stronger, and the old man weaker and weaker, like the house of
Saul and David. A man I conceive does commence sincere Christian and real
Disciple of Christ when he has obtained the first victory, but cannot approve
himself to God and his own conscience to be and to continue such, farther than
he follows his enterprise, and pursues that victory by endeavoring the
destruction of the whole body of sin, and by aspiring after a standing complete
in all the will of God.

When our Savior said ( Luke 12.47, That servant which knew his Lords will and
prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with
many stripes: we see the least that will secure a man from this threatening of
our Lord, is a man's preparing himself to do according to his Lords will. And if
by preparing himself be meant a putting himself in the best posture he can to
do it, by using the best means and helps he can in order to it, and then doing
it as well as he can, though not so well as he would; then it seems very
probable that for a man thus to prepare himself to do his Lords will, will not
only secure him from being beaten as a disobedient servant, but also render
him acceptable to his Lord in such his preparation to please him.

And I think the Apostles rule will hold in reference to this, though mentioned
but upon a particular occasion; that of Almsgiving, 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be
first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not. So long as a man's doing his Lords will as well
as his alms, does but answer his ability and capacity, and proceeds from a
willing mind, a mind inclined and bent to do better, as he to give a better
alms if he could; this man's endeavor and service will be no more rejected
because it is so mean, than the poor widows two mites were, but be accepted
because it holds some proportion with his ability, and proceeds from a mind and
will, that would have put the man upon doing more if he could have done it. And
this indeed is in a favorable sense, a man's serving his Lord and Master with
all his might, with all that little strength which he has.

And yet in this, Almighty God does not, I conceive, weigh men in reference to
their performance or endeavors to perform, by grains and scruples. For he
knows whereof we are made, and how we are but dust, as the Psalmist speaks. He
considers the composition of our nature, Flesh as well as Spirit, and the
constitution and complexion thereof, and how the motions and activity of the
Spirit are limited and straightned by the body to which it is united. He
considers all the disadvantages we are under from without us, as of times and
places where the providence of God has cast us, and of education, company, and
acquaintance, and the like; he considers all a man's circumstances, and then
according to the goodness and benignity of his nature, makes allowances in
estimating a man according to his endeavors and performances. He is not
extreme in marking what is done amiss. He pities us as a Father pities his
children, and spares us as a man spares his own Son that serves him, if the
Bias of our will and constant endeavors do but stand right toward him, and if
our endeavors do but hold some good proportion to that assistance we receive
from him. An instance of all which we have in the character which the Scripture
gives of David, when it says, He turned not aside from any thing commanded by
God, all his days except in the matter of Vriah, 1 Kings 15.5.

These things I note by the way, to the end we might be the better able to make
some judgment not only of what assistance men receive from God when he works
in them both to will and to do, but also what that willing and doing is, which
we may hope will through grace, be accepted for a performance of that
condition, to which the promise of pardon and life is made.

And thus we have seen in some measure, how Almighty God by the assistance of
his grace, brings about that change both in the mind and manners of men, by
which the condition of his promise of pardon and life is performed. He awakens
men's fears by making them sensible of their danger by reason of sin. And these
fears, especially when they grow any thing strong, prevail against those
prejudices which make men unwilling to consider the concernments of their souls
and things relating to another life. And by considering, men come through Gods
further assistance to have new apprehensions of things, to see and to judge of
things as they are, and then to choose or refuse them according to that judgment.

God does not give men new faculties of understanding and will: he only assists
those faculties to throw off that burden which oppressed them, to break those
fetters by which they were bound, and so to restore them by degrees to their
native liberty of acting regularly. Hence the Scripture calls this work of God
upon the soul, a being renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created
him, Col. 3.10. that is, to a right judgment of things wherein the soul of man
resembled its Maker. It is termed a being renewed in the Spirit of the mind,
Ephesians. 4.23. a being transformed by the renewing of the mind, Romans 12.2. and
the renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5.

That which is most connatural to the will in man, is to choose his happiness.
It is not in man's power to choose to be miserable under that notion, but
whenever he does so, its under the notion of good. And this is the corruption
that cleaves to man in his degenerate state, to choose that which is evil under
the notion of good; and likewise to choose an inferior good with a greater
degree of volition than a good that is superior. As when a temporal good, and
the good of the body, is chosen with a greater strength and power of willing,
than an eternal good, and the good of the soul.

Now that which God does in regenerating man, is the vouchsasing him such
assistance, as by which his mind is restored to a power and liberty of making
right judgment of things, to judge that to be good which is so, and that to be
evil which is so. And then to make a right judgment between an inferior and a
superior good, which the Apostle calls a proving or trying things that differ,
and the approving of things that are excellent, Phil. 1.9. That which he does
therein in reference to the will, is to enable it in its election and rejection
of things, to be governed by the rectified judgment of the mind, to be no
longer imposed upon by the irregularity of the sensitive appetites unto which
it had been in bondage, while they usurped the Throne, the place and office of
the understanding and judgment in giving laws to the will what it should choose
and what it should refuse. For so far as the will is renewed, it chooses and
refuses, according to the laws and dictates of an enlightened mind and rectified
judgment, and no longer by the blind appetites and propensions of sense. When
ever an inferior and superior good come in competition, the will so far as
renewed, will still choose that which is superior. And when two evils come in
competition, a greater and a less, the evil of sinning, and the evil of
suffering, the will as renewed chooses the less.

But in all this change made in the mind and will, there is no unnatural force
put upon the faculties, but on the contrary, they are thereby relieved against
an unnatural force which had been put upon them. They had by an unnatural force
been turned aside from acting regularly to the making of wrong judgment of
things, and wrong elections of them. It was an unnatural force which put the
sensual appetites and passions into the place of governing the will in her
resolutions and elections. And Gods work in transforming and renewing the soul,
is but his relieving and freeing it from these tyrannical impositions, and
restoring the faculties in their several operations to their pristine liberty
and order: the mind to judge of things as they are, and the will to submit her
self in her resolutions and elections, to the government of the judgment now
rectified: and the appetites and passions to conform themselves to the
elections and resolutions of the will under the conduct of such a rectified
judgment. And when things are thus right in the soul, which is the fountain and
spring of external actions, the life and conversation cannot in the main and in
the general course of it, but be regular also.

The doing of all this, the working so great a change in the soul, will indeed
require not only the operation of Gods word, but the operation of the hand of
his power also, to bring every thing into its right place, and each faculty to
do its own work. For the faculties of the soul, mind, and will, are enfeebled
by sin, which is the sickness of the soul, as men's limbs are by sickness of the
body, so that they cannot do that which otherwise would be natural, easy, and
pleasant to them, until God himself is pleased to convey strength into them, to
strengthen men with strength in their souls, as the Psalmist speaks.

Yet it must be confessed that God does not to effect this cure, give this
strength in so miraculous a manner as strength and perfect soundness was given
to the Cripple, Acts 3. which was done in an instant, but in a more leisurely
and gradual way; the seed which he sows in the soul, comes to perfection by
degrees, first the blade, then the ear, after that, the full corn in the ear,
Mark 4. the work of thorowconversion is not begun and finished all in an
instant ordinarily, but is usually carried on in such a slow and regular
process, as if it were wholly contrived and wrought by the power of our own
reason, as a late judicious Author well expresses it.

CHAP. VI. Of Gods assisting those that perish, toward their performing the
condition of the promise of Salvation: and of their refusing to make use of
that assistance; and of their perishing for that reason. Of Gods not hindering
men from refusing his assistance, and of the reason why.
IT is of no small concernment to satisfy our minds in this, to wit, that it
is not for want of mercy and goodness in God toward those that perish, that
yet they do perish. And if we consider how that God does assist even those that
perish, toward their performing the condition on which salvation is promised,
until that assistance is rejected, and that their perishing proceeds from their
refusing to use that assistance, and the reason why God does not hinder them by
the irresistibleness of his grace from refusing that assistance, it will go far
toward such a satisfaction.

1. I shall begin with the first of these, and show that God does assist those
that perish, toward their performing the condition on which salvation is
promised. This I suppose will appear more than probable when these things
following shall be considered.

1. The holy Scriptures acquaint us, that God would have all men to be saved
and come to the knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. That he is not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. 2 Pet. 3.9. Now
since neither of these can be attained without Gods assistance, how can it be
said that he would have all men to come to repentance, if he did not afford
them his assistance toward it? How can his willingness on this behalf be known
or discerned, if he should withold that assistance from any of them, without
which that cannot be done, which yet he says he would have done?

2. The same mercy and grace which inclined God the Father to give his Son, and
the Son to give himself a ransom for all, cannot as we may well conceive, but
incline him to afford unto all his preparatory assistance toward performing
that condition, without which his giving of Christ for all, would be
ineffectual to their salvation. His giving his Son for all, which is the
greater gift, infers his willingness to vouchsafe to all the less also, so long
as his end in giving the greater will be lost, unless he give the lesser also.

3. If God did not begin to assist even those that perish, to perform the
condition of the promise, until that assistance has been refused and opposed, I
would fain know how they can be left without excuse when they come to be
condemned for not repenting, unless we could suppose them able of themselves to
repent without Divine Assistance, which yet the Scriptures will not suffer us
to suppose. For if they could as well plead that Divine Assistance had never
been afforded them, but always withheld from them, as they may plead the
impossibility of their performing the condition of the promise without Divine
Assistance, it would be an excuse, why they did not repent and believe, and a
great one too.

4. How can it be said, which yet is usually and generally affirmed, that under
the New Covenant, salvation is granted to all men that do not wilfully refuse
it, if assistance to perform the condition, were not afforded unto all, as well
as the promise of it is on that condition; until they wilfully refuse to make
use of that assistance? For men can no more perform the condition on which
salvation is promised, without Divine Assistance, than they can be saved
without performing that condition: and consequently Salvation cannot be said to
be offered to all, unless Divine Assistance be afforded to all likewise.

5. It is no wise probable that God should require and expect repentance from
all men, which yet he does, Acts 17.30. or that he should account them culpable
if they do not repent, if he did not afford unto all, such means and assistance
as by which they may be able to repent. No wise or good man will require such
work to be done by his Servants, without furnishing them with such Tools,
without which it cannot be done: much less will God require repentance from all
men, unless he had vouchsafed such assistance unto all, as by which repentance
might be no impossible thing to them.

6. It is no wise likely that since Christ died for all, but that it was that
all might have the benefit of his death upon one condition or other: Nor is it
any whit more probable that God should promise this benefit upon an impossible
condition. For men to promise any thing to men upon impossible conditions, is
but trifling, and who dare fasten any thing like it on God? And yet for God to
promise the benefit of Christ's death unto all, upon condition of repentance,
would be to promise it upon an impossible condition, unless he did afford unto
all his assistance toward it.

7. In the days of the Old World the Spirit of God by the preaching of Noah, by
his long suffering, and by his operations on men's minds, did strive with the
then whole World to bring them to repentance, and even with the spirits which
afterward were in prison for their disobedience, Genesis 6.3. compared with 1 Pet.
3.19, 20. which striving with them by the Spirit of God, was his assisting of
them toward their repentance. And if God did afford his assistance unto all
before the Flood to bring them to repentance, it is no wise likely but that he
has done, and does so to all likewise after the flood.

8. Our Savior in his Discourse wherein he showed that no man could come to
him, except he were prepared by the Father, said, It is written in the
Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God, John 6.45. And it no ways
follows that all are not taught of God, because all do not learn, as is showed
in another place. Many are taught when but few learn, as many are called when
but few are chosen. And if all are taught of God, then all have a preparatory
assistance from him.

9. We cannot reasonably think but that God who is the lover of Souls, is more
ready to apply himself to the minds of all men, to dispose them to what tends
to their salvation, till by their often opposition they provoke him to leave
them as incurable, than the Devil the Evil Spirit is to dispose them to what
tends to their destruction; and yet this evil Spirit which works in the
children of disobedience, is as we have reason to believe, busy with the minds
of all men for their hurt.

10. When it is said by St. Stephen concerning the disobedient Jews, Ye have
always resisted the Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do ye, Acts 7.51. it is
evident that the Holy Ghost had been attempting and making many Essays upon
their minds, as bad as they were, in order to the reclaiming them; otherwise
the Holy Ghost could not be said to have been resisted by them. The Holy Ghost
doubtless did often suggest to them that the way in which they walked, was evil
in the nature of it, and destructive in its tendency, such as was altogether
unsafe for them, and tending to their ruin. For so much is signified in
reference to their Fathers, by that in Nehem. 9.30. Many years did thou
forbear them, and testifiedst against them by the Spirit in thy Prophets. Thou
testifiedst against them, that thou might bring them again unto thy Law, as
it is in Verse 29. and so escape the misery they were otherwise bringing upon
themselves. And this the Spirit of God did out of compassion to them: He sent
to them by his Messengers, rising up betimes and sending; because he had
compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place. 2 Chronicles. 36.15:

11. The goodness and long-suffering of God, which he exercises toward the
worst of men, carries in it the nature of Divine Assistance toward their
repenting. It leads to repentance, according to that of S. Paul, Romans 2.4. And
Gods leading men to repentance, is certainly his assisting them toward it. By
his long suffering he gives them opportunity to bethink themselves, and upon
second thoughts to repent; and not only so, but by it he invites them to
repent: for that is the language of Gods forbearance, if men would but consider
that they might understand it.

For, for what other end can men think that God forbears to cut them off after
they have once deserved it? Surely, it is not that they might sin the more, and
that so their punishment might be the greater; I believe hardly any wicked men
can think so. And if not for that, for what else can they think it to be, but
that they might have time to repent? But whether they apprehend it and consider
it or no, it is so, he spares them for that very reason. He is long-suffering
to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance. 2 Pet. 3.9. And is it likely that God who spares them that they may
repent, will deny them his grace, without which he knows they cannot? To what
purpose should he spare them to repent, when he knows they cannot, if he were
resolved not to enable them to it?

And as the forbearance, so the goodness of God leads to repentance. For when
sinners obnoxious to God, are not only spared by him, but also made partakers
of the effects of his goodness and kindness (according to that of our Savior,
he is kind to the unthankful and to the evil, Luke 6.35.) they must needs
conclude, if they consider it, that he does not delight in their misery as
such, though they have deserved evil and not good at his hands, but that by his
kindness he would gain upon them and draw them to better thoughts of him, and
to a better behavior toward him. He left not himself without witness (viz. of
his seeking to draw all Nations from walking in their own ways) in that he did
good, and gave them rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their
hearts with food and gladness, Acts 14.17.

If any conclude from Gods forbearance and goodness to wicked men, that he is
not displeased with their evil ways, no more than they themselves are; like
those, Psalm. 50.20. These things thou have done, and I kept silence, says God,
thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self: I say, if any can
persuade themselves thus to conclude, it must be only profligate wretches,
sinners of no ordinary rank. For very Heathens, and such as the Apostle brands
with a very black character, thought otherwise. Their thoughts did not only
accuse them, but they knew the judgment of God, as he says, that they which
commit such things are worthy of death; and therefore sought to appease God by
their sacrifices. And this is evidence enough, that such as they, as bad as
they were, did not think God was not displeased with their evil ways, or that
he did forbear them upon that account.

Now this long-suffering and this goodness of God, is a piece of Divine
Assistance toward repentance, which God vouchsafes even to the Heathen and
barbarous Nations. And however this assistance may be much inferior to what is
vouchsafed them who have the Oracles of God among them; yet this, with the
secret operation of God by impressing principles of natural Religion upon the
minds of such, have, as I have showed, so far prevailed upon many of them, as
that they have been thereby prepared to receive and believe the Gospel, as soon
as it has been sufficiently revealed and made known to them: and so far also
as in the mean time to become morally religious in devotion toward God, and in
justice and charity toward men.

This seems very evident in those uncircumcised Gentiles, which are styled
Religious Proselytes, Act. 13.43. men fearing God, ver. 16.26. devout men, Act.
10.7. as Dr. Hammond has observed in his Notes upon Acts 10.2. Of which sort
were Cornelius and the Eunuch. And when the Lord said to S. Paul in a Vision at
Corinth, I have much people in this City, as a reason why he would have him
continue preaching there, notwithstanding the Jews in that place opposed
themselves and blasphemed, Acts 18.10. I question not but he meant it of such
Gentiles as were in the first degree morally religiously disposed, and so were
prepared to receive the Faith of the Gospel, as other such so prepared had done
before them. And of such as these, only further improved in morality, I
suppose S. Paul speaks, Romans 2.26. when he says, If the uncircumcision keep
the righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for
circumcision? And in reference to such it was that S. Peter also said, I
perceive of a truth that God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he
that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted with him, Acts 10.34,
35.

These several considerations tend, you see, to evince, that God does not deny
his preparatory assistance to any of those that perish: and that therefore
their perishing is not for want of so much mercy in God toward them, as by
which their perishing might have been prevented, had they not refused and
opposed the mercy of God it self toward them, in that way and method of
saving, in which he saves others that are saved. God has concluded all under
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all, Romans 11.32. And those who will not
be saved by the mercy of God in that way and method of his mercy in which he
saves those that are saved; nor unless they can be saved by Gods mercy in a way
of their own choosing, in opposition to Gods, must sit down with their own
choice, and go without that salvation which they might have had if they would,
and which God of his compassion, did more than barely offer them, while his
Spirit did strive with them, as it did with them of the Old World. These are
they that receive the grace of God in vain, against whose folly S. Paul does
with great seriousness and earnestness beseech and admonish men, 2 Cor. 6.1.
And truly they are men of a strange presumption, that can promise themselves
that which God never promised them; as if God should for their sakes, alter his
ordinary method of his mercy in saving men, to save them, when he has many and
many times peremptorily declared the contrary in the Scriptures of truth. They
doubtless that can do thus, are the men the Scripture speaks of, that despise
their own souls, that set little by them, and concern themselves little about
them.

By the reasons given to induce a persuasion that God affords his preparatory
assistance unto all, I do not say, nor mean, that he does vouchsafe it to all
equally and alike. For the scope of our Saviors Parable, I conceive, does
intimate the contrary, when he said, To one is delivered one talent, to another
two, and to another five, Mat. 25. But then if he which has but the least,
does but use that for the end for which he received it, he seems by parity of
reason to be capable of being dealt with as a faithful servant in opposition to
him who is doomed as slothful, though he does not do so much as he does who
has received more. He that gained but two talents by using the two which he
had received, was pronounced a faithful servant, and dealt with as such, as
well as he who gained five with using the five which were delivered him. So
that we see a man's faithfulness and unfaithfulness is estimated by his using or
not using what is afforded him, for the end for which it is vouchsafed him. If
he that has but one talent, gain though it be but one, with using that one he
has received, he, we may suppose, will be dealt with as a faithful servant, as
well as he that gains two with two, or five with five. If a man's repentance,
faith, and usefulness in the World, do but hold some good proportion to the
measure and degree of assistance he has from God in means and helps external
and internal, though both the one and the other be but of the lesser size, yet
we cannot deny such to be capable of better usage from God than such as are,
and will be sentenced for impenitent, unfaithful, and unprofitable. We cannot
say that so little will make a man which has more means and helps, capable of
the reward of a faithful servant, as will another which has not so much. For
to whom much is given, much will be required, and to whom men commit much, of
him they ask the more, says our Savior, Luke 12.48. That probably will not be
sufficient to save a man who enjoys the Gospel, which may be sufficient to save
such a one as Cornelius was before the Gospel was made known to him. God is a
God of knowledge and judgment, by him actions are weighed, and all
circumstances of a man's case considered. And doubtless, God makes larger
allowances in estimating the goodness of a man's performances that has less
assistance, than he does in estimating his for good that has more.

This I have here noted the rather, to the end we who have the Gospel, may have
the more charitable opinion concerning the state and condition of some of them
which have it not: and likewise to put them in mind who enjoy more means, and
therein more assistance from God than others, how absolutely necessary it is
for them to do more than others, to the obtaining from God, the approbation of
good and saithful servants, and such as have performed the condition of the
promise.

2. Having now made out the first of the things proposed, viz. That God does
assist even those that perish, toward their performing the condition on which
pardon and life are promised, until that assistance is rejected; I proceed now
to the second. Which is to show that the reason why men are deprived of the
pardon and salvation purchased by our Savior, is founded in their refusing to
make use of Gods assisting grace, through which otherwise they might have been
enabled to have performed the condition, on which pardon and life are promised.

Whatever means God uses, tending to awaken, direct, or persuade men to
repent, reform, and amend, are his aids and assistances vouchsafed them to that
end. And such are his reproofs, instructions, commands, counsels, threatenings,
and promises, when applied by his Spirit unto the minds of men.

Now then, men's refusing to hearken to, and to consider these things, or to
comply with them, and their endeavoring not to be affected with them, or moved
by them, is their refusing to be assisted by God to perform the condition of
the promise.

And upon this very thing is both the wickedness of men and their destruction
charged in Scripture, and that under a great variety of expression. Sometimes
it is termed a not enclining the ear to hear, a not hearkening, a refusing to
hear, a refusing to return, a stopping the ears that they might not hear, a
closing the eyes that they may not see, a rejecting of the word of the Lord,
and of the counsel of God against themselves.

These things which are spoken of the outward senses, do signify and represent
the posture of bad men's minds, when they refuse to set their hearts to what God
says or does to them. They seeing see not, and hearing they hear not, as our
Savior expresses it, Mat. 13.13. as men are said to do, when their minds are
not at all busied or concerned with the things they hear or see. And when it is
so with them, they are no more moved or affected with the things they see or
hear, than as if they had not seen nor heard them at all.

And when the Scripture says that they stop their ears that they may not hear,
this signifies somewhat more, to wit, the arming themselves against what is
said, so that the things spoken may not enter their souls, nor at all affect
them, and is much what the same thing which the Scripture means by men's
hardening themselves and stiffening their neeks. These are so far from
endeavoring to comply with Gods applications to them, for the altering their
way and course of life, that they are afraid of being affected with or
converted by any thing that may be spoken or done to them. Their ears are dull
of hearing, and their eyes they have closed, lest at any time they should see
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their
hearts, and should be converted, and I should heal them, says our Lord
concerning them, Matt. 13.15.

It is true indeed, No man can come to the Son, except it be given him of the
Father, and except the Father draw him, John 6.44, 65. But then the reason why
men are not drawn so, as to be prepared to come to the Son so soon as he is
sufficiently revealed to them, is because they refuse to be so. The Wisdom of
God speaks after this manner. I have called and ye refused, I have stretched
out my hand and no man regarded, they would none of my counsel, they despised
all my reproof; the turning away of the simple shall slay them, Prove. 1.24. God
we see, calls and stretches out his hands to sinners; he reproves, he counsels
and persuades; and this is his drawing. But many of those whom he thus draws,
they we see refuse, they regard not, they despise, they turn away: and this is
their refusing and rejecting Gods assistance, it is their refusing to be drawn;
and it is this their refusing and turning away that slayes them. See that ye
refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped not who refused him that
spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that
speaks from heaven. Heb. 12.25. How often would I have gathered you, and ye
would not, says our Savior, Mat. 23.37. And again, Ye will not come to me
that ye might have life, John 5.40.

3. We may perceive by all this, that Gods method of drawing men, is not to
work upon them in an irresistible manner; for if it were, there would be no
place left to draw back or to refuse: which yet by the Scriptures and
experimental observation, we see there is.

But this will further appear when we consider that the same preparatory grace
and assistance from God, which will dispose some to repentance, proves
ineffectual to others, which could not be, if repentance were wrought in an
irresistible manner and way. Our Savior has told us for instance, that if
Tire and Sidon had but had the same means of repentance vouchsafed unto them,
which Corazin and Bethsaida had, they would have repented, when yet Corazin and
Bethsaida did not. Mat. 11.21. Woe unto thee Corazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida:
for if the mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and
Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. Nay a less
degree and proportion of means will work repentance in some, when a greater
will not in others. Which is an evident proof that repentance may be wrought by
a less proportion of means than that which is irresistible; otherwise that
which is irresistible in its operation, may be resisted, which is a
contradiction in terms. The men of Nineveh repented at the preaching of Jonas,
when the obstinate Jews did not repent, though they had more powerful means
vouchsafed them to bring them to it than the men of Nineveh had, to wit, the
preaching and many mighty miracles of our Savior; which was the reason why our
Savior said, the men of Nineveh should rise in judgment against them, and
condemn them, Mat. 12.41. The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of
Jonas, and behold a greater than Jonas is here. That which is or may be made
ineffectual to its end, is not irresistible in its operation: but the means of
repentance vouchsafed the unbelieving Jews, was made ineffectual by them as to
their repentance, though more and greater than the men of Nineveh had, by which
repentance was wrought in them. By which it is manifest that the repentance of
the Ninevites was not wrought by an irresistible operation; because the means
used to bring the unbelieving Jews to repentance, was greater than that the
Ninevites had, and yet was resisted.

Though I do not say or think that God does always give the same degree of
assistance to all persons in like cases, (he does what he will with his own) it
is enough he gives sufficient to all; yet the reason of the different event of
the same means of grace vouchsafed to those that do not repent, and to those
that do, ordinarily so far as we can judge, lies in the greater degree of
untractableness and unteachableness which is found in the one, than is found in
the other, by means whereof the same applications and assistances from God, are
rendered ineffectual to the one, which are not so to the other. But if the
method and manner of Gods operation in working repentance and faith, were
irresistible, no degree of obstinacy in men, could withstand it, or render it
ineffectual.

There is an opinion indeed much different from this, and which has obtained
even among many good and worthy men, which does suppose the reason of the
different event of Gods applications to men, to lie in the different manner of
his applying himself to them. As when we are invited by it to conceive, that
the reason why some repent and others do not, is because God works it
irresistibly in the one, when he refuses to do so in the other. The ill
consequents of which opinion we may well suppose they were no whit aware of who
were the first promoters of it, and were far enough from owning them, though
they held fast the opinion which does infer them. But yet if the things
necessarily consequent upon this opinion prove it to be bad, it can be no
breach of any rule of charity or modesty to mention them upon so fair an
occasion as this now before us, but rather the contrary if I should not, and
may consist well enough with that veneration I have for the memory of many of
those who have embraced it.

This opinion renders the damnation of such as perish impossible for them ever
to have escaped after they had once sinned. For if nothing less than Gods
irresistible operation be sufficient to bring sinners to repentance, then would
it have been impossible for any that perish to have prevented it, because no
such means of repentance was ever vouchsafed them; for if it had, they could
not but have repented as well as any. This opinion therefore tends to lessen
the grace and mercy of God in that provision which he has made for the
redemption of the World, as if it were not sufficient for the salvation of any,
but such as are, and shall be actually and eventually saved. It implies and
supposes that the reason why such as perish are not saved by the death of
Christ as well as others, is for want of so much compassion in God toward
them, as to assist them to perform the condition on which such salvation is
purchased and promised. Whereas Almighty God has not only given his Son to be
a propitiation for the sin of the whole World, but has also afforded such
assistance unto all, as by which they might have come to perform that condition
upon which the promise of salvation is made, as I have before endeavored to
show. It does not consist with the plain and obvious sense of such Scriptures
as tell us, that God is not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance. For how can we conceive any such willingness in God
concerning those who yet do perish, if he should wholly have refused them that
assistance without which it was impossible they should repent and escape
perishing?

An opinion it seems to be, if it were true, which would render all Gods
applications to those that perish, to have prevented their perishing, useless
and insignificant. For to what end should other means be used to bring those to
repentance who in the issue do not repent, if no other means be sufficient to
effect it in them, but such an irresistible operation of God as he never
intended them? And how ill a representation would it make of God, if he
according to the tenor of this opinion, should at last condemn men for not
repenting, and for not believing and obeying the Gospel, when it was impossible
they should, so long as God refused to work these graces irresistibly in them.

And truly if those that perish had so much to plead in excuse for themselves,
why they did not repent under all the mighty motives they had to persuade them
to it, and other means to assist them in it, it would abate or rather quite
take away a great part of the torments of the damned, which do arise from a
sense of their gross, wilful and obstinate neglect to hearken to those powerful
motives they once had to persuade them to repent, and to make use of those
helps and means they once had to assist them in it. If they could but plead the
impossibility of their repenting upon the account of Gods not vouchsafing them
the irresistible operations of his grace and Spirit, which was granted to all
others that escape perishing, it would in a great measure at least, abate the
tormenting gnawing of the worm that never dies. For then it would leave no
place for those gripes of conscience, fierce self-accusations, and intolerable
self-reflections, which proceed from the remembrance and consideration of the
loss of the opportunity they once had given them from God, of escaping the
misery they have brought upon themselves, wherewith they are perpetually
racked. For if they could believe that all they could have done here in this
life toward the escaping of that miserable state, would have availed them
nothing, but that it depended wholly upon the irresistible operation of God
upon them, which was altogether out of their power, they might perhaps turn
their rage against Almighty God, for not affording them the same means of
escaping, as he had done others that were sinners as well as themselves; but
would hardly reflect upon themselves for not doing that which was impossible
for them to have done. This ill consequence alone of the opinion under
consideration, if there were no other, were enough one would think, to detect
the crookedness and deformity of it, which yet, as I have said, has obtained
so long as it has done among many good men as well as others. And indeed
should this opinion generally obtain among bad men, it would in all
probability, be a dangerous temptation upon them, to neglect doing what they
might do to flee from the wrath to come, and to expect that if God intends to
save them, that one time or other he should come with such power upon them to
convert them, as that they should not be able to withstand it.

4. But if this should run in the mind of any, that God could, if he would,
hinder men from refusing his assistance, and prevent the perishing of any by
working repentance in all by the irresistible operations of his grace: I shall
answer such a thought thus: That it is possible for God to do, whatever it is
possible for him to will should be done. Gods power has no other bounds set to
it, but his own Will. Whatever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in
earth, in the seas, and in all deep places, Psalm. 135.6. But then it is
impossible for him to will any thing, or to do any thing which is not perfectly
agreeable to his own infinite wisdom, by which he regulates his will and all
the exertions of his power. For he works all things according to the counsel
of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. Not according to the prerogative or absoluteness
of his will simply considered, but according to his will regulated and governed
by infinite wisdom and counsel. The Kings strength loves judgment, says the
Psalmist, speaking of God, Psalm. 99.4.

So that we may truly say that God can no more do that which does not agree
with his wisdom, than he can that which does not agree with his truth, or with
his righteousness. As it is impossible for God to lie, so it is impossible for
him to do any thing that does not become his wisdom.

Why could not God have done more for his Vineyard than he had done? Isa. 5.4.
It was not doubtless because he had already acted therein to the utmost extent
of his power simply and absolutely considered, but because he had done as much,
all things considered, as became a wise God to do toward such a People to make
them good, as there he means by his Vineyard.

S. Mark chapter 6.5. speaking of our Savior, says, that he could do no mighty
work there, to wit, in his own Country, save that he laid his hands upon a few
sick folk, and healed them. But why could he not do as mighty works, and as
many of them in his own Country as he did in other places? Doubtless it was not
for want of power, but considering the ill temper of the people there, and the
vehement prejudice they had against him, he did not think it fit for him, meet
or convenient to do so many, and so mighty works there, as he did elsewhere. S.
Matthew says, he did not many mighty works there, because of their unbelief,
chap. 13.58. Lo here we see the wisdom of our Savior restraining the acting of
his power in things tending to work faith and repentance in men.

Every one knows that it is matter of wisdom in a Governor to try men by
committing to them lesser trusts at first. And if they quit themselves well
under those, then to commit greater trusts to them, and so to prefer them by
degrees. But if they miscarry under those lesser trusts, they do not only
forbear committing to them greater, but also withdraw from them those lesser
trusts which had been committed to them. And this they do upon that rational
principle mentioned by our Savior, Luke 16.10. He that is faithful in that
which is least, will be faithful also in much; and he which is unfaithful in
the least, will be unfaithful in much.

And according to this rule of wisdom, God himself proceeds ordinarily, in
vouchsafing his assistances unto men, in order to their performing the
condition of the promise, as our Savior has told us, Mat. 13.12. and repeated
the same, chap. 25.29. in that saying; To every one that has shall be given,
and he shall have abundance; and from him that has not, shall be taken away
even that which he has. God begins with men by awakening their natural
principles of Religion, in causing thoughts to arise in their minds about their
future state, and what may become of their souls when this life is over, and
about the tendency of good and evil ways. And when this operation of God upon
their minds is not slighted but attended to, and thoughts of this nature
revolved in their minds, so that they do but incline to amend their lives, and
to take some care of their souls, then God comes in with more and further
assistance, and so on, if that be attended to also, until he has wrought those
first inclinations into resolutions, and then those resolutions into actual
endeavors, till at last he brings them up to a performance of the condition of
the promise.

But if men make no use of these lesser beginnings of God with them in those
preparatory assistances, to the ends aforesaid, but neglect and slight them,
and at last oppose them, and harden themselves against them, so that they grow
worse rather than better under them; then Almighty God, after he has thus
striven with them as long as he thinks fit, at last leaves them to themselves,
by withdrawing those assistances which he had before afforded them; and so
takes away from them that which they had, because they did not make any use of
it to the end for which it was given them.

Now this method of Gods proceeding with men, is represented in Scripture as a
thing which is meet and worthy; that is, which becomes the wisdom and
righteousness of God as Governor of the World. Thus for instance in the lowest
kind; when God had begun with the Gentiles to operate upon their minds by
principles of natural religion, and to work in them so much knowledge and sense
of himself by his works and otherwise, as to leave them without excuse, and yet
they did not retain God in acknowledgment, nor glorify him as God, nor were
thankful for his undeserved favors; made no good use of these lower beginnings
of God with them; then God gave them up to a reprobate mind, and to vile
affections, took off and withdrew that restraint which his beginning
assistances put upon them. And this dealing of God with them, S. Paul calls a
recompense which was meet, such as was fit and becoming the wisdom, the
righteousness and goodness of God the Governor of the World, and such as was
unexceptionable upon all accounts whatsoever, Romans 1.27.

Those in the Parable of our Savior who were invited to the Wedding Feast, and
yet would not come, but slighted it, though they were told what preparations
were made for their entertainment, are said to be unworthy, Matt. 22.8. There
would have been no decorum or comeliness in forcing the Wedding Feast upon such,
whether they would or no. The invitation signifies Gods application to the
minds of men, to draw them to do that by which they might become partakers of
the blessings by Christ held forth in the Gospel. Their obstinate refusing to
do which, is that which makes them unworthy of those benefits, and of Gods
further applications to them to make them capable of them. Thus the
contumacious Jews, when they put the Gospel away from them, when it brought a
tender of salvation to them, they thereby judged themselves unworthy of
everlasting life, and unworthy also of Gods further applications to them: for
thereupon the Apostles left them, Acts 13.46.

It is remarkable that our blessed Savior himself gives thanks unto his Father
for hiding those things from the wise and prudent, which he revealed unto
Babes: which is an argument of the wisdom and comeliness of Gods proceeding thus
with men, in denying them the after-assistances of his grace, that have
hardened themselves against his first: and our Saviors words imply so much
when he says, Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight, Mat. 11.25,
26.

But besides these testimonies from Scripture, the nature and reason of the
thing shows it to be seemly and a becoming thing in God, and agreeable to the
highest wisdom, for him as Governor of the World, not irresistibly to work
grace in those that oppose it to the uttermost in all other applications which
God makes to them. It becomes the wisdom of God to govern his Creatures
according to the frame and constitution of those natures he has given them.
Man then being made an intelligent and free agent, endued with reason and
judgment, and liberty of will to choose or refuse according to the dictates of
his mind and judgment, it must needs be most congruous and becoming the wisdom
of God, in governing this kind of Creature, to give him such Laws as by which
he might know what is fit for him to choose and what to refuse. And God having
given him such a nature, and such laws as are suitable to it, it is most
congruous to leave him to the freedom of his own choice, and finally to
determine him to the end of the way he makes choice of, whether it be life or
death. And it is so more especially when death is not awarded unto any, until
they have first slighted and withstood those applications which God has made
to them to warn them of their danger, and to take them off from proceeding in
such ways as inevitably tend to their destruction. Now when God has many and
many a time over-done thus with men, and yet they will take no warning, nor be
persuaded to concern themselves for their souls, what can be done to give such
men grace, and to save them? unless God should depart from his own rules of
government, and the terms he has fixed of giving and withholding grace, of
rewarding and punishing men. And this in wisdom he cannot do, since they were
established by himself in wisdom and counsel at the first.

When our Savior has said it as the Law of Heaven, and the will of the
Almighty, that from him that has not shall be taken away that which he has,
meaning that which he had, but did not use; how can such men as have had
assistance from God afforded them, but have made no use of it, ever hope that
God should give them grace and save them? unless they could promise themselves
that he is so fond of them, as for their sakes to wave his own established laws
and rules, and to do it for them in a way of prerogative above his own law? A
thing which they can never with any color of reason expect, unless they could
suppose their case compassionable: for none else but a compassionable case is
so much as an object of mercy. But for such as these who harden themselves
against all terms of mercy, when such terms have often and long been afforded
them, together with great motives to persuade them to accept of them, and
assistance to enable them to do so; how can it possibly be imagined that their
case can be compassionable? May they not as well think the case of the Devils
themselves compassionable? yea, much better, who never had such tenders of
mercy and recovery made them, nor rejected such terms as themselves have done.

Besides the administration of Justice in punishing obstinate criminals,
becomes a good and wise Governor as well as Mercy, toward those whose case is
truly compassionable; and so it does God in the administration of his
Government. And if such criminals as those I have now mentioned, be not the
objects of Gods severity, I think there will none be found throughout the whole
race of Mankind.

These things I have noted to show for what reason we may conceive God in his
wisdom does not [though we should suppose that he could] cause the mighty
motives of Religion to operate effectually upon the most refractory sinners, in
a way of persuasion, without destroying that liberty which is essential to the
will, so as thereby to bring them to repentance.

But though I need not such an argument, nor to lay any stress upon it, yet it
is thought by some impossible in the nature of the thing, for that liberty
which is essential to the will as such, to be preserved, and at the same time
for the will to be irresistibly constrained; these being things inconsistent.
And if so, then the will cannot be irresistibly forced, without altering the
humane species by that very act. And if this should be true (and I cannot see
how it can fairly be denied) it would be reason enough of it self to satisfy
any man, why God has not thought fit to work grace in men by an irresistible
operation.

For if God should deprive man of all liberty of will to choose or refuse in
things of a moral nature, and govern him merely by his power, he would thereby
take him from under his Government by laws, and then there would be no place
left either for virtue or vice, future rewards or punishments, as there is not
among irrational Creatures, who are under no such laws as man is, having no
such nature as as man has. It is the spontaneousness, the voluntariness of an
action as referring to a law, that makes it virtuous or vicious, and so
rewardable or punishable in another world. If I do it willingly, I have a
reward, says S. Paul: Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own
lust, and enticed, says S. James. It was no virtue in Balaam to bless Israel,
so long as he did it only by constraint, no more than it was in his Ass to
reprove him. If you can suppose a man to do any thing merely by virtue of an
extrinsecal power without him, without the least consent of his own will, that
in a moral sense is not the act of the man, but is wholly owing to that power,
by which it was necessitated to be done.

Men are too too apt to presume unduly upon the goodness and mercy of God to
their own hurt, and to think it inconsistent with his natural goodness being
infinite, not to save them if he can. And therefore to undeceive men in this
matter, I have insisted the more on these things, and to show how agreeable it
is to the Divine Wisdom, for God to withdraw his assistance from men, after
they have obstinatery persisted in refusing and opposing it in its design upon
them. And if it be agreeable to his wisdom, it cannot be disagreeable to his
goodness: for it is as well goodness in God to control Vice, as it is for him
to encourage Virtue, in what way, and by what methods seems best unto him.

There is a great deal of difference between true love and goodness, and
fondness. Men by fondness love many times without reason, and bestow their
favors more than becomes them. But true and generous goodness governs it self
by wisdom and prudence, and so it does in God. The wisdom of God will not
suffer his goodness to throw away his saving benefits upon those who by
incapacitating themselves to enjoy them, have rendered themselves altogether
unworthy of them. For it would disparage the wisdom, and so the goodness of God
the donor, in case he should confer them upon such, because his different
affection to evil and good, would be thereby in a great measure obscured, and
the sinews of his Government weakened. Honor is not seemly for a Fool, says
the Wiseman, Prove. 26.1. As it will not become the Fool himself, so neither
will it become the wisdom of him that confers it, to place it on one so
incapable of it as a Fool is.

CHAP. VII. Of the after-assistance of the Holy Spirit, which those receive,
who have been assisted already to perform the condition of the promise, as new
beginners in doing so.
THose who have been assisted by God to repent, believe, and obey, and therein
to begin their performance of the condition of the promise of pardon and life,
do still stand in need of his further assistance to persevere, and to continue
to do so to their lives end, and to do it more and more excellently. For as
Believers hold their title in the benefits promised no longer than they
continue to perform the condition on which the promise of them is made, so
neither do they continue in the performance of that condition longer than they
are assisted by God to do so. Now to persevere in performing the condition of
the promise, is as necessary for men to continue their title to the benefits
promised, as their performance of that condition at the first was to begin it.

For the promise runs thus: He that shall endure to the end, the same shall be
saved, Mat. 24.13. And to him that overcomes and keeps my works unto the
end, will I give power over the Nations, Rev. 2.26. But when the righteous
turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, all the
righteousness which he has done shall not be mentioned: in the trespass which
he has trespassed, and in the sin which he has sinned, in them he shall die,
Ezekiel. 18.24.

And as this perseverance is necessary for the reason and end aforesaid, so is
a constant and continual assistance from God to enable the Disciples of Christ
so to persevere. As the same power is necessary to continue the natural life,
which first gave being to it, so is it in the spiritual life and state also. Ye
are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Being
confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in you, will
perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6.

And that which is very remarkable touching this After-assistance of which I
speak, is, That a greater presence and more constant assistance of the Spirit
of God is promised and vouchsafed unto men after they believe, than they had
before. This appears by having the Holy Spirit given them after, in such a
degree which they had not before; and by Gods dwelling, and the Spirits abiding
in them after, who did not do so before.

First, those who have believed the Gospel and sincerely delivered up
themselves to the conduct of it in their lives, do thereby come under that
special privilege of having the Holy Spirit given them, to assist, influence,
and quicken them, and to carry on the work of sanctification in them. This our
Savior promised, John 7.38, 39. Jesus cried, saying, he that believes on me,
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water: this, says the Evangelist,
he spoke of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive. Acts
2.38. Repent and be baptized for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive
the gift of the Holy Ghost. Which promises we find made good afterward in
several instances. Of the Believers it is said, Acts 4.31. that they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost. And Acts 5.32. We, says S. Peter, are witnesses of
these things, and so is the Holy Ghost, whom God has given to them that obey
him. And S. Paul to the Ephesians says, After ye believed, ye were sealed with
the holy spirit of promise, chap. 1.13. that is, they were marked for his, and
distinguished from those that were not, by his giving them the Spirit. For if
any man have not the Spirit of Chhist, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. Sensual not
having the Spirit, Jude 19.

It is true indeed, those first Christians, and others after for some time, did
receive the Holy Spirit in a sense that was peculiar to those times, for the
confirmation and propagation of the Christian Religion, until it was well
settled, and had taken some rooting in the World. As when they were in an
extraordinary way enabled by the Spirit to speak with other tongues, and to
perform other miraculous operations, as our Savior had foretold they should.
For these signs, said he, shall follow them that believe in my name; in my name
they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues, etc. Mark 16.17.
A more full and particular enumeration of which extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit scattered among the Believers of those times, we have in 1 Cor. 12.

But besides these, the Believers then received in receiving the Holy Spirit,
an increase of gracious qualifications, called the fruit of the Spirit, such as
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, and
temperance, as the Apostle reckons them up, Gal. 5.22. And in this sense the
Holy Spirit has been given to all true Believers ever since, and is now. For
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, he is no true
Christian, Romans 8.9.

By men's having the Spirit then, and by the Spirits being given them after they
believe, is meant, I conceive, a more constant and a more plentiful influence
and effusion of the Spirit to change and renew them, to restore them to the
likeness of God, to the spirit and temper of Jesus Christ, than ever was
vouchsafed them toward their believing, or by enabling them to believe at
first. Before men repent, believe, or begin to obey, they have the Spirit at
work in their minds indeed, to suggest to their thoughts and considerations,
things of highest concernment to them, and to incline them to look after them
in time, and before the day of grace and salvation is over and gone. He then at
times stands at the door and knocks, and strives with every man, and vouchsafes
to such more and more of his assistance, until they are enabled to believe, who
do not make fast the door against him, but rather open to him and refuse not to
be led on by degrees. The more they attended to the teaching of the Father by
his Spirit, and the nearer they came to believe indeed, the more frequent
visits they had from him, and the more assistance. But after they have followed
on so far, and become so teachable as to believe indeed and sincerely, to give
up themselves to his conduct, then he communicates himself more freely and more
constantly to them than ever before, in divine influence and assistance to root
and establish them in the Christian Faith and Life, and to carry them on
further and further toward perfection.

This, secondly, is set out to us in another vein of Scriptures, viz. such as
speak of Gods dwelling in true Believers, and sincere Christians, and of their
being the temple of the Holy Ghost, of which nature are many texts, Romans 8.11.
1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of
God dwells in you? 1 Cor. 6.19. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 2.22. 1 John 3.24. and
4.13, 16. By all which is signified the more constant residence of the Holy
Spirit in and with men after they believe and become true Christians, to assist
them in their great affairs for their souls and another World, as one that is
never long absent from them, but ready at hand at all times to help them in
doing their duty, and to overcome temptations, unless by grieving him, they
cause him to withdraw himself. If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him,
John 14.23.

This giving of the Holy Spirit to sincere Christians to be always with them as
his dwelling in them implies, is not only to help and assist them to persevere
in doing only so much as will entitle them to pardon and life barely, as their
performing the condition of the promise, though but in the lowest sense of
performance will do: But Gods design in giving his Spirit to them after they
have performed the condition in the lowest sense, is to fit and prepare them
for greater degrees of blessedness and glory, for a higher and more glorious
exaltation therein, than a bare performance of the condition of the promise in
simple consideration, and in the lowest degree of performance will well bear.

Our Savior came, as he says, that we might have life, and that we might have
it in abundance, John 10.10. not barely to save us, but to exalt us to such a
height of glory, that the glory and blessedness of his Body, the Church, might
hold some good proportion with his own glory and blessedness, as Head of it.
And to encourage true Christians to endeavor to excel in holiness and
goodness, in order to this, there are other conditional promises made, besides
that of pardon and life upon condition of faith and repentance simply
considered. To such as give all diligence in adding to their Faith Virtue,
Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly kindness and Charity, so
that these things be in them and abound, the promise is of an abundant entrance
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.
And he that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9.6. And he that
humbles himself as a little child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 18.4.

Besides, the Vessels of Mercy will hold more or less glory, according to their
different capacities in grace and service, as they are made larger or lesser.
By how much the more near Christians come to Christ in goodness, by so much
they are qualified to be the more near to him in happiness and glory. But
still, as I say, this greater and more constant presence of the Spirit is given
to true Christians after they believe, to carry on this great and glorious
design of grace toward them, to take them out of the spirit of this World, and
to lift them up in holiness and goodness, thereby to make them capable of the
greater glory and happiness.

To make this plain and familiar to our thoughts, let it be considered, that
upon men's unfeigned believing, follows immediately their adoption. As many as
received him, to them he gave power, right, or privilege to become the sons of
God, even to them that believe on his name, John 1.12. This is a very great
advancement indeed, and holds some proportion to that deep humiliation our
Savior underwent to prepare our way to it. Now those whom God adopts to be
sons, those he adopts to be heirs also to his great inheritance and glorious
estate: so says the Apostle, if children then heirs, heirs of God, yea
joint-heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17.

This being their happy case; the blessed God and Father, who has adopted the
Believers for his children and heirs, gives them his Holy Spirit to be always
with them, puts his Spirit within them to tutor and discipline them, and to
give them thereby such breeding as may sit and prepare them for so high a
relation, and for so glorious an inheritance as that is which he intends to
settle upon them. Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your hearts, says the Apostle, Gal. 4.6. Saint Paul having spoken of
the happy state which he, with other the Believers, expect and long for after
the dissolution of this earthly tabernacle in which the soul now dwells, 2 Cor.
5. says in verse 5. Now he that has wrought us for the selfsame thing, is
God, who also has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit. His giving them his
Spirit to sit them for that inheritance, is an earnest or pledge that he does
really intend to bestow it upon them. When he says, He that has wrought us
for the self-same thing is God, we hereby see that it is the work of God by his
Spirit to frame frame and fashion the Believers for that magnificent estate in
the next World which is prepared for them, and to which they are adopted. This
work of God upon them, is to make them meet to be partakers of the inheritance
of the Saints in light, Gal. 1.12. These Believers are those Vessels of Mercy
whom he thus before prepares unto glory, Romans 9.23. It is the benevolent work
and business of our Lord and Savior by his Spirit, so to sanctify and cleanse
the whole Society of Believers, that he may present them to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, and to beautify and
adorn them as a Bride for such a Husband as Jesus Christ is, and will appear to
be in the day of the manifestation of all his glory, that he may not be ashamed
to own them for such.

And thus we see another of the ends for which Christians receive a greater and
more constant presence and assistance of the Holy Spirit after they believe
than they did before, is to fit and prepare them for greater glory and
happiness than the lowest degree of performing the condition of the promise as
at the first will make them capable of. We will now a little consider in what,
or wherein the Holy Spirit does assist the Believers, when they grow up thereby
unto more perfection in the Christian life.

One of the first things I conceive he does is, to stir them up to, and to
assist them in making prayers, and supplications unto Almighty God, for the
working in them that which is wellpleasing in his sight. For although God be
ready to bless them with all spiritual blessings in Christ, yet not without
being sought unto to do it for them. And accordingly they are promised but upon
that condition; Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, Matthew.
7.7. Otherwise it will fare with them as it did with those S. James speaks to,
James 4.2. Ye have not because ye ask not.

Now to the end therefore that Believers may receive such an increase and
growth in all divine Virtues, as by means whereof they may live as becomes the
Gospel, and be made meet for the celestial glory, the Holy Spirit does assist
them to make requests according to the will of God, and helps their
infirmities, when otherwise they know not how to pray as they ought, Romans 8.26,
27. Almighty God pours on them the Spirit of grace and supplication, as the
Prophet speaks, Zech. 12.10. He helps them not only to pray for such things as
they ought, but also in such a manner as they should, to wit, with a great
sense of their own wants and of their own unworthiness to obtain, and of the
worth and excellency, and defireableness of those spiritual blessings they pray
for. He helps them to pray with seriousness and devotion of soul, and with an
humble fervency accompanied with sighs and groans, which cannot well be uttered
by them many times. He helps them also to pray in faith concerning the goodness
of the nature of God, and his readiness to give and to forgive; and concerning
the prevailing intercession of Jesus Christ our blessed Advocate. God sends
forth the Spirit of his Son into their hearts crying, Abba Father, enabling
them in their Addresses to God, to depend upon him as their Father, and humbly
to expect to be used and dealt with by him in all respects as a Father, while
they resolve and endeavor to carry it toward him as his children.

And when the Holy Spirit enables them to pray thus, they may be said to pray
in the Holy Ghost, as Jude 20. to make prayers and supplications in the Spirit,
as Ephesians. 6.18.

And when the Holy Spirit has thus helped the Believers to seek those things
of God which pertain to life and godliness, grace, strength, and ability to
overcome corruptions and temptations, and to live a sober, righteous, and a
godly life; then the Holy Spirit in way of return to such prayers, does assist
them in their endeavors in the use of means, to attain those things they have
begged of God. This we are well assured of by our Savior himself, when we
compare his saying as related by S. Matthew, with the same as related by S.
Luke. In Mat. 7.11. he says, If ye then being evil, know how to give good
gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven
give good things to them that ask him? Or how much more shall your heavenly
Father give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him? says S. Luke 11.13. From
both which compared, we learn, that God is most ready and willing to give those
that seriously ask them out of a sense of their want of them, all graces or
gracious qualifications and dispositions of soul, necessary to their pleasing
of God, by giving them his Holy Spirit to work them in them: Or that by giving
them his Holy Spirit, he gives them all those good things; because when the
Spirit is given unto men, it is to work those good things in them, by way of
assistance.

This might be showed in particular instances; I shall mention some. When we
crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts, when weeleanse our selves
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, when we mortify the deeds of the
body, it is still by the help and assisistance of Gods Spirit that it is done,
Romans 8.13. If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall
live. Gods Spirit in his Servants lusts against the flesh, as the flesh does
against the Spirit: it draws a contrary way, and therein prevails against the
flesh. The flesh calls upon men to be gratified in this and that, in things
either unlawful in themselves, or in that degree which is unlawful. But the
Spirit calls upon us, by exciting thoughts in us, to mind and regard our souls,
and by no means to wrong them by disturbing their peace, or hazarding their
safety, to gratify the flesh with momentary pleasures, which will leave guilt
and trouble upon the mind, when they are vanished and gone themselves. And the
Spirit by frequent prevailing herein, comes at last to kill this itch in the
flesh.

Again, when the Believers minds and wills become more and more reconciled to
their duty, and to be in love with it, in all the instances of it both toward
God and toward men, it is still through the help of the Holy Spirit that they
are so, 1 Pet. 2.22. Ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through
the Spirit. That they obey the truth in what it requires, it is through the
Spirit, strengthening and quickening them thereto, by making the motives
thereto, present to their thoughts. In 2 Chronicles. 30.12. it is said, that in Juda
the hand of God was to give them one heart to do the commandment of the King
and of the Princes by the word of the Lord. The hand of God upon the heart, as
well as the word of the Lord by the ministry of men, is that by which men's
wills are bowed and inclined to what God commands. He that keeps his
commandments, dwells in him, and he in him, says the Apostle, 1 John 3.24.
Our keeping the commandments is an eviderce of Gods dwelling in us, because it
is the effect of his presence with us to assist us therein; he argues from the
effect to the cause.

Again, it is the effect of the Holy Spirits presence with Believers, and of
his operation in them, when their minds and spirits become purified and refined
from inordinateness of affection and unruliness of passion, until by degrees
they are brought in some good measure unto a likeness and conformity to the
spirit and temper of Jesus Christ, whose Scholars they are. They that are
joined to the Lord are one spirit. They mind, love, hate, and design the same
things which our Savior does. They participate of that love, gentleness,
benignity and goodness which was so eminent in him (the fruit of the Spirit is
in all goodness, righteousness, and truth, Ephesians. 5.9.) by which means they
come to be in the world as he was in the world, as S. John's phrase is. Hereby,
says S. John, we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given
us, Joh. 3.24. It is so like him, that it must needs come from him, and if it
be in us, it is because he dwells in us. If we love one another, God dwells
in us, and his love is perfected in us, 1 John 4.12. When we love one another
as Christ has loved us, when we are merciful as our heavenly Father is
mercciful, his love and goodness is so resembled by us, as that it is perfectly
discernible in us.

Moreover the Holy Spirit is given to the Believers, to be with them, to
strengthen them with resolution and courage to hold on their course of holy
living, and cleaving faithfully to Christ, notwithstanding all opposition and
discouragement they may meet with from the World in doing so. To this end they
are strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man, Ephesians. 3.16. For
God has not given them the spirit of fear, but of power and love, and of a
sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7.

And not only so, but the Holy Spirit is given to the Believers to be always
with them, to maintain and uphold in them a comfortable and cheerful frame of
spirit, and so to keep them from fainting, when they are called to suffer for
the sake of our Savior, or his truth or doctrine. And it is doubtless from
this effect among others, of the Spirits abiding with the Believers, that he is
styled the Comforter. And for the same reason principally, the joy which they
have amidst their sufferings for righteousness sake, is called the joy of the
Holy Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1.6. having received the word in much affliction, with joy
of the Holy Ghost. And well may it be called the joy of the Holy Ghost, because
solid joy under such circumstances, can proceed from no other cause but the
Holy Spirits operation. It is not the manner of the World as it is with
Believers, to rejoice in affliction, in wrongs and injuries, and hard usage
from men, but the contrary; because they have no principle in them, out of
which such a thing should proceed. And therefore our Savior says to his
Disciples, My peace I give unto you, not as the world gives give I unto you,
Joh. 14.27. The Holy Spirit can raise joy, yea great joy in the souls of the
followers of Christ when they suffer never so hard measure from the hands of
men, so long as they know it is for their faithfulness to their blessed Lord
and Master, who has suffered and done so much for them as he has done. The
Spirit of God can so order their thoughts within them, that they shall not look
upon themselves as disgraced thereby, but as highly honored by their Master,
by giving them both opportunity and courage to do him that honor when his
adversaries would cast reproach and shame upon him and his Cause, and all that
appear for it. And thus the Apostles when they had been beaten, departed from
the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the
name of Jesus their Lord, Acts 5.41. The Holy Ghost can suggest to them also,
that a great deal of good by such sufferings may be done to others in causing
them to think the more and the better of the Christian Religion, when they see
with what cheerfulness the Professors of it can suffer for its sake. When the
Thessalonians received the Word in much affliction, and yet with joy of the
Holy Ghost, they became thereby ensamples to all that believed in Macedonia and
Achaia, and from them and their deportment in suffering for the Gospel, the
word of the Lord sounded out, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in
every place their faith was spread abroad and talked of. 1 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8. It
was this joyous deportment of the primitive Martyrs in their sufferings that
tended so greatly to the increase and enlargement of the Church, as History
relates it did.

The Christians then were enabled to glory in tribulation of this kind, in as
much as they were guided to consider that this patient enduring without
repining, would give them experience of their sincerity and fidelity in
cleaving to Christ; and then this experience would give them hope, such as
should not make them ashamed through any disappointment, but great confidence
toward God of being accepted, Romans 5.3, 4.

And not only so, but also touching the greatness of the reward which is laid
up in heaven for such; a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Upon
account whereof our Savior bids them to rejoice and to be exceeding glad, yea
to leap for joy in that day, when they should be persecuted for righteousness
sake, and have their name cast out as evil, and the like. When the Christians
were enabled to suffer the spoiling of their goods, yea and of their lives too,
not only with patience, but also with joyfulness: when they were as sorrowing,
and yet always rejoicing; whence was this? And how can it be imagined that they
should ever be able to do, and to be so, but that they were strengthened with
all might according to Gods glorious power, unto all patience and
long-suffering with joyfulness, as S. Paul speaks, Col. 1.11. The Spirit of God
and of glory, then rested upon them as the other Apostle says, 1 Pet. 4.14.
How came S. Stephen to stand with such an undaunted courage before the Council,
as if his face had been the face of an Angel? Why it was because he was full of
the Holy Ghost, he had a mighty presence of the Spirit with him to enable him
thereunto.

S. Paul learned by experience, that as his sufferings did abound for Christ,
so his consolations by Christ did abound also, (2 Cor. 1.5.) that when he was
weak, then he was strong; that he had a mightier presence, a more powerful and
comfortable influence of the Holy Spirit in times of great trials and
sufferings for Christ, than he had at other times. And this experience of his
made him so far from being afraid of suffering, that for the sake of that
wonderful comfort which was wont to come along with suffering, he was rather
glad when suffering came, than any way dejected and cast down for it, 2 Cor.
12.9, 10. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in mine infirmities, that
the power of Christ may rest upon me. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities,
in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for Christ's
sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong. Their hope that God would make good
to them his exceeding great and precious promises, was at such time raised very
high, made lively, vigorous and strong, by the Spirit of God. Rejoicing in
hope, says S. Paul in one place, abounding in hope through the power of the
Holy Ghost; in another, Romans 12.12. and 15.13. When the Holy Ghost did put
forth himself, did exert his power in raising the Christians hope, it is no
marvel then if they did abound therein; that is, that their expectations rose
very high, were vigorous and strong, and very affecting, filling them with such
joy as over-topp'd, and in a great measure swallowed up the sense of their
sufferings.

And thus I have endeavored to show how the Spirit of God does assist the
Believers to do more than merely to persevere and hold out in performing the
condition of the promise under the sorest trials and greatest temptations to
the contrary; for it enables them to glory and rejoice under them, and so to be
more than conquerors, to fight the good fight of Faith, to finish their course,
to keep the Faith, and all in order to their laying hold of eternal life.

To conclude then this matter: all these and other like assistances, influences
and consolations of the good Spirit of God, by which the Believers are prepared
for glory, are, I conceive, the things meant by S. Paul by that Communion, or
rather Communication of the Holy Ghost, which he in his Apostolical benediction
seriously desired and invoked in the behalf of the Christians when he dismissed
them thus; The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the
communion or communication of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen. 2 Cor.
13.14. For as he wished them the comfort and benefit that flows from the grace
or charity of our Lord Jesus Christ, expressed in his Mediatorial performance,
and from the love of God, from which that did proceed: So he did likewise the
communication of those assistances and graces of the Holy Spirit, by which they
might be enabled to do their part in performing what was required of themselves
in order thereunto.

CHAP. VIII. Cautions against men's depriving themselves of Divine Assistance,
by running into two contrary extremes.
HAving thus far showed, as well as I could, what assistance men receive from
God in performing the condition of the promise of pardon and life: it will be
necessary now to add something by way of Caution.

1. To take heed not to deprive our selves of those benefits for the attaining
of which these assistances are granted, nor of those assistances themselves, by
neglecting to do what God expects we should do toward the working out our own
salvation (as we shall if we neglect to fall in with these assistances) by
endeavoring to do those things for the accomplishing of which, these
assistances are afforded us.

The very notion of assistance implies in it that those who are assisted by
God, are not merely passive in performing the condition of the promise, for the
performance whereof these assistances are vouchsafed us, but some way active in
that performance.

God doubtless does expect when he has awakened in men a sense of their danger
by reason of sin; and has set before them what he has done, and Christ has
done to rescue and deliver them from it; and what must be done by themselves to
make them capable of the blessed effects of our Saviors performance in
obtaining pardon and life; and what assistance they shall have to that end, if
they will but truly endeavor to do what they can do toward it: I say when God
has set all this before them, he expects that they should put forth themselves
in endeavors tending toward the performance of the condition of the promise.
He expects they should think on, and consider those things which he sets before
them, and at least out of regard to their own safety to be moved thereby to
make use of the means tending to enable them to perform the condition of
obtaining pardon and life, and to be doing what they well can do toward that
performance.

Doubtless such expressions in Scripture, as I shall now set before you, cannot
signify less than this. Ezekiel. 14.6. Thus says the Lord God, repent and turn
your selves from your Idols. Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent and turn your selves from all
your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin. Verse. 31. Cast away
from you all your transgressions whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a
new heart and a new spirit; for why will ye die, O house of Israel? Ver. 32. I
have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God: wherefore
turn your selves and live. Can all these expressions, can men's repenting and
turning themselves, and their making them a new heart, possibly signify less
than real endeavors to do so? Again, Jer. 4.4. Circumcise your selves unto the
Lord, and take away the foreskin of your hearts. Acts 2.40. Save your selves
from this untoward generation. And all the precepts, exhortations and
persuasions in Scripture to repent, to believe, to obey, are of the same
signification. Such for instance, as Acts 17.30. But now God commands all men
every where to repent. Chap. 2.38. Repent and be baptized. Chap. 3.19. Repent
ye therefore and be converted; and the like. These Scriptures imply, and
suppose that men can do something toward repenting, toward turning themselves
and making them a new heart, or else we must suppose that God commands,
presses, and persuadeth men to do that, toward which he knows they can do
nothing. The latter of which to suppose, would be to suppose the Scriptures to
make the same bad representation of God with the slothful servant in the
Parable, viz. that he is a hard Master, expecting to reap where he has not
sown, and to gather where he has not scattered. And who would not abhor to
fasten that upon God, which is not consistent with the goodness of a man? We
know what it signified in Pharaoh to require the full tale of Brick, when he
did not give the people Straw wherewith to make them. And God forbid we should
represent the good God to our selves in the likeness of Pharaoh.

Besides, for any to say that men are wholly passive in performing the
condition of the promise, is to lay a temptation upon themselves and others,
not to endeavor to perform it, nor to do any thing toward it. For who will
attempt to do, or endeavor to do that which they believe impossible to be done
by them? And for men not to endeavor to do what they can toward the
performance of that condition, is the directest course they can take to deprive
themselves of that assistance from God by which they might have performed it.
For from him that has not, shall be taken away even that which he has, says
our Savior, Mat. 13.12. Him that has not; that is, him that has not used
what he had; as we may see by him that had the one talent, and had it taken
away, because he did not use it. And that this is the meaning of those words,
From him that has not, shall be taken away that which he has, appears by our
Saviors next words, Verse 13. by which he explains that saying of his:
Therefore speak I to them in Parables, because they seeing, see not; and
hearing, they hear not: Meaning that they had as it were eyes, but did not see
with them, and ears, but did not hear with them: that is, they had means by
which they might have seen and heard, and understood so much as would have made
them capable of further discoveries and assistances, but did not make use of
them, and therefore those farther discoveries and assistances, were withheld
from them, which yet were granted to the Disciples.

What our Savior here said in this matter, was in answer to a question of the
Disciples, who asked him, saying, Why speak thou to them in Parables? Verse
10. And his answer was, Because it was not given unto them (the disobedient
Jews) to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, as it was to the
Disciples. And the reason why it was not given, was as he shows, because they
seeing saw not, and hearing heard not. They had eyes and ears to see and hear
with, but did not use them for the ends for which they received them. They had
not heard and learned of the Father by attending to, or regarding his methods
of preparing men for the Faith of the Gospel. They had not attended unto those
things which natural Religion it self would have taught them, and which they
might have seen by the natural light of their minds, as well as they saw
external objects with the eyes of their bodies, if they had not shut them: Nor
had they learned by his teaching them by Moses and the Prophets. And because
they did not use what they had before, therefore it was that more assistance
was not given them to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven. That this
was the reason of it, is yet further confirmed by what our Savior said on the
other hand, John 7.17. If any man will do his will ( i.e. the Fathers will) he
shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my
self. For by this we see, that if these Jews to whom it was not given to know
the mysteries of the Kingdom, had been inclined and disposed in their own minds
by former motives, to have done the will of God which they already knew, as
others of them were, it would have been given unto them as well as it was to
the Disciples, to have known those mysteries. The reason therefore why this
further knowledge was not given them, was because they had no mind to do what
they had been taught by God; by a teaching antecedent to his teaching them by
Christ.

By all which we may see that men cannot take a more direct course, as I say,
to deprive themselves of that assistance from God, by which they might perform
the condition of the promise, than by neglecting to do what they may and can do
through Gods preventing grace toward that performance. And if so, then that
opinion must needs be of a very dangerous nature that does incline men to such
a neglect: And yet such is the opinion that men are wholly passive in
performing the condition of the promise. For what can be a greater check (as I
have said) to men's endeavors to effect any thing, than an opinion that they
can do nothing toward it. Men are very prone to govern themselves in acting or
forbearing to act, by their principles and the notions they have of things: if
these be corrupt, that which is the consequence of them cannot be sound. Men's
error in practice, is very much owing to the error of their minds, and wrong
notions of things; They do always err in their heart, for they have not known my
ways, says the Holy Ghost, Heb. 3.10. there the error in life and practice
begins. If men have wrong notions in their minds of Gods ways and methods of
proceeding with men in reference to their salvation, it can hardly be avoided
but they will more or less err in point of such practice also, as is any way
influenced by those notions. If the light which is in you be darkness, how
great is that darkness! Mat. 6.23.

Almighty God gives to every man from whom he requires repentance and faith,
ability to do something toward it, though not completely to repent and believe
without further assistance than that which he gives at the first. When men
therefore do but improve that little which they have, in doing that little
which they can do toward their repenting and believing, God will vouchsafe
them further assistance and ability to do yet more toward it; and if they do
but improve that additional ability to the doing yet more toward the same end,
God will doubtless vouchsafe to such, further and further assistance, until
they acquire thereby that true faith and repentance, on which pardon and life
are promised. For so says our Savior, Whosoever has, to him shall be given,
and he shall have abundance, Mat. 13.12. And to you that have, more shall be
given. And again, With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you, Mark
4.24. All which sayings seem to signify, that according to Gods ordinary
method of proceeding with men, they shall have more or less assistance from
him, as they do with more or less care and diligence use what they have
received already.

And as there is need for men to be cautioned against neglecting to use what
power they have toward performing the condition of the promise in repenting
and believing before they do repent and believe; so there is need likewise of
cautioning others against neglecting to improve their repentance, faith, and
obedience, from a lower to a higher degree, from the state of Babes to a manly
stature in Christianity. For there is a danger of abusing this comfortable
doctrine of Divine Assistance, to a spiritual sloth, idleness, and negligence,
and that under pretense of honoring God, and glorifying Free Grace; as by
leaving all to be done by him, that he may have the honor of all. As if men
were not in confidence of Gods assistance, and so in the strength of the Lord
to run the race set before them, but to be taken up into arms and carried all
the way to Heaven without their running or going.

Whereas when men truly enter into the Christian state, and seriously set their
faces for heaven, they then enter into a spiritual warfare against the Flesh,
World, and Devil; and they, as the Israelites, must fight for the promised Land
before they enter it, though they receive it by promise as they did: they must
first fight the good sight of faith, and then lay hold of eternal life. It is
he that overcomes, that shall inherit all things, Rev. 21.7. For men not to
stir up themselves, not to gird up the loins of their minds to sight their way
through to Heaven, but to resolve to be only passive, under pretense that the
Captain of our salvation might have all the honor of the Victory, would be
much what as ridiculous as it would be for Soldiers in an Army to say they
would leave it wholly to their Captain General to fight for them while they sit
still, that he might have all the honor of the Victory. The ability of God and
our Savior to save, has no other limits save what his will directed by his
infinite wisdom has put upon it: but the divine will has so limited this
power, that the promise of Crowning is not made but to such as through striving
overcome.

All the promises and assurances we have of Divine Assistance, are to encourage
our diligence and industry in working out and carrying quite through the
business of our salvation, and to overcome all that does oppose us, or which
any way tends to hinder us in it. Of this nature is that of S. Paul, Phil.
2.12, 13. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling: for it is God
that works in you to will and to do of his good pleasure. Gods working in us,
his readiness to assist us, is given as the motive and argument to persuade us
to work out our own salvation. If we do but put forth our selves to do what we
can in doing our duty, though it be with fear and trembling, when we consider
our own weakness and the strength of the enemies we are to encounter and
overcome in doing so, we are assured of this for our encouragement, that if we
do so, we shall find an inward and secret assistance from God to fortify our
resolutions, and to bring the same to good effect, so that all our spiritual
enemies shall not be able to hinder us, but that we shall still hold on our way
and grow stronger and stronger, as Job speaks of the righteous, and he that
has clean hands. God will not fail to add more strength to our willing and
doing, in carrying on the work of grace, and so of salvation, to a greater
height and more perfection, if we are but faithful in endeavoring it our
selves. Be of good courage and God shall strengthen thine heart, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 27.14. The motive wherewith to persuade men to be of good
courage and firm resolution in the way of their duty, is we see, because then
God will strengthen their hearts; that is, will yield them more and further
assistance, and by that means make their duty more and more easy to them, as
it must needs be, to the same degree their strength is increased, by which it
is to be done.

The Lord is so ready, nay so certain to assist his servants in their faithful
endeavors to do their duty, that they may be as sure of it, and as much depend
upon it as if they had it in their own power. And therefore St. Paul exhorted
the Christians to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians.
6.10. As if they might reckon themselves armed with his strength, while they
depend upon him for it in doing their duty. Which made S. Paul speak so
considently, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil.
4.13. And again, If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live. He accounted that if they had any mind to mortify the deeds of the
body, they might be sure of help from the Spirit wherewith to do it, whenever
in good earnest they went about it.

But when men think themselves so sure of being kept by the power of God as
that they grow careless and remiss as to their own endeavors of doing their
duty, and standing upon their guard against temptations, they many times slip
into such ways and doings by which the Spirit of God is grieved and withdraws
from them, and withholds his quickening influences, and then they grow dry and
flat, and unsavory too, and fall even then when they thought they stood sure.

2. And the like may be said touching the danger on the other hand also. For
when men have such an opinion of their own power and ability to perform the
condition of the promise, as that they are not mindful of the Holy Spirits
assistance, nor sensible of their need of it, but are negligent in addressing
to God for it, and in their dependence upon him for the supplies of it, it
cannot be expected that the Holy Spirit should take any such pleasure in such
men, as to take up his residence and make his abode with them. And if not, the
communication of his assistance to such men must needs be more rare and more
sparing, and his visits less frequent. And when they are so, it will be visible
in the dullness, dead-heartedness, and barrenness of such Christians, though
then they may retain a form of godliness.

For the Holy Spirit will not vouchsafe to such his special presence and
assistance, who do not know their need of it, nor how to prize it. And
accordingly our Savior speaking of the Spirit of truth, says, whom the World
cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him, John 14.17. So
that it seems men's receiving the Spirit depends very much upon their knowing
him in the usefulness and benefit of his communications, and valuing him
accordingly.

So that we see there is danger of running into extremes on both hands; either
in men's pretending so much dependence upon divine Assistance, as to neglect to
do what they can do toward performing the condition of the promise: or else in
having such an opinion of their own power and ability to perform it, as to
overlook and neglect the Divine Assistance, as if they had little or no need
of it.

Such as this latter sort are far from the mind of S. Paul, who was still
careful to attribute his after, as well as his first Christian performances to
Divine Assistance. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. I
labored more than they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me,
1 Cor. 15.10. And again. I will not dare to speak of any of those things which
Christ has not wrought by me, Romans 15.18. Not that we are sufficient of our
selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2
Cor. 3.5. And our Savior taught his Disciples to be of the same mind, when he
said, Without me ye can do nothing; John 15.5.

And where Christians are full of the sense of their need of Divine Assistance,
and accordingly highly prize it, seek it, and depend on God for it, and yet are
withal as careful and diligent in their own endeavors, as if all the work lay
wholly on their hands. These are they the Holy Spirit delights in, and delights
to spiritualize, to influence, quicken, and strengthen, and to lift them up
near unto Heaven, in preparing them for it. For thus says our Savior to his
Disciples, speaking to them of the Spirit of truth whom the World cannot
receive, because it does not know him; but ye know him, (says he) therefore he
abides with you and shall be among you: for so Dr. Hammond reads the place,
John 14.17. As if he had said, because ye know how to value his presence and
assistance, therefore you shall have it.

CHAP. IX. Something of the grounds of encouragement which such have to expect
assistance fully to perform the condition of the promise, as have not refused
to make use of Gods preparatory assistance toward it.
THat God does prevent all endeavors on our part of returning to him, by his
applications to us to make us sensible of the badness and danger of our sinful
state, to dispose us thereby to hearken to his merciful terms of being
delivered from it, before we our selves make any one step toward it; I have
showed before. Now those who have made so much use of Gods preparatory
assistance as thereupon to become inquisitive what they should do to be saved,
and desirous to be taught. These I reckon have encouragement to expect and hope
to be further and further assisted, until they are enabled fully to perform the
condition of the promise.

1. For first our Savior has positively asserted, and that more than once,
that to him that has, more shall be given, and he shall have abundance, Mat.
13.12. and 25.29. Which can be understood, I conceive, of nothing more properly
than of Divine Assistance: and so he, whosoever he be, that has had assistance
from God toward performing the condition of the Gospel Covenant, and has made
use of it by using endeavors toward such a performance, to him more shall be
given, to wit, more assistance, until he have abundance of it, and of grace
proportionably.

2. Those who have made use of Gods preparatory assistance, are given by the
Father to his Son Christ Jesus, to be assisted by him fully to perform the
condition of the promise in believing and obeying the Gospel. And those that
are given by the Father to the Son to be thus assisted, have great reason to be
confidently persuaded they shall. For our Savior has said of such, that he
will in no wise cast them out, but receive them as Disciples, and treat them as
becomes such a Master.

That those who are given by the Father to the Son, are such as have made use
of Gods preparatory assistance, appears by comparing our Saviors words in John
6.37. with those in the 44 and 45 verses. All that the Father gives me, shall
come unto me, says he verse 37. And in verse 44. he says, No man can come
unto me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him: and verse 45. Every
man that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me. Now if those,
and only those come to Christ, whom the Father gives him, then those must
needs be the persons which are given to Christ, which are prepared by the
Father; because all these, and none but these come to Christ, according to our
Saviors words expressly.

Now that the Father gives these to the Son for that end that they may be
assisted by him to perform the condition of the promise, will (I conceive)
appear by what will follow by and by. The Fathers giving these to the Son, does
not suppose them to have believed in the Son, when he gives them to him, but
the contrary. For the Fathers giving them to the Son, is antecedent to their
coming to him: for Christ says all that the Father gives me, shall come unto
me, not are come unto me. And to what end do they come to him, but to learn of
him, and be taught by him how to be saved? i.e. to perform the condition on
which salvation is promised.

For that I take to be the meaning of the Fathers giving these to the Son, viz.
his committing them to him to be made Disciples by him, to be taught and
enabled to do that on which salvation is promised.

Not that the Fathers thus giving these to the Son to be assisted by him, is so
to be understood, as if the Father did wholly remit them to the Son, and did
not still continue to assist them by the same Spirit by which he prepared them
for him at the first. For that faith by which they perform the condition of the
promise, is the gift of God, and those who are regenerated, are born of God;
and it is God that works in them both to will and to do, even when they
perform the condition of the promise in the best manner that ever it is
performed. And accordingly we are to direct our prayers to the Father for the
Holy Spirit, and for all the assistances and fruits of it. But those prepared
by the Father, are said to be given to the Son, in order to their being brought
by him to believe the Gospel; because the dispensing of all Evangelical
assistances, and of all Gospel Grace, is committed to the Son; but yet so as
that the Father gives this by the Son, as the Son also does by the Holy Ghost.

For the better understanding of this matter we must know, that after our
Saviors humiliation, came his exaltation by the Father, who gave unto him as
Mediator God-man, a Kingdom glory and greatness, all power in Heaven and
Earth, he gave all things into his hands, Joh. 3.35. committed all judgment to
the Son, Joh. 5.22. The Father committed to the Son the whole Evangelical
Economy, the power of managing all affairs belonging to the being and
well-being of the Church which he had purchased with his own blood, over which
he made him head; yea, head also over all things to the Church; for he made him
Prince of the Kings of the Earth, the only Potentate, as the Scripture speaks.

This authority and power is said to be given to Christ, because he is the Son
of man; John 5.27. that is, I conceive, because he is the Messiah, to whom such
a Kingdom and Regal power was promised and foretold in the Prophets, under that
denomination of the Son of Man. Thus Daniel saw in a Vision one like the Son of
man, to whom the ancient of days gave dominion, glory, and a Kingdom, that all
People, Nations, and Languages might serve him, Dan. 7.13, 14. And Son of Man
is the appellation which our Savior as the Messiah, does frequently give unto
himself, as is recorded in the Evangelical History, and which S. John in his
Book of Revelations, does also more than once give him. And Isaias foretold
concerning a child that should be born, that the Government should be upon his
shoulders, upon the throne of David and upon his Kingdom to order and establish
it for ever, chap. 9.6, 7. To which agrees that of the Angel to the Mother of
our Lord, Luke 1.33, 34. The Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his
father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his
Kingdom there shall be no end. All agreeing that this Kingdom, Government and
Power, should be administered by the Son of God in humane nature, and because he
is the Son of Man.

Now in this gift of the Father, the giving such to his Son as he had prepared
to become his Disciples, and to be made so by him, is included; they are part
of the all things which the Father has put into his hand. In giving him a
Kingdom, he gives him a people to be his Subjects, whose good behavior, and
whose happiness he is to provide for, and to promote by his spiritual
Government. When the Prophet had spoken of Gods setting his Son upon his holy
hill of Zion, Psalm. 2.6. in verse 8. he brings in God speaking thus to him; Ask
of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. These are prepared by the
Father to become Subjects to the Son then when he gives them to him; but are
actually made subject to his Spiritual Government by the Son himself, by his
going forth conquering and to conquer by his Gospel; it is by his arrows the
people fall under him.

Now the Fathers thus committing to his Son the power of managing all matters
that concern the forming and perfecting one Christian Church throughout the
World, and so of dispensing all aids and assistances to that end, does not
imply or suppose the Fathers relinquishing this power, but his doing all by his
Son, as designing to interess the Man Christ Jesus in all these great affairs.
And thus when the Father sends the Holy Spirit, by whose influences we receive
our assistances, he then sends him in the name of the Son, as being concerned
with him in such sending; John 14.26. The Comforter which is the Holy Ghost
whom the Father will send in my name, says our Savior. And on the other hand,
the Son when he sends the Holy Spirit, he sends him as from the Father who is
always concerned also in such sending, John 15.26. When the Comforter is come,
whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which
proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me.

But as I say, the Father dispenses the influences and assistances of the
Spirit by the Son, as God-man, now in the time of this Kingdom of his which the
Father has given him. S. Paul speaking of Gods saving us by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which says he, he shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior, Tit. 3.6. I thank my God always
on your behalf, for the grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ; that
in every thing ye are enriched by him, 1 Cor. 1.4, 5. And because these aids
are thus dispensed by the Son, though from the Father, and by the Holy Ghost,
they are called the supplies of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.19. And it
is God that supplies all our need, according to his riches in glory, but it is
by Jesus Christ, Phil. 4.19. And the Holy Spirit is styled the Spirit of the
Son, even then when he is sent into our hearts by the Father, for the reason
aforesaid, Gal. 4.6. And so for the gifts and graces of the Spirit, they are
all dispensed by Jesus Christ. To every one of us (says S. Paul) is given
grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Ephesians. 4.7.

All this I have noted, that we might the better understand for what reason and
in what respect those prepared to receive the Faith of the Gospel, are said to
be given by the Father to the Son to work that faith in them: and it is because
in giving him the Mediatory Kingdom, he gives him the power of dispensing all
those aids and assistances, by which men are made true and sincere Christians.

But to proceed yet a little further in this matter, the use of which, as to
the principal scope of this Chapter, will be better discerned afterward: the
reason why the Father confers this Regal dignity and authority upon the Son,
and the power of sending the Spirit, and of dispensing aids and gifts, is not
only that all men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father, which
yet is one reason of it, John 5.23. Nor yet only as a reward of his deep
humiliation, suffering, and obedience unto death, which is another, Phil. 2.9,
10. but also that Gods great design of reforming the World by sending his Son
into it, and of converting sinners to the faith and obedience of the Gospel,
might by that means be facilitated, as tending to render Christ the more
glorious, and the more attractive an object of Faith. It is by his being thus
exalted, that men are more especially brought to believe in him. It is by him
that we do believe in God that raised him from the dead, and gave him glory
that our faith and hope might be in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. So that we see this
glorious advancement of Christ, has the nature of an aid in it to help us to
believe.

The meanness of our Saviors appearance in the World while he was in it, and
his crucifixion at the last, was that which prejudiced men against both him and
his doctrine; it was their stumbling block, and that at which they were
offended, and all through a mistake of the nature of Christ's Kingdom and
Government; so that he had but very few Disciples at last, notwithstanding all
his mighty miracles and gracious words. But when he was raised from the dead,
and exalted in his kingdom and glory, and had given a powerful demonstration of
it by sending the Holy Ghost, as he had promised he would, to enable those that
preached in his name, and those that believed in his name, to do so many
wonderful things in his name as they did: this proof of his exaltation, in a
short time filled a great part of the World with Disciples to him, and made men
flock by multitudes into his Church and Kingdom.

This effect of his glorious exaltation, was foretold by the Prophets. Thy
people shall be willing in the day of thy power, more than the womb of the
morning, according to the marginal reading, Psalm. 110.3. These words, more than
the womb of the morning, seem to be hyperbolical, to show the vast numbers of
Disciples and Subjects, the day of Christ's power and glorious exaltation,
should procure him, even like the drops of the morning-dew for multitude. The
Prophet Isaiah speaking as it were to the Messiah, of whom he prophesied, said,
Nations that knew thee not shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy God,
and for the Holy One of Israel, for he has glorified thee, Isa. 55.5. That is
the reason we see of the Nations running in unto him; it is because Almighty
God has glorified him, exalted, extolled, and made him very high, as the same
Prophet speaks, chap. 52.13.

When men perceived that the God of Heaven so far approved of what Christ had
taught, done, and suffered in the World, as to reward him for it with such
power and glory, this procured from them a belief of his doctrine, and put a
great reputation upon it: it raised in men also a great expectation from him as
from one that was very well able to prefer and reward his friends and
followers, as he had promised he would.

We find that the sending of the Holy Ghost, the pouring out of the Spirit in
those greater measures foretold by the Prophets, was deferred unto this time of
the glorious exaltation of Christ. So says the Evangelist S. John 7.39. The
Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. And the
reason hereof was, that he might have the honor of sending him, and of
dispensing the assistances and manifold gifts of the Spirit, and thereby
convince men that he was the same which he always declared himself to be, the
Son of God sent down from Heaven. If I go not away the Comforter will not come
unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is come, he
shall convince the World of righteousness, because I go to the Father and ye
see me no more. John 16.7, 8, 10. Convince the World of righteousness, that is,
he should convince them that Christ was no deceiver, as they accused him to be
here on Earth, but the true Messiah, Son of God and Savior of the World, as he
had declared himself to be while he was here in the World. And this our Savior
says the Holy Ghost should convince the World of, because of his going to the
Father: that is, by the Fathers receiving him up into glory after his
resurrection and placing him there in royal Majesty. This our Savior says the
Spirit should convince the World of when he was come from him; and the event
plainly declares how.

For within a few days after our Saviors ascension into Heaven, and his
enthronation there, he sends down the Holy Ghost upon his Apostles that
preached in his name and were his witness, and upon others also that believed
in his name, enabling them by the Holy Ghost to speak and do such things, as by
hearing and seeing of which, great multitudes were presently convinced that
Jesus was the Christ, the true Messiah and Savior of the World, about three
thousand of them being baptized into this Faith the very same day in which the
Holy Ghost was thus sent by Christ.

For S. Peter discoursed to them of this wonderful event thus, Acts 2.32, 33.
This Jesus (of whom he had been speaking) has God raised up, whereof we all
are witnesses. Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having
received from the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this
which ye now see and hear. The end and design of all which, was to convince men
that Jesus is the Christ of God; which was done by convincing them that God had
thus exalted him and given this power of doing these wonders by the Spirit he
had sent. For that is the use S. Peter drew it to, Verse 36. Therefore let all
the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus whom ye
have crucified, both Lord and Christ.

Now this sending of the Holy Ghost was so necessary to qualify the Apostles
for the great work of converting the World by preaching Christ and his
doctrine, and for the procuring credit to be given to it, that our Savior
would not have them so much as set upon it, or go about it, but commanded them
to tarry at Jerusalem until they were endued with this power from on high, Luke
24.49. And the preaching of the Gospel under this qualification, was doubtless
the preaching it in demonstration of the Spirit and of power, which S. Paul
speaks of 1 Cor. 2.4.

Now by this we see how those assistances which men receive in believing, and
so in performing the condition of the promise, do depend upon the Fathers
giving all things into the hands of the Son: and how for that reason the Father
gives such as have been preparatively assisted by him, unto the Son to be
completely assisted to perform the condition of the promise. And indeed the
reason why so many turned to God in so little a time after Christ's exaltation,
than ever was known before, was because those assistances then dispensed by
him, were more and greater than ever were vouchsafed the World before.

And lest any should be discouraged, or think their condition worse than indeed
it is, for that we have no such external assistances by the sending of the Holy
Ghost, as men in those primitive times had, let this one thing be considered;
That the Christians now are as really assisted by that sending of the Holy
Ghost which was in those times, as those were who lived then; supposing the
truth of the History of it, of which there is no cause to doubt. For we have
the same Gospel as they had, and that under the same evidence by which it was
demonstrated to them to be from Heaven, and that the then glorified Jesus was
the author of it. And we may as truly be said to have Christ and his Apostles
now in respect of external assistance, as the Jews in those times were to have
Moses and the Prophets. For we have the same doctrine which Christ and his
Apostles preached, and many of the same miracles which they wrought to confirm
it, transmitted down to us by their writings and unquestionable tradition; and
the Jews had Moses and the Prophets no otherwise in our Saviors time, when he
said they had Moses and the Prophets. The miracles of the Apostles then,
wrought the same effect, procured the same belief of their doctrine, in many
that only heard of them by credible testimony, as they did in them that saw
them done. We see our Savior upbraided his Disciples for not believing matter
of Fact, when testified to them by credible eyewitnesses. Mark 16.14. And he
said to Thomas, blessed are they which have not seen, and yet have believed.
And when S. John had written a History of some of the signs or miracles which
our Savior did, he says, these are written that men might believe, John 20.30,
31. By this he supposed his written testimony of what he had seen and heard, to
be a competent ground of faith in others. and S. Paul says, Hold fast the
tradition which ye have been taught, whether by word or our Epistle, 2 Thessalonians.
2.15.

But although it is not necessary that the same miraculous operations of the
Holy Spirit, should be repeated in every Age, to convince men that Christ, who
was first crucified, is now advanced to the throne of his glory, and has the
power of sending the Holy Ghost to confirm the doctrine which was preached in
his name by them who proved their mission from him by signs and wonders, and
mighty deeds which were done in his name: though, as I say, the repetition of
these be not necessary in every Age, this having been done once for all in one
Age, as S. Jude speaks of the Faith once delivered to the Saints; yet the
inward assistance by the Spirit, to cause the external assistances to operate
the more effectually upon the mind, is still necessary, and is still continued
in the Church. For in this respect our Savior by his Spirit as well as by his
word, is with his people always to the end of the World, as he promised he
would, and as he promised his Spirit likewise should. I will pray the Father
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever,
even the Spirit of truth. John 14.16. It was this presence of Christ, I
conceive, which S. Paul desired might be and continue with Timothies Spirit, 2 Timothy 4.22. The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy Spirit.

In this part of my Discourse concerning Divine Assistance, I have endeavored
to show, that our Lord and Savior has the power of dispensing Evangelical and
Spiritual Assistances committed to him by the Father, and that that is the
reason why the Father is said to give such to the Son as have heard and learned
of the Father. And now this high advancement of the Son, and his having all
power in Heaven and Earth given to him, leaves no place for us to doubt of his
ability to assist those to the uttermost, who do not make themselves incapable
of it, by refusing to make use of it, and of the Fathers preparatory
assistance. And truly all such have no more reason neither to doubt of our
Saviors willingness to assist them, than they have of his power, if these few
things following be but duly considered.

1. That Kingdom, Glory, and Greatness forementioned, and the power of
dispensing aids and assistances is given by the Father to the Son for this very
end among others, that he might use and manage all for the bringing men, such
as the Father has given him, to perform the condition of the promise, in
repenting, in believing, and obeying the Gospel, Acts 5.31. Him has God
exalted with his own right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give
repentance and remission of sins. The father advanced him to that high honor
and dignity, that he might be a public good to mankind, in assisting them to
perform the condition of the promise, as he had been before by his humiliation
for the obtaining of the promise upon that condition, that so he might be a
complete Savior in saving us as well from sin in the power and pollution of
it, as from the guilt of it. He ascended far above all Heavens, that he might
fill or fulfill all things, Ephesians. 4.10. That he might fully dispense and bestow
whatever is necessary to the perfecting of the Saints and edification of the
body of Christ. The Apostle having said in chap. 1.20, 21. that God having
raised Christ from the dead, set him at his own right hand in the heavenly
places, far above all principality and power, might and dominion, and every
name that is named, not only in this World, but also in that which is to come;
and having put all things under his feet; then in Verse 22, and 23. he says, he
gave him to be head over all things to the Church, which is his body, the
fullness of him that fills all in all. He did not only give him to be the
Head of his Church, but to be Head over all things to the Church, to the use
and benefit of the Church; for the fullness of this power of his in the issue
and benefit of it, runs in to his Church for whom he received it, and in
respect whereof, the Church is his fullness in a passive sense: for it is he
that fills all in all, as S. John says, of his fullness we have all received,
and grace for grace, John 1.16. such a fullness as holds some proportion with
the fullness of such a head: all the fullness wherewith all and every one of his
Church are filled, is derived from him, it is all of his silling, and that as
he is Head of the Church, and Head over all things to the Church.

For he is not only a political Head to the Church to govern it by Laws, but
such a Head also as resembles a natural head by way of influence, conveying by
his Spirit a vital and quickening power unto all the members, to enable them to
obey those Laws. The whole body has from this head nourishment ministered, as
S. Paul shows Col. 2.19. Upon which account S. Paul could say, I am able to do
all things through Christ which strengthens me. But without him (as our
Savior told his Disciples) ye can do nothing.

Now if all this fullness, all this power we have been speaking of, was given to
the Son, was put into his hands for that end that he should use it, and manage
it in aiding and assisting those whom the Father has given him, to perform the
condition on which pardon and eternal life are promised, there is no question
to be made of his willingness to use it to that end, especially when we further
consider that which follows.

2. For in the second place, he is as faithful as he is able, faithful to use
the fullness of his sufficiency for the ends and uses for which he received it.
He is faithful to him that appointed him, in all his house, Heb. 3.2. Faithful
is he that calls you, who also will do it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. All, says our
Savior, that the Father gives me, shall come unto me, and him that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out, John 6.37. When he was leaving the World, he
could with all confidence say unto his Father, I have finished the work which
thou gave me to do, Joh. 17. And if he did thus in the day of his humiliation
and temptation, it cannot be thought but that he will likewise finish what the
Father has given him to do now in the day of his exaltation and power. Why do
the holy Angels sing, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and
riches, and wisdom, and strength? but because he faithfully uses them for
those noble and worthy ends for which he received them. Rev. 5. When he
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and received gifts for men,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 68.18. he then gave gifts unto men, says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4.10. When upon his glorious exaltation he had received the
promise of the Father, to wit, the power of sending the Holy Ghost, he
presently pours it out upon his Disciples, Acts 2.33. what he receives for us,
he will be sure to communicate to us. If the clouds be full of rain, they empty
themselves upon the earth, says the Wise man, Eccles. 11.3. for that is the
end of their being so filled, to supply the necessities of the inhabitants of
the earth. They indeed do thus by a natural necessity; but our Savior out of
his fullness supplies the spiritual wants of men spontaneously. Never was the
kindest Mother more willing that her full breasts should be drawn by her tender
Infant, than our blessed Savior is that we should draw and derive from his
fullness to the relief and supply of all our spiritual wants to make us good and
happy.

To think or to suspect that our Savior should withold any of that aid from
men which he has received for them, and which is necessary to enable them to
perform the condition of the promise, supposing them capable of it, would be
highly to dishonor him. It is a grievous thing among men, to withold from
the people, that which their extreme necessity calls for, when it is in ones
power to relieve them without injury to himself or to his, or to the public.
He that withholds corn, the people shall curse him, says Solomon, Prove.
11.26. The reverence which we owe to our blessed Savior, and the assurance we
have of his goodness and good will toward men, will not suffer us once to
think there is in him any thing of like nature. And if he himself threatened
that unprofitable servant in the Gospel as he did, for not using the talent
committed to him, to the end and purpose for which he received it, we may be
sure he himself will be very far from not discharging the trust he has
received from his Father.

3. We have no reason to fear or to doubt but that that compassion and love
toward us, and the longing desire our Savior had after our salvation, which
made him willing to suffer so much as he has, to obtain a conditional pardon
for us, and a conditional promise of it, does and will make him willing to
assist all those in the performance of that condition, who have not, or do not
make themselves incapable of it, by not using, but opposing such preparatory
aids as have been afforded them. He who has laid so costly a foundation in his
own blood, to make us good and happy, cannot, as we may well think, be wanting
to build upon that foundation what is necessary on his part to complete his
design of grace and favor toward us. We cannot think he will be willing to
lose all the cost he has already expended toward the procuring of pardon and
life for us, for want of doing that further for us, which he can with far more
ease do, (if we have not made ourselves incapable of it) than what he has done
already.

Has our blessed Savior any thing to give us which is better than himself, or
more dear to him? And if not, as doubtless he has not, then we may confidently
conclude, that that which put him upon giving himself for us, will not suffer
him to keep back from us that which he can give us without any detriment to
himself, or disparagement to his wisdom, unless we have made our selves
incapable of it. As S. Paul says of God the Father, he that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us
all things? so we may say of God the Son; he that spared not himself when we
stood in need of a Savior, but gave himself to death for us; how shall he not
give us that also, which though it be less for him to give, yet is such which
in some sort we stand in as much need of as we did of a Savior, his assistance
I mean. If when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life, as the Apostle
inferrs, Romans 5.10. If merely by Christ's dying for our sins, we were thus far
restored to Gods favor, as that he was pleased to propose to us free and easy
conditions of mercy and pardon; much more easy will it be, and most agreeable
to that former essay of his goodness, now he has gone so far with us, to
bestow on us also ability to perform those conditions (unless we have made our
selves incapable of it) since without such assistance, all the rest would
signify no more to us, than as if Christ had never died for us, nor than as if
such conditions had never been obtained for us, or proposed to us.

4. That plenitude of power and sufficiency lodged in our Savior, to answer
and to supply all the spiritual wants and necessities of men, on whose behalf
our Savior took on him the great office of Mediator, will never turn to such
an account of glory, honor, and praise to God the Father of all mercies, while
it is restrained and kept back only within himself, as it will when
communicated and given forth in the effects of it, to them for whose benefit he
received it: nor will it till then neither redound so much to his own honor as
God the Father designed it should. And if not, how can we possibly think there
should be any thing of unwillingness in him to afford all those his assistance
to perform the condition of the promise, who do not refuse to make use of it?

For as it was the design of our Savior in all the good he did to men while he
was in the World, to gain glory thereby unto his Father, so it was a great
inducement to him to do that good, when he knew it would turn to such an
account. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, that will I do, that
the Father may be glorified in the Son, John 14.13. It was matter of great
satisfaction to our Savior when he was upon leaving the World, that he could
say to his Father, I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work
which thou gave me to do. John 17.4. he took pleasure in doing that work for
that reason, because he glorified the Father thereby. And we cannot think he is
less zealous for the honor of his Father now he is so highly exalted by him,
than he was in the day of his humiliation and temptation.

Considering then that our Saviors assisting us to perform the condition of
the promise, will in several respects bring in a great revenue of glory to God,
as well as it will of good to men, we may be consident that he will rather be
grieved for that men are no more forward to make use of his assistance, than
any way backward to afford it them.

S. Paul thought it a prevailing argument to obtain a liberal contribution for
the relief of Fellow Christians, when he could say, it would both supply the
necessities of the Saints, and cause many thanksgivings unto God, 2 Cor. 9.12.
Now our Saviors assisting men to perform the condition of the promise, will
not only make them happy, but will also fill their hearts and mouths with many
and many thanksgivings unto God, for his grace bestowed on them by Jesus
Christ. And if so, we cannot doubt of our Saviors willingness to assist all
those who are any whit willing to be assisted. Charity in good men will make
them willing to engage in such an action as will both relieve men, and procure
many thanksgivings unto God, though they do thereby to a degree empty
themselves, and diminish of their own store. How much more then will that
goodness in our Savior, which is infinitely greater, dispose him to yield us
his assistance to become good in performing the condition of the promise, when
he shall thereby both glorify his Father, and make us happy, and procure to
himself the satisfaction of doing all this good, and everlasting love and
praise from those that are made happy by it; and all this too without any more
diminishing of his own riches, than when by a word of his mouth he healed the
diseased bodies of men.

5. The pleasure which our Savior takes in men's becoming good, as they do by
performing the condition of the promise, is a ground of great assurance, that
nothing shall be wanting on his part, fully to assist them to perform that
condition, that will consist with his wisdom and with the terms on which the
Father will have men to be so assisted. The Prophet speaking of the Messiah,
says, He shall see his seed, and he shall see of the travel of his soul and be
satisfied. Isa. 53. To see the fruit of his Mediatory performance in men's being
recovered from being bad to become good, from Rebels to become obedi nt
Subjects, yea dutiful children to his Father, and so heirs of salvation, is and
needs must be matter of great satisfaction to the soul of our Savior, because
it is the very prize for which he ran, the design of his whole undertaking, as
Mediator. And therefore he cannot possibly be wanting in any thing that is but
fit for him to do to help men to become good, or to perform the condition of
the promise, which is the same. We see by his weeping over Jerusalem, how he is
grieved when men refuse to make use of those helps and means of deliverance
which he has obtained for them at a costly rate; when they refuse to be helped
out of the pit of destruction, when help is offered them. By which we may
easily judge how acceptable it is to him to help and assist them to get out of
a sinful state, who have any mind to be so assisted by him.

These considerations are enough and sufficient, I conceive, to satisfy us
touching our Saviors willingness to assist those to perform the condition of
the promise, who do not remain unwilling to be so assisted by him, after what
God has been doing in their souls to make them willing: and greatly tend
likewise to strengthen their faith in Christ, and to encourage their dependence
upon him for all necessary supplies of assistance and grace, who have any mind
to become good, or to increase in goodness, and to put forth their endeavors
to that end.

THE END.
Books sold by Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-head in S. Paul's Churchyard.
SHerlocks Discourse of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and our Union and
Communion with him, etc. To which is annexed a Defense and Continuation; with a
particular respect to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and the Charge of
Socinianism and Pelagianism, in Oct.

Hotchkis 's Discourse concerning the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to
us, and our Sins to him, etc. in two Parts, in Oct.

Allens Answer to Fergusson, about Justification, in Octav.

-- His Mystery of Iniquity unfolded, etc. in Oct.

-- His Christian Justification stated, in Oct.

-- His Friendly Advice to the Non-Conformists, beginning with the Anabaptists,
in Oct.

Hallywels Account of Familism against the Quakers, in Oct.

-- His Discourse of the Excellency of Christianity, in Oct.

-- His Sacred Method of saving Humane Souls by Jesus Christ, in Oct.

Needhams Six Sermons most of them preached at St. Mary's in Cambridge. in Oct.

Worthingtons Discourse of Self-Resignation, in Oct.


