Imprimatur,

Carolus Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris domesticis.

A Friendly Call, OR A SEASONABLE PERSUASIVE TO UNITY. DIRECTED To all
Nonconformists and Dissenters in Religion from the Church of ENGLAND. As the
only secure Means to Frustrate and Prevent all POPISH PLOTS and Designs against
the Peace of this Kingdom both in CHVRCH and STATE.

By a Lover of the Truth and a Friend to Peace and Unity.

Pfal. 123.1. Behold how good and how pleasant a thing it is, for Brethren to
dwell together in Unity.

1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye all speak the same Thing, and that there be no Divisions among you; but
that ye be perfectly joined together, in the same Mind, and in the same
Judgment.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset and J. Leigh Booksellers in Fleet Street. 1679.

A Friendly Call, OR A PERSUASIVE TO UNITY.
THE wisest of Kings has told us, that there is a Time, and season for all
things; Eccles. 3.1. and 7.
a Time to keep Silence, and a Time to Speak; and certainly now, if ever, the
last Time is not only Convenient, but absolutely Necessary: and should Man hold
his Peace, and neglect this Duty, Hab. 2.11.
even the Stone should cry out of the Wall, and the Beam of the Timber shall
answer it. I could wish I had the Voice of Stentor, that I might be heard
throughout our Israel, or that of a Trumpet, that I might be heard by the Ears
of the People: I would cry aloud to this deaf Generation, that they might be
awakened out of the dream they now seem to be possessed with, and be roused
from the Lethargy and Apoplectical estate they now lie under. Isaiah 58.1
Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show my People
their Treansgressions, and the House of Jacob their Sins.

I direct this my Discourse and Friendly Call to all in General; but more
particularly to those, who are Dissenters from the Church of England, and who
seem to make a breach in the Conformity, and happy Unity of the Church, and who
through over-nice Scruples, cause a Schism and Rent in its seamless Garment.
It Is to You that I now speak, as a Friend, as a Brother, for so we ought to be
one to another, and not as Wolves and Dogs, snarling and snapping one at the
other, but with gentleness and freedom admonish one another: Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another
in Love: Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace.
It Is the Command of Christ, who is Love it self, John 13.34.
that we Love one another: by it we are known to be his true Disciples and
followers of Him. And there can be no greater sign of this Love, than Friendly
to admonish one another of Errors, and straying from the Truth; and to assist
the weak, to raise up those that fall; to call to Unity and Concord, and to
stir up to Peace and Amity: That we may be all of one Mind, 1 Pet. 3.8.9.
having Compassion one of another, loving as Brethren, being Pitiful, being
Courteous, not rendering Evil for Evil, and Railing for Railing.

It Is with this Spirit of Brotherly Love, and of Holy Friendship, that I would
Call unto you at this Time, and though I would Call and Cry aloud, to be heard,
and that I might unstop your sealed Ears, yet I would not do it in the Thunder
and Ratle of Words only; in the empty noise of Sounds and gingling of
Syllables; with vain Rhetoric or fruitless Oratory; but I would speak home to
your Understandings, to your Hearts, and to your Spirits; I would speak Life
and Fire, that you might be at this time Quickened, and that you might feel and
be sensible of the Truth. I know, there have been many Boanerges, Sons of
Thunder, that have rent the Mountains, and broken to pieces the Rocks of
Division with their Voices and with the Wind of their Mouths: there have been
also those who have made Earthquakes, and troubled the waters of Dissension:
there have been others, who with their fiery Zeal have burnt up all before
them; and with too much Wrath, and Bitterness, have rather widened than healed
up the Breaches; and by such Debates and Disputes have rather hindered than
farthered the happy and desired Unity and Conformity in the Land. I will not
say God was not in them, but I would now with a still small Voice speak Peace
and Harmony, persuade to Unity and Conformity, to Brotherly Love and Affection;
I would speak with the Tongue of Charity rather than with that of Men and
Angels; I would bring Balm to your Wounds and Ease to your Griefs of
Separation: This is the End, this is the Scope, and this is the meaning and
true intention of this Call at this time: 2 Cor. 13.11
that we may be of good Comfort, and of one Mind, that we may live in Peace,
and that the God of Love and Peace may be with us.

As the intention of this Call is Charity to the whole Nation, I come not
therefore with Launcets and Razers, to cut and break up the Wounds, or with
Probes and Pledgets, to search or keep them open; the Wounds of Division and
Separation have been sufficiently handled by able and skilful Chirurgions, and
now is the time, if ever, to apply a Cataplasm, and healing Plaster, a
ripening and cicatricing Searecloth, that there may no Scar or Deformity
remain, which Panacea is Unity of Spirit in the bond of Peace. And as this is
it I would Call to in Charity and with all earnestness, with Love and also with
Power, so I would do it in few Words, and if I could, to the purpose. Matt.
6.7. 1 Cor. 14 19
For it was a Heathenish fault, to use vain repetition, and to be thought to be
heard for much Speaking; and I had, as St. Paul says, much rather speak five
words with my understanding, that I might be beneficial to others, than ten
thousand not to be understood; therefore as the Wiseman Counsels, Eccl. 5.2.
Prove. 10.19.
My Words shall be few, for in the multiplicity thereof there wants not Sin.

And now in the first place Consider, that Love is the special Command of Jesus
Christ our Pattern, by whose Name we are Called, our Savior and our Master;
it is a Mark by which he will have his true Sheep known from the counterfeit,
from the Wolves in Sheeps clothing; 1 John 4.20.
and St. John will not believe any one, that shall make a Profession of Love to
God, and not at the same time show it to his Brother; he tells him, that shall
so Profess, that he is a Liar: and surely it is the greatest Hypocrisy in the
World, and we deceive our selves, if we think we can at any time truly Love
God, whilst at the same time we are at open Enmity and Hatred with our Brother.

But let us not commit a great Mistake, and think they only to be our Brethren,
that are of our own Way, our own Profession, our own Church Fellowship, and
Brotherhood; and that Christ has restrained our Love to be extended only to
the Few: who are then the Brethren? Christ tells you, one another; Lev. 19.18.
James 2.8 9
who are they? Your Neighbor whom you ought to Love as your Self, by which we
fulfill the Royal Law, according to the Scripture; without respect of Persons,
for that is Sinful. Christ tells you this Neighbor is a Samaritan, a
Separatist, one with whom the Jews had no Commerce, one of a different Judgment
and profession; a Sectary, a Dissenter in Religion, a Nonconformist to the
Worship at Jerusalem; he that shows Mercy and lives in Brotherly Love is this
Neighbor: But Christ has sublimed this Royal Law of Love, and gone a step
beyond Moses, that we might not mistake and contract this Virtue, that is of so
diffusive and expanding a Nature, that can cover multitudes of faults, and
extend it self to all Mankind, and stretch its ample Wings over the whole
World; Christ, I say, thinks it exceeds not the Love of Publicans to Love only
good Samaritans, such as relieve your Wants, or use you Kindly, Matt. 5.46.
such as Comply with you, such as return you Kindness for Kindness, such as
walk Friendly with you; but he gives us a more general Command, that we may
make no mistakes, Matt. 5.44.
Love your Enemies: those that openly Profess themselves Dissenters, and that
speak evil of your way, and despitefully use you. Though there may be a
difference between the Love shown to an Enemy and that toward a Brother, that
being more general, this being more near and particular. But to Conclude, this
love to the Brethren is so extensive, that it ought to reach to all who make an
open Profession of the Name of Jesus Christ, who confess him to be the Son of
God and that he is come in the Flesh; and who so ever truly Believes this, is
born of God, is thy Brother, and ought to be Beloved; 1 John 5.1.
for every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of
him.

Since then it is so absolutely necessary to keep this Royal Law of Love, if we
will be true Christians, and followers of Christ, there can be no greater
Argument to persuade to Unity, as the means to that End; for without Unity we
cannot conveniently exercise this Brotherly Love; and without Concord and
Agreement there can be no true Harmony; and whilst there is a Separation and
Disagreement, Love is apt to wax cold; and Envyings, Backbitings, Hatred and
Malice are apt to arise; Disputes, Cavillings, Janglings and Debates are
multiplied; which being all contrary to the Nature of Love and Peace, they are
stifled and born down, and trampled under Foot: And thus the seamless Garment
of the Church is torn in pieces, and the beauty of Unity spoiled. Therefore I
beseech you Brethren, 1 Cor. 1.10.
by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and
that there be no Divisions among you, but that you be perfectly joined together
in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment.

Divisions and Schisms, Rents and Separations, have sprung up in the Church
from the evil Seed of the wicked Sower, which have yielded an ample Crop of
Tares, Cockle and Darnel. But it was not so at the first, Christ founded his
Church upon the Rock of Unity, it was once Entire and Uniform; and the
Apostles, and the Primitive Fathers of the Church built up the Superstructure
in Uniformity and with Intireness. There were no gaps seen in the Walls, there
were no blemishes; the Stones stood not at a distance from one another, but
closely united and cemented, and there appeared nothing but Beauty and
Conformity. The Law of Love was exercised, there were no Names of Difference
and Separation, no Names of Scorn and Infamy, they were distinguished by the
Titles of Fathers, Sons and Brethren; and there was then in those Happy and
Golden days of the Church, though troubled by Persecution, a true and perfect
Concord, Harmony and Agreement. If there were any differences arose, they were
ended without Strife, and without Division and Separation; though some were of
Paul, and others of Apollos, all were of God, in the Unity of Faith and in the
Bond of Peace. Psalm. 85.10
Then Mercy and Truth did meet together, and Righteousness and Peace did kiss
each other.

But the Evil one, who envies at the Unity of the Church of Christ, who cannot
endure to behold its Glory and Conformity, who hates the Love of Brethren; who
makes use of all his Cunning and Malice, to cause Divisions and Separations;
who sowes Envyings, who plants Cavillings, who raises vain Disputes, and
frivolous Debates, and scatters up and down, idle and needless Scruples, to
disturb the quiet and the peace of the Church; who still loves to Fish in
troubled Waters; seeing the Beauty and Glory of United Christians, made use of
all his cunning Arts and Skill, and set to work all his evil Agents and
Instruments, to break this Unity, to sow Discords and Divisions, and to spoil
the pleasant Harmony of the People of God. All the Persecutions that the Devil
stirred up against the Saints, the many Deaths of the Martyrs, Afflictions,
Crosses, Disgraces, Torments, could not so well effect his desires: he
perceived that the Blood of the Martyrs was the semen Ecclesiae, that made the
Church to flourish and spring up; he therefore flings away the Sword, and
betakes himself to Poison, wherewith he more easily brought his Evil purposes
and designs to pass, and soon defaced the Beauty and Comeliness of the Visible
Church: the Poison of Pride, of Ambition, of Luxury and Ease, and of false
Doctrine. By this means he set them at Variance one with another, the Children
against the Father, the Father against the Children; the Shepherd against the
Sheep, and the Sheep against the Shepherd; and the Pastors against one another;
the Flocks are scattered upon the Hills, and the fair Unity is broken. Thus a
gap being made, how many Evils soon entered at these breaches? Presently
Heresies sprung up, Sects increased, Schisms multiplied, names of Division and
Separations were known, then came into the World the spawns of Symonaicks,
Nicholaitans, Cerinthians, Marcionists, Montanists, Porphyrians, Manachees,
Novatians, Arrians, Eunomians, Denatists, Photinians, Luciferians, Jovianists,
Pelagians, Anthropomorphites, Nestorians, Sabbatians, Quaternians,
Monothelites, Millenarians, Anabaptists, Socinians, Antinomians, Quakers, and
many others; which multiplied like the Grecian Gods, of which Hesiod reckons up
Thirty thousand. Then every one ran after his own Inventions, they frame to
themselves Idols of their own; every Man will have an Ephod, a Church, a
Congregation by themselves; all Government, all Obedience to Laws and
Constitutions, all Submission to Magistrates, to Bishops, and Fathers of the
Church are laid aside, and every one does what seems good in his own Eyes; and
thus Confusion, Separation, Schism, Heresy and Rebellion were let in, to
disturb the Peace, the Quiet, and the Unity of the Church. Thus, I say, it was
effected by the means of Satan, that Evil one, who still makes it his great
business, where ever he finds Unity and Peace, to spoil and deface them, and to
raise up Strife and Separation.

Since Separation and Division among Brethren, proceeds from the Cunning and
Malice of Satan, why should it continue any longer in our Israel? Why should
not every Man put to his helping hand, to build up the Walls of Unity? Are we
not Brethren? Have we not one Father God? One Head Jesus Christ? Is he not our
Common Shepherd? Have we not one Faith, Salvation by Christ? Do not we Believe
him come in the Flesh? Do not we Confess his Name? Are we not all Christians?
And indeed are we not also of one Mother the Church? Why then this Separation?
This Division? This drawing several Ways? Why cannot or why do not you Unite as
you ought to do? If there be any obstacles and stumbling blocks of offense that
lie in the way, set to your Hands and endeavor to remove them. I suppose they
are not so many, nor so great, but they may be easily enough removed, if you go
about it willingly and sincerely; if you are not biased or perverted by your
own Passions and your own contradictory and perverse Wills: if you are not
Stubborn and Dogmatical, and not too stiff in your own Opinions in small
matters, you must yield somewhat in Love one to another, that the Work may be
done and the Breaches made up; and that the Walls of a perfect Uniformity may
at last be built for the security and welfare both of Church and State.

And that this may be Effected and that our happy Unity may be lasting and
perpetual, that the Stones may be made smooth and polished fit for the
building, that they may lie fast, equal and close; all ruggedness and gratings
must be done away, for whilst they remain they will not be fit for the
building, and there will be but little hopes of Conformity and entireness. You
must then lay aside that bitterness of Spirit, which some of you call Zeal,
wherewith you upbraid those of the contrary Party, and to the multitude
cunningly insinuate an Opinion of Holiness and Integrity of your Selves, and of
looseness and neglect of your Adversaries: always on the least occasions lashing
them with sharp and severe reproofs, ripping up the faults of Bishops and the
Clergy of the Prelatical Party. You must leave these common Aspersions which
abound among many, throwing all Faults and Errors on the Ecclesiastical
Government; and to it impute all Faults, all Corruptions, endeavoring thereby
to win to your selves the Opinion of Wisdom: you must also leave to intrude
upon the People and your Hearers your own Form of Church Government, as the
only remedy to avoid all Evils, as the only true Way to walk in, and as if
Salvation were hard to be purchased any where else; and giving it so many
glorious Titles and Encomiums, and so possessing the minds of Men with an
overweaning of the one, and a bitter and malicious Scorn and Detestation of the
other. Leave also to interpret the whole scope of Scripture, as if framed to
maintain your own Form of Government, presenting your Followers with false
Glosses, whereby they read only as you would have them, and pervert Scripture
to maintain the false Ideas of their sickly Imaginations; and thus every Sect
makes the Scripture to speak in favor of their Way and false Opinions, to
maintain their Schism and Separation; calling all Samaria and Babylon that are
not of themselves, and their own Congregations Sion and Jerusalem. You must
also leave off those Names of Separation and Distinguishment, calling your
selves the Godly, the Brethren, the Good People, Gods Children, the Sanctified;
and others, the Ungodly, Reprobates, Worldlings, Time-servers, Men-pleasers,
Moralists, and Latitudinarians, Arminians, and the like. You must also lay
aside that eager endeavor of making Proselytes, especially of the weaker
Vessels who are apt to be easily led and persuaded by godly and Religious
pretenses, though thereby they do great damage to their Husbands and Families,
making the Separation within their private Walls as wide as that which you have
caused in the Nation. You must also cease to cry out and exclaim against
Magistrates and Rulers, Kings and Governors, as Severe, Cruel and Tyrannical,
upon the least restraint of your Liberties; as if you were thereby become
Martyrs for the Cause of Christ, and branding those, that perhaps not with out
occasion given thereto, put some moderate restraint upon you, with the Titles
of Blood-suckers, and Blood-thirsty Men, Persecutors and Tormentors; drawing
all the Scriptures that any way favor the Innocence of such as have Suffered
for the Truth by wicked Tyrants, to your own selves, and apply them still to
your Case as if you were the Persons pointed out by the Finger of the Holy
Ghost, and for whom they were chiefly intended. Also you must not speak
contemptibly of Bishops as you too frequently do, giving them scurrilous Names,
as Limbs of Antichrist, Locusts of the bottomless pit, domineering Lords,
Usurpers, Spiritual Tyrants, Lordly Bishops, etc. and calling the Ministers of
the Gospel in contempt Priests, nay Baal's Priests, Time-servers, Hirelings,
State Divines, dumb Dogs, vain Bablers, with such like Language; those whom the
Scriptures Dignifie and Honor with the Titles of Christ's Ambassadors, Gods
Stewards, Pastors of Christ's flock, Stars, Angels, Gods, receive too often from
you contrary Denominations; being scandalized at the Title of Lord given to
Bishops, which is an Honorary Name annexed to their Temporalties by the Kings
of England, you call them in Disdain, Lordlings, Proud, Imperious, Arrogant,
and the like. You must also leave to Whisper in private against the Governors
and against the Secular Power, as if tending to and infected with Popery, and
of complaining to your Disciples that you are fain to fly to Corners and to
Private Meetings, like the Primitive Christians, whilst Papists, Drunkards and
Swearers are not meddled with or disturbed; that you are more roughly handled
than those who go to Mass, that your Godly Meetings are disturbed, whilst
Taverns, Alehouses and Play Houses are never looked into, and where they
commit Enormities without Check or Control: that you are the true Church, and
that the Word and Sacraments are by you dispensed in Purity, and according to
the Primitive Institution; that the public Places of Gods Worship are defiled
with Common Prayers, Singing, Anthems, Read-Sermons and Set-Prayers, Organs,
and such like (as you call them) Superstitious rags of Popery. You must also
utterly lay aside all your Reverend thoughts of your great Idol the Covenant,
the Moloch of Presbytery, the Scottish Dagon, a very Monster of Rebellion; this
must be never thought of more, but laid aside and drowned in the Sea of
Oblivion. You must also leave off your continual Scoffing at the public
Prayers of the Church which you have termed Porridg, your unseasonable jests
and jears against so Religious an exercise; composed by the most Learned and
Holy Men of this Nation, and sealed to with their Blood and Lives. And you must
utterly disclaim and remove out of the way, the very thoughts of that Principle
that have been owned by you, and is a a very Mountain in the gap of Separation,
that in the Cause of Religion it is Lawful to take up Arms against your King
and Sovereign. You must also lay aside that evil Eye which you have against the
Riches and Revenues of the Bishops, which you would gladly share among your
selves and account it no Sacrilege: The Bishops Lands stick in your Stomachs,
because they have slipped from between your Fingers; but be not your Eye evil
because that of your Ancestors has been good; because Pious Princes and
Religious Nobles have bestowed so much means on the Church. They rob you not,
it is not the effect of your Labor nor proceeds from the sweat of your Brows, a
Poor Clergy would be soon Vile and Contemptible. And though it be no fault to
have a steady and unchanged Mind and Opinion upon well grounded Principles, yet
I think all these stumbling blocks of Offenses will not be accounted by your
selves any found Principles or Foundations to build upon; but are Stones and
Rocks against which you dash your Feet, and which divert you from the path that
leads to Peace and Unity: therefore be not over stiff in your own Opinions, and
think it no disgrace or undervaluing to your Cause or Reputation to give way,
and at last see the great Benefit that will accrue not only to the whole Nation
but your Selves, by putting to your own Hands to the removing all these
forementioned Obstacles.

I am not Ignorant that against this my Advice you have Objected the tenderness
of your Consciences, that has enfeebled your Hands and kept you back from
performing what is required of you. But have a care you delude not your selves
in this Point, and pretend Conscience when there is something else in the way.
There is no Sect, no Libertine, the very Levellers and Ranters themselves, but
have the same Plea, and fly away from their Duties to this starting hole.
Conscience has been the general pretense for all those who had no mind to
obey: It Is the common Shield and Buckler of Defense, but I think there can be
no Plea for Conscience when a lawful Authority requires only lawful things;
such as are not Derogatory to the Honor of God, nor hurtful to the common
Society of Men. I know also that you will tell me, Romans 14.33.14.
that what is not of Faith is Sin, and that, though there is nothing unclean of
it self; yet to him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is
unclean. But have a care that your Conscience, that is so tender, does not
strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel, stumble at a Straw and leap over a Block:
I would not have you to do any thing against Conscience, but then you must
rectify your Conscience by the Rule of Gods Word, otherwise it is no
Conscience; for there can be no pretense of Conscience in doing Evil or
Unlawful things, it must be only in indifferent things where it hangs in
aequilibrio as it were, that it can admit of Doubts and Scruples. Known Good
and known Evil does not admit of that pretense. The Apostle Paul commands
thee to obey for Conscience sake; but you pretend Conscience for Disobedience
and Rebellion: He commands you to be subject for Conscience sake, you pretend
to be free for Conscience sake: these are Contradictions, and are repugnant one
to another. These are not doubful Cases, the Rule is too plain here to admit of
Scruples. That the way to Peace may be plain, you must not through Ignorance,
Prejudice or Precipitancy, call those things Popery and Superstition which are
not, nor persuade your Followers with so much Imbitterness against them: be not
so loud against them, decry them not only with Noise and Bawling, bring them to
the Test and let all things be weighed by the Balances of the Sanctuary; and
then it will be easily seen what is really Popery and Superstition, and what so
pretended. Religion is for the most part taken up upon Trust, Custom and
Education rather than Choice; frame it for us, and we follow therein our
Parents and our Nurses. They call every thing Popery that is not made use of by
themselves: Every one that pleads for Ceremonies, though never so decent, is
esteemed Popishly affected; and generally among the common People of your
Persuasion, Episcopacy is thought no better of than Popery, and Prelates and
Ministers of the Church of England than of Cardinals and Priests. But my
Masters it is a hard Case, that those very Persons who were the chief
Instruments of breaking the Tyrannical Yoke of Rome in this Nation, and for
which many of them were Martyred, should be they who framed those very
Constitutions which you call Popish, and for which they lost their Lives by
Popish Adversaries. And also that they should be esteemed Popish Abettors,
because of their approving of these Ceremonies who have so strenuously wrote
against the Tenets of Rome, and who like worthy Champions have stood in the Gap
and defended the true Protestant Cause against all gainsayers. That these very
Persons who have Converted many from the Popish Religion, have Established many
that were Wavering, have Recovered others that were Lapsed, and that have
Confirmed several that were Doubting; that these (I say) should be Branded by
you with the Ignominious mark of Popery, is strange and hardly Paralleled. And
lastly, that this desired Unity may be brought about, you are desired to use so
much Charity as not rashly to damn another for every Difference, and so much
Ingenuity as not to render the Opinions of your Adversaries more black and
odious to the World than you in your Consciences know them to be. Since the
Church of England has Justified her self by some of the unanswerable Writings
of her worthy Sons, from all Imputations of Heresy and Schism, from all
novelty and false Doctrine, and Answered all Objections whatsoever against her
Ceremonies and Discipline.

There is yet one other Stone of offense, which I had almost forgot, and which
will help to Unity if it be may be rolled away, for many other lesser gravelly
adherences will be avoided with it, and this is an Opinion, That it is
unlawful, and sinful, to do any thing without direction from the Scripture or
the Word of God, whereby you think by that means to overthrow the Ceremonies of
the Church of England. But, I will say, in the Learned Dr. Sandersons own
words, Sand. ad clerum Ser. 4. p. 62.
That if you will understand this only of the Substantials of Gods Worship, and
of the exercises of Spiritual and Supernatural Graces, the assertion is true
and sound; but if you extend it as you do to all the actions of common Life
whatsoever, whether Natural or Civil, it is altogether false and indefensible.
I shall not go about to confute this Opinion, it is not my Business or Intention
to enter into Disputes of the Merits of the Cause, it has been sufficiently
done by more skilful Hands and learned Pens: But this Weapon is so made that it
may be turned against your own selves, it offends as much as defends you, and
cuts both ways like a two edged Sword; for by that Rule you can no more defend
the wearing your short Cloaks and little Bands, than the other party their
Gowns and Rochetts; and it will be as difficult to prove from Scripture your
Institutions and Formalities, as the other their Ceremonies and Customs. The
Holy Word of God is a perfect and most absolute and sufficient direction as to
all things concerning our Salvation, and as to that point we need not the help
of Traditions; but certainly in things indifferent, and in things about the
common Actions of Life, we need not seek any farther than the Light of Reason
and the common Rules of Discretion, and not expect particular Warrants only
from the Scripture for every action of humane Life. All that we are to take
care of is that our Actions be regulated as near as may be to those Rules laid
down in the Holy Scriptures for us to walk by, at least that they be no ways
contradictory; and then it will be sufficient to maintain their Legality,
whilst they are established by the Law of Nature or that of Reason, without
seeking to deduce Authority for them out of the Holy Scriptures.

These are the chief things that at present occur to my Memory which lie in the
way that leads to Peace and Unity, and which if removed will render the way
more plain and eaven. These are not things of Indifferency, you will not own
them nor plead for them, and I question not, when you have laid aside your
imbittered Passions and rigid Dispositions against your Adversaries, you will
be willing to put to your Hands, that all these Stones of offense may be done
away, and which should not have been mentioned but for that end. But I would
not have you think that I am Partial, and that this Call ought not also to be
heard on the other side, and that I would not incite those also of the Church
of England to do their part in every thing that may be justly required of them.
And here I cannot but justify them from any aspersion of that Nature, in that
in all their Writings they have held out to you the right Hand of fellowship,
they have invited you to come in to them, they have Called to Unity, they have
desired your Fellowship, and that there may be no longer this Distance and
Separation, they have at all times exhibited a willingness to have this breach
made up; they would receive you into their Churches, they would Communicate
with you as Brothers, they would provide for you as Sons, they would take care
of you as Fathers, if you would own them as such. What then makes this breach?
What is it continues this Separation? What makes you so stiff in things of
small moment? Why should not they yield? Say you; why should not you obey? Say
they. One would think the weight of Authority should in this Case cast the
balance: but sure you have put something more into the scales than what
appears to the World, that neither the kindness shown you by your Opposers, the
Indulgence of Princes nor the commands of Authority are able to move up your
heavy scale. But I would also have this Call reach to the Ears of those of the
Church of England, to whom with Reverence and Submission be it spoken, that you
are also desired to continue to use all means that this Unity may be effected,
and that you would on your parts endeavor to remove all Obstacles thereto: You
must then endeavor to forget all that is past, you must not remember our late
Troubles, Wars, Confusions, Devastations, as the effects of an unholy War for
Religion; you must not tell them any more of their unsanctified and bloody
Covenant, you must not say they are a stiff-necked Generation and people of a
perverse Mind and Heart; you must not mention their proud and arrogant Tryers,
nor fright them with the Hobgoblin Smectymnnus; you must now forget all that is
past and continue that kindness and moderation that most of you have still on
all occasions shown them, that the distance that is yet between you may be
overcome, and that you may meet as Brothers, and be united in Heart and Spirit.

These Rubs being presupposed to be removed, what is it now that you Contend
for? Things as you your selves say of small moment, trifles, Ceremonies, etc.
It Is true they are not Essentials, matters of Faith, things of absolute
necessity to Salvation, things of indifferency; yet not trifles and of no
weight or value. If they be as you say, why stand you so stiff against them?
Why all this bustle and do about nothing? But you have a refuge, Conscience.
They plead the same for retaining them, and also have Antiquity and Authority
to back them. Common Prayer will not down with you, no set Form, it stints the
Spirit, with other small and frivolous objections against some parts of the
Liturgy. For shame leave off at last those needless Cavils of which some of
your selves have been ashamed. You know that Forms of Prayer have been in all
Ages both in the Greek and Latin Churches, and are not only of a primitive
Institution in the very Infancy of the Church, when there was a double measure
of the Spirit poured down upon its Bishops and Pastors, but our Lord Jesus
Christ himself thought good to leave a Set and prescribed Form of Prayer, and
also the like Forms were used of old in the Jewish Church and Service, they
were not left to their own Inventions. I will not go about to argue the Case
with you, but if it be Lawful to Pray in a set Form, as I suppose none of you
will gainsay, it is then expedient because Commanded by Authority. But have you
not a Christian Liberty left you to exercise your Gifts and to show your
Eloquence and Parts in Prayer Ex tempore before your Sermons? And that the
Spirit may not be quenched, as you say, may you not enlarge your selves? And is
it not an usual practice in our Churches? Why then should you scruple so much
at our Liturgy? Would you have none? But all the Gifted and Ungifted left to
their own Inventions? In your time had you not a Directory? What was it but a
Form of Worship after your Mode? And what Church is there abroad, even Geneva
it self, without some Forms both of Worship and of Prayer. That our Book of
Common Prayer was taken out of the Mass Book, and that it was the Mass in
English as many of the ignorant have been Taught, to cast the greater Odium
upon it, is an Imposture enough discovered and unmasked. Speak out, is there
any thing Sinful or Unlawful in the Liturgy? Or that is not agreeable to Gods
Word? Prove but that and then you do something, for the Church holds in her
Articles of Religion, That it is not Lawful for her to ordain any thing that is
contrary or besides the Word of God. Besides have not your requests been
gratified in many things, in altering several passages in the Liturgy, as in
the Offices of Marriage, Churching of Women and Burials; what is it you would
then have all or none? Cannot you be pleased without it be wholly cast aside?
Will no Concessions else serve your turn? O that you would make some weighty
exceptions and not use such a frivolous and vain Cavilling against it not worth
the Answering, or that you would show the World one of your own that were
better before you take away this; that would be reasonable and worthy your
undertaking. And since some of you have allowed of a Liturgy, and for peace
sake of many inconvenient Circumstances in Gods Worship, Baxt. Disp. p. 487.
Safe way. p. 198.
and acknowledge also that the Governors of the Church have a decisive power in
things undetermined in Scripture; why should you not yield to accept of this
equitable Proposition, to accept of and Conform to this Form of Prayer and
these Rites of the Church, till better be Instituted or Ordained.

As to the Cross in Baptism a Moral Hiroglyphick only of our Saviors Death and
Crucifixion, Godfathers and Godmothers, Confirmation, Kneeling at the
Sacrament, Bowing at the Name of Jesus, Standing up at Reading the Creed, and
other things of the like Nature; are these things worthy to cause an Eternal
Separation betwixt you? Are they of so great moment as to make so wide and long
a breach in a Nation? Are they of worth and value to make you run into Contempt
and Rebellion? Let us know your Minds, if any of these should be yielded to
your tender Consciences and disused, to please you, would you then Conform in
all the rest? Would not your Answer be as formerly to Queen Elizabeth? That you
would not leave a Hoof behind. All the Ceremonies of the Church must be laid
aside, you would have a naked Religion without Clothes, which is not seemly.
Ceremonies are but the Garments and decencies of Religion, not part of it but
somewhat that it cannot well be seen without, they are like our Clothes that
may be altered, that may be cut to the mode and size of the Times without
altering the form of our Body. There have been Laws made for prohibiting the
use of some Garments and that have enjoined the wearing of others, though
before it was at the choice of the People to wear or not wear them, after such
Laws made they were no longer indifferent. It is even so of our Ceremonies,
they are indifferent things of themselves, but being enjoined by Authority they
are now no longer so; Obedience is no indifferent thing, that is absolutely
enjoined by the Word of God; it is obedience to Ecclesiastical Laws that is
required. This obedience is either justly due to these Laws or it is not: If it
is, why then do you disobey? If you say it is not, 1 Pet. 2.13.
you contradict the Scriptures, Submit to every Ordinance of Man, whether it be
unto the King as Supreme or unto Governors etc. Romans 13.1.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers. However it is the safest way
to obey, should they Command things doubtful, let the blame lie upon them, you
will be excused. God requires not impossibilities: But certainly God has given
to the Governors of the Church a Power of making Laws and Canons: Let all
things be done decently and according to order. 1 Cor. 14.40
And according to this Rule of the Apostle, the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England are as few, decent, comely and fitting, as in any Church of
the Christian World; and all Exceptions against them that I ever could yet see,
empty and of no substance. Manton on Jude.
Some of you have told us there are but two Lawful Causes of Separation from
the Church, Persecution and a general corruption of Doctrine: for both these
Causes and no other have we Separated from the Church of Rome, and if you can
prove these two marks of Separation to be inherent to the Church of England,
you will have sufficient to ground your Separation as Lawful, and have some
plea for what you do; but till then, I beseech you, set your face toward the
Temple of Obedience and be refractory no longer; and since these things which
make this Breach between you are not of any great Moment, are but Ceremonies
and the outward Garments and Garnatures of Religion; leave off that obstinacy
and submit your selves to the Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake.

The great Cry that you have made against these Rites and Ceremonies of the
English Church has been, that they were Popery and of Popish extraction,
borrowed from the Church of Rome: but all this while you tell us not what
Popery is, neither can you disown or dissent from all that is held or practiced
by the Church of Rome. Certainly our Forefathers to whom we owe these things,
our Reformation from the Romish Church and the Purity of our Religion, would
not have laid down their Lives and have been Martyred by the Church of Rome, if
it had then been thought either by themselves or by the others that what they
had done as to the Reforming the Ceremonies of the Church, or toward the
maintaining the Doctrines they Held, or that the Orders and Discipline they had
Constituted had been Popery or rather not opposite in some measure thereto. As
by Dissenting she showed the Church of Rome that she had no dependency upon
her, and that she so far disowned her as she had disowned God, by laying aside
all those gross Corruptions for which our Church Separated from her; so on the
other side, by retaining some of her harmless and innocent Ceremonies, they
showed her they did not do any thing by the Spirit of Opposition only, whereby
they might take offense without having a just ground and cause for it. But
Bishop Sanderson in his Preface to his Sermons tells you what in Truth Popery
is, Sand. Pref. Sect. 15.
That it is those Doctrines which are contrary to the Word of God or but
superadded thereunto as necessary Points of Faith to be of all Christians
Believed under pain of Damnation; and all those Superstitions used in the
Worship of God which either are Unlawful as being contrary to the Word of God,
or being not contrary and therefore Arbitrary or Indifferent are made
Essentials and imposed as necessary parts of Worship. From all which the Church
of England has been sufficiently Vindicated and Cleared, and you cannot but
know in your own Consciences that she disowns the shadow of all those things,
and you abuse her when you tax her of Popery or Superstition by reason of her
Rites and Ceremonies. But you too often confound Superstition and Idolatry
together, sometimes the keeping of Christmas is Superstitious, the Cross, the
Surplice, the Common Prayer Book, the Holy Days, the Vigils, Lent, all
Superstitious: and sometimes it is the Idol Christmas, the Idol Common Prayer
Book, the Idol Saints Days, and the like. But as you know what Idolatry is, the
giving an Holy and Religious Worship to any thing that is only due to our Maker
the only true God; so you may know also, that Superstition is not the doing or
omitting of any thing more or less than is necessary in matters of Religion by
reason of the Obligation laid upon them by Superiors; but it is the performing
or not performing those things by reason of a necessity that is laid upon them
that they are sinful of themselves, whereby the Consciences of Men are inslaved
and terrified. And by this means all things that you Judge to be Unlawful
though indifferent in themselves, till commanded by Authority, you prohibit
under the Obligation of Sin, thereby imposing on the Consciences of others a
necessity of not using them, though commanded by Authority, as being of
themselves vile and sinful; and this is truly Superstition.

But what is it you would have? Would you have no Government? No Discipline? No
Form in the Church? If any, why not this as is already Established? Since you
are not able to Convince it or Convict it either of Popery or Superstition? You
would have your own, you think that purer and better, but you must then stay
till you can Convince the Magistrate also, you must Convince your King and
Governors, make them first of your Persuasion, exhibit to them your Arguments,
your Reasons, your Persuasions, all you have done hitherto is nothing; you see
Thousands are not of your Mind and they will not believe your Church Government
and your Classical Form to be any ways Quadrate with such a Monarchy as this
is; it may perhaps be fit for a small City, a little Commonwealth, a Province
or so, it may be fitted for the Constitution of Geneva or some Cantons of the
Switzers, but it can never be made to sit well about the Necks of these three
Kingdoms; neither will you be able to persuade the King to pull down the
Bishops to set up arbitrary and boundless Tryers, to lay aside the Ancient
Liturgy and to bring in its place your Directory, to put down Ecclesiastical
Courts and set up Commissioners; we have had too late trial of your Way, and
the Tyranny of your Church Government cannot so soon be forgotten, when every
the Heads of your Classes were as Absolute as Popes, and your Inferior Clergy
as Proud as Cardinals. But had the King and State a mind to gratify you and to
set up your Form, would not there still be as many Dissenters, for you are not
yet agreed among your selves, you have not yet shaped a Form that would please
others, the Independent, Anabaptist, Quaker, Cry out against it and had rather
live under the Rule of the Bishops than under the rigid Government of
Presbytery; it will be impossible to please you all, and you may as soon hope
to fit a Garment for the Moon. Till you are agreed then of a better Form of
Ecclesiastical Government, and that you are able to Convince the King and the
State and your other Dissenting Brethren, that you have a better and one more
agreeable to the Constitution of this Nation, to the Primitive Institution and
Purity, without the unlawful Argument of the Sword and Rebellion; submit, I
say, in Gods Name and for Conscience sake to this as is set up, and be no
longer Separatists, and Congregate no longer by your selves, but be persuaded,
as you ought, to hearken to the Call both of God and Man, of the Scriptures
that press you to Unity and Amity, of your Brethren that invite you to
Conformity and Communion, and to your Superiors, who Command you to Submission
and Obedience.

As to the Doctrine of the Church of England, you have not wherewith to find
any the least shadow of Cavilling against it, you cannot but Confess its
Principles to be found; but all your Pique is against its Discipline or Church
Regiment, which, as the Learned and Rational Mr. Hooker Law of Eccl. Po^. Lib.
3. Sect. 3
Hooker tells you, is a thing different from Matters of Faith and Salvation.
But who is it that ought to lay down the Rules and matters of Church Polity,
and to frame the Laws and Constitutions of Church Government? Are they not Men?
And such to whose care the Governance of the Church is Committed? To Kings the
Nursing Fathers, and to subordinate Ministers, as Bishops, etc? Would you have
all Laws already laid down in Scripture? And nothing left for the exercise of
the Light of Reason in these matters? But there is no doubt but these Laws of
Ecclesiastical Polity may be made by Man Legally, and by the Authority of God,
Luminis naturalis dictatum repellere, non modo stultum est sed and impium.
August. Lib. 4 de Trin. Cap. 6.
and in which Man may make use of his Reason, following therein the Rules of
the Law of God and the Law of Nature, which in the substance is one with the
Moral Law of the Scripture; and also though these Humane or Canon Laws be not
expressly set down in any part of the Scripture, yet they ought upon unerring
Principles to be deduced therefrom, or at least without Contradiction unto any
positive Law or Command in Scripture. By this means the Laws of Man may be said
to be the Laws of God: For he owns the very Laws of the Heathen to be of
himself, though framed by the Light of Nature only, and by him written in their
Hearts, by which the Gentiles were either Excused or Condemned. 2 Romans 15.
Why then fly you from these Laws as such Bug-bears? Why do you not in all
Humility and Singleness of Heart yield Obedience to them for the Lords sake?
Where lies the Illegality of them. Because you cannot find Lawn Sleeves and
Rochets in Scripture, therefore must they not be worn? And because you do not
Read of Gowns, Tippets, square Caps and Canonical Girdles, therefore it is
unlawful for Ministers to wear them? When God gave us the Light of the
Scripture he did not take from us the Light of Reason, this indeed is but a dim
Light in respect of the other, and ought not be trusted to in matters of Faith,
Divine and Supernatural things; but being in Conjunction with the greater Light
of Gods Word, we have a clear and perfect Sunshine to see as far as an Humane
condition will permit of into the business both of Doctrine and Manors, and we
are thereby enabled to give Rules in matters of Faith and Life. For though the
Scripture is a perfect and absolute Rule in it self and contains all things
within it self as to what belongs to our Salvation, yet it is no ways
derogatory from its fullness and sufficiency to say that we cannot make use of
this Rule without the Light of our Reason: and also that in Civil things we may
with a Christian Liberty do many things that we find not in Scripture, by the
mere use of Reason alone, and that very Lawfully and without Sin, so those
things be not contradictory to the Word of God. If then our Governors have a
Power given them that they may Ordain and Constitute diverse Ceremonies in the
Church, though not mentioned and found in Scripture, then ought Inferiors to
submit to such Laws and Rules, and are in Duty bound to observe them, when they
are enjoined by a Lawful Authority. Do but consider with your selves that
whilst you so strictly Demand Scripture to be shown for the use of Ceremonies
and other things made use of in the Church of England, may not others with the
like Liberty bid you to show what Example or Command you have in Scripture for
your Lay Presbyters, your Classes, your stone Churches, your Tithes, your
Infant Sprinklings, your Singing Psalms, your Weekly Sabbath; all these things
you know have been Objected against you, to which you led the Way and opened
the Gap by such your unreasonable Demands.

If Man has not a Liberty given him to make use of his Reason in Ordering the
Affairs of the Church, or in altering many things and adding others as may be
Convenient to the temper and constitution of Times but must have a Precedent or
Command for it expressly in Scripture; how did David err when he thought to
build a Temple at Jerusalem? 2 Samuel 1.2, 3 1 King. 8.5. 2 Chronicles. 7.6 7.30.23.
Which the Prophet approved of: Or Solomon for keeping a Feast of seven days
for the Dedication of the Altar? Or Hezekiah for continuing the Feast of
Unleavened Bread seven days longer than the time appointed by the Law? Or
Mordecai for making an Ordinance for the Yearly observation of the Feast of
Purim? Esth. 9.27.
The building of Synagogues, wearing of Sackcloth and Ashes in sign of
Humiliation: their Fasts, more then were Commanded immediately by God, Zach.
8.19.
were all of Humane Institution and without doubt Lawful. Times alter, and what
at one Time may be thought Fitting and Harmless, at another would be accounted
Scandalous and Unfitting, as that Osculum Charitatis used in the Times of the
Apostles and approved of by them, Romans 16.16. 2 Cor. 13.12
would now give Cause of offense, and those Agapae or Love Feasts used by the
Primitive Christians, at first Innocent enough, but soon grew to be worthy of
Reproof by the Apostle. 1 Cor. 11.
There is Milk for Babes and Meat for stronger Men. There is a difference
between the Church in its Infancy and after the growth of so many Years. It has
been Corrupted and grown four on its Lees, and it has been again Purged and
Refined, therefore there must of necessity have been several Laws, Rules,
Canons and Institutions framed for its several Dispensations, most agreeable to
the temper of the Ages and the Times in which they were made: And the Orders of
the Times of the Apostles themselves are not in all things now to be urged as
of absolute necessity.

I cannot but wonder since that these Ceremonies and Rites of the Church are by
you accounted of but as Mint and Cummin, nay by some Condemned as Toys, Trifles
and Follies, that you should stand so stiffly against them; but those of the
Church of England thinking not so meanly of them, have therefore the more
Reason to stand for their Continuance. They say there ought to be a bowing of
the Knee as well as of the Heart. That by outward Actions the Mind is stirred
up with greater fervency to Attention and Devotion. That Solemnities have been
in all Ages, both in Religious and Divine matters as well as Civil: That these
things are necessary and of use as Garments to the Body: That without them
Religion would appear Naked and Uncomly: That they are also Edifying and
Significant: That they move the Heart and the Affections, and that they are of
great use and force: That they have been Instituted not without great Care and
Deliberation by Holy, Pious and Learned Men: That they have been long Confirmed
in the Minds of Men: That to alter or abolish them would be Dangerous and
Scandalous: That they are Harmless and Innocent of themselves: That they give
not the Offense, but that it is taken Unjustly against them: That under the Use
of them the Land has long flourished with Peace and Prosperity till our late
distracted Times: That since God has again Restored them almost Miraculously
when they were thought to be Dead and for ever Extinguished. These things
Considered, and that they appear not such Trifles to them as you account them,
they have more Reason not to Depart from them, and you less to Insist upon
their Abolishment.

But alas it is not only Ceremony that you would take way, but the Root and
Branch (as you are wont to say) of Episcopacy; the Bishops it seems are also
Popery: they must not stand, but is not Self all the while at the Bottom? Is it
not that you may Reign in their stead with your Lay Elders? And what is this
Episcopacy so much Cried out against by you and others of your Dissenting
stamp? I Will tell you in the Learned Mr. Chillingworth's Words, Episcopacy in
the Essentiality of it is an appointment of one Man of eminent Sanctity and
Sufficiency to have a Care of all the Churches within a certain Precinct or
Diocese, furnished with Authority (not Absolute or Arbitrary but Regulated by
Laws) to the intent that all the Churches under him may be provided of Good and
Able Pastors or Presbyters. This is the Government you are so scandalized at
and which you would take away, being the Institution of Christ himself who made
his Apostles Bishops or Overseers of his Church, for Matthias was chosen to an
Episcopal Office (...). And St. Act. 1. Cyp. l. 3. Ep. 9
Cyprian calls all the Apostles by the same Name Episcopos. And although they
had a large Commission from Christ, Go Baptize all Nations, and seem
Indefinite, yet we find some of them Bishops by Restraint, as St. James at
Jerusalem, St. Paul took to himself the Care of the Gentiles, and St. Peter of
the Jews, St. John took Charge of Asia the Less, where were afterward seven
Churches governed by so many Bishops termed by St. John Angels. Rev. 2.
And the Apostles themselves appointed others as Titus and Timothy at first
Agents only in their stead, and afterward with Apostolical power of their own.
And if there be any Credit to be given to History and to Antiquity it self, we
find that Linus was made Bishop of Rome by the Apostles, Iren. l. 3. c. 3
Polycarpus of Smyrna, Evodius of Antioch and Titus of Creet; Erecting Churches
in all these places where the Gospel of Jesus Christ was Received, all having
the same Faith, the same Sacraments, and the same Form of Government; so as
they seemed but one Body and in a perfect Unity one with another, that every
thing might be done with Decency and in Order. Socrates and Euschius have given
us whole Catalogues of Bishops successively to their Times, and we find them
nominated in many Histories and Writings of Old, and from their beginning
deduced down to our Times. This is the Regiment you would have pulled down,
this is one Form you oppose, a Government of Divine Institution, by that of the
Holy Ghost conferred on the Apostles, and by them on others, and so
successively in the Church in all Ages and through all times by Ordination and
Laying on of Hands, so that there can hardly be manifested a more plain and
evident Truth.

I am not Ignorant that you admit of the Name of Bishops and of Presbyters, but
would make them of equal Authority; you would indeed be all Bishops or Popes
rather, Subjection and Obedience are things that have seemed very scandalous to
you. But there is nothing more plain than that Bishops had not only the
preheminency of Order but of Rule also. And as there were in the Jewish Church,
the High Priest, the Inferior Priest, and the Levites, who were not only
different in Order and Superiority, but there was a distinction, so that the
one might do what the other might not do, the Levites might not Entrench on the
Office of the Priests, and the Priests could not enter into the Sanctum
Sanctorum. So in the Church of Christ the Bishops, the Presbyters and the
Deacons were distinct in Order and Office; the Deacons were subservient to the
Presbyters, and they to the Bishop to whom the Power of Rule and Ordination was
only given; and the Presbyters again received theirs of Administering the
Sacraments, Dispensing the Word, etc. from them, being by them Ordained
thereto. The Bishops are the Fathers, the other the Children; they Command not
as Lords and Arbitrarily, these obey not as Slaves but as Sons; they Rule, and
these obey according to the Word of God and according to that Primitive
Institution which made that excellent Harmony, all things being done for the
Glory of God. I know the many long and tedious Cavils and Disputes which some
of the most Subtle of you have entered into about this thing, and what dust you
have raised about this Jurisdiction: But it has been all laid, and none that
have Eyes but can see clearly into the matter, that Christ gave Power to his
Apostles to Rule and Govern his Church, and that the same Power was by them
Conferred to others, Mar. 16.15. Matt. 10.24. Matt. 28.19 20.
and so shall continue to the end of the World according to Christ's Commission.
But if you cannot find in Scripture that you ought to submit to Bishops as your
Fathers, I hope you will believe Mr. Calvin, and for his sake have at least a
better Opinion of them, who says, Calvin. Epist. ad Card. Sandolet.
Nullo non anathemate dignos Arbitror, qui se Episcopis libentissime non
submittunt. I think them worthy of a Curse, who do not willingly submit
themselves to Bishops.

Open then your Eyes at last and look not so asquint on this Form of
Government, and more particularly as it is here Established in the Church of
England, which certainly is the most like and comes nearest to the Primitive
Institution of the Apostles, and the next Ages, of any Church in the World,
both for the Purity of its Doctrine and the Order of its Government; its
Ceremonies being both Few and Decent, and its Power regulated by Just Laws. And
as one says, Vindication of the Conforming Clergy. p. 50.
The Church of England is a body of so firm a Constitution, and so excellently
Tempered, and so well Shaped, and of so clear a Strength and Vigor in all its
Limbs, that no outward Force is able to Injure it: nothing but some inward
Corruption and decay in the Vital parts that can possibly bring it to the
Ground. Indeed you had trip'd up its Heels and laid it along, but it was but a
Foil, you see how soon it arose again; and in that little Interspace or
Interregnum, as I may term it, what horrid Confusions were amongst us? With all
your Arts you could not hinder others from invading your Province. Instead of
Surplices you beheld Scarlet Cloaks, Wigs and Swords, as Ornaments to those who
Preached in your Pulpits; nay the very Women invading the Chair and challenging
a Liberty, though expressly contrary to the Rule of the Apostle. You saw what
ill Steersmen you were and how the Ship of the Commonwealth thrived under your
Government, in what danger of Drowning or of being Split upon the Rocks or
Perishing in the Quicksands. Methinks this little Trial might Convince you of
the Weakness and Imbecility of the one, and the Firmness and excellent Temper
of the other Government; by which this Land has so long Flourished, and which
is so fitted not only to Monarchy, making that Maxim good, as we by Experience
saw, no Bishop, no King, but also to the Temper and Constitution of the People
of England; that there can be no better Government ever thought on, which shall
be here so well Approved and Received. It is not only my Opinion but of many
more the most Eminent and Learned of the Nation, and those not of small Repute
and who have been Able to give sufficient Proof to maintain their good Opinion
of the Excellency of our present Form of Church Government; and among the rest
the Learned Mr. Hooker has these Words, Pref. Sect. 1.
which he sets down as his full Persuasion, Surely the present Form of Church
Government, which the Laws of this Land have Established, is such as no Law of
God nor Reason of Man has hitherto been alleged of force sufficient to prove
they do ill, who to the uttermost of their power withstand the alteration
thereof. And contrariwise, The other which instead of it we are required to
accept is only by Error and Misconceit named the Ordinanee of Jesus Christ, no
one proof as yet brought forth whereby it may clearly appear to be so in very
deed. And these two Assertions he has so fully and unanswerably Maintained in
his excellent Book of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity, that methinks you
should lay your Finger on your Mouths and no longer speak against this Form of
Church Government, nor remain at this Distance and in this state of Separation,
till you have found out better Arguments for to Justify your so doing, than
those you have yet made known to the World.

However low and mean Opinion you have of this Form of Church Government as it
is now Established in England, it is otherwise respected abroad: By others it is
looked upon with Envy and Admiration: The beauty of the Church of England is
not so Despicable as her Dissenting Sons would make it: She shines and glitters
in the Eyes of her Neighbors: She appears White and Innocent to those who
behold her: She is Brightned by the Flames of her Martyrs, and comes forth of
those persecuting Fires with Purity and Glory: She is looked upon as a Matron
gravely Adorned with her Ceremonies, they are Rich and all of Value, not Gaudy,
Cumbersom or Fantastic: She is Stupor Mundi the amazement (as one says) of the
World for Learning, Piety and Religion: Her Doctrines are Sound, her Principles
Firm, her Integrity Noted: She is full of Love and Meekness: She is a perfect
hater of Persecution: She had rather Suffer than do an injury: in Fine she is
the Light, Glory and Splendour of the whole Christian World; yet she is not
proud, she Lords it not over Men's Consciences; she stoops to win with Love; she
stretches out her Arms to embrace those who fly from her; she Invites and Wooes
those that shun her; she does all she can that there may be an Unity and
Conformity through the whole Land; and certainly we may Cry out with the Poet,
O Fortunatos nimium sua si bona norint Angligenos -- But what in the mean time
do her Unnatural and Disobedient Sons? They bespatter her Reputation, they
fling dirt in her Face, they endeavor to pollute her Garments, they would
render her Odious, Papistical, Ridiculous; they Call her Whore and compare her
with Babylon; they treat her after an evil sort and give By-names to all her
Ornaments. But though she is despised and rejected of Men, Isa. 53.3. Psalm.
119.50 51
one full of sorrows and acquainted with griefs; yet she Cries out with David,
This is my Comfort in my Affliction: for thy Word has Quickened me. The Proud
have had me greatly in Derision: yet I have not Declined from thy Law.

Lay aside now your Passions I beseech you, Put off your former Conversation,
Ephesians. 4.22, 23 25
and be Renewed in the Spirit of your Mind: Speak every Man truth with his
Neighbor, for we are Members one of another: Christ is our Head. There is but
one Body, 15 4, 5, 6
one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all. O do
but consider the Beauty of Unity, let it Allure you, let it break your
Stifness, let it move you to run into the open Arms of your Mother, and to be
knit in the Bands of Amity with your Brethren. Psalm. 133.
Consider how Good and how Pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity: It is like precious ointment upon the Head: like the Dew of Hermon Hill;
and like that which falls upon the Mountains of Sion. Psalm. 1.
It will make you like a Tree planted by the Rivers of Waters. Ye will be no
longer Barren but Fruitful: How Happy and Blessed then would the Nation be! The
Nations round about us would Tremble, and our Adversaries would be Confounded.
O that there were a full Assent and Consent among you both in Spirituals as
well as Temporals! It is not enough that you Live together, that you Trade
together, that you Converse one with another; but to Complete your Happiness,
you must Pray together, and Worship together, that Compleats the Friendship.
The Heathen Orator can tell you, Tul. de Amic.
Amicitia est Divinarum Humanarumque rerum summa cum benevolentia Consensio.
It Is that makes the true Harmony, that is the truest Friendship: an Agreement
with the highest good Will, or as I may say, with one Heart and Mind in Divine
things as well as in Humane things, in Church as well as in State, in Worship
as well as in Traffic, in Spiritual Communion as well as Worldly Commerce, in
Traffic for Heavenly Treasure as much as for Perishable Goods. I say, let the
Shine and Luster of this Glorious State move you to set some steps toward this
Unity. Ye have been too long asunder, why should there be any Difference
between Benjamin and Judah? Meet, I say, at last as Brethren; come with willing
Hearts and Minds. The Goliath of Opposition may be easily Slain; one single
Stone will sink that Philistin. Let some among you set an Example, others will
follow. Consider the Peace of Israel more than your own Interest, and think how
you will Strengthen the Hands of your Brethren by this so much desired Unity
and happy Conformity.

Hearken, I beseech you, to the Cries and Calls of your Brethren, they cannot be
Wounded but you must Suffer: Now is the time before it be too late. Sow to your
selves in Righteousness, Hos. 10.12.8.
and you shall Reap in Mercy. The time will come else, that you will Call to
the Mountains to cover you, and the Hills to fall on you. You will be driven
into your holes like Conies. Have a care that you become not like Babylon, Isa.
14.23.
an habitation for the Bittern, and for standing Pools of Water; and that God
does not at last sweep you with the besom of Destruction. There is now a
greater necessity than ever, that you should be no longer divided; you are
weakened like a River cut into many Streams; your Hands are Enfeebled, and your
Enemies are Armed round about you. Do you not see your Common Enemies the
Papists laugh aloud at your Separation? How thereby they seek to work your
Destruction! They Love to set Ephraim against Judah and Judah against Ephraim.
Call to mind the Times of old, have you forgot the Yoke of their Tyranny? Will
you give the opportunity to these Philistines to Bind you and to take from you
your Strength, by cutting away the Locks of Unity that would make you
Invincible? Were you ever in more Danger than at this time? Do not you see them
gnashing their Teeth at you round about? Methinks this pressing necessity of
Uniting should now make you forget all Animosities, and laying aside all
unnecessary Cavils and Scruples, to join your Forces together lest the Romans
should come. A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. Delude not your
selves, you will be involved in the Ruin of your Brethren. The Church of
England cannot suffer, but you will partake of her Sufferings also. Join
therefore your Hands and your Stength together and become as one Nation; you
will then daunt your Opposers, and Frustrate the hopes and designs of your
Enemies. This Unity will be as a brazen Wall of Defense round about you, which
they shall never be able to undermine or cast down. Think of this pressing
necessity that at this time urges you to Conformity, lest you fall into the
worst of Afflictions, to deserve the Evils that will come upon you. Boet. l. 1.
Consolat. Philos.
Hoc tantum (says the Philosopher) dixerim ultimam esse adversae fortunae
Sarcinam, quod dum Miseris aliquid crimen affigitur, quae praeferunt meruisse
creduntur. Have a care, I say, that the blame be not justly fixed upon you, and
that you deserve not all those Evils that you will bring upon your selves by
this obstinacy of not Conforming, and by this dangerous and pernicious
Separation.

Now is the time for you to look about you and to carry your Eyes in your Head,
lest Venient Romani become a Prophecy. See what you have got already by
forsaking your Mother the Church of England, a Company of Spurious Brats that
you would disown, but are the Fruits of your Separation. They have entered into
the World by the same Gap that you first made, you have multiplied your selves
into Divisions and Subdivisions, and are become like the Phistines at Gibea,
every Man's Sword against his Fellow. 1 Samuel 14.20.
Have a Care, I say, that Popery does not overrun us by your means. Consider
the Scandals and Advantages that you give to those strenuous Engines, they know
how to Fish in our troubled Waters, and to get by our Confusions. There can be
nothing more Beneficial to their Intentions, or that can Further their Designs
more than to see us divided into so many Fractions, and to stand lik
Adversaries ready to devour one another. They had no hopes so long as the happy
Band of Unity remained unbroken; they know well the Maxim, Divide and Impera,
Divide and Reign. It has been all along their Policy to cause Separation; they
are a Cunning as well as a Malicious Generation, they are too Skilful for you
in Politics, their Jesuits are bred Statesmen, they are the Boutefeus of
Kingdoms, they are in all places ready to set People and Nations together by
the Ears; they make it their business to cause Divisions and to promote
Separation. Their Spleen and Malice is against the Church of England, it is at
her they only aim, she is the mark of their Spite and Envy. They are a subtle
sort of People, they know you will soon perish by her ruin, and that her fall
must crush you to pieces. Therefore it is her Policy to make you like Vipers to
gnaw asunder the Womb of your Mother, and to eat your way to Separation through
her bowels. See at last, I say, the Malice and Cunning of your Adversaries,
take example by your Enemies, learn of them to Unite for your own Security.
What is it that makes the Roman Church yet so Potent in the World,
notwithstanding her many Errors and more filthy Corruptions? It Is the Basis of
Unity; that very thing which they Inculcate as a Principle to all of her
Persuasion, Believe as the Church Believes, ties them so strictly together into
one band that they cannot easily be broken. It Is this Unity which they endeavor
to maintain with all their Might and Force, which keeps them together and makes
them so Strong. They are like the Grecian Phalanx not to be broken and
therefore Invincible, or like the Roman Bands that locked one another fast
together with their Shields, as if they were all but one great Penthouse
against the falling Darts of their Enemies. They hinder therefore all Disputes
in their Religion that there may be no Divisions. It Is the Strength of their
Unity that makes them so Formidable; And as they know by that their own
strength, so they are sensible that nothing can more weaken their Adversaries
than to cause Separation among them. By this Policy they have done more
mischief than by their Arms, and when they cannot Convince by Argument nor
Confound by Force, they this way overthrow by Cunning, by Policy, by Subtilty,
making their Enemies do the Work for them; and by their breaking the Bands of
Unity, Separate them one from another, and make them to become a Prey to them,
who stand ready to make use of the Advantage; and like the Kite in the fable,
carry away the feeble Combatants pecking at one another with Bulrushes and
Bents.

Are you not sensible that they are among you? That they are disguised Papists,
Jesuists transformed into the shapes of Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists, Quakers, that foment the Difference and Disunion from the Church
of England. They are very Proteus's, they can vary their Figures, they can
feign Sanctity, and transform themselves into Angels of Light. They are in your
Pulpits, they can speak your Words, they know how to Counterfiet your Voices,
your Tones and your Dress. They become all things with all Men, in another
fense than St. Paul meant. They do all this to promote their Cause, and which
they are sensible they can no ways better do than by widening the breach of
Separation, by keeping you asunder and by increasing your Divisions. Open your
Eyes at last and behold the subtilty of your inveterate Adversaries, give them
no longer this Advantage against you, hearken not to their wicked Suggestions
when they whisper Rebellion into your Ears under the Notion of Liberty of
Conscience, and Disobedience under the pretense of Sanctity and Holiness; when
they bid you not Submit and Conform to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church
under the persuasion of your Purity: You have hearkened to them too long, at
length know the Voice of this Siren that Sings so melodiously in your Ears;
'twill at last draw you into the Sea of Perdition and Destruction, and betray
you to more Miseries than you have yet felt. I am Credibly informed they had
the chief Hand in the late Insurrection in Scotland, and that two of them
suffered for it under the garb and shape of Holiness, indeavoring to promote
the old Cause with a new Rebellion. These are they that appear as harmless
Doves, but are Ravenous Vultures; you take them to be harmless Sheep of your
own flock, but they are Wolves that secretly devour you. They are subtle Foxes
that secretly prey upon you, and are worse than Samson's that had Firebrarnds
at their Tails. Hos. 12.7.
They are like Ephraim they carry the Balances of Deceit in their Hands; they
are cunning Merchants that know how to weigh your Tempers and Dispositions.
Prove. 11.9.
They are the Cutthroat Hypocrites that destroy their Neighbors with their
Mouths.

Pelliculam veterem retinent, Pers. Sat. 5.
and front politi
Astutam vapido gestant sub pectore vulpem.
These are they that endeavor to keep you from Conformity, and with a thousand
cunning fetches and most specious Pretenses work you to their Wills, and never
leave you till they have drawn you from Unity to Separation, from Separation to
Rebellion, and so to Ruin and Destruction, and there they leave you.

But if you will not believe all this, and shall think it feigned of them to
affright and scare you, and that you cannot be made sensible of their close and
Hypocritical Intreagues; can you forget their unmasked Cruelties? Their Horid
Massacres? And Bloody Persecutions? Do not you tremble lest you should fall
anew under their Power? Are you not afraid more of their Tyrannical Yoke than
of Uniting with your Brethren of the Church of England? Had you rather stoop to
the Idolatrous Church of Rome than to your own Reformed Church? Will you rather
admit again of all her Superstitions than a few Ceremonies in Ours? Would you
be rather Content with the Bloody Court of the Inquisition than with that of
the Bishops? Think yet of the Blood they have Spilt in this Kingdom in the time
of their Reign, let the horror thereof a little move you, and let the fear of
the like possess you with some thoughts of preventing it by your Unanimity and
closing with your Brethren. Think a little of their Persecutions and Slaughters
of the Waldenses and Albigenses in France, of the Hussites in Bohemia, of the
Protestants in Germany, Hungary, and the Low Countries, of the cruel Massacre
in Paris, the horrid Destruction and Cruelties of late years in Piedmont, the
Bonfires of Martyrs in the days of Queen Mary, the Gunpowder Plot, and our late
Wars begun and fomented by them and their Agents abroad and at home. They are
still the same Sedulous promoters of their own Cause; they are no Changelings.
Are your Eyes still shut? Have you not seen your dear City consumed to Ashes by
their Fire Balls? And do not you now behold new Plots and Contrivances, by the
same Persons, to ruin the Church, the State and the Kingdom? Have we not seen
a Minister of Justice Murdered by their Hands? Are not we daily threatened with
farther Mischief? And if not prevented by the overruling hand of Divine
Providence, and by the Care of our Prince and his Faithful Counselors, are we
not still in danger? What gives them this Advantage against us but your
Separation? What makes their hopes Flourish but your Division? At last
therefore harken, I beseech you, to the Call of your Brethren, who still invite
you to Unity and Conformity; that the Children of Israel and the Children of
Judah may come together and seek their Lord their God: Jer. 50.4, 5.
That they may join themselves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall
not be forgotten. That you may become as one People and that your Breaches may
be made up. Amen.

If you are not Men of a perverse Nature, if you have not Hearts of Adamant
that cannot be pierced, if you will not Consider the Good of the Kingdom nor
your own Danger; yet if you have any Souls or any spark of Generosity or good
Nature in your Breasts, methinks the Kindness, Mercy and Indulgence of the King
shown toward you should draw you to a Compliance. Hearts that neither Tortures
nor Racks could overcome, Souls irresistible to Force, not to be Conquered by
Power, have yet melted before the Fire of Love, have been overcome with
Kindness, have acknowledged and submitted to Generosity. Flints are easily
broken on beds of Down, Adamants are made soft by the blood of Goats. And is
there no way to penetrate your rocky Hearts? Will not Indulgence move you? Nor
Kindness draw you? Nor Mercy allure you? Nor Favor cause you? Nor Good Will
invite you to Conform? Will neither fair means nor foul work upon you? Could
you ever have hoped for or expected the great Favor and Indulgence that has
been shown you by your Prince, one that is justly styled the Merciful, after
all those Evils that you had brought upon this Nation by your Separation from
and Opposition to the Church? Has he not moderated the Laws made against you?
Has he not hindered all Force to be used toward you? Has he not suffered you to
enjoy your darling private Meetings in Contempt of the Church, and in the Face
of the whole Nation? Are you Molested and Disturbed? Would you have granted the
same Toleration, had you had the Power in your Hand? We Know and Remember the
time that you would not, and we yet are in doubt of your good will in that
Case, had you the Reins in your Hands. You say, you acknowledge it, you own the
Mercy and great Favor and Indulgence, therefore you Pray for the King, and wish
Life to his Majesty for your own Ends; but still Disobey him and his Laws by
your stubborn resisting all the kind Invitations given you to Unity and
Conformity. Let at last the great Mercy that is shown you be a Motive to bring
you to this desired and happy Unity. Let Love draw you, resist no longer, meet
with kindness and submission the Benevolence and tender Heartedness of so
Gracious a Prince toward you. Return like the lost Prodigal Son to the Father
of your Country, and into the Bosom of your Mother, that the fatted Calf may be
killed and that there may be a general rejoicing and Jubilee throughout the
Land. Then shall we say, Sing O ye Heavens, Isa. 44.23.
for the Lord has done it: shout ye lower parts of the Earth: break forth into
Singing ye Mountains, O Forest and every Tree therein: for the Lord has
redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel.

Though I have already mentioned your Duty to the Magistrate, that you ought to
submit to and obey your Prince and your Governors, that your just Obedience to
Authority is Required and Commanded by Scripture, and against which you can
have no lawful Defense; I cannot but again remind you of this necessary Duty,
how will you Answer this before God? After what manner can you evade such
positive Commands? The Infidelity of Princes could not excuse this Law: How
then can you Answer your Contempt of the Laws and Commands not only of a
Christian but a Protestant Prince? One that Commands nothing but Lawful things:
It is not enough that you think otherwise of them, and that you pretend
scruples of Conscience, there is no such exception in the Rule laid down by the
Apostle. 1 Samuel 15.22, 23
Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers. Submit to every Ordinance of
Man. Has the Lord as great delight in Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices as in
obeying the voice of the Lord? To obey is better than Sacrifice: and to harken
than the fat of Rams. Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft: and Stubbornness
is as Iniquity and Idolatry. Certainly obedience to your Prince and to his
Lawful Commands would be more acceptable than all your long Prayers and
frequent Preaching which is become your Idol, and which you set up in the room
of the Crosses you have pulled down. Speak out and tell us whether an Act for
Uniformity and Conformity made by the three States of the Land be a Legal Act
or no, if it be, why do you not obey? Why do you trouble the Waters with your
needless Scruples of little weight and value, and about trifles only as you
Call them? Is not the Word truly dispensed in the Public Churches? Are not the
Sacraments rightly Administered? Are not their Prayers free from Scandal or
Irreverence? Are not their Doctrines clear of Error or Falsity? Why then do you
deny to Hear, Receive and Communicate together? But in spite (as I may say)
both of the Commands of God and Man, Separate your selves and run into
Disobedience? I verily believe those of the Church of England would never run
into that Contempt of the King and his Laws; I am persuaded that for Conscience
sake they would submit, should the King and Parliament by their Authority take
away those Ceremonies about which you Contend. They have learnt better than to
Rebel, and the Doctrine of of their Church has imbued them with sounder and
better Principles. But God forbid that to gratify those who can show no sound
Reason for what they would have, no lawful or weighty plea for what they do,
and can pretend nothing but a stubborn Will and refractory Conscience, that the
decent Garments of the Church should be curtailed or taken from her, or that
she should lose the least shred thereof. But have you forgot already how
vehemently you pressed Obedience from your Pulpits? And these very Texts now
shown you were in all your Mouths when you would have set up your own
Sanctified Form, to bring the People to your Lure and to submit to your Rule.
If they were then the Commands of God and ought to be obeyed, how comes it that
they are not so still? Or do the Bishops Command worse things than Goodwyn,
Manton or Nigh? Is submission to these Lawful, to those not? Does not the fifth
Commandment, Honor your Father, reach to your King the Father of his Country?
Icon Bas. p. 285.
Or to the Bishops the Fathers of the Church? The Royal Martyr observes, that
you had not Loyalty enough to say Amen to those Petitions for his Majesty which
are in the Common Prayer, and that he believed it was one of the greatest
faults some Men could find in it. What signifies it to Command if there be no
Obedience? There ought to be an Harmony betwixt Commanding and Obeying, they
should go Hand in Hand: they are both Arts or rather make up but one Science,
for one cannot be well without the other. King cannot be well without Subjects
nor Subjects without one to Command. Eras.
Imperare, and parere imperio, Ars emnium pulcherrima: quae duae res a Civibus
excludunt seditiones, and tuentur Concordiam. They are Correlatives and make up
but one fair Art, but it is these two that maintain Concord, Amity and Peace,
and shut out Seditions and Rebellions. For your Kings sake, for the sake of the
Laws, and for your Countries sake, -- Amor Patriae ratione valentior omni,
Ovid. de Pont.
which should be of more Power to persuade you than any Argument I could bring.
Harken at last to good Counsel and be longer Obstinate, do not provoke Clemency
it self to Anger, and Mercy to Justice. Frangendum est, Mo. Viat.
quod nulla Caput Clementia Mollit. If nothing will mollify you, may you not
expect to be broken? Outlying Deer are to be frightened within the Pale for
their own security. Psalm. 95.8, 5.
Harden not your Hearts to day if you will hear his Voice, let it be instantly,
accept of the proffered kindness, defer it no longer, put it not off till to
morrow, Prove. 27.1.
For you know not what a day may bring forth.

And now after all this what should I say more to urge and persuade you to
Conformity? I have already told you the danger we are in by these Distractions
caused by your Disunion, and the Evil that seems to hang over our Heads
threatening us with the stormy cloud of Popery. Fire and Faggot seem to be
enkindling in our Streets by your dissertion, new Plots to embroyl a Nation are
encouraged by your Nonconformity; and a great Gap is made whereby our present
Adversaries are ready to enter and to overturn the Fabric of our Church by
your Breach. Behold all this I beseech you with an Eye of Pity and
Commiseration, and stand no longer on Scruples and Niceties. Be not affrighted
at Mormoes of your own making; yield at last to necessity and involve not all
in ruin by your obstinacy. Leave all By-respects and Self-interest, examine
your Consciences and deal nakedly with your own Souls, and tell us truly if you
do not think an Unity betwixt you and your Brethren would not be an happiness
to this Nation: You cannot but Know it and Confess it secretly: Lay aside then
your Terms, stand not so stiffly upon Capitulations; acknowledge that it is as
Lawful for Bishops to Rule as for the Superintendents in the Lutheran Churches
or leading Presbyters in Geneva. Boggle no longer at Words; startle not at
Titles. Lords, Masters, Fathers, are Scriptural phrases and given to good and
holy Men. They are Terms not unfitting and avowable. But are these things to be
stood upon now? Are they of value to Continue the Breach betwixt you? Ought
there to be this difference about Indifferent things? Is it not better to take
St. Romans 14.3.
Paul's Counsel to the Romans. Let not him that eats despise him that eats
not: and let not him that eats not, judge him that eats. He tells them
this, that although there were some private difference among them in
indifferent matters, yet that they should Continue in their Unity and not make
any Separation betwixt each other, but labor in the Edification and
Instruction of each other, v. 1.
though one be weak and the other be strong, though some have scruples of small
weight and others know better things, Romans 15.1.
and not by breaking the band of their Unity and Community seek to ruin each
other. Let not those that Conform despise the weakness of those who do Not, nor
let those who do not Conform judge the Liberty of those that Do. They that
break this Rule want Charity, and this ought to be exercised on both sides
where Indifferent things are not determined and made otherways by Authority.
That alters the Case, for though they are still the same in their Natures, that
is Indifferent; yet they are not so in their use, because enjoined. Those of
the Church of England do not despise you for your scruples, for they would
receive you; and they intrude not her Constitutions as the Laws of God but as
the Laws of Men, not of Divine necessity but of humane Institution for the more
orderly Worship of God, and that there might be a general Uniformity in the
Church. Show therefore by your Conformity, since you are thereto Lawfully
required, that you do not judge your Brother as he does not despise you, but
that you will live in Charity and Unity as you ought to do. Be not any longer
so Scrupulous, nay I may say Superstitious; Sand. Sermon. ad Clerum 4 Sect. 11.
for as Bishop Sanderson says, The taking away of Indifferency from Indifferent
things is in Truth Superstition: either by requiring them as Necessary or
forbidding them as Unlawful. Let the lesser obligation give way to the greater.
For if Opinion may make a good thing Evil to him that doubts or thinks it Evil,
Romans 14.23.
for what is not of Faith is Sin, it cannot however make a thing Evil in it
self to become either good in it self or so to him that thinks so. To disobey
the Commands of Authority is of it self a very great Evil, and your Opinion
that you may Separate and not Conform can never make it Good to you
notwithstanding your scruples, nor can any ways Justify your Actions, because
Disobedience is of it self a great Evil. Now our Governors or those in
Authority over us have Commanded those things to be done about which you
scruple, and that by the Authority of the Scripture, 1 Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and in Order, which gives them a Power to make
such Constitutions; therefore all your scruples of Conscience cannot take off
the greater Obligation of Obedience which you are expressly bound to in
Conscience by Gods Command, and you are no longer sui juris, where a Superior
Power has determined your Liberty. If you scruple to play at Cards and Dice or
any other indifferent thing of which you have Power to determine to do or not
to do, if you do it against your Conscience you sin, because you are sui juris
in that Case, there being no Obligation upon you to the Contrary; but if you
scruple coming to Church because of the Ceremonies, being both a good Action
and Commanded by Authority, not to do it must certainly be a great Sin,
notwithstanding your scruples to the contrary, for you are not at your own
choice but under Obedience; and thereby bound in Conscience as if God had
Commanded them himself, for he has given you his strict Command to obey the
higher Powers, Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13.
and to submit to their Ordinances; neither will it avail you to plead your
scruples of Conscience, Romans 13.5.
since you are Commanded to obey for Conscience sake, and since what is
Commanded is no Sin: For if the Magistrate should Command us to take Gods Name
in vain or to Commit Fornication, we may with a safe Conscience disobey,
because we have an higher Obligation upon us, for that God has Commanded the
Contrary and we are bound to obey God before Man. Be at last Convinced and
stand no longer upon these niceties and scruples about things of lesser weight
when greater Dangers are impending, and much trouble is ready to arise by
reason of this Separation and Disunion between you: Salust.
have a care that by your discord you do not ruin your selves. Discordia
maximae Res dilabuntur: it is able to overthrow Kingdoms, give the Hag no
longer entertainment among you; let her be banished from our Churches as well
as from our Kingdom, that at last we may meet with oneness of Heart and
singleness of Mind as becomes Brethren. 1 Pet. 1.22.3.8.
Love one another with a pure Heart fervently: Be ye all of one Mind, having
Compassion one of another: Love as Brethren.

Whatsoever the pretenses of many are, yet we find that Interest sways more
with them than Religion: very few do refrain purely for Conscience sake. Many
do it because they have been bred so, and will not or care not to be better
informed: most remain Nonconformists without being able to show any tolerable
Reason why they are so, besides those Idle Opinions they have of the Impurity
of the Church of England. Methinks these sort of People who shun the Church out
of a certain squeamishness of her nearness (as they falsely think) to Popery,
should be afraid of those visible advantages their Separation gives to those of
that Religion to contrive its setting up again in this Land, and that this fear
should let them see that it is their Common interest to Unite with and
strengthen the Hands of their Brethren. Certainly though you intend no such
thing, yet you are a means of the great increase of Popery in this Land by your
Divisions. How would that Party rejoice could they see Episcopacy as it is now
Established in this Land pulled down, they would not much care what Form you
would set up, for they believe, and not amiss, that Confusions and Distractions
would soon follow, on which they ground their not improbable Hopes of Raising
up their own Church upon our broken Pillars. You cry out continually, with no
little noise of the growth and increase of Popery or of People perverted to
Popery in this Land, but look not on your selves as the Means and Cause by your
Separation, giving them the same pretense for that plea of yours, Liberty of
Conscience, and that they ought not to be compelled any more than your selves.
Luc. 6.31.
Do as you would be done unto. If you would not be compelled why should they?
Prout vultis ut faciant vobis homines, vos etiam facite eis similiter. What
reason have you to lay any force upon others when you will not have any laid
upon your selves? The Common Interest could make Herod and Pilate though
Enemies to become Friends for fear of a Common Enemy the King of the Jews. See
I beseech you now if it be not your Interest to close with those of the Church
of England against your Common Enemy of Rome, and if it be not now most
seasonable to effect it. This Union would be the best means in the World to
frustrate all their Plots and Designs against us. It would put them quite out
of Heart, and dash all their Hopes. They would then lose their sheet Anchor
their last Refuge: It would take away all their Advantages and put them past
all their shifts: It is the only way to bring Peace and Happiness to the
Nation. We need to fear no Enemies abroad if we were thus United at home: we
should be like the bundle of Arrows not to be broken together, but being parted
asunder into Factions easily broke into pieces. Union is the Life and Blood of
Government both in the Church as well as in the State. A Doeg or Achitophel at
home is worse than the Philistines or Moabites abroad. Our mischief is from our
selves. Eras. Apoth.
Patriae periclitantis potius habenda est ratio quam privatae incolumitatis. We
should rather regard the safety of our Country than of our selves. Cicero said
their was a select place of Happiness and Eternal felicity reserved in Heaven
for those who preserved, helped, and brought good to their Country. Some. Scip.
And I am of the Opinion that by your Conformity you will merit more than by
all your scruples of Separation. By your submission you will deserve the Reward
of Victors; you shall have the Garland of Praise to adorn your Brows; the Palm
of Conquest shall be put into your Hands; and the Olive Branch of Peace shall
be placed on your Trophies; your Country shall applaud you, your King shall
cherish you, and your Brethren shall rejoice with you; you shall have the right
hand of fellowship given to you, and there shall be no longer any difference in
our Israel. Cic. Off. l. 1.
Pro patria quis bonus dubitet mortem oppetere? What good Man doubts to meet
Death for his Countries sake? says Cicero. The task is not so difficult that is
required of you; you are desired to Live for your Countries sake, to Live in
Union and Love with your Friends, and to join together against your Common
Foes. It is not enough that you say you will join your Purses and your Arms
with your Brethren, and that you are ready to assist them with your Lives and
Fortunes: for where there is not a Unity of Hearts and Religion there can be no
true Concord and Amity. There will still remain jealousies and suspicions among
you. There can be no perfect Confidence and trust between you. There will be a
thousand fears and doubts of each other; distrusts and surmises will still
arise till you are United in Heart and in Mind, and remain no longer two but
one.

O that I could but make you sensible of the Blessing of this Unity; how much
Glory it would add to the Nation! How much scandal it would take from Religion!
How much security it would give to three Kingdoms! How much content and
satisfaction to your Prince, and how much joy and gladness to the Hearts of all
your Brethren: what Peace should we enjoy at home! What esteem and aw should we
purchase abroad! What Love would be begotten between one another! And what
happiness and prosperity would it bring to all! You would then see again those
Happy days of Queen Elizabeth, our Armies to Prosper, our Citizens to Flourish;
Conquest abroad and Peace at home; Charity to increase and Contention to cease;
Love to abound and Strife to wax less. -- redeunt Saturnia Regna. Virg.
The golden Age would seem to be returned again, and Righteousness would run
down like a stream. There would then be a general rejoicing in our Streets,
Psalm. 118.23
and we should all Cry out, This is the Lords doing: it is mavelous in our
Eyes.

If I thought I were able to prevail with you, I could be willing to spend my
Breath in Calling; but how often have you been Called unto and ye will not
hear! How often have you been Cried upon and you are still Deaf! The King has
Called you, the Laws have Called you, your Fathers and your Brethren have
Called you and Cried aloud unto you, and yet you will not hear, you will not
Answer as you ought, you will and do still contend and still stand out; you do
submit you say to the Laws, you are peaceable and quiet; you disturb not the
Church, you Assemble your selves only to hear the Word and to satisfy your
Conscience; you Pray for the King, you Preach and Hear sound Doctrine, Why then
should we disturb you by these frequent Callings? It Is true you do Obey the
Laws, but it is by halves; it is a passive obedience only; you step not one step
forward; you stand still and suffer as as you think; you thereby judge your
selves no less than Martyrs and Sufferers for your Cause and for your
Conscience; you resist not because your Hands are bound, but you still Watch
and Wait and Pray for a day of Deliverance; you Hope still to have your turn,
and you are still Righteous in your own Eyes: you Pray for the King, it is your
Duty, and he has deserved it by his Indulgence; you Preach sound Doctrine,
that is also to be heard in our Pulpits; but Obedience is better than all this,
Unity and Conformity would be of more advantage to you, and, doubt not, more
acceptable to God than all your Prayers, than all your Preaching joined with
Disobedience. At last therefore endeavor to satisfy your Consciences, go
about it in earnest, lay aside all stubbornness of Heart, all Spiritual Pride,
all Self-interest. Let the Case be stated truly betwixt you: There are those
that will not think much to convince you if Scripture and Reason will do it.
But you must then Come with willing Minds, you must not be so stiff as you have
hitherto been, rather than comply one jot you will break, you cannot bow; you
will not yield in what you may, in those things that you cannot Condemn; you
will not so much as Read the Chapters appointed for the Day, because Commanded;
you will not repeat the Creed and the ten Commandments; you will but rarely
admit of the Lords Prayer, because by us so often used, and those who have thus
far Complied and set you a good Example have been reproached for it, and have
been looked upon as backsliders. But this is not the way to Unity and Peace,
you must bring willing and yielding Hearts with you; you must not be Obstinate
and Opiniative; you must not be Resolved before Hand; you must have desires and
longings for Unity; you must hear without Passion and Interest, and with a
desire not of Disputing and showing your Parts but of satisfying your Minds and
Consciences, and then no doubt but your scruples may be all Resolved, and you
may Conform with satisfaction.

Lay these things seriously to your Heart, pass them not slightly over, think
not these words only a little vain Air, God may Call you by a weak Instrument,
by a small Voice. Resist not the Spirit, Harden not your Hearts. It Is God that
Calls, he would have you return, Remember the Womb wherein you were born, and
the Paps that gave you suck. Think of the Peace and Unity of Israel. Be Dutiful
as Children. Love as Brethren. Obey the King. Submit to Ordinances. Be Subject
to Rulers. Honor the Magistrate. Yield to Governors. Be United in Mind. Be of
one Heart. Worship together. Separate no longer, and God will build you up.
Psalm. 76.1, 2.
Then God will be known in Judah, and his Name will be great in Israel. In
Salem shall be his Tabernacle, and his Name shall be great in Zion. You shall
then be United like Israel and Judah, you shall have but one King, you shall be
no more two Nations, Eze. 37.22.
neither shall you be divided into two Kingdoms any more at all. Then what
Nation will there be so Great, who has God so nigh unto them? Then you shall
be his People, Deuteronomy. 4.7.
and He will be your God. He will give you one Heart, and one Way, that you may
fear him for ever; Jer. 32.38, 39 Romans 15.6.
for the good of you and your Children after you. Then will ye with one Mind,
and one Voice glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. For ye
were as Sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop
of our Souls. 1 Pet. 2.25.
Then there shall be but one Shepherd and one Fold, and they shall hear his
Voice together. Then shall ye all be glad in the Lord, John 10.16.
the Righteous shall rejoice, Psalm. 32.11.
and the Upright in Heart shall shout for Joy. Then shall you have Beauty for
Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning, and the Garment of Praise for Heaviness,
and the Lord shall be Glorified. Isa. 61.3.
Therefore Remember from whence you are fallen and Repent. Return into the
Bosom of your Mother, Rev. 2.5. Phil. 2.2.
That your Joy may be complete in the Lord, and that there may be seen
throughout the Land, all to be like Minded, having one and the same Love, being
of one accord, and of one Mind. Amen.

Inobedientia est ex duritia mentis obstinatae, Tullius.
cui debeas, imperanti nolle obtemperare.

Tres sunt species obstinatorum. Hug. de 12. abusi.
Prima eorum qui Correctione non Proficiunt. Secunda eorum qui ex Commonitione
deteriores fiunt. Tertia eorum qui emendationem promittunt sed non faciunt.

Plenissima Peccatorum obtinetur ablutio, Leo Papa Sermon.
quando totius Ecclesiae una est Oration, and una Confessio. Si enim duorum vel
trium Sanctiorum pio Consensui omnia, quae poposcerint Dominus praestanda
promittit, quid negabitur multorum millium Plebi unam observantiam pariter
exequenti, and per unum Spiritum concorditer supplicanti?

Cujus aures Clausi Veritati sunt, Tul. de amic.
ut ab amico verum audire nequeat, hujus salus desperanda est.

FINIS.

