A Word to the Army, Touching Their SIN and DUTY: If it may be, to convince
them of the Greatness of the one, and their Defectiveness in the other; With a
word of Advice in the Conclusion, humbly tendered to them, in order to their
Recovery to that Path of Unfeigned Repentance.

By William Allen late Adjutant General to the Army in Ireland, an unfeigned
seeker of their souls welfare, being under great fears and thoughts of heart
for them.

Cry aloud, list up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their
transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. Isa. 58. Yet they seck me
daily, and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did righteousness, and
forsook not the Ordinances of their God, they ask of me the Ordinances of
Justice, they take delight in approaching to God. Wherefore have we fasted,
say they, and thou see not? wherefore have we afflicted our souls, and thou
take no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your fast you find pleasure, and
exact all your labors; behold you fast for strife and debate, and to smite
with the fist of wickedness, you shall not fast as you do this day, to make
your voice to be heard on high.

Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to
undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that you break
every yoke? is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the
poor that are cast out, to thy house, when thou see the naked, that thou
cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thy own flesh?

Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy health shall spring
forth speedily, and thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of
the Lord shall be thy rereward.

Wherefore the Lord said, For as much as this people draw near me with their
mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from
me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men; therefore
behold I will proceed to do a marvelous work amongst this people, even a
marvelous work and wonder, for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and
the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid, Isa. 28.

The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken, Lo, they have rejected
the Word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Jer. 9.9. London, Printed
for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1660

A Word to the ARMY, touching their Sin, and Duty, if it may be, to convince
them of the greatness of the one, and their defectiveness in the other.
I Should not delight in this day of Public Calamity come upon you, to be
uncovering your nakedness, did I not judge it a duty in order to lead you to
the true covering, and out of all false ones, which in vain you hide under, in
your defiled state, rendering your selves by so doing but the more naked in the
sight of God and men, giving enemies more occasion to rejoice at you, and
encourage themselves in an evil matter against you, saying, They offend not,
because you not only have, but still do sin against the Lord, the habitation
of Justice, and hope of your Fathers, though they that say so, it may be too
truly, shall not go unpunisht in the end.

I beseech you therefore give me leave, in the bowels of love and meekness, a
little to treat with you, as an Army under these distinct considerations, of
chief Commanders, and commanded; for so I shall speak to you, both as to your
sin, and duty.

And first to you Commanders, you have been concerned of late years in very
eminent Transactions in Public Affairs in these Nations; have pretended to a
very great knowledge, and strict observation of the Lord, and his goings, and
doings, in the midst of us, with what he yet intended to do further in the
latter days; and by comparing his works with his word, have often said, you
judge his design to be the exaltation of his Son, the Lord Jesus, and his
interest in these Nations, and removing out of the way what ever hindered his
going on with this work: As also you observed his Motions herein to be
gradual, causing his work small in the beginnings, to go and grow higher and
higher by degrees, and more refined as it grew, and so have Instruments been
he has made use of, and when they have not had spirits growing up in light,
life, and refinedness, with the work, by many strange providence have been
some on one account, some upon another, laid aside; yea some of them beginning
but a little to slack their pace, and draw back, have not stayed in that
retrograde motion, till they have joined with the most avowed enemies to the
Blessed Cause at first they were engaged in, so dangerous a thing is drawing
back.

And while you were thus rightly observing the works and word of the Lord, and
helped to follow it accordingly, being little in your own eyes, and going out in
a spirit of trembling, you exalted your selves in Israel, went on and
prospered; God was with you, and the shout of a King amongst you, enemies
feared, fled, and fell before you, and your most difficult ways and works were
made plain, and easy; and though you walked in untrodden-paths, you were
carried on safely; enemies envying, yet dreading you; friends rejoicing, and
blessing God for you, and you from him in his name; and though it must be
remembered to the praise of the Lord, and due abasement of Instruments, you
sometimes walked as men, especially when you leaned to your own understandings,
and did not trust in the Lord, as before; Particularly in 47, in your
tamperings with the King, and his interest, which lead into those Labyrinths
(as you may well remember) in 48. out of which, nothing but the wisdom of the
Lord directing to seeking him, and consulting your duty according to his word
could extricate you, as was eminently experienced in that not to be forgotten
meeting at Winsor 48. see the memorial of it; and how the Lord lead that year,
yea several years after even to Woreester fight, by a gracious guiding presence
of his, you cannot but remember that were wise observers of the operations of
his hand: and after that fight, when you were returned in safety, you then also
seemed to have upon your hearts, a great sense of your duty, in prosecuting the
work of the Lord you had been employed in, but found as you judged the
Parliament unwilling to go so fast, or rather hindering and obstructing you in
the speed you were intended to make, upon which, some contests arose between
you and them in that point, and you come to see as you say, a necessity of
dissolving them, as men not spirited for the further work of the Lord in that
day; how clear and true the demonstration of this necessity was, I take not
upon me to judge, since you so lately (how truly I dare not determine neither)
call in question your action aforesaid, and call them to sit again, saying, The
work had not prospered since their dissolution, which might be too true, yet
the Cause might rather be that greater unfittedness found in you that followed
them, who walked in more polluted paths, in which the work of the Lord could not
prosper; and this seems to me rather to be the mind of the Lord, especially
when I consider the work that Parliament, after you had called them, and they
sat again, were employed about, and upon the matter, only prospered in, viz.
judging those more gross turnings aside from the Lord and his work, that they
found amongst you in the Army, which when they have in some measure judged, as
men not designed to, nor delighted in by the Lord to be used much further,
they do by strange providential proceedings amongst them, period themselves,
and in the doing that, also well-nigh hazard putting a period to the peace of
these Nations.

But you having dissolved them, as aforesaid the first time, a little Assembly
of men is called, not in the way, nor after the manner of the Nations, but upon
a more select and avowed account of men fearing God, though I doubt in their
choice, the wisdom of man was too much exercised; but being come together,
though they had their weaknesses as men, not to be pleaded for, or owned, they
seem more effectually to prosecute the true ends of Government, viz.
discouraging the bad, countenancing the good, attempting to break and remove
oppressive yoaks, and to assert the liberty of the poor people of the Lord, as
well as others, on all accounts, than any before, or since, that I have
observed: But these mercies being too great for so ungrateful, and so unworthy
a people as this Nation; together with the Instruments weakness and inability
to bring them forth in that glory and beauty, as God will have his works
brought forth in their season; as also the great Artifice used by the Devil,
and Instruments amongst themselves, who acted Tobiah and Sanballats part, when
they could not by opposing the work openly so effectually hinder it, come in
and pretend, as they of old, to build with them, and thereby cause the work to
cease, and render both it and the most forward workmen a scorn and reproach
amongst the Heathen; these also are suddenly (on what grounds, in what manner,
and for what ends becomes the Army to consider) dissolved; and the names of
many of them, whose memorial in ages to come shall be blessed, were cast out as
evil for Righteousness sake, and marks of Ignominy and Reproach put upon them
before all the Nation by some of your selves or adherents, that knew what would
gratify you, and pursued that path accordingly, as your weekly Pamphleter
Needham, whose tongue is no slander, used, (and still uses frequently for your
service) to do at that day; and you made it much your business to be raking
into, and laying open, Cham-like, the infirmities and nakedness of your
brethren, contrary to that counsel, or rather reproof given in a like case in
Obadiah, from 10, to the 15. compared with 8, and 9 verses, being a glass in
which you may see your selves and actions; I desire you will look into with
trembling. For thy violence against thy Brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee,
and thou shall be cut off for ever. In the day that THOU STOODEST ON THE OTHER
SIDE, in the day that the stranger carried away captive his forces, and
foreigners entered into his Gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, EVEN THOU WAST
AS ONE OF THEM, but thou should not have looked on the day of thy Brother,
neither should thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of
their destruction: neither should thou have SPOKEN PROUDLY IN THE DAY OF
DISTRESS. Thou should not have entered into the gate of my people, in the
day of their calamity, yea thou should not have looked on their affliction
in the day of their calamity, nor have laid hands on their substance in the day
of their calamity, neither should thou have stood in the cross way, to cut
off those that did escape, neither should thou have delivered up those of
his that did remain in the day of his distress. For the day of the Lord is near
upon all the Heathen; as thou have done, it shall be done unto thee, thy
reward shall return upon thine own head, Verse. 8. Shall I not in that day,
says the Lord, even destroy the wise men out of Edom, and understanding out of
the Mount of Esau? Verse. 9. And thy mighty men. O Teman, shall be dismayed, to
the end that every one of the Mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter.

Your next step you take as a fruit, I fear of your former, was falling back
again into the old exploded way of the Nation; having too near a similitude
(though a far worse ground) to their action, 1 Samuel 8.5, 7. You having now
departed from that more pure path you were eminently lead to, and blessed in
while you pursued the ends of Righteousness, as you acknowledge; the consent of
the good people in the three Nations, Navies, Armies, Churches flow in to you,
and in hopes of what would be brought out by you, rise up as one man, and call
you blessed: But a King you must have, as the Nations, in nature, though not in
name; who also is made, I believe, in judgment, beyond his own and your
intention, too much like him described, in 1 Samuel from the 11th. to the end;
but you (as they) will have him in that posture, and near that port of King and
Courtiers formerly, which being so annexed to this near similitude, rises with
it in all its Pompal formalities, as a Ghost out of its grave, to be once more
adored by a company of dying declining Christians, and by this means is the
hearts and hopes of the profane Cavileer, and neutral spirit, and their
adherents encouraged, and the spirit of the most sincere through the three
Nations (except such as could say a confederacy) bowed down and dejected: A
Government framed, none knew by whom, and imposed by you the chief Officers,
and your adherents, on the three Nations, Navies, and Armies, without their
consent, unless fraudulently, and unfairly gotten: Addresses made and sent down
to be signed by the Army, not time given for due consideration or consultation
in a case of that kind; or if some did consider and express their
dissatisfaction, they were presently either thrown out of their places, or else
looked on as persons not fit to be trusted in them; And I beseech you
consider, was not this an evil, an high aggravated evil? considering its
circumstances against that positive Rule, Luke 6.39. And as you would that men
should do to you, do ye also to them likewise; It also lays you under, like
guilt to that, charged 1 Cor. 6.8. Nay, you do wrong, and defraud, and that
your Brethren; As also against that Rule, 1 These. 4.6. That no man go beyond,
or defraud his Brother in any matter. To all which add the cries, calls, tears,
and beseechings of some from all parts to you, to ponder your paths, warning
you in the Name of the Lord, of the danger of your way, that it was displeasing
to the Lord, gratifying to enemies, and grievous to the hearts of his most
sincere ones in the three Nations, and yet you would not hear; no, though the
Lord also every morning brought his judgment to light, yet you were as the
unjust, that knew no shame; but you slight those that bore witness for the
Lord against you, and contemned the witness they bore, saying of and to some of
them, they would have been quiet, had they been uppermost, and the cause of
their dissatisfaction, was only because they were not so, which your own
consciences could tell you was notoriously false; but at last you proceed to
imprison some, banish others into remote Islands, snatching and keeping others
from their precious Relations, to what prejudice to some of them is not desired
to be further remembered, and with all art and industry, by frowns, favors,
profits, airy honors, endeavor to debauch others from their former professed
principles and practices, of more integrity to God and their Country, and what
woeful work you have helped to make of this kind in City, Country, Churches, by
your King-craft, and worse than Bishop-like trapannings, there is sad cause to
remember; and I should speak more, had not the Lord spoke so much; but surely
you did not only sin, but made Israel to sin; fulfilling that sad word, Isa.
9.16. For the leaders of the people cause them to err, and they that are lead
of them are destroyed; and hereby you pave a way, as it were, to the Lords
anger, which discovered it self at home and abroad, at Sea and at Land, amongst
your Councils and Forces, insomuch as he who you had set up as your Protector
in name, was never less truly so to you, these Nations, nor himself, than he
was after you had so unduly exalted him, and clothed him with those vain empty
names and titles you had given him.

But you go on, as persons engaged, and endeavor to engage others, as fast as
you can, in the same snares with your selves, which the places you were in gave
you great advantage to do, being chiefest Officers, Councillors, yea of the
closest Caball some of you, and others of you more subordinate, were ready to
receive impressions from the rest, and communicate accordingly to those under
their charge; by means of which, many, if not most of those filthy, flattering,
hypocritical Addresses, were framed, and little less than imposed on Regiments
under their commands, and made as traps and snares frequently to catch and weed
out such as could not run to the same excess with you, without asking a
question for conscience sake, whereby many poor souls for fear of losing their
places, profits, favors, etc. contrary to their consciences, bowed down to
these abominations, and engaged with you (though falsely) to live and dye with
that poor person that was then up, against all opposers, forgetting the Lord
whom you in those paths were opposing, and provoking him to his face, thereby
to oppose you, by taking away your Protector from amongst you, as he saw good,
which stroke, with the manner of it (in several respects, not thought fit to
mention) taking him away on that remarkable day, the third of September, made
famous formerly by the Lords eminent owning him and the Army under his command,
in two signal Victories obtained against the enemies of the Lord, when he
fought his battles on his name and peoples behalf, and he is now like Aaron of
old, uncloathed and stripped of that honor formerly put upon him, not wisely
improved by him to the service of the Lord that gave it; Ah, this stroke spoke
much to wise observers, yea very much to you that survived to look well to your
next steps, but alas, God speaks once, yea twice, but man regards not, you
still hold fast deceit, and refuse to return, and wax worse and worse
deceiving, and being deceived; who could have thought that you, who were used
to say Gods work grew more refined, and so must Instruments, that should be
used and prosper in it: that you should be the Instruments to advance another
poor man to his, your own, these Nations hurt, Gods dishonor, and the
dis-service of that blessed cause of God (by this and such like means now
become a byword, and a reproach amongst the Heathen) that you knew was
sufficiently destitute of the Character aforesaid? but this you do; and the
better to cover your evil herein, you cloathe him with those Epithites you did,
giving occasion thereby to the poor fawning Sycophant-like spirited people in
the Nation to strive in sin to outstrip you, giving those very Epithites, some
of them, to him, that were due to God only, viz. the man of Gods right hand,
whom he had made strong for himself, with others too much like it; and this
person, not to mention his merit or right, is advanced by you to a place of the
chiefest rule and dignity in the head of three Nations, without the fair or
free consent of them, the Armies or Navies; how right this was in the sight of
God or men, judge ye.

But you proceed in your fraudulent practices, as formerly, to gain consent,
where it is not given, and are helped herein, by some of the poor Prophets of
the Land, who now (as of old) lead the Van in this day of Degeneracy,
strengthening the hands of the wicked, as well as saddening the hearts of the
righteous, according to Ezekiel. 13. so that none returns from his wickedness; and
that they may strengthen themselves and you in this carnal confederacy, present
you with the names of an hundred Churches in the lump, that so you may not at
all suspect your way, having such a number of those who have professed to have
given up their names to Christ, to approve of you therein, and as it were bless
you in the name of the Lord; and thus you wrap it up, fulfilling that word,
Jer. 5.30, 31. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land, the
Prophets prophese falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end thereof? And hereby
you bring your selves by such actions within the verge of that judgment,
written in Prove. 24.24. He that says to the WICKED, thou art RIGHTEOUS, him
shall the people CURSE, NATIONS SHALL ABHOR HIM. I should speak much more here,
but that I desire rather to be silent, the person concerned being gone off the
stage, and I wish may keep off, lest a worse thing befall him, and many learn
by such sudden castings down, as well as liftings up, to know that the Lord
rules in the Kingdoms of this world, giving them to whom he pleases; and
whoeser walks in pride, he is able to abase, and may so know him, as more to
know himself, and learn the fear of the Lord, that teaches to depart from all
iniquity.

And having spoken thus to you Commanders, lest the inferior rank of men of
all sorts in the Army, should think themselves innocent, by beholding you so
guilty, give me leave to add a word to such.

And first I desire you will remember that you have your share of sin in these
things, having been the legs and hands by which these mischiefs aforesaid have
been acted; some of you having actually seized the poor Saints of the Lord,
haling to prisons, and keeping them there, or at least, saying, a confederacy
with those that did so, or not bearing a faithful witness, as be came you
against it, standing most of you under the influence of sinful engagements,
ready bent to fulfill the pleasure of your Rulers more fully in that point,
contrary to light, and much struglings in your own consciences against such
things, the Lord grant you repentance and pardon for it, and to beware of any
such engagements that shall be tendered to you in future, (and oh that you had a
little more considered that lately tendered to you, and signed by you, about the
conduct of the Army, which I fear will prove a sore snare) and though it will
be said for you in the case aforesaid, that you were under many temptations,
viz. fears of frowns, and loss of favors, as also that little money due to you
for your Arrears, if you had born your witness, or quit your station; all which
indeed might have been your portion, in discharge of your duty, yet you not
venturing to run such a hazard for the Lord, how have you fallen! below the
spirits of Christians, of English men, of an Army nor mercinary, yea of Romans,
though Heathens, who valued their Country, and the Common Rights of it, at a
higher rate; and by your sin, without repentance, are also under that woe
denounced, in Isa. 31.2. Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, and will
not call back his word, but will arise against the house of evil doers, and
against the HELP of them that work inquity; and you have sinned also against
that Rule, Isa. 8.13. Say not a confederacy to all them to whom these people
shall say a confederacy, neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid, but
sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be
your dread; and let me beseech you so to ponder the paths of your feet, as to
repent of what is past, and to take heed in time to come, that you follow no
leader, nor leaders in any way, how plausible soever, that you have not
well-grounded assurance, is warranted by the word, which while you observe as
your Rule, will be an honor to the Lord, and you, while you live, and peace
of conscience to you, when you come to dye, when all else you do, not
concurrent herewith, will leave you under sorrow, shame, and a blot that will
nor be wiped away.

In the next place I desire to consider the best pleas I have met with by any
of the Army in their own vindication; as first, they say all Governments are
lawful, and so that by a Protector, and therefore that was not their sin.

Answer, How far a Government by a King or Protector is in its own nature
lawful, or unlawful, I shall not here dispute, but it satisfies me that the
introducing both the one and the other, has been declared Treason by a Law of
the Land that we have as much reason to reverence and adhere to (considering
the reasons upon which it is grounded) as most Laws extant; to which let me
also add, the full concurrence of the Army therewith, with their expressed
abhorrence of the contrary, stated by the Army, sometimes upon transcendent
grounds, to a Law of the Land, as is to be seen in their Muscellborough
declaration in the year 50. all which considered, together with what God has
spoken since in opposition to such a practice, makes it very near of kin to a
thing unlawful at least for this Army to bring in such a Government.

But secondly, It is said that these Governments were not of choice, but of
necessity.

Answer, So you say, but how or to whom that necessity appears beside your
selves, is a question; when you are willing to submit this point to the
judgment of more unbiassed persons, I hope you will be heard, and till then,
not expect to be believed.

But thirdly, you say your aims and ends were good.

Answer, What your ends were, the Lord knows, and will ere long let you and us
know better; but good ends for the most part make but bad and unwarrantable
Rules to act by; and so far as men may rationally guess at your ends, by your
means you use toward them, they were not like to be very good; and of this
you wanted not warnings from all parts, but you would not then hear.

Again, though you in the first part you acted under a single person might have
something of a color of good ends in what you did, yet sure you had none such
for your second part under your second single person; or if you shall yet say,
you did judge that also a likely way and means to those good ends, will not all
rational men in these three Nations rise up at once and conclude you as a
company of the most unfit men in England to judge in cases of like kind in
future, who are subject to such gross mistakes, wherein our lives, liberties
and estates are concerned? and how would the sense of your miscarriage
formerly, if it were right upon you, make you dread like paths, which you now
notwithstanding, as fearlesly as ever are running toward.

But fourthly, You say you have repented, and endeavor to evince it by, First,
your dissolving that Parliament called by Richard Cromwell. Secondly, In
throwing down him.

Answer, Whether those actions had more of sin or repentance in them, your
preingagements considered, remains a question with some, though out of question
with others, especially as to you chief Commanders; and to the latter of them,
whether you were herein so guilty, as you would now be thought to be, let the
Arguments used by some of you to him, at that time, pleading your necessity
from others, more than willingness in your selves to that work, speak; though I
believe indeed you were minded to attempt somewhat of alteration in his
Counsel, as you were nearly concerned, in point of reputation, and otherwise,
at that time to do; as also that you were providentially carried upon those
legs on which you went, whither some of you would not have gone; and therefore
at that time in the General Council of Officers you did plead hard for the
single Person, some of you; others to have but the name, when the thing it self
could not be had, and thereby manifesting your constant good affection to the
last, losing this ground but by inches, rather furiously driven off it, than
fairly quitting it; so that upon the whole, this looks very unlike a piece of
repentance in you the chief Officers; but if any have a share more than others
in this service, it is the inferior ranks of men in the Army, who sinned not
after the similitude of the chief Officers transgression, in setting him up,
though some were drawn, and others driven by them, to sacrifice to him in those
wretched addresses, when up, but were much more willingly helpful, and truly
joyful, in throwing him down.

But fifthly, You say you acknowledged your evils to the late Parliament, when
you brought them to sit again.

Answer, You did very generally and cursorily mention some of your wanderings,
but how few of these many particulars aforementioned, with many more of like
kind chargeable upon you, is observable? and the more so, because when any
comes to speak with you particularly, they usually meet with that common
question much in use amongst that poor people in Malachies time, saying,
Wherein have we done so evil? And though demonstrations are clear now, as they
were then, yet it is as hard to convince you, as it was them; and therefore
that I might (if the will of the Lord were) a little help you in this main
point of Repentance, upon the truth of which, and your being renewed, depends
so much in this case; I therefore would a little treat you on this subject.

Repentance, when in truth, I take, does consist in these following
particulars, viz. 1 Conviction, 2 Humiliation, 3 Confession, And 4 Forsaking
sin confessed, and would entreat you seriously to consider this first part, to
wit, Conviction; and ask your souls this single question, which the Lord will
one day ask you, viz. Have you indeed been convinced, that you have wandered out
of the way, with the causes, effects, and degrees thereof, and sinfulness of
your so wandering, with respect to some Rule, or Rules of the Law by you
transgressed herein, and what those Rules are; as also what is the nature of
your sin toward God, toward Men, toward those without, those within, those
under your charge; as also those that have been imprisoned, oppressed, afflicted,
derided, and scorned, by you, or some of you, for their endeavoring to be
faithful to the Lord, and his interest in this backsliding day? if you are
rightly convinced, you will see your sin, in these its several aspects; for as
the Spirit of the Lord convinces clearly, so as no light does like it, so it
convinces very particularly and fully, and usually lays the soul convinced
under the weight of its sin, in its several aggravations, as it respects some
Rule or Rules transgressed by it, and so renders sin exceeding sinful, Romans
7.13. Now, have you been so convinced? has that deluge of dishonor brought
upon the Name of the Lord, those stains, blemishes, and blasphemies brought
upon that blessed cause of God? together with that ignominy, contempt and
cruelty cast upon, and exercised toward many of those poor unworthy witnesses
to the Lord and his work, in this day of declining, been with weight upon your
hearts, yea or no? if not, sure you are yet very far from through convictions.

2 As to your Humiliation, that always attends true conviction, and includes
contrition, as Zach. 12.10, 11, 12. Ezekiel. 7.16. Have you been at this work,
families apart, your wives apart, and each soul apart, mourning bitterly over
your transgressions, as an Army? if so, what means those sleighty extenuating
expressions concerning your sin, when spoken of? as also the silence of you
Leaders (who have lead in transgression) in your days of seeming solemn
mourning before the Lord? you either contenting your selves, that some amongst
you speak largely in your names, leaving you to your liberty of assent or
dissent (which you may possibly think you have) in such eases, or else
otherwise discovering heart-risings against others, using plainness amongst
you, which you brook not so well; be pleased to read David's practice in such a
case, a King and Commander, not inferior to any of you, 1 Chronicles. 2.8. And
David said unto God, I have sinned greatly, because I have done this thing. And
verse. 17. Is it not I that commanded this people to be numbered? Even I it is
that have sinned, and done evil indeed, but as for these sheep, what have they
done? let thine hand, I pray thee, O Lord my God, be on me, and on my Fathers
house, but not on thy people, that they should be plagued.

3 To that of confession, which ought to be particular and public, where
evils have been so, Lev. 5.5. And it shall be when be shall be guilty in one
of these things, that he shall confess that he has sinned in that THING.
Ezra 10.11. Now therefore make confession unto the Lord God of your Fathers,
and do his pleasure, and separate your selves from the people of the Land, and
from the strange wives; then all the Congregation answered and said with a loud
voice, As thou have said, so must we do, but the people are many, and it is a
time of much rain, and we are not able to stand without, neither is this a
work of one day or two, for we are many that have transgressed in this thing.
Act. 26.10, 11. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the Saints did
I shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief Priests, and when
they were put to death, I gave my voice against them, and I punished them often
in every Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad
against them, I persecuted them even to strange Cities. Where is now this free,
full, public, particular confession of yours? James 5.16. Confess your faults
one to another, and pray one for another that you may be healed. This is the
way that God will be glorified, by persons that have so publicly dishonored
him, as you have done in your public actions. Ezekiel. 44.10. And the Levites
that went astray; When Israel went astray, which went astray away from me
after their Idols, they shall even bear their iniquities, v. 13. They shall
bear their shame, and their abominations which they have committed. Take heed
therefore of consulting with flesh and blood in this case; it is a hard lesson
for persons in that port and degree in the world that you are in; but this is a
part of that great lesson of self-denial, wherein every cross that lies in the
way of duty, must be taken up by you; for if you have sinned, you must rise
out of it in the way of God, or be ruined by it; for he will assuredly
distrain for his glory that you will not give him.

4 As to your forsaking of sin, that must not only be forsaking such
particular acts of sin, which its possible have forsaken you, and you are not
capable of committing those individual acts again; but a departing from all of
that kind, yea of every kind; and in this give me leave once more to ask
you; what are you doing herein? are you not again, instead of forsaking,
fallen, and falling, into some of your old steps, that yet you would be deemed
to have repented of? else, why did you (not long since) come before the Lord in
a very solemn day, professing you were there like a company of poor children
that knew not one step of your way, to inquire of the Lord a right way, when
before your coming there, you had resolved of; so, considerable a part of your
way, as the conduct of your Army; and that not for that time only, as was then
your pretense (which had been somewhat more tolerable) and whether not also of
that rare composition since called the Committy of safety? you may do well to
consider; at least whether in any rational man's judgment, the constitution of
it considered, it can be thought to be the product of such a solemn days
seeking the Lord for direction; and is not your Army thus settled intended to
be influential to the framing your whole fabric of Government now in the
forge? and have not some of you already said, that if it please not the people
it is to be offered to, they must be pleased whether they will or not, and
yet pretensions of all freedom to be used toward all good people? yea, I
have been told by some of you, that you intended to do nothing in your
Government without advice had with good people, from all parts; has that been,
or is it intended? what is this other than the very first step that Oliver
Cromwell took? and who sees not that this Army will yet again, notwithstanding
all its mistakes be supreme, admit nothing above it, or equal to it in all our
greatest concerns of life, liberty or estate? which must needs have this
effect, to make good men nauciate it, or what is to be done by it, as
formerly; and then those that will follow for the loaves, and transgress for a
morsel of bread, shall again be admitted in their sphere of subserviency, to a
competent share in this new gained dominion over the lives, liberties and
estates of such as cannot for conscience sake bow to such an Image, when set
up; and if this be indeed forsaking sin, then I understand it not; but this is
your way, to which, if God will condescend to save by, you will serve him in,
but not out of it, as I perceive; but know this, you must come to his ways, or
be broken by him; and deceive not your selves, I beseech you, with pretensions
of doing good out of the way of it; though they may be as high raised in your
imagination as Heaven, yet if not laid in deep humiliation for past
transgression, with through abhorring your selves in sense of them, as also
declining all paths that lead to the like in future, they will prove but
abortive, and like a house built upon the sand, that will assuredly fall, and
great will be the fall of it; and therefore since its most certain you cannot
prosper in any work in your hands, till the Lord have accomplished this great
work of unfeigned repentance upon your hearts, consider your ways, and see if
the Lord has recovered you to this path of his good pleasure, manifest it, and
bless him for it; and if not, take heed of pretending to it, but rather confess
your sin, and give glory to the Lord, who has said, He will indeed be
sanctified by all that draw near to him, and before all the people he will be
glorified; and truly, till you are taught to glorify him in this way of his,
that leading, guiding presence of God, in relation to his work in your hands,
will not be with you, but will certainly and visibly depart from you; and oh
that I could say it were not already departed, as from Saul of old, causing you
to labor in the fire for vanity, and run out of one fire into another, which
is too visibly your portion at this day; and base fears of man (for want of a
Spirit of Faith, as formerly to make the Lord your fear, and your dread) are
upon you, causing you to make undue haste many times; and the spirit of rage
and madness of the Nations, rising against you, cannot be kept down by the
spirit that yet appears to act you, but it grows and gains visibly, yea runs
upon you, teareth and rends you daily; and it is only the Spirit of the Lord
that can raise up a standard to give check to such floods; and till this Spirit
more appears to act you, which will first carry you out of your own wisdom,
strength, and every polluted path, and make you as poor children, not in word
only, but in truth, to say in the Lord you have all, and not elsewhere, you
are, I am persuaded, with other poor ones that follow you, like to wander in
the wilderness; and which is most sad, without a guide, till many, if not most
of your carcasses fall there, or the Lord have purged out the rebels from among
you; there is but one Name under Heaven that Salvation shall be had from for
Nations, as well as Souls, the closing with whom in his own way, as the wisdom
of the word directs to, would make you and these Nations also in their public
affairs happy; and the contrary makes them miserable: this is the foundation,
other than which (what ever any poor deluded flattering Courtiers have formerly
profanely said of any of the projects of men's brains) can no man lay, nor any
Nation or Nations with security by warrant from the word build upon; but their
buildings will tumble, for he has said, He will shake Nations thereby to
remove what ever may be shaken, till their desire comes to him, who shall
alone bear the glory, and not man or men with him.

My poor advice is therefore to you; as ever you intend to prosper, be wise,
ye Rulers, Officers and Soldiers, kiss the Son, not only as a King and
Savior to your souls, but as King of Nations, lest he be angry, and ye
perish from the way, for if his wrath be kindled, and that but a little, only
blessed are they that trust in him.

And if you desire thus to own him, do it by acknowledging him as your
Lawgiver, by your receiving and magnifying that Law, he has said, he will
magnify and make honorable, and casting off the Laws of the Heathen, that
serve for little else, but to lead into labyrinths; yea, Seek the Lord, and
wait on him for light and wisdom, and consult his Word, and see if it be not
able thoroughly to furnish to every good work, beyond what any Laws of men can
do; yea, this were the way to lay such a Magna Charta, as would stand more sure
against any alterations, than any you can lay, both as to our rights, as men
and Christians, which is the great thing in contest, and would have a blessed
instructing effect upon the administrators, as in Joshua 1.8. As also upon them
to whom they do administer, teaching them the knowledge and fear of the Lord,
which is so much wanting in these Nations at present; when every man's
particular interest should lead him to consult the Law of the Lord, in which
his great interest is so much made known, and by beholding the Righteousness of
that Law should fall in love with it, and into a more frequent delightful
meditation upon it, which being blessed by the Lord, might be instrumental to
turn water into wine, to the converting of many poor souls that might begin at
first, but with their own interest, besides the civilizing effects, as to
manners amongst men, this Law of the Lord has a blessed tendency to beget,
beyond any other Law whatsoever.

But for you or others, that shall go after any other, besides, or short of
him, or his righteous Laws, truly your sorrows will be multiplied, and you
will lie down in them at the last; and though you may think you have
strengthened your selves in the unitedness of your Army under such a conduct,
yea much more strengthened your arm of flesh, by your new-raised Militia, or
what else you may imagine, remember that the wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven against all unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness; And you have none of these coverings large enough to keep that
from falling heavy upon you, to the sudden dissolving of every Covenant with
death and Hell, and overflowing every hiding place made up but of the refuge of
lies, how like to truth soever they may be.

These things being of some weight upon my heart, I durst not but speak to you,
though I had arguments enough from a sense of my own unworthiness upon all
accounts to have silenced me, as well as my weakness for such an undertaking,
in a service in its own nature usually unacceptable, and much more may be so
with you for my sake; but I have in this matter consulted duty to the Lord, who
I have endeavored to eye in it; and secondly, to your souls, that I would fain
see recovered out of such destroying paths. I hope you will pass by weakness
herein, and accept my intention, which has been to serve you the most
effectually I could. I have not troubled you often in this kind, and for ought I
know, it may be the last service of this nature I may ever discharge to you as
an Army, which if it be of any use, I shall rejoice, if otherwise, my soul I
hope shall mourn on your behalfs (if it may be to prevent that misery coming
on you) and all of us with you, but that I trust the Lord who knows how to
deliver, when all other means fails, will be a little Sanctuary to all that in
sincerity commit themselves to him, desiring to hate every false way, for he
has said it, that is able to perform it; Upon all the glory there shall be a
defense, and when the Enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord
shall lift up a standard against him; Which I believe he will yet do for his
poor remnant, for his holy Names-sake, and so do it as to astonish and confound
enemies of all sorts, greatly discover and shame false-hearted friends, take
his people off from Idols, yea every pleasant picture, and cause them to sing
to himself alone, as the God of their salvations, who remembers them in their
low estate, because his mercy endures for ever.

FINIS.

