The CRY of Innocent Blood, Sounding to the Ear of each Member in PARLIAMENT*
Being a Short RELATION OF THE Barbarous Cruelties Inflicted lately upon the
Peaceable People of God called Quakers, at their Meeting in Horslydown, in the
County of Surrey.

Also some Plain-Dealing with the Persecuting, RULERS, by C. H.

Isa. 3. 15. What mean ye that ye beat my People to pieces, and grind the Faces
of the Poor, says the Lord of Hosts.

Son of man, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show the Rulers their Sin.
etc.

Psa. 52. 1. When the Wicked spring as the Grass, and when all the Workers of
Iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.

Printed in the Year, 1670.

A short Relation of the Barbarous Cruelties inflicted on the People of God,
called Quakers, at their Meeting in Horslydown.
ON the 25th of the 7th Month 1670. several of the aforesaid People, being
peaceably assembled at their usual Meeting place aforesaid, (not in
Stubbornness, nor in contempt to Magistracy, but in tenderness of Conscience to
God) There came in some Musketteers, and haled them forth into the Street*
where the Troopers came, and rod in amongst them in a violent manner, beating
and abusing both Men and Women, and punching them in the Faces and Bodies with
their Carbines; and soon after the Foot-Souldiers came, and fell upon them
also, and beat both Men and Women in a Cruel and Outrageous manner, also
punching them on the Feet with the But-ends of their Pikes and Muskets, till
they broke several of them, also running the Muzzle of their Muskets with
violence against the Bodies of many* and then a Party of Horse came
desperately, and sought to ride over them; but the Horses being more merciful
then their Riders, and not going forward, they turned their Horses, and by
curbing and reining them backward, strove to do what mischief they could. The
number of those that were Wounded, and sorely Bruised, and had their Blood
spilt this day were above twenty Persons.

On the 2d day of the 8th Month, They being kept out of their Meeting Place
aforesaid, there came a Party of Foot and a Party of Horse, who laid on upon
Friends in a violent and cruel manner, knocking them with their Muskets and
Pikes, and the Horsemen with their Carbines, until the Blood lay in the
Streets; and so they continued for a long time until they brake several Pikes,
and Muskets, and one Carbine; and then took the Barrel by one end, and gnashed
their teeth, striking till several were so beaten and bruised, that their lives
were in danger. There were wounded, and sorely bruised, this day above thirty
Person.

Again, The 9th of the 8th Month, The Soldiers, both Horse and Foot, came to
the Meeting at the aforesaid Place, and one of them having a Shovel threw the
Dirt and Mire on both Men and Women, in a shameful manner, and after him came
both Horse and Foot, and fell upon them, Striking and Knocking down, without
respect to Age or Sect, in a very cruel manner, until they spilt the Blood of
many; and when some of the Inhabitants in pity took them into their Houses, to
save their Lives, the Soldiers forced open the Doors, and haled them into the
Street again, and plucked off their Hats, that they might strike on their bare
Heads* insomuch that many had their Heads broken in a grievous manner, and thus
they continued a long time; also tearing Men and Women's Clothes off their
Backs, and haling Women through the Mire by their Horse sides; some of the
Foot-Souldiers putting their hands under the Women's Coats, using unclean
Expressions and immodest Behavior* And a Red-coat Soldier struck one Woman
Friend twice with his Musket on the Belly, and once on the Breast, another flung
Dirt in her Face; and since that, she has never been well, but has
Miscarried, these abuses being the cause of it, it has been the Death of her
Child, her Life being in great Danger: And a man Friend they abused with Blows,
and afterward took him, and carried him into a backward place, being there,
one demanded his Money, and endeavored to rifling his Pockets, swearing, GOD
DAM HIM, he would STAB him, if he would not give it him; swearing again, He
would PISTOL him. The number of those that were wounded, and had their Blood
spilt, and were sorely bruised this day were above fifty Persons.

And on the 16th day of the 8th Month 1670. Being again kept out of their
Meeting Place, there ^^me a great Party of Horse and Foot, and would presently
have fell on, upon them, had there not been. Constables there, who for some
time kept them off, but at last they broke out into a great rage, and some of
the Foot with the But-ends of their Mu^kets* and the Horsemen with great thick
Trunchins and Staves, said on upon them in such a violent manner, as if they
would have killed all in the place; and in a short time the Blood ran down
about the Ears of many* And above twenty Persons received sore Wounds and cruel
Bruises; and one of the Constables endeavoring to stop them from shedding
Blood* and to keep the Peace, they fell upon him also, and broke his Head; and
when they were rebuked of their cruelty, some answered, If you knew what orders
we have you would say we dealt Mercifully with you.

The Substance of the Relation, before mentioned, was laid before the King and
his Council, and for some time there was some cessation of their Cruelty, but
since they have begun again in the like manner, though not in same degree, with
great threatenings to be worse and worse in their savage behavior toward them,
which cannot well be, except they directly murder in the place.

Also it is to be observed, that when the Troopers and Soldiers have come, and
thus abused and wounded the Innocent; some have asked them saying, How can you
deal thus with a people that have love and good will to all men, and make no
resistance nor opposition; and then they have replied, We had rather, and it
would be better for us, if you did resist and oppose: And so it is manifest,
they do those things to provoke opposition, that they might imbrue their hands
in our blood, and have our Lives and Estates for a spoil and a prey.

Now that such barbarous inhumane Cruelties should be committed (in a Nation
reputed famous for Christianity, and the excellency of its Laws) by mercenary
men, in time of peace, is that which cannot be paralelled among the Heathen;
and its a great shame and reproach to the Magistracy and Ministry of this
Nation, that men should be found therein so void of manhood; so far degenerated
from the true nature of mankind; so stony and hard-hearted; so seared in
Conscience, that they can act and exercise such brutish Cruelties upon a
peaceable people, who have love and good will to all men, and whose Principles
leads them to follow peace, and ensue it.

Well, If such hard-hearted unreasonable men shall be suffered, and tolerated
to rifle us, and knock us on the head, and spil our Blood in the Street, bruise
and mangle our Bodies before we are brought to a Trial, or Condemned by Law;
then farwell good Government, and the Fundamental Laws of England, which are
very tender of the Liberties, Estates, and lives of men* and the Magistrates,
who are sworn to do justice and right to all men, and to execute the Law
without respect of persons may endeavor to get a dispensation for their Oaths,
but we would hope better things.

Here are a few of the names of those who had their Blood spilt, and were sore
wounded, as Witnesses to the truth of these things, and in the behalf of
themselves, and the rest.

Robert Allen, John Potter, William Peachy, Stephen Cook, Henry Ham, John
Dowden, Henry Day, William Stewardson, Edward Crisp. Adam Waker.
ANd now Oh ye Rulers of this Nation, I know the way to please many of you,
would be to smooth you up with fine words* but the way to please the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, who is greater then you all, is to deal plainly with you; and
that I may be clear of you in the Day of God, it is with me thus to write.

Certainly God is Angry with you* and that not without a Cause given him by
you; he has tried you long, to see what you would do for him* he has sent his
Servants, and otfen warned you to abstain from Violence and Iniquity, but you
have had little regard to it: Look back, and consider what you have done at all
your Sittings, since you were chosen and brought into place, and see if you can
find one Act made or revived by you for the subduing of Prophanness and
Debauchery: Do not all sorts of ungodly Meetings abound in your Cities and
Countries; as Stage Plays, Bear and Bull-Beatings* Cock-Fights, Footbal and
Cudgel-Plays, Race-Running both Horse and Foot, Huntings, Revelling? Where is
the Fair or Market but it rings with beastly Ballet-Singers? And where are any
of these stopped by you; or do you not rather, many of your selves, keep open
house for such to come sometimes, with Moris-dancers and Mummers? And how does
Drunken-Meetings abound with Dice and Cards, filled with Cursing and Hellish*
Oaths, and the Noise of Fiddlers and Vagabonds roaring like Beasts and Swine?
So that one may say with the Prophet, Hell has enlarged her self: And is not
there daily new Inventions of Wickedness? And was there ever more Pride, and
Whoredom, and Oppression, in Sodom and Egypt then is now found amongst a
People Professing Christianity? What is become of the good wholesome Laws of
England, which were made for the suppressing of Prophanness? You have neither
revived them by Proclamation nor Conversation; but still at your Sitting, one
of your chiefest businesses has been to impose heavy Burdens upon People
Consciences, that are tender toward God: But such whose Conscience will serve
to run to such ungodly Meetings before mentioned, they have Liberty enough, and
are upheld and encouraged, and may have DRUMS and TRUMPETS to gather such
Meetings in the open Streets; and if one comes in the Name of the Lord to
reprove such doings he is in danger of his Life, and may be to be, sent to
Prison, and called a Rebel, a Heretic, and such like; and Wickedness is now
grown to such a hight, that nasty Songs and Ballads may be heard in your
Streets, and hung upon the Gates of your Cities, to be sold, to corrupt Youth;
but Meeting Houses for the Worship of God are pulled down, and defaced, and
drunken Soldiers carry away of the Timber to sell, that they may feed their
lusts; but many Play Houses are built and repaired, and sets the Kings Arms
upon such, and to these one may repair, and not fear being Fined, and there
both Knaves and Fools may stand up, and Lie, and Swear, and use all the Tricks
Hell can afford, and teach People Vanity; but I hear of no Fines that are
levied upon these kind of Teachers or Houses, though these are the Seditious
Meetings, that draw People from the Grace of God, the Anointing within, which
would teach People to live Soberly; and such Meetings as these are a terror and
trouble to the Kings good Subjects, and a disturbance to the Peace of them that
love Righteousness, and are Subjects to Christ's Kingdom. And therefore, before
you go about to meddle with tender Conscience, humble your selves under the
Hand of God, that you may know your own purged; and also, stop that Fountain of
Wickedness, which since you came in place is set open, more then formerly; and
call in all those Laws which you have made, and caused the Innocent to suffer
by; and acknowledge* your Sin to God, and the Nation; and open the Prison
Doors, that those that make Conscience of Oaths, and Feeding Deceivers, and
have long suffered under you, may once again enjoy their Families and Native
Rights; for I am to tell you, Poor Naboth in the Eye of the Lord, has as good
Right to his little Vineyard, as Ahab to his Crown; and it is not the Swearing
of the Sons of Beliel that can make a just Birthright, or yet prevent the heavy
Vengeance of the Lord from overtaking the Oppressors of those whom God loves.

And now consider what Honor you have got by your last Act against religious
Meetings; it is true, you have almost undone many hundred Families, not leaving
a Cow to give their Children Milk, or Bed to lie upon. Old Pharaoh had a bad
name, but you have done worse then he* for though, like you, he refused to let
Gods People Worship him aright; yet I do not read that he put them in Prison,
or took away their Goods and Cattle as you have done. I have also made inquiry
who for the most have assisted you in this Work through the Conntries, and I
find chiefly Drunkards, such as could Swear any thing* and Hang*men, and such
as were burnt in the Hand formerly for theft, and Pick-Pockets, and supposed
Highway men, and base Fellows that have spent their Estates in Profaneness;
these, and such like, have been your Informers in many places; as also rude
debaucht idle Soldiers; and many Officers have heen made for fear of such, and
also lest they should pay a fine, to act against their own souls* and violate
the Law of God in their own Consciences: And these your Doings an All-seeing
Eye has beheld, and though you are as lords in the Earth, the Almighty God,
who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, will call you to Judgment, and then you shall
know with him there is no respect of Persons.

THE END.

