AN ABRIDGMENT OF THE PREROGATIVES OF St. ANN, MOTHER of the MOTHER of GOD.

With the Approbation of the Doctors at Paris: And Thence Done into English to
accompany The Contemplations on the Life and Glory of Holy MARY; and the
Defense of the Same; with some Pieces of a like nature.

To which a PREFACE is added concerning the Original of the STORY.

IMPRIMATUR,

Liber cui Titulus, [ An Abridgment of the Prerogatives of S. Ann, etc.]

Guil. Needham R. R. in Christo P. ac D.D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr. Dom.
Feb. 14. 1687.


LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
THat Article of the Pastoral Letter of Cardinal Camus, which directs his
Clergy not to disguise or misrepresent the Doctrine of the Church, as it shows
the ingenuity of that Illustrious Prelate, so it manifestly detects, that he
thought such Artifices were not unusual. I know that Ingenuity and fair
Representing are what all will commend, but what few can bear, and as few
practice. There is an Order of men whose Talent is generally thought not to lie
much that way, who cease not with all imaginable vigor to prosecute the giver
of so Pestilent Advice. Nor is it indeed strange, that Dexterity should be
looked on as more advantageous to a Party, than naked Honesty. But I must needs
say, tho some have played more cunningly, there are others who have dealt more
honestly; among whom I place the Contemplator on the Life of H. Mary: For this
Gentleman deals plainly enough with the World, and gives such a Pattern of
Devotion toward the Queen, as she is called, of all pure Creatures, as shows
he is not ashamed to bring into the greatest Light, what others at the same
time industriously cast into Shadow. And having showed himself so very fair and
open, I expected he would have before this time prevented the office of the
following Treatise; and that having said so much of the Maternity of Holy Mary,
he must have more than a little left for the Maternity of St. Anne. For if both
(according to him, and the Maids of St. Joseph) the Tree is known by its Fruit,
and the Branches are holy if the Root be sanctified; therefore if Jesus was
entirely Holy, Mary's flesh was never defiled, and if not Marys, neither St.
Anns: If so, I say St. Ann has good reason to complain of her being passed over
with such silence, while so great Adorations are paid to her Daughter. And if
it look like Protestant-presumption to go to God the Father only through Jesus
Christ, without the Intercession of his Mother, it must needs be less
Presumption, and greater Humility, to beg the Grandmother too to intercede. If
we can go so far, as to suspect the efficacy of our Prayers, when offered up in
the sole Name of Jesus, and think it safest to recurr to the Divine Maternity,
and the Name of Mary, it must needs be the best way to make them thoroughly
effectual to follow the Advice of the Josephine Maids, and in the first place
to address our selves to St. Ann, and in her name approach to the Daughter, who
to be sure is not able to refuse her Mother any thing, no more than her Son can
her. Nay, if we go to St. Anns Mother, it will be so much the better yet, and
the same Reason would still carry us higher till we can go no farther. The
Principles are plainly owned, and expressly and industriously taught; and then
it must be somewhat too like foulness to deny evident and palpable
Consequences: But I am so charitable as to think that the Contemplator on H.
Mary, who has so Seraphical a Pen in describing her Honors and Glories, is
just to his Principles; and if so, none can be fitter to extol the Prerogatives
of her Mother.

For we are told from Apocryphal Writers, and his own fruitful Imagination, of
the strange wonders of Mary's Maternity, P. 26, 28.
How she was exempted from the general Curse of Sin in her Passive Conception
in the Womb of S. Ann; how she had the use of Reason while there; understood
the Natures, and Decrees of God; saw into all the Mysteries of Grace; exercised
Acts of a most pure, inflamed and restless Love, and sung a joyful Magnificat
to her wonderful Benefactor. We are told how the P. 29.
Angels sung, Glory be to the Mother of God; and then it cannot be otherwise,
but that she who is thus early complemented Queen of Heaven, must at her P. 45.
Nativity be adorned with all inward and outward Graces, and have a most
harmonious Body and Soul, upon which we must believe, that Heaven, Limbo and
Earth, were replenished with transcendent Joys: We are after this told, how P.
52.
from the hour of her Birth she makes a Vow, and at Three years end performs
it; P. 54.
how she is received into the Temple, and placed on the steps, on each of which
she sings forth a Gradual Psalm, and contemplates on the several Mysteries of
the Rosary, and then begs the Chief Priest to be admitted into the Society of
the Holy Women who watched and prayed by the Ark; how her whole Life, both in
the Temple and afterward, is only P. 80.
one continued act of super-eminent Contemplation and Ecstasy, with which at
last she is cast into a Fever of Love, which causes her death, upon which her
Soul is conveyed with ineffable Harmonies of Angels, and seated in Glory above
all their Quires, and P. 83.
her Body assumed up afterward, and vested with Super-Seraphical Majesty; and
P. 90.
how the Angels and Elect severally do homage to her; how the Angels give her
the Badges of Sovereignty over Men, Archangels, over Nobles, Thrones, over
Kings, and so the rest; and how solemnly the Blessed Trinity congratulates her;
and all this is as particularly and exactly described, as if he had been no
less than Master of the Ceremonies.

It Is pity the Scriptures should be so scanty and imperfect, as to have none of
this rare stuff; but our Josephine Maids, who give the reason for the silence
of the Evangelists concerning their great Patroness, may give the same, why so
little is said by them concerning her Daughter, viz. That God conceals the
greatest Excellencies, and that the holiest Saints are lost to the World
through the excess of their Merit; that Mary being the Soul that nearest
approached to the Divinity, was a Treasure as ineffable as God; but that, God
has at length been pleased to draw these things out of silence by Annual
Commemorations.

But as many as reason freely, cannot but have some suspicion of the late
ushering these Commemorations into the Calendar, and be apt to guess at the
true Reason of the silence of the Holy Penmen, and conclude, the Holy Spirit
foreseeing that superstitious worship that was to come into the World, to
undermine the glorious designs of this Blessed Religion, took away whatever
might prove the occasions.

The Enemy of Mankind was soon sensible of the Provision the Holy Ghost had
made against the superstition which he designed to introduce into the Church,
and therefore early sat his Instruments at work to prepare Materials. Gospels
were forged, and put forth under the name of Apostles, containing a Doctrine
totally repugnant to theirs. Nor could Satan ever have a more cunning device to
weaken and depreciate those Instruments of our Salvation delivered to us by
God, than this of coining others; For by giving false Scriptures, not only
those were imposed upon who were not able to discover the Cheat, but, afterward
when the Doctrine had taken some root, even those that could; it being then
very hard (if not impossible) satisfactorily to learn (other Authors of the
same times, and of those immediately subsequent mentioning the same things) how
much, or what is to be credited in such Writings, especially if ancient. For
very frequently, after the Piece has appeared to be a Forgery, the Matter of it
has not been disbelieved, even by Learned Men, but kept its ground upon the
Authority of other Writers, who were but Copiers of that Condemned Original.

We have an Example of this in the very Case of the B. Virgin and her Mother,
who continue still to have those Worships and Invocations made to them, whose
probable Foundation is rejected even by the stiffest Asserters of their
Prerogatives; for there being so very little said of the One, and nothing at
all of the Other, in the received Gospels; our great Enemy, toward the
accomplishment of his forementioned Design, was not negligent to supply that
seeming Defect: And how could this be better done, than under the Name of S.
James the Cousin or Brother of our Lord, who being of the same Family, cannot
but be supposed well acquainted with what he relates. This seems to be the main
Original for super-inducing such a Devotion; and the whole Fabric of the
Marian Religion appears to lean upon no better Support: But notwithstanding the
Discovery of the Forgery, Gregory the 13th thought fit by his A. 1584.
Breve, to give S. Ann a Festival on the 26th of July; and Sixtus 5. Reforming
the Breviary, appointed an Order to it; which was the occasion of the
Establishment of the Maids of S. Joseph, who upon the keeping this Day, formed
themselves into a Family, taking S. Ann for their Patroness, and were
afterward confirmed, and taken into the Protection of the late Queen Mother of
France, Ann of Austria. So that in this Age the Mother of the Blessed Virgin is
drawn out of Silence by a Festival of the Church; and the next Age may find
perhaps another Festival even for Her Mother.

I cannot find so much as the Names of Joachim and Ann before Epiphanius, who
indeed Haeres. 78. p. 1049. Ed. Paris 1622.
mentions them, and no more; nor is his Authority considerable enough to
establish any thing. S. Austin Contra Faustum l. 23. To. 6. p. 98. Paris 1555.
writing against Faustus, does not seem satisfied even as to this: and gives
the same Reason that a Protestant would, which is its Uncanonicalness; Quia
Canonicum non est, non me constringit, says the Father. The De Nativitate
Virginis, To. 9. par. 3.
Epistle to Chromatius, concerning the Nativity of the Virgin, which is at the
end of S. Hierom's Works, is no less than that other of the same stamp
concerning her De Assumptione B. V.
Assumption, spurious; and is so condemned by Baronius, having been so first by
Erasmus, and since by all generally, except Chr. a Castro. Yet this and the
Prot-evangelium are the incomparable Pieces that have had so many Copiers. It
is not easy to determine of what Antiquity the Forgery is, but how great
soever that be, there appear no Signs, but such as are very late, of its being
much credited. Germanus, Hippolytus, and Damascene say a little; but the Story
is very naked, till Lib. 1. c. 7.
Nicephorus that lying Monk dresses it; and even that is very short. The
counterfeit S. Hierom tells a long Tale with such a grace, as to make it
doubtful who deserves the Bell, he or the counterfeit S. James; they look like
two such inimitable Originals, as one cannot be thought to Copy from the other:
Tho Pseudo-Hieronymus is so ingenuous as to tell us he is beholding to Seleucus
for this fine Legend; and this gives us some hint how this came to be Minted.

First, we have the Letter of Chromatius and Heliodorus to S. Hierom,
pretending that Armonius and Virinus had told them that S. Hierom had an Hebrew
Gospel of S. Matthew, wherein the Infancy of the V. Mary, and our Savior were
written, which they desire him to turn into Latin: To this the False Hierom
answers, excusing the difficulty of the Work, for that the Apostle designed not
to have it published, that therefore he had sealed it up in the Hebrew, and not
added it to his Common Gospel, to the end it might be secret, but delivered it
to be kept by some choice Religious Men, who would not suffer it to be
Translated, but only gave some Relations that it contained; till Seleucus first
published it, wherein tho he spoke Truth as to the History and Miracles, yet
added many Falsehoods as to the Doctrines, and therefore he promises to make a
verbal and exact Translation from the Hebrew: But the Forgery is so ill spun,
and the Blunders so gross, as to give as good a Character of the Author's
Talents, as of his Veracity. The Author probably was Seleucus the Manichaean,
or Leucius, as J. Casaubon reads in some Manuscripts, the first Syllable being
left out; and it is for this Reason that S. Austin disputing against Faustus the
Manichee, Si illius Apocryphae Scripturae ubi Joachim, Pater Mariae legitur,
detinerer. L. 23.
rejects such Apocryphal Writings, perhaps the very same: and elsewhere
condemns this Leucius. But he can be condemned by none more severely than by a
Pope, Gelasius, who calls him a Disciple of the Devil, and says, all his Books
are Apocryphal; which reflects a little odly on that other Pope, who not only
received this Forgery, but founded a Day and Office upon the shameless Fable of
this Heretic.

But because Pseudo-Jacobus writes with greater Authority, and would intrude
his stuff for Scripture, it may not be amiss, or undiverting, to see what is so
Authoritatively delivered with the Apostolical Benediction at the end. He
begins the Story, telling us of one Joachim, who is said to be very Rich and
Charitable, and to give double Offerings to God of his Estate. Now, we are
told, that when the great Feast of the Lord drew near, the People of Israel
brought all their Offerings, amongst whom was Joachim, none of the least
eminent; and Reuben stood up against him, and said, It is not lawful for you to
offer yours, because you have not made Seed in Israel. Upon which the Gentleman
was very sad, and went to the Genealogy of the Twelve Tribes, saying to
himself, I Will see whether in the Tribes of Israel I can find any who are without
Seed. Having accordingly made an enquiry, he sees that all the Righteous had
Seed: Thence he calls Abraham to mind, and how God was pleased to give him
Isaac in his old Age.

And Joachim was much cast down, and appeared not to his Wife, but retired into
the Wilderness, where he fixed his Tent, and fasted forty days, and forty
nights, saying with himself, I will not go up to eat or drink, but my Prayer
shall be my Food.

But in the mean while his Wife Ann endured two griefs, her Widowhood and her
Barrenness. Now the great Festival came, and Judith her Maid said to her, How
long will you afflict your spirit? It Is not lawful for you to mourn, for it is a
great Holy Day: Come, Madam, put on your best Dress. But Ann answered, Depart
from me, I will not do it: God has grievously humbled me. Judith on the other
side was still importunate with her Mistress, and said, What shall I say to you
if you will not hear? Deservedly has God shut up your Womb. And Ann was greatly
troubled at it, and was prevailed upon to put off her Mourning habit, and to
put on her Wedding garments: And about the Ninth hour she went into the Garden
to walk, where seeing a Laurel-Tree, she sits down under it, and pours forth
her Prayers to this effect; God of my Fathers bless me, and hear my Prayer, as
thou blessed'st the Womb of Sarah, and gave her a Son.

When looking up into Heaven she saw a Sparrows Nest, which made her lament
after a very grievous rate, and burst into such expessions; Woe is me! To what
can I be likened? or, What Womb brought me forth, that I should be a Curse
before the Children of Israel? For they laugh at, and reproach me, they throw
me out of the Temple of the Lord my God. Alas! what am I like to? I cannot be
compared to the Birds of the Heaven, etc. And after this manner she proceeds,
alleging to God, that he deals worse by her than by any other sort of
Creatures, worse than by the Birds and Beasts, nay, than by the Elements, for
that all these are fruitful. And no sooner had she finished her Complaint, but
the Angel of the Lord took his flight toward her, and said to her, Ann, Ann,
the Lord has heard thy Prayer, thou shall conceive, and bring forth a Child,
and thy name shall be celebrated over all the World. Then Ann very gratefully
makes a Vow to God, to make a Present to him of the Child which she shall have,
whether Male or Female, to Minister to him all the days of its life.

And after this, behold two Angels came, and said to her, Joachim your Husband
is coming with his Flocks: For the Angel of the Lord came down to him, and said
Joachim, Joachim, God has heard thy Prayer, go hence, behold, Ann thy Wife
shall conceive in her Womb. And he went down, and called his Shepherds, saying,
Bring me ten pure Ewe Lambs, and they shall be for my God; Twelve Calves which
shall be for the Priests; and an Hundred Goats for the People.

And Joachim came with his Flocks, and Ann stood in the Gate and saw him
coming, and ran and hung on his neck, saying, now she knew she was Blessed, and
so sings her Magnificat.

And Joachim rested the first day in his House, and on the morrow made his
offerings; but being more incredulous than his Wife, he desires a Sign for the
confirmation of what the Angel had foretold, which accordingly appears on the
Ephod. To conclude, Ann at the end of nine months is delivered of the Virgin
Mary. And the Birth is little less Miraculous than the Conception.

Afterward, when she was six Months old, her Mother put her on the ground, to
try whether she could walk upright; and she walked seven steps, and came into
her Mothers Lap. And Ann said, As the Lord lives, thou shall not walk on the
Earth, till I shall have offered thee in the Lord's Temple. And she made a
Chapel in her Chamber, and whatever was impure or common, was for her sake
removed: And she had Holy Hebrew Maids to wait on her.

The first year being over, Joachim made a great Feast, and invited the High
Priests and Scribes, with the Sanhedrin and all the People; and he offered up
his Oblations to the Priests, and they blessed him, saying, God of our Fathers
bless this Girl, and give her a famous and eternal Name in all Generations. And
all the People said, Amen, Amen. Then they offered her to the Priests, and they
blessed her, saying, The most high God bless this Child, and bless her with a
blessing that shall have no end. Then the Mother snatching her away, gave her
the Teat, and withal made this Song; I will sing Praises to the Lord my God,
who has visited me, and taken from me the Reproach of mine Enemies. The Lord
God has given the manifold Fruit of Righteousness in his sight; who shall
declare to the Sons of Reuben that Ann gives suck?

Singing this, she carried her into her Chapel, and went forth and Ministered
to them. The Feast being over, they went away rejoicing, and gave her the name
of Mary, glorifying the God of Israel.

When she was two years old, Joachim would have carried her to the Temple to
pay their Vow, but that Ann hindered it till the completion of the third year,
which was then done with a great deal of solemnity. The Hebrew holy Maids being
invited, took each their Lamps and lighted them, and went without looking back
till they came to the Temple; where the High Priest received and kissed her, and
said, Mary, the Lord has magnified thy Name in all Generations; and more to
that effect. And he placed her upon the third step of the Altar, and the Lord
God sent his Grace upon her, and she Danced, and all the House of Israel fell
in love with her. But the wonder is, she took no notice of her Parents, and
they went home admiring and praising God that she turned not after them.

After this we are told, how she was educated here like a Dove, and fed by the
hands of an Angel; till being twelve years of Age, a great Council was held how
to dispose of her. This was opened by the High Priest, who tells the rest of
the Priests her Age, and asks their advice, lest the Sanctuary forsooth be
defiled. The Answer was, Do thou stand at the Altar and pray for her, and
whatsoever God shall manifest to thee, that will we do. Upon this the H.
Priest, in his Pontifical Habit, goes into the Holy of Holies and makes
supplication for her, when behold the Angel of the Lord stood by him, and said
to him, Zachary, Zachary, go forth, and call together the Widowers of the
People, and let all bring their Rods; and to whom God shall show the Sign, his
Wife shall she be to keep.

Now the Heralds went over all the Land of Judea, and the Trumpet of the Lord
sounded, and all ran forth; and Joseph throwing away his Ax, went out to meet
them: So they went all together to the H. Priest, who taking the Rods they
brought, from them, went into the Temple and prayed; after Prayer he took the
Rods and went forth, and restored to every one his Rod, and no sign appeared.
But Joseph took his the last, and a Dove immediately flew out of it, to the no
small amazement of the spectators, and lighted on Joseph 's head. Upon this the
Priest said to him, The Lord has chosen you to take this Virgin to keep her.
Which Joseph opposes, making answer, I have Children, and am old, whereas she
is a young Girl; whence I am afraid of becoming ridiculous to the Children of
Israel. At last the Vengeance being proposed to him, which God executed on
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, being put by it into a dreadful fright, he makes no
longer resistance, but says, Mary, I take thee from the Temple of the Lord, but
I will leave thee at home, and go about my Carpenters Trade: And I pray God to
keep thee all the days of thy life.

Then we are told how, not long after this, the Priests had a Council about
making a Veil to the Temple, for which the Holy Maids of the House of David
were called, and all took their work by Lot, true Purple falling to Mary's
share. About which time Zacharias dying, is succeeded by Samuel. Mary having
received her Purple, went to work; and taking a Pitcher, went to draw water,
and she heard a Voice, Hail Mary full of Grace: and she looked about on both
sides to know whence the Voice came, but could see nothing. She comes trembling
into the House, puts down her Pitcher, and taking the Purple, sat down in her
seat to work; and the Angel of the Lord stood before her, and said, Fear not
Mary, for thou, etc. Then are intermixed some Passages taken out of the
Evangelists.

After which it is said, that she being six months gone, and sixteen years old,
Joseph returned from his business, about which he had been some years without
coming home to his Wife. Now finding her big, he was much startled, and
expostulated with her in many words; but is at last advertised of the whole
matter by an Angel. But the pity was, that a Scribe coming to speak with
Joseph, perceives Mary great with Child, and upon this makes a terrible outcry.
Immediately Justice lays hold on Joseph, and he is brought before the H.
Priest; and being both examined, he maintains that he had not kept company with
her; and she says, with a great deal of bitter crying, that she had neither his
nor any other Man's. They both denying, the Priest makes them drink the Water of
Redargution, which having done them no hurt, to the great astonishment of the
beholders, the Priest said, that since God had not manifested their sin,
neither did he condemn them.

Then is inserred what is related by St. Luke, how upon the Edict of Augustus,
Joseph leads her to Bethlehem. But this is not without enriching the Relation,
and using even wicked and immodest expressions. At last we are told, how she
was Delivered in a Cave, saving S. Luke's Honor, Joseph having found her a
Midwife by a great Miracle, and in his journey met with plenty of great
Miracles: which Midwife tells another who is called Salome; who not believing
that a Virgin had brought forth a Child, comes to make the proof; which is so
profanely and impudently described, together with other matters of as vile a
nature as can well be imagined. All which declare it to be made in derision of
Christianity; but that the better to make the Cheat pass, there are inserted in
form of Rapsody, some Expressions of the Evangelists, and some Rites to which
color may be given by some passages of the Old Testament, besides the
simplicity of the manner of Speech, and several Hebraisms affected. By the help
of which he thought he might, as he does conclude, I James writ this History in
Jerusalem, where a tumult being raised, I withdrew my self into a desert place,
till the death of Herod; and then like an Apostle he gives the Blessing.

The first Man that produced this rich Gospel, and Translated it from the Greek
was Prot-evangelion cum Evangelica Historia S. Mari Evangelistae, and vita ejus
in 8. Basil. 1552.
Postel; and it came out with the Notes of Bibliander, after which it appeared
with a great deal of suitable company, under the Title of Orthodoxagrapha. Gr.
Lat Editore Grynaeo. Bald. 1569.
Orthodox Writings, which have as much right all of them to this Title, as this
Gospel has to the Brother of our Lord. This Book indeed is so agreeable to the
Genius of the first Publisher, as to make L' Introduction au Traite de la
conformite des Merveilles Anciennes avec les Modernes. chapter 33.
H. Stevens suspect him to have a finger in the Forgery. But without defrauding
him of the praises of handing it forth into the World, we may reasonably allow
it elder, and probably the Original, as has been said, of the Fable: which is
too believed by Casaubon. This much is certain, that the Gospel going under the
name of S. James, the Brother of our Lord, is expressly named, and condemned as
Apocryphal by An. 494. Con. Binii. To. 2. p. 264.
the Roman Synod under Gelasius, about the latter end of the fifth Century, as
likewise the Book of the Nativity of our Savior, and concerning Mary and the
Midwife; with all those written by Leucius. We have by the same Synod,
consisting of Seventy Bishops, condemned the several Gospels passing under the
names of Thaddeus, Matthias, Peter, Barnaby, Thomas, Bartholomew, Andrew, which
no doubt but were filled with such like Stories. It is no wonder then, if in
the darker Ages such Trash came to be received, when it was very hard to make
things incredible enough to gain belief; and no Superstition so gross as might
not pass under those venerable Names. We have not only the Book of the Infancy
of Jesus, and that of the Birth of Mary referred to by the Legendaries; but
some also were not ashamed to own the Gospel of S. Ann. An Instance whereof is
given in one Bonaventure of Ipres in Flanders by H. Stevens, telling us, That
When Jesus Christ was grown big enough to work, Joseph began to employ him in
his Trade, and once above the rest having commanded him to Saw a piece of Wood,
he sawed it without taking heed to the mark that Joseph had made, so that it
was too short; at which Joseph, being very angry, threatened to beat him, and
would have done so, had not he made it longer, by taking himself one end, and
making Joseph take the other, and each one pulling. If such things as these are
not a scandal to Christianity, and the Invention of the Father of Lies, I know
not what is.

But, God be praised, it has fell out very happily, that these False
Evangelists have notoriously given themselves the Lie; having not either
Learning or Wit enough to lay the Plan of their Story so, as not to clash with
the greatest Evidences of Time and Place. Hence they bring upon the Stage such
persons as Issachar, Reuben, etc. who we are certain never were. And who, that
is in the least acquainted with the Customs of the Jews, can believe, that a
Girl of Three years old was ever put into the Sanctum Sanctorum, and there
lived alone, without any body to take care of her, for many years? Certainly if
only the High Priest entered there, and he not above one day in the year, and
then neither not above once or twice; and if he entered three or four times, was
to be put to death: nothing can be grosser than to place there a young helpless
Child. And if we believe this, it is not much if we believe she lived there
without Meat, Drink, Bed and Conversation for Ten or a Dozen years. Besides,
that there were no Nuns or Holy Women in the Temple, as the Story supposes, is
at large proved against Baronius by Exercit. ad Bar. App. Annal. N. 21, 22, 23.
Casaubon.

Having said so much of the Matter and Foundation, I have but little to add of
the following Book it self. The Publisher tells you, That it relates directly
to the Glory of the Supreme Creator of all things: And the Approvers tell you,
that they find nothing in it but what is conformable to the Apostolical Roman
Church; and that it is very useful to maintain the Devotion to S. Ann. But how
directly that Devotion relates to the Glory of the Supreme Creator, they may be
better able to reconcile than I am. I might easily compare some of the
Doctrines with those of a Spanish Doctor lately condemned at Rome; nay, and
parallel some of the very Expressions, to show that what is Heretical at one
time, may be Orthodox at another. I might also show how the Legend came to be
patched up out of the History of Hannah, Samuel's Mother, and that of our ever
Blessed Lord; and might give a view of some other Ave Maria Gratia plena, etc.
-- and benedicta sit Anna Matter sua, de qua sine macula tua processit caro
Virginea.
Devotions made to St. Ann: But I am afraid I have too extravagantly already
tired the Reader's patience, and therefore do conclude.

TO THE Queen Regent.
MADAM,
IT is Divine Providence, and not Fortune or Humane Industry, that bestows
Scepters and Crowns; and all France visibly discovers in the Regency of YOUR
MAJESTY, the Mild and Loving thoughts of the Divine Regent of the World, in
giving us the Best, as well as the Greatest Princess of the Earth to Govern it.

But may YOUR MAJESTY be pleased to suffer us, the poor Daughters of St.
JOSEPH, to declare, That it is in You that we have not only observed, but felt
one of the most beautiful draughts of this Divine Providence; which is, That as
it has its Eye and Scepter over the least of the Worms that creep upon the
Earth, as well as over the most exalted of Monarchs who is lifted up on the
Throne; So, Great Queen, Your Regency bearing its Glory already beyond
Admiration, by so many Glorious Actions which seem to rob each other of their
splendour in the Government of Your State, You judged that it would have lost
somewhat of its Luster, had not You showed Your self as well a Charitable
Mother of the poor Orphans, as a worthy Queen Regent of this great Monarchy.
You have said from the beginning, what the Wisdom Incarnate said formerly, in
this World, Suffer these little Souls to come to me. I am pleased to assist the
Designs of Preventing Grace, which has drawn 'em out of the evil steps and
perils of great Miseries, to which an extreme Poverty would have reduced 'em:
Divine Providence has taken 'em into its care, and it pleases Me to make My
self its Agent, or Lieutenant, in the means of Loving and Helping them; I
receive them under my Protection, and into My Bosom.

Truly it is an Action so much the more Powerful and Meritorious before God, as
it has the less of Interest, and as he alone could be its motive: But it is an
Action which perfectly resembles, and worthily honors the steps of Divine
Providence, of whose Favors and Succors, the Little as well as the Great, the
Shorn as well as the Crowned heads partake.

The most sublime cares in which YOUR MAJESTY is constantly to Admiration taken
up for the Glory and Felicity of this State, are, it must be confessed, the
lively Colors of its Pourtraiture: But Divine Providence was willing that the
little destitute Maids, whose Honor and Life You preserve, should give the
Shades.

That therefore all France may admire the wonders of Your Conduct, Your poor
Maids of St. Joseph will do nothing else in the World but publish to it the
Miracles of Your Charity, and declare in the condition wherein we mean
Creatures are, That as there is nothing too high for Your Regency, so nothing
is too low for Your Goodness; which by too much meriting toward us, puts us
into an entire inability of being ever able to be sufficiently Thankful.

Behold, nevertheless, a small Testimony of our profound Acknowledgment, which
carries our Hearts to the Feet of Your Majesty by this little Work and
Abridgment of the Prerogatives of St. Ann, which we adjudged ought to be, if
not worthy, at least not unworthy of Your Eyes, for the dignity of the Subject
which it treats. And the motives which invited us to this Duty are, That as it
was the day of St. Ann, when God inspired into us the first designs of Erecting
an House after the Pattern of his, where Maids should be bred and instructed
till the time they be provided for, in like manner as the Holy Virgin her
Daughter was so carefully and so holily educated by her: So is it this same
Saint which we believe to have been among the second Causes, that which
procured us from the First this incomparable favor of the greatest Queen in
the World, who imitates her Virtues, as well as worthily bears her Name.

Wherefore after having taken St. Ann for our Tutelar, and the Governant in
this House, and Dedicated to her a Chapel in the Design of erecting thereto a
Confrairy in her Honor, who has tied us to her self by Adoption, and by
Spirit and Grace to Jesus and Mary, who compose her Family; we have presumed
for the best return of Thanks which we have been able to present to Your
Majesty, to represent to You upon this little Paper, as in a Map, a World of
Merits and Perfections which were in this Great Saint, so to make yours
acknowledged and admired, and God praised by seeing your Majesty's Life a true
Image and Abstract of Hers. For if St. Ann were of the Blood Royal of David,
and consequently of the Race of Patriarchs and Prophets, and so much honored
by God; all the World knows that Your Majesty is of a Royal Birth, so exalted,
as the Sun always honors it with its Light, having no Horizon or setting for
its Realms.

If St. Ann were Great in Piety and Devotion; and if imitating the ancient Ann,
Samuel's Mother, she had frequent recourse to the Sanctuary by her Prayers and
Vows; the Piety which Your Majesty has from Your Ancestors, Charles 5. and
Philip 2. is so familiar to You, as it may be called the Star which commands
Your Inclinations; the Spirit which gives Life to Your Actions, and Success to
all Your Designs.

If St. Ann be worthily named by St. Damascene a Reasonable Turtle, forasmuch
as she past good part of her Life in solitude and sighing; alas, Madam, how
many years has your Majesty led a Life more like to a solitary Person, than to
the chiefest and the most virtuous Queen of the Universe!

If St. Ann were great in the Love which she bore to her God, whom she could
scarce ever suffer to be out of her sight; and to her Neighbor, by the
assistance she gave to all who were any ways necessitous; alas, Great Queen, it
is at Your expense, and by Your own experience, that You have learnt, like the
Messiah, both to suffer for God, and to suffer with the Miserable. And a time
was when the Divine Providence had taken away the use and disposal of Riches,
thereby to augment Your Charity toward God, but which at this day has given
You the means whereby You may exercise Charity toward Your Subjects with a
Liberality as extensive as exceeds both hopes and desires.

If Prayer and Faith made St. Ann bear the Fruit of Benediction, and the first
fruits of our Redemption; our Sacred Monarch, who shall, if it please God, one
day place the Flowerdeluces above the Crescent, and the other fair flower of
Your Majesty's Crown, are the Fruits as well of Your Prayers, and of Your Royal
Virtues, as of your Womb. Have not so many reiterated Vows, so many sighs of
your Majesty sent toward Heaven, made you the peaceable Dove of this State, and
the Calm of our Storms?

If St. Ann gave Lessons to her little Daughter, the holy Virgin, of living in
Humility, Charity and Holiness; how many Blessings owe we to Heaven, to see
this Royal Spirit with which Your Majesty was born, and so many excellent
Virtues and Royal Qualities slide so admirably into the Eyes, Ears, and Spirit
of our good young King? How under so good a Government shall we not have a King
of Wonders, one Liberal, Generous, and Pious?

Lastly, If Jesus and Mary were both the most excellent Masterpieces of the
Divine Power, both the Richest Treasures of Divine Wisdom, both the Divinest
Objects of its Goodness, both the Worthiest Subjects of the Cares and the
Government of St. Ann, yet hindered her not from daily adopting and associating
to these two noble parts of her Family, several confiding Souls; So, tho the
Attention of Your Majesty more peculiarly regards the Education of the King,
and the second Hope of France, his Brother; both given by Heaven for the Rest
of this Monarchy, and for the Consolation of Your Majesty; yet You disdain not
to open Your Bosom, and to tender the Arms of Your Mercy and Protection to the
poor little Orphans, the Maids of St. Joseph.

Behold, MADAM, the just resemblances of Your Glorious Pattern, which have
given us the Confidence of laying at Your Majesty's Feet an Abridgment of the
Wonders of this Holy Lady, whom God chose from all Eternity to be the Principle
of his Ways in the Salvation of Men; thinking we could not better clear our
selves of the Ingratitude which Your Majesty's Luster and excess of Goodness
have made necessary, than by a little Treatise that contains the Prerogatives
of St. Ann, to whom your Majesty gives and consecrates daily Your Person, Your
Family, Your Realm and Your Subjects; and in consideration of whom, we bring to
the Feet of your Majesty the Vows which we make of living and dying,

MADAM, YOUR MAJESTY'S Most Humble, and most Obedient, and most Obliged
Servants, THE MAIDS OF S. JOSEPH.

The Epistle of the French Publisher, to the Christian Reader.
It is about a year since, a little Book, entitled, The Acts of Invocation of
St. Joseph, composed by the R. P. Chiflet of the Society of Jesus, accidentally
falling into my hands, I Published it, and took the boldness to Dedicate it to
the Queen. Now in as much as I could not have the Honor of presenting it my
self, a Great Lady of the Court did me the favor to supply this defect, and to
present it in my name. But it being but a week since I received the Copy of
another Treatise, Intitul'd, The Prerogatives of St. Ann, Dedicated in like
manner to her Majesty by the Maids of St. Joseph, it seemed proper to me to
Print this as a continuance of the former. I therefore put it to the Press as
soon as I could, not to retard the Fruit that the Public might thence reap;
and, having otherwise proposed to my self, that in things which respect the
Love of God, together with Christian Piety as well toward St. Joseph as St.
Ann, as likewise the service of our Great Queen, I ought to use Diligence, and
to give in the time prefixed, as I have endeavored to do, this little Work; so
if by Praecipitation of the Impression there be any faults crept in, I beseech
you, Reader, that you would excuse them, upon the assurance I give you, that in
the new Edition which I purpose suddenly to make, I will endeavor to give you
content, and to make this Book as Correct as it shall be possible for me.
Receive it therefore, Reader, for a Testimony of mine Affection, or rather for
the Love of your self, which I am assured will not fail of being agreeable,
seeing it relates directly to the Glory of the Supreme Creator of all things.
Farewell.

THE PREROGATIVES OF St. ANNE.
CHAP. I. The Silence of the Evangelists concerning the Merits of St. Ann.
IT is Natures best Order to conceal from our eyes what her excellentest and
chiefest Works contain of the utmost perfection and greatness, as if in this
she meant to reproach the Vanity of our minds, which can hardly conceive a good
desire in the heart, without bringing it up immediately to the mouth, and
publishing it to the Rays of the Sun. Whereas Heaven, the most wonderful part
of the visible Creation, shows not its powerful influences which govern all
inferior things; or the Fire, that imperious quality which softens the most
intractable Metals; or the Earth its Gold, which it forms within its entrails;
or the Sea its Treasures, which it incloses within its Abysses.

An Order that might be styled Religious, if Nature guided it with Judgment:
but is yet better observed in Grace, which is pleased to cover and drown in
Ignorance and Silence the greatest perfections of the most holy and most
elevated Souls, with the design, that being afterward revealed, they may more
attract our admirations and respects. And when I consider how God showed not
himself to Moses, but in the transient glimps of a burning bush, and how he
says that his habitations are in darkness, and his thrones in the clouds, and
that he never abases himself so low as to make our senses or our reason capable
of his sight, or of the knowledge of his perfections; I discover presently, in
my Opinion, the reason for which certain Souls, the most eminent in sanctity,
and the most approaching to the Deity, are a Treasure as ineffable as God, who
conceals it from human eyes. The Athenians offered more Incense to that God
they knew not, than to those who were fastened to their Shrines, or enclosed in
their Temples: So we owe more reverence and honor to those heroical and
glorious Souls who are happily hidden to the World, and lost in God, to be
known by him alone, than to those whose Virtue has been Preached, and who have
had an immortal glory among Mortals. These have had their share in the rewards
of the World; those have been despised; These have united the honors of the
Earth with the merit of those of Heaven; those have renounced their own Glory
to procure that of God. And St. Paul having said, that there are certain Souls
who are willing to go beyond the first Lessons, who learn by the observance of
God's Commandments, and the Churches Laws, to study the most exalted maxims of
Christianity, and surpass the obligations common to all Christians, even so far
as to the renouncing, hating, and annihilating themselves, to be sacrificed on
every trial and occasion to the Empire of Divine Love, which transforms them
all into God, and makes them enter into the Powers of the Lord, (says the
Prophet) that is, into an adorable Communication, and as it were into the
rights of the same Attributes of Purity, Holiness and Charity of this God, to
whose Union this kind of Perfect Life has exalted 'em; this heavenly Doctor
called such Souls dead, and hidden in God with Jesus Christ, because the
spiritual work of inward Abnegations, and Abandonings of all their proper
Interest, and their own self into that of God, falling not under the sense and
reason of men, it must also thence be, that men are not capable of the
Perfections which this Labor acquires them: which makes him say, That he
esteems them greater for the perfections which they have and discover not, than
for those which would carry their Reputation and Name over the Universe, and
acquire 'em the Acclamations and Honors of the World. Words which seem to have
been read by that Ancient, when he said, That Virtue is hidden within her self,
that our eyes were too feeble to support her luster; and that she hid for those
who were most assiduous at her Sacrifices, Beauties which would obscure those
of the Sun, if the generality of men were capable of observing 'em.

Hence I draw this advantageous Conclusion for the Honor of St. Ann, That had
men looked on her perfection with a steady eye, and a constant view, she had
not appeared greater to their eyes than Saturn to ours, which tho the vastest
in extent of all our Planets, the most perfect too and most beautiful, seems
the smallest, because he is the farthest removed from our sight. St. Ann was a
Mystery hidden from Eternity in God, who was pleased to make use of her for the
productions of his first Designs, and for giving by her the first attacks to
death, which had introduced into the World; demonstrating how, if the weakness
of one Woman had given beginning to its Conquests, the Virtue and Generosity of
another should beat down its Trophies, and overturn its Empire; since in the
ordinary course of Generation she conceived and gave to the World a Daughter,
who acknowledged neither its Way nor Dominion. If then in this miserable case
of our race, our Impotence be such, as not to be able to resist the power, and
to oppose our selves to the violence of Death, a St. Ann be found alone in
Nature, who has done that which none could tell how to do, taken from Death the
first Pretensions and Rights which it had usurped over human births; Who can
have thoughts capable to form an Idea of her merit? or words to express what is
not beneath both what she was, and what we owe to her? Add, how this Saint
having studied nothing but continual Annihilations of her self, and
Glorifications of her God, she retained nothing of the Earth, but made her self
wholly Celestial, whose merit was therefore removed from all human knowledge,
and reserved for the Divine alone. And as Alexander the Great said, That the
Scepter and Crown of the World were not, but for the Virtues of him who
admitted nothing worthy to bound his Ambition, but what was not known to the
rest of men, and what the greatest of the Gods kept concealed in his brain; She
also whom Jesus Christ had designed for the Regency and Government of his
Family, to command there as the Virgins Mother, who was His, required far other
qualifications than common Morality, and ought to have far different Virtues
from those, which ordinary holiness teaches all men: which therefore have been
kept unknown, by reason of the greatness and excess of this merit. But God
alone, who is able to give the just praises of holy Actions to every one
according to the weight and excellence of their value, has been pleased to draw
them out of silence in this Age, by an Annual Commemoration and solemn Feast in
his Church, to show them unto all the World in the Glory of their Triumphs; and
has discovered to us two sorts, some External, which she borrows elsewhere;
others Internal, with which she adorns her Soul. For

CHAP. II. The External Perfections of St. ANN.
I Advance them from the consideration of her Daughter; for if the goodness of
the Fruit necessarily proves that of the Tree, this fair Plant of Eternity, St.
Ann, cannot be better known than by her Daughter the Holy Virgin; and tho one
should write in her honor as many Volumes as are in the World, there could not
hence be given us so perfect a knowledge of her Prerogatives, as is in simply
saying, that she was the Mother of the Mother of God, and the Grandmother of
God himself.

It is this Tree that the Angels showed to St. Bridgid, saying to her, Figure
to your self, chaste Spouse of Jesus Christ, a Royal Eagle, who going to make
her Nest, and prepare a Lodging for her young Eagles, goes from Forest to
Forest, flies from Mountain to Mountain, to choose a Tree which may serve her
design, and having met with that which surpasses all others in height and
beauty, which has the deepest and strongest Roots, and the best defended from
Storms and Tempests, she stops there, and makes choice of the strongest Branch,
and the nearest to Heaven, to feed there, and breed her young ones.

Imagine now that God is this Eagle, who running over with his Eyes, as it
were, so many beautiful Trees, all the Women who were to be from the first to
the last, perceived not any one so worthy to receive the Glorious Virgin, who
was to be the little Nest of the Heavenly Eaglet, who is the Word Incarnate, as
St. Ann, in whom he rested himself, as in the Tree of Paradise, which he knew
to be the tallest in Devotion, the deepest in Humility, the largest in Charity,
and of the most pleasant odor in Sanctity.

O Beautiful Tree! and far other than that which was represented in a Picture
at the triumphant entry of Mary de Medicis, Queen Mother of Lewis 13. which
bore Scepters for Boughs, Crowns for Flowers, Kings for the Stock, and little
Deities for the Fruits. St. Ann was the fair Tree of the Genealogy of Jesus and
Mary, whose Stock is made up with the David's, the Solomon's, and other Kings
whose Flowers are Diadems; but the Holy Virgin, the richest Crown, as being the
finest Flower of Heaven and Earth, and her Fruit is the Incarnate Son of God.
Certainly as the most glorious Diadem of the First of the uncreated Persons, is
the Production of his Word the second Person, whom he begat in the splendour of
Saints; so, if, in one word, you would know the price of that Crown which St.
Ann bore both on Earth and in Heaven, it must be said, and this is to say all,
that her Treasure and her Crown, was the giving being to her who gave it to a
God, which is to be Crowned with the Merits of Mary, like the Tree with its
Flowers and Fruit.

Whence it is to be concluded, That the Dignity, the Grace, and the Holiness of
this only, and only Perfect Daughter, ought to reflect back to her Mother, even
to a point, That she rendered her incomparable in Sanctity, as she was in her
Dignity. For of two things, one must of necessity happen, Either that this holy
Virgin had not the Power, or that having the Power, she communicated to her
whatever we can fancy greatest in Grace. Her Paps have too much credit and
access with the Word, her Son, not to have the Power, who being in the terms of
Clement of Alexandria, the Pap of his Heavenly Father, which gave foecundity to
all Nature, would also, as he had been the Principle of the Universe, by being
Mamelle de son Pere, the Virgin should be his; and that from the Bosom of his
Mother should proceed a Power, (but yet not without proportion) and a Force to
establish a World of Grace to make Saints, and to make them worthy of Glory. So
that it is true in some sort, and good Divinity to say, That the Felicity of
the Saints is derived from Mary, and that there is no body who is not obliged
to her for the fortification of his Patience, for the Victory over his
Temptations, for Preservation from Falls, for Augmentation of his Merits, for
his final Grace, and finally, for his Glory.

This Principle supposed, who will doubt that St. Ann was not the Masterpriece
of Mary's Workmanship, and that the Power of this last, was not the Measure of
the Excellence of the former? She could make a Prodigy of Virtue, and a Miracle
of Greatness, therefore she did; and not only from the time that She was her
Daughter, but even before She was created, we may say, That She labored on
this Masterpiece. And it is one of the greatest Miracles of the Mysteries of
our Religion, that the Children give Life to their Parents; and those who are
not yet, give admirable Advantages to those who already are.

Thus Jesus is the Son of Adam, according to Nature, and his Father according
to Grace; the Virgin is the Mother of the Savior, by the shadowing of the Holy
Spirit, and is likewise the eldest Daughter to the Redeemer. Thus St. Ann is in
the state of Grace, the Daughter of her Daughter, the Holy Virgin, by a
Plenitude of Grace, which She from her received.

Which ought not to be thought strange by him, who has tasted the Sense, and
universal Consent of the Fathers, who assert, that what was given in Plenitude
to Christ, ought in Proportion to be attributed to the Holy Virgin; that they
both were busied in the cares of our Salvation with the same Courage, tho not
the same Power: It Is then the Spirit of Christ is not only diffused in the new,
but has its extent over all the Old Testament; and no Body was saved, but by
his Merits anticipated; wherefore should one deny Jesus Christ to have in
favor of the foreseen Merits of his Mother, granted some Graces as well
before, as after his Conception, to certain Souls, especially to those most
nearly allied to him.

Among these, St. Ann, in Consideration of the Merits of this Virgin, was
elevated to the Prerogatives and Crowns, which ought to answer the degree of
Alliance which she had to her, which was no less than of a Mother to a
Daughter, an Alliance which establishes.

CHAP. III. The first Reason of the Prerogatives of St. ANN.
SHE gave to the Virgin Being and Life, which is the dearest Treasure of Man,
and the Foundation of other Perfections. In exchange, therefore, it is
reasonable the Virgin should impart to Her all the Noble Qualities, which might
make a Soul filled with Complacency to her God.

For if our Lady had an extreme Zeal to carry Jesus Christ into the House of
her Cousin Elizabeth, so to sanctify her Child, while he was enclosed in her
Womb; if this Zeal thought long, and her Love gave her Wings to fly thither
without fear of the Inconveniences and Fatigues of the Journey, with design of
procuring Holiness to her Relations, and her Blood. God having put a perfect
Order in her Affections and Loves; must it not be said, That that which She had
for the rest of her Relations, was but a spark in respect of the cares which
She had for her which was her Mother? And must it not be believed She gave her
a better allotment in Jesus Christ and his Graces; there being nothing so
reasonable as to do all the good She could to her Parent?

Certainly one of the most powerful Arguments for convincing a generous Spirit,
is the fitness of the matter; and this fitness is more prevalent with good
Judgments, than the strictness of Laws.

Whence St. Thomas speaking of the two highest Mysteries, the Incarnation of
the Word, and the Reality of his Body, the adorable Sacrament and Sacrifice of
the Altar, says they ought to be believed, because it was fit that the Son of
God for the perfect Union of himself with us, should be allied by the Personal
Union with our Nature, and be really in the Eucharist, to satisfy the Rules of
Love, which require a continual Presence of the beloved Object. Lastly, says
this Saint, to show that these Mysteries have fitness, is sufficient to show,
that they are so in Truth.

Now there is nothing more reasonable, than to say, That the Virgin loved her
Mother with a generous and noble Love, that is never without Liberalities and
Graces; and that she imparted to her the richest Presents of Heaven, since She
had 'em in her Power, and her Hands; and that in doing so, She satisfied the
most just Sentiments of Nature, and obeyed the Holy Laws of her God, which
commanded the Honor of her Father and Mother. And as there was in this the
greatest Fitness, we proceed to show, that there was also the greatest

CHAP. IV. JUSTICE. The second Reason of the Prerogatives of St. ANN.
GOD's Justice would not have less Satisfaction for the Sins of Men, than the
Death of a God. Now it is wonderful in the Holy Virgin, that to conform her self
to this Justice, She forgot (if I may so say) how She was the Mother of God;
and She offered her self, like a bloody Victim on the Altar of the Cross. For
as the Son of God ought not to pass from the Bosom of his Father, into that of
a Virgin Mother, and to make himself Man without her Consent; so neither ought
he, neither would he be destined to the Death, which was to make us Immortal,
but by the Consent of this his Mother.

If then She generously executes the thing in the World, which is the most
difficult to her, the depriving her self of the Object of all her Delights,
consenting to the Death of her only Son, an Action naturally contrary to the
Love of such a Mother: If She quits the part of a Lover, to become a Believer;
and a Mothers Affections, to perform Obedience to God; if lastly, Justice
carries her beyond Love; how can it be, that the Virgin obliged by Divine and
Humane Laws, to Honor her Mother, should not employ all the Artifices of her
Love, and all the efforts of her Power, to make of St. Ann a true Sanctuary of
all Graces?

The Grace to consult the Judgment of St. Peter, is a Participation of Divine
Nature; the Virgin therefore having the Plenitude of this in her Bosom, for the
Communication of it to Souls, and being not only blessed among all Women, but
the very Spring of all Blessings; what part ought She to give to her Mother? A
Duty which further proceeds from

CHAP. V. The Obedience of the Virgin to St. ANN. The third Reason of her
Prerogatives.
IF from this, that the Son of God was well pleased to submit his impeccable
Will, to that of the Virgin; a good Consequence is drawn, how Innocent and
Straight ought that Rule to be, which gave Law to the Son of God?

So to see this little Virgin impeccable by Grace, as her Son was by Nature, at
the Feet of St. Ann, to take the Instructions and Exercises of her Mother, has
one not a just Motive to believe the Innocence, and the Rectitude of the
Affections and Passions of this Holy Mother, who ought to regulate those of her
Daugther, who was the most perfect of all Creatures? The Personal Union set a
part, is as much removed from the least spot of Sin, as the Sun from Darkness
and Obscurity; and St. Austin took so high a flight in the Praises of the
Virgin, that he got out of Sight, saying, That he advanced nothing that
exceeded her Merit, by calling her the Form of God; that is, tho there be no
Miracle in the World like to the Mercies of Jesus Christ, and those of his
Mother be but little Rays in Comparison of this Sun; he was pleased to frame as
it were an Idea, on which he cast his Eyes, to mark upon his Soul the beautiful
Lines of the excellent Practices of Virtue, which he saw in his Mother, to the
end one might see in the Son, as it were a lively Image, and Expression of the
rare Virtues of the Mother; or else, and rather this brave Title of Form of
God, means that Jesus Christ had a design, that as in the Looking-Glass, the
Image of his Face is seen, who locks into it, and as Wax receives the Form and
Figure of the Seal, which is imprinted on it; even so, the Holy Virgin was
marked with the Seal of the Divine Perfections of Jesus; and She has
represented them in her self after a very excellent manner.

So nothing is advanced concerning the Merits of St. Ann, which accrues not to
the Honor and Glory of her Daughter, by calling her the true Form of the
Virgin, and by saying She had such Accumulation of Perfections, that to see the
Holy Virgin practice those Virtues, which came so near those of her Mother, one
would reasonably judge that St. Ann might serve as an Original and Model to the
holy Actions of the Virgin, if they had not been otherwise more Holy in
proportion to the Grace of the Mother of God, which heightened them.

To what degree of Sanctity ought St. Ann to be exalted, who so lively
expressed, and so perfectly represented in her self, the Virtues of the Virgin;
and whose rare Qualities might be the Idea's and Patterns of those of this her
so worthy a Daughter. But

CHAP. VI. The Glory of JESUS CHRIST. The fourth Reason of the Prerogatives of
St. ANN
REquires that St. Ann should be such, to be his worthy Grandmother. For if
the Messiah from the time that he prepared his Birth for the World, and put his
first disposals and designs in Abraham, desired Innocence and Sanctity from him
to merit this favor; must he not desire those incomparably greater in St. Ann,
according to the measure that She more nearly approached his Blood. The Holy
Virgin then seeing the Glory of her Son engaged, and the Sanctity of her Mother
to enter into the Interests of the Incarnate Word her Son, must ^he not have
made St. Ann a Work of Grace worthy of the Admiration of Angels, and of the
Adoration of Men?

And if elsewhere, in the designs of the eternal Providence, and in the
Language of Scripture, Names serve for a mark of Offices, and Offices are the
measures of Merits; St. Ann having been chosen in the Idea's of eternal
Predestination to be the Grandmother of Jesus Christ; ought not this step to
comprehend as many Excellencies as demonstrate the Sublimeness of this Saints
Perfections? There need be used only the Dignity of her Name of Grandmother of
Jesus Christ. An Argument which the Apostle uses to prove the Pre-eminences of
Jesus Christ above the Angelical Natures; for that he was the Son of God. The
Dignity therefore in St. Ann, that having entered by the Conception and
Nativity of the Virgin, into the Economy of the Incarnation, and into the
state of the Hypostatical Union, She was by this her Daughter, exalted into so
dazzling a Throne of Glory, that there is only above it, the Trinity of
uncreated Persons, the Humanity of Jesus Christ, and the Holiness of her
Daughter, Mother of God; leaving below her Greatness all other created
Eminencies; without doubt St. Ann ought to expect such a Preeminence from the
Queen of Virtues, and the worthy Mother of the King of Virtues, the Virgin. It
remains now to see

CHAP. VII. The Internal Perfections of St. ANN
WIth Relation to which we must Sacrifice closed Eyes, like those who adored
the Fortune of the Romans, and in the Extasis of our Hearts, and in the humble
Sentiments that carry our Souls to confess our Impotencies, to acknowledge the
Merits and Virtues of her, who bore in her barren Womb the first fruits of our
Redemption, and who nourished with her Milk the Fruit of all Benediction; let
us be content to say, That as the fairest Flower of the Virgins Crown was the
Meriting her exalted Dignity of Mother of God; so that of St. Ann is, that God
gave to her Merits, this glorious Advantage of conceiving in her Bowels a
Daughter, whose Conception without Sin, and Birth full of Honor; effected the
Re-establishment of the Universe. Merits which were

CHAP. VIII. Her Prayers.
FOR tho God in the Decrees of his Providence be resolved to bestow certain
Graces on some Persons; he nevertheless determined before the World not to
grant them but to those who ask for them; and in the everlasting Preparation of
such Favors, their Prayers are included either as Causes or Means of obtaining.

Hence he would have us ask the very things which he is resolved to give us, as
we must open our Eyes to receive the light of the Sun, and observe some
Formalities to obtain the Graces of a Prince. Thus God having in his eternal
Predestination prepared this incomparable Benefit for St. Ann, to be Mother of
the Mother of the Word Incarnate; he would that She should acquire this
ineffable Treasure by her Tears and Vows; that so her Merit might enter into
the Execution of this everlasting Counsel. St. Ann therefore having been above
twenty years in a State of Barrenness with him whom God had given her for a
Husband, St. Joachim, was in Affliction to see her self without a Child, who
might blot out the Reproach which She met with in the Company of other Ladies;
requested daily from Heaven, with a Countenance of Grief, a Remedy for her
Disgrace.

But there is nothing which so much contracted her Heart, as the Confusion and
Shame which the High Priest Issachar one day put her into, as She went
according to her Custom to Jerusalem, at the Solemnity of one of the great
Feasts of the year, where in face of all the World, he reproached her of
Rashness and Boldness, to appear with the rest, She who bore the marks of Gods
Malediction, with which being troubled tothe quick, and not knowing from whom
to receive Consolation, She had recourse to God with Supplication to take from
her this Reproach, and with Promise to Consecrate to him the Fruit which he
should please to give her; and not daring to present her self any more openly
to the World, She threw her self into a Solitude and Retreat, which shut up all
Avenues to Company, having no other Companions but her Thoughts, and her
Affections for Heaven. In this lonesome place, where She was wholly attentive
to her God, wholly fixed and bent in Spirit and Will to him, to consider his
Greatness, and admire his Perfections, and where She did every day noble and
heroical Acts of Love, and of Conformity to the Divine Pleasure, of Faith and
Hope, of Adoration and Glorification, and other Virtues; not to speak of the
Sublime Operations of the Mystical Life, to which God had exalted her, and
which all the Words of Men are ^ot able to explicate.

But where in recompense of her Introversions and Recollections, there was
happily fulfilled in her the Prophecy in Isa. 35. in favor of the Souls that
retire from their Commerce with the World, to be busied only with God; for as
much as She received unspeakable Joys in her Desert; and that her Retreat was
to her a Spring of living Delights. For the heavenly Angel came to visit her on
the beginning of December, and brought to her the happy, and the fortunate News
from God, of a Daughter, which should be named Mary, which should not only
cause Joy to her, but should likewise be the happiness of infinite others,
since she was to be the Mother of the Messiah promised in the Law; and to
collect in her self the Riches of Libanus and Carmel, which are the
Fruitfulness of a Mother, and the Integrity of the Virgin in the same Spirit.

And, as has been said, so God repaired with an exceeding advantage by himself,
and by the abundance of his Graces, all the Losses which this Soul suffered,
retired from the Contentments and Recreations of all Creatures, and made her
Solitude like Paradise. Mirth and Joy are found here, and Praises are here
retained; for having seen her. Barrenness followed with the Birth of a
Daughter, who is the Treasure of Heaven and Earth, and who gave her a God for
Grandson: O the Noble Fruit of the Prayer of St. Ann! Mary, who is the Wonder
of Nature, the Prodigy of Grace, and the Miracle of Glory. After her Prayer
comes

CHAP. IX. Her Humility.
IF Prayer be in the Opinion of the Fathers, an Elevation of the Soul to God,
as of a Vapor from the Earth to Heaven; it is necessary First, That as the
Vapor is elevated from the Earth by the Rays of the Sun, attracting it with
its heat, and subtilizing it by taking away its gravitating Quality derived
from the Earth, the place of its Origin; just so the Prayer of St. Ann, that
it might be elevated as high as Gods Throne, was directed thitherward in little
Fumes which the heat of Divine Love excited in her, purifying whatever she had
of Earth, that her Soul might have only the Affections and Sentiments of Heaven.

Secondly, That as the Vapor being in the Middle Region of the Air, melts and
falls back toward the Earth, as if the Sun by its Rays would constrain it to
return to, and know its first Principle; just so the Prayer which the Tongue
and Heart of St. Ann had sent up into the Bosom of God, ought by the Divine Ray
to be abased and reflected into the Consideration of one's Nothing, and to
return to the Earth by Sentiments of Humility; but such as should bring along
with them the Showers and the Dews of Jesus and Mary, and which should
fertilize the Human Nature with a God Man, and with the Mother of God: An
excellent Rule of Prayer in the Approaches and Fervours, the Unions and
Exaltations of one Being to descend back into Meanness, and the Meditation that
one is Nothing, that one is worth Nothing, that one can do Nothing, that one
merits nothing from God.

Which is the Reason perhaps why the High Priest sprinkled those who offered
Sacrifices, with Ashes mixed with Water, to advertise them that they were
nothing but dead Earth, incapable of Consistence and Motion without the Favors
of Heaven; and that they ought to be of Abraham's mind, who said, I will appear
before my Lord, dust and ashes as I am. Hence it follows that we ought to hope
for the Grace of God, and Supernatural Powers.

It is in these Valleys of mean esteem of ones self, says David, that God makes
the Fountains of his Favors, and the Waters of his Grace to flow; and not upon
the Mountains and Spirits of Presumption, that approach the Temples and the
Altars, with Head and Face lifted up before him, in whose Presence the Angels
tremble, and the Seraphims sink down into the lowest depths with Reverence; and
before whom; says St. Austin, if thou will humble thy self, the bait of thy
Humility attracts him, and he is constrained to descend from his Father's Bosom
into thine; thou possessest him, and do with him after the Inclination of thy
will: But if vain glory accompany thy Prayer, thou find a God who has
Thunder in his hand to destroy thee. 'Twas in these valleys of mean esteem of
her self, the Prayer of St. Ann found Forces, and the grant of her Requests.
Her Third Merit was

CHAP X. Her Generous Confidence in God's Providence.
THE Earth, in my Opinion, is the Noblest, tho the last of the Elements,
because being not able to act of its self, this state gives it so much Sympathy
with the Sun, that it becomes fruitful through the favor of his Beams in all
kinds of Production: So it is a very glorious Weakness, and powerful Impotence,
for an humble Soul to acknowledge her Miseries and her Nothing: Since God
beholding this Void, he immediately replenishes it with his Grace; for where
the Creature is not, there is the Creator presently found; and where Manhood
leaves us, there the Godhead enters by a Consequence as necessary in the Order
of Grace, as in that of Nature, the Air immediately fills those places which it
finds void.

Now as God has extraordinary Graces that reward Humility, and exalt it from
its meanness into which it seems plunged; among others there is a generousness
of Heart which the humble Soul draws from the great Confidence she puts in
this, that an Infinite Wisdom both knows, and is able; and will help her;
triumphing over her Miseries and Weaknesses; and being to her what her Soul is
to her Body, or the Heaven to the Earth.

Confidence in God, which comprehends all the most distant degrees of nature in
a most simple Unity, unites these two Contrarieties, to believe that we can do
nothing, and that we can do every thing. That we are able to do nothing of our
own strength, and that we can do every thing in virtue of the Divine Arm on
which we rely. Thus when Humility has made us diffident of our selves, we
ought to raise our Courages by an holy and invincible Faith, that may make us
brave all the Disgraces and Difficulties of the World, looking to this
all-seeing eye, and all-powerful Arm, who has a heart readier to give to us,
than ours to ask or receive.

Such was the Prayer of S. Ann, animated with a lively Faith, not only a
general one, which made her believe that God to whom she prayed was
all-powerful, and all-good, and had a Paternal Providence, and an infinite love
for her; but a particular faith that this gracious God would grant her the
desired Grace, according to the Pattern of another Ann the Mother of Samuel, 1
King. 1. Concerning whom the Sacred Oracle pronounces that after the Prayer
which she made to obtain a Son, she was no more agitated by any waves of
Inquietude; but was left in a constant evenness, and a perfect tranquillity of
mind, as if she already had the thing she prayed for, says St. Chrysostom of
the first Anna, and felt the Babe formed and stirring in her womb, inasmuch as
she had begged it with a spirit not wavering, undoubtful of success, but with an
entire confidence, and an unshaken persuasion that she should obtain. It Is
thus, says St. Thomas 2a. 2ae. Q. 83. that as Charity makes our Prayer
meritorious, Confidence makes it impetratorious, or effectual. Thus it is that
those great Courages who fully confide in God, glorify him more by the Noble
and high Sentiments that they have of him, than a Million of narrow hearts, to
whom all seems lost as soon as they see any thing fail 'em, and themselves left
by some one of these broken reeds, the Creatures on which they relied.

Thus it is that St. Basil in his 20th. Orat. de Principatu exalts Confidence
as much as Sacrifice, and says, It Is no more lawful to place it any where else
than in God, than to present the Cult which the Sacrifice contains, to any
other than him. To this I add, that as the Honor we give to God in Sacrifice
is very great by reason of the Protestation we there make of acknowledging him
for our Sovereign: So that which he receives from us by Confidence, is
wonderful, inasmuch as it is like an Oath of Fealty, and an Homage whereby we
oblige our selves to be willing to depend on him alone, avowing his infinite
bounty and infallible verity, and renouncing every other hold which we might
have but him, which is very honorable to him; and it is thus that our Saint by
the vigor and firmness of her Faith merited the greatest Grace in the World
next to the Personal Union, and Divine Maternity, that is, to bear in her Womb
the Virgin, who was to be the Mother of God, and to have for Grandson, and
embrace in her Arms no less than him who has God for his Father.

After these Preeminences of this great Saint, we have nothing to do but to
contribute our Homages by Invocation of her Powers, and the imitation of her
Virtues. As for,

CHAP. XI. Her Credit and Power in Heaven.
IF St. Ann next to the Virgin be the nearest to Jesus Christ, and has a
greater share of him than any of all the Saints in the Incarnation, which is
the cause of the Crowns they wear; it is easy to conclude, that this Proximity
has given her the most eminent of Paradise, as water partakes more of the
qualities of its Spring, the nearer it is to it; and that her Credit is
parallel to her Greatness, which the better to comprehend, it is necessary to
remember how all Gods creatures being the productions of his Goodness, by the
Being which he gave them as an extract of his own, he would have them to rejoyn
again to him as to their final, as well as efficient cause, placing this
Perfection in this Reunion and Return to their Principle.

Now according to the Doctrine of St. Thomas, in his Book of the Humility of
Christ, his Will was to recall to himself middle things by the high, and low
ones by the middle; and he makes use of Jesus Christ, to gather together, and
reunite by him whatever is in Heaven or in Earth; and this Jesus Christ makes
use in the first place of the Holy Virgin as the nearest allied, then of some
Persons of Election and near approach to the Incarnation, the Principle of all
Sanctification; upon this account therefore St. Ann was to have the next rank
to her Daughter, and must approach nearest after her in the Sanctity of Jesus
Christ, and in Grace, which is with St. James a quality wholly Divine,
defending from the Father of Lights into our Souls, and must come there first
by Christ, then by the Virgin, and after that by St. Ann; consequently in our
Indigencies and Needs we must address our selves by St. ANN to the Virgin, and
by the Virgin to Jesus Christ, and by Jesus Christ to God his Father, who can
refuse nothing to his Son, no more than he can to his Mother, or she to hers
who is St. Ann. And as St. Gertrude, a Virgin of an incomparable Piety and
Glory of the French Scepter, saw one day in an extacy Angels who descended from
Heaven, and who in the midst of the Quire where the singing was, brought a most
resplendent Throne of Glory, in the which the H. Virgin being seated, like a
Queen full of Majesty, received the Prayers of all the Nuns who approacht this
Throne, and fulfilled their request.

It must be said that this Throne was the Glorious St. Ann, in which Jesus and
Mary are set down; and if we would obtain any Grace whatever, we must prostrate
our selves before this Throne of Grace, Ann being rightly interpreted Grace,
and go thither with Confidence and Fervor. But above all, with

CHAP. XII. The Imitation of her Virtues,
BY which we revere her Sanctity, as by our Prayers we humbly acknowledge her
Power.

And this the whole end and fruit that God would have by Invocations and Cults
toward this Saint, and the sole means which those Souls who carry this fair
Name of Ann, have to possess it with advantage.

For as God seeing that we are but impotent and wretched Creatures, having no
Present worthy to approach his Throne, and to be offered to him, desires from
our Weakness only the sanctification of his Name, which is performed by
Holiness in our Manners, and Innocence in our Lives.

It is also this his Grandmother desires from the Souls who carry her Name,
signifying a Spring of Grace, that their hearts be always replenished with it,
for that else they would possess it but by injustice and violence; and this
would be to have a splendid name in appearance, accompanied with very ill
circumstances; and to fall into the reproach of a Judas, a word which signifies
Confession, but who was notwithstanding the perfidious Traitor of his Master;
or of an Absalom, That is to say, the Peace of his Father, and who was yet his
torment and his scourge; or of a Solomon, amabilis Deo, the beloved of God, by
whom he was nevertheless hated for his impurities. This, lastly, would be to be
a Capernaum, Ager penitentiae, the Field of penitence, a Town which was yet so
obstinate, and which cared so little to do Penance, that Jesus Christ in St.
Luke swore its destruction.

A Name then so favorable, and so full of Grace as Ann, ought to furnish
continual matters of Virtue to the Souls who have the honor to bear it, if
they but never so little permit their thoughts to meditate on it; and this
obliges them particularly, as it generally obliges all Christians,

To have always holy Alliances and Sacred ties with God the Principle of Grace,
to follow always the guidances and motives of Grace, but especially to practice
such of her Virtues as Jesus Christ knows to be most convenient for our
condition; as among other, her solitudes and her retreats, so to make you often
seen to God and to your self: For it is in the Hives that the Bees make
secretly their Honey, and the Silkworms make their Silk within their Cells;
Nature forms the King of Metals in silence, in the Caverns of the Earth, out of
the noise and sight of Men: The Manna fell during the rest and calm of the
night, not with Storm or Tempest, but gently and without tumult, as the dew
which is softly and without show transpir'd into the bosom of the Earth.

It is not in the hurry of the World, in the noise of Housekeeping, in the
Inquietude of Cares, in the turmoils of an active and a divided Life, but in
the separation from every thing in the bottom of the Soul, in Tranquillity, the
disengagement and liberty of the Spirit in the recollection and solitude of the
Heart, where the Holy Spirit sheds abundantly its Graces, to prepare a Soul, of
whom he designs to make an instrument of his Wonders, as he did of St. Ann.

It is in this Sanctuary that this hidden Manna is found, Rev. 2. that is given
to the Souls Triumphant over the World, which is no other thing but an
ineffable Consolation begot from a very inward and continual Inclination
toward God, with a sense and relish of his Truths and Greatness, better
apprehended by Experience than by Knowledge.

It is in the Quietude of this Divine Genter and Fund, that there is tasted
this kind of Prayer which you desire, Holy Souls, which consists not so much in
that which is ours in functions and uses of our Powers, but in that which is
God's, and in the infusion of his Graces, where through a full silence of the
Soul, which is a denudation of Thoughts in the Understanding, and of Affections
in the Will; the sole Master of Hearts speaks and brings nothing thither but
that sole disposition of Respect and Submission to the most pure, most simple,
and most inward action of the Uncreated Spirit in ours.

It is here you shall not only be able to carry your Hopes beyond the Forces,
and to cast your filial and amorous Confidences into the Protection of God's
Arm, and into the Sweetness of the Love which he has for you; but shall also
adjust you to your Rule, which cannot fail, that after the request of some Grace
from God, you may have your Spirit at rest, and deposited in that of God, to
wait for, with Patience and Silence, as Jeremy says, the Salvation of God.

It is here, That after the Pattern of St. Ann, you give up your self to the
entire Consummation of the most holy Will, and most adorable Designs, which God
has had from Eternity upon you, and upon each moment of your Life. And it is
here, that your Soul appearing quite naked before him, submits her self to him
with absolute Resignation of Spirit, of Sense, of Taste, and of all manner of
Satifaction, desiring naught but God's only Good, and the Interest of his
Glory; breathing forth these Words from all your Heart, I cast my self at the
Mercy of the Love which you have for me, O my God. I am the Object of the
Vigilance and the Affection of a God. It Is enough for me that thou take the
Title of my Father, to make me see that thy Power is inseparable from thy
Goodness, that I ought to expect thence all the good that shall be to thy
Glory, and my Salvation, which is whatever I must; that all the present desires
of God be accomplished on me: I am content and indifferent to all, for Scarcity
or Abundance, to Act or to Suffer, for Obtaining or Refusing, Consolation or
Desolation, Calvary or Thabor. I offer my self to all as a pure Capacity of God
to his designs.

It is here, lastly, That you must supplicate him to lead you into Devotion,
and all other Exercises of Life; either retired or secular, by the way he has
ordained for you, whether of Conformity, which is a total Subjection, and
resolute Dependence of your Will on the Divine Will in all Events and
Occurrences, however displeasing and irksom, comforting your self in your very
misfortune, or disgrace, of seeing you an Object of the Divine Severity, if it
tend to his Glory. Or

Of Uniformity, which adds to the other an Union of your Will with the Divine,
which takes away all repugnance and difficulty, and brings an appetite and
longing desire of what God Wills, and carries the Soul to will it, for this
reason only, that God is therewith contented, and desires it; and which causes
that in all our internal and external Operations, the Soul be in a moment
united to God, to know in these his good pleasure, and to put the same
immediately into Practice: Or lastly,

Of Deformity, which unites the Will by such an efficacy of Love to the Divine,
that the Soul no longer feels or perceives her self, than as if She were really
no more in being; and in her Manners and Actions, only feels in her self the
uncreated Will, by an entire Transformation made her own, as we see a little
drop of Water presently take the Color, Taste, and Nature of Wine; and a piece
of Iron thrown into the Fire, quit in some manner, the Form and Appearance of
Iron, to take that of Fire; and as the Air, which is penetrated by the Rays of
the Sun, seems not so much to be enlightened, as to be light it self.

By these three ways, or even any one of these, you will worthily Honor the
Greatness and Prerogatives, and certainly implore the Favors of the Great St.
ANN.

The Prayer to St. ANN.
O Great Saint, in Honor of Gods regarding and exalting You in his Eternity,
to these most high and sublime Estates of Mother of the Mother of God, and
Grandmother of Jesus Christ;

And in Union of all the Graees which were given you in consequence of these;
of the Sanctity of your Soul, of your most profound Humility, of your perfect
Resignation, of your eminent Devotion, of your Silence and Retreat, of the
tenderness of your Loves toward your Daughter and Grandson, of your continual
Application of Mind toward these two Divine Objects; of all the Offices of
Grandmother, which you were worthy to render to Jesus Christ in Honor of this,
that he has so strongly ti'd you in Blood, Spirit and Grace, to his
Hypostatical Union.

In Adoration of all the Virtues of your Life, and of the last Breath, in which
You gave up the Spirit in the state of final Grace, consummated in the hand of
your Grandson, and your God.

In Homage of the Right and Power which you had of Mother over your Daughter,
and of Grandmother over her Son, and of their Submissions and Reverences which
they rendered You.

In Acknowledgment, lastly, of this, That you were not only of the Family which
Jesus Christ came to establish upon Earth, but even Mother and Head of this
Family, and looking on Jesus, as making a part of your Family.

O glorious Saint, associate me to this worthy Family, bind and unite my Soul
to Jesus Christ, and that I may be wholly his; since you touch him so near, as
there is none but Mary betwixt you and Him.

O, I believe, That in Virtue of this great Communication of Love and Grace,
which was between you, and the Author, and the Mother of Grace, that you have
Right and Power in Heaven, to give Souls to Jesus, and to Mary.

O my Sovereign, next to Jesus and Mary, give them my Soul; I yield and resign
to You all the Power that I have over my self; I put under Your Government and
Protection all the Moments and Motions of my Life, and all the Persons that
compose my Family, which henceforward I will call Yours.

Lastly, My all-dear Mother and Mistress, for the last Grace, I beg of You,
That as You had always your Eyes upon the Divine Face of Jesus Christ, and Your
Heart in his with Burnings and Flames which he enkindled within you when you
had the Honor of Kissing and Embracing him, a time which so continued to
increase each moment, that at last it put a Period to Your Life, when not being
able to support the effort of it, You happily, and by an excess and languishing
of Love, expired in the hands of Your Daughter, and in the Kisses of Your
Grandson.

O that You would just so assist me in the Passage and Decisive Moment of mine
Eternity, and obtain for me an happy Death under the Protection of the Virgin,
and in the Grace of Jesus.

Approbation.
Nous soubsignez Docteurs en Theology de la Faculte de Paris, certifions avoir
leu, and examine ce Livre Intitule Les Grandeurs de Saint Anne, dedie a la
Reyne par les Filles de Saint Joseph, auquel n'avons rien trouve que de
conform a l'Eglise Apostolic and Roman. Au contraire l'avons estime digne
d'estre mis en lumiere, comme tref-utile pour entretenir la Devotion a Saint
Anne. En foy de quoy nous avons segne. Fait a Paris ce dixiesme Juillet Mil six
cens quarantetrois.

Vincent Jude. C. Bourlon.

The Approbation in English.
We the Doctors in Divinity underwritten, of the Faculty of Paris, do certify,
That we have read and examined this Book, entitled, The Prerogatives of St.
Ann, dedicated to the Queen by the Maids of St. Joseph, wherein we have found
nothing but what is conformable to the Apostolic and Roman Church. On the
contrary, we have thought it worthy to be Published as very useful to maintain
the Devotion to St. Ann. In Faith whereof we have signed. Given at Paris this
10th of July, 1643.

Vincent Jude. C. Bourlon.

FINIS.

