INSVLAE FORTVNATAE.

A DISCOURSE, Showing the Happiness of these NATIONS Under our Present
GOVERNORS and GOVERNMENT; OR, How they may be happy if they will themselves.

Delivered for Substance in a SERMON On a late Solemn Day appointed by
Authority, for Imploring the Blessing of God upon his MAJESTY, AND The Present
PARLIAMENT.

By R. A. Pastor of the Church at Henfield.

O Fortunatos Nimium bona si sua Norint Anglicolas! London: Printed by J. C.
for the Author. 1675.

To the Honorable Sir John Pelham, Sir Cecil Bishop, Sir John Fagg, Baronets;
Henry Goring, Edward Blaker, and Richard Bridger of Combs, Esquires; and to the
rest of the Honorable Members of Parliament, and Justices of Peace for the
County of Sussex.
Honorable Patriots;
THe unthankful Murmures and Complaints of unreasonable men, wherewith they
much obscure the Great Merits of our Pious King and Religious Parliament, gave
occasion to this Discourse; wherein I have endeavored to prove, that they have
no just cause of complaint, but only in themselves: For his Majesty, like a
Skilful Pilot, has Steered a right and straight Course to the safe Harbor of
Peace and Tranquillity; as appears clearly in his many Pious Motions, Orders,
and Proclamations: and if we are not yet arrived, our General Disobedience is
the greatest Remora. The Honorable Parliament have done great things for the
good of the Nation, specially in securing our Religion against the Intrusions
of Popery, whereof our Forefathers were quite weary; as appears by that Prayer
in the Old Letany, From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, Good Lord deliver
us. And if their Pious Intentions have not attained the Desired End, our
general unthankfulness is the undoubted cause of it. Our Distempers are high
still; the Lord direct you to fit and proper Remedies. My humble Petition to
his Majesty, and the Honorable Parliament, is for the Church of England; She
has been terribly shaken with late Storms; and the Enemy cries out still, Down
with her, down with her, even to the ground. We desire not the Life of our
Enemies, nor the trouble of any that are Peaceable; conceiving it none of the
best ways to settle Peace and Truth. But after all these Storms, if the Church
were well settled upon her own Foundations or Principles, her Breaches repaired
with her own Materials, and good Discipline restored, She would be the Glory of
the Nation, the Honor of his Majesty's Reign, the Joy and Comfort of all good
Subjects, and a most hopeful means of composing most of our greatest
Differences. The Church lies in the Bowels of the Commonwealth; and if the
Church be disquieted, the Commonwealth cannot be at rest. And I humbly beseech
your Honors to remember the Ministers of the Church, to deliver them out of
the many Oppressions which they are under; and that they may enjoy the small
remainder of their Ancient Patrimony with more Peace to the Church, and less
Scandal to Religion. The whole Land is overwhelmed with Impiety and
Licentiousness, all manner of Debauchery and Profaneness; Drunkenness, Lying,
Swearing, Oppression, etc. insomuch that we have just cause to fear, that God
has a Controversy with the Land, the issue whereof may be some Fearful
Judgment. Good Laws are trodden under foot, Dignities reviled, Authority
out-faced with the Insolence of unreasonable and wicked men, the Word of God
despised; and the Word of the King, in his Pious Proclamations, not at all
regarded The Nurseries of all Vice, and Corrupters of Youth, thoroughout the
Nation, Taverns and Tipling-Houses increase beyond number, to the dishonor of
God, and disquiet of the Realm; being great occasions of profaning the Lords
Day, and of many other disorders against the Peace of the Nation. A Cardinal
Archbishop of Saltzburg said once, That he knew there was need of Reformation;
but that a poor Monk should do it, was not to be endured. I meddle not with it,
but leave that to your Honors Wisdoms; Humbly conceiving, that a well-setled
Ministry would be no small help to it.

Your Honors humble Servant, RIC. ALLEN.
Feb. 15. 1674.
TO THE READER.
IN Athens every Citizen took an Oath to maintain the Professed Religion after
this manner: Pugnabo pro Sacris, and solus, and simul cum aliis. If Pagans were
so zealous for their Idolatrous Religion, how much more ought we to be for the
Gospel of Christ, the Power of God unto Salvation! especially they that are
called to the Ministry of it.

I have no spirit of bitterness, I use no bitterness of speech against
Recusants, but deal with them as friendly as Truth will give me leave. But if
angry Fellows among them will never be quiet, but provoke us daily; revile our
Church, slander her Doctrine, vilify her Famous Doctors, abuse and seduce her
People with Old threadbare Stories; no man can justly blame us for standing up
in our own Defense.

A Learned Benedictine at this day (once one of us) would fain divide our
Church; and to that purpose, reports falsely of her Doctrine. If ever he
understood it, he may be ashamed; if he never did, yet sure he will be sorry,
if he be so ingenuous as he professes: But if they are so uncharitable one to
another, as a Famous Friar (P. W.) of the Order of S. Francis at this day makes
sad complaint, we must look for no better. For this present undertaking, I
thought my self obliged unto it in a threefold respect. First, as a Christian,
to maintain the truth of the Gospel Secondly, as a Minister, to maintain the
Doctrine of our Church. Thirdly, as a Subject, to maintain the Honor and
Dignity of our Gracious Sovereign, and to let his People see some Reasons to
bless God for him, who deserves better of the Nation than every one takes
notice of.

Our good King and Parliament have applied several Remedies to heal our
Breaches; but if we will neither receive Instruction, nor endure Correction,
our condition may be worse than we commonly fear: For as Philotimus in Plutarch
told his Patient, Non est de Reduviis negotium, etc.

Now if any think it much that I prefix so many Great Names to so small a Book,
let them take notice, that the Piety and Zeal those Honorable Persons have for
the true Protestant Religion, imboldened me; and that brevity, for some
Reasons, was the greatest part of my Study.

If any mistake my honest meaning, or slight my little Book, (as I know some
will, and I know their reasons without asking) let them know, that I can solace
my self with the Conscience of my own good intentions, and bid them heartily

FAREWELL.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 18. for then, read him. Page 14. line 17. for need, read cause.

Insulae Fortunatae, etc.
EZRA 7.27. Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, who has put such a thing
as this in the Kings Heart, to Beautify the House of the Lord which is in
Jerusalem.


THe House of the Lord was then the Temple at Jerusalem; but now every place
set apart and Consecrated to the Worship and Service of God, is, and may be
rightly called his House.

The Temple at Jerusalem was burnt with Fire by the Chaldees, restored again by
the Kings of Persia; Cyrus laid the Foundation, Darius finished the Building,
Artaxerxes furnished the House with all Necessaries for the Service of God; for
he sent Ezra the Scribe, with Presents of Gold and Silver to buy Meat Offerings
and Drink Offerings, Bullocks, Rams, and Lambs, to offer upon the Altar of the
House of God, as the God of Heaven had Commanded: And thus he Beautified the
House of God.

At the same time the Jews were restored to the enjoyment of many Temporal
Blessings and sweet comforts in their own Country, a Land flowing with Milk and
Honey: But Ezra passes by all these, as of small value, in comparison, and
blesses God for restoring his Holy Worship and Service in his own House at
Jerusalem.

Obs. 1. That true Religion, the pure Worship and Service of God, is the
fairest Beauty of Gods House; Faithful Pastors, and Godly People, the richest
Ornaments.

Obs. 2. That of all Blessings under Heaven, the Truth of Religion, the Purity
of Gods Worship, and the enjoyment of them in his Ordinances, is the chiefest,
choicest, and most precious.

It is as the Ark of God to Israel, and to the House of Obed-Edom; the glory,
riches and strength of a Nation. As the Temple was then ( Ezekiel. 24.21.) such is
now the House of God, beautified with the truth of Religion, and purity of
Divine Worship: It is the Excellency of our Strength; the main Bulwark of our
Peace and Safety; the surest Ground or Foundation of all true Happiness,
National or Personal. Our Saxon Ancestors, in their Witten-Gemotts, used, in
the first place, to consult about Affairs of the Church, and Matters of
Religion; and when those things were well settled, then followed Affairs of the
Commonwealth: Our Pious Ancestors rightly conceiving, that Religion was the
principal and most precious; and that if Gods Business were done first, their
own would thrive the better; according to that of our Savior (Matthew. 6.33.)
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added. There is
no loss of time in seeking Gods Kingdom first.

Now it cannot be denied, but that this Nation has received of God, by the
hands of our Gracious Sovereign, many rich Mercies, which call aloud for
returns of Thankfulness unto God, of Love and Loyalty to our Sovereign; but
instead hereof, we hear unthankful murmures and complaints. The World was ever
given to it; and we can expect no other of men, who never know when they are
well: But we have as much cause to bless God for our Good King, as ever Ezra
had for the Great King. To stop the mouths then of such querulous people that
are never content, I shall endeavor to show you, how much we are bound to
return all Loyalty, Love and Obedience to our Pious Sovereign, with due Honor
and Respect to our Religious Parliament, for all the good they have done us,
enough to make us an happy People, if we will our selves.

First, It is not so long since, but that we may remember, when we were under
the Conduct of Blind Guides, who knew not what they did, nor whither they were
roaving; for they were in the Dark themselves, (witness their own confession in
the Armies Remonstrance) and led us into such a miserable Confusion, that none
but our Sovereign did, or could save us from utter Desolation: and had it not
been for his great Prudence and Moderation, we might have been in as bad a
condition again.

Secondly, His Majesty was no sooner returned to the exercise of his Royal
Authority, but his first care was for the House of God, to cast out the Filth
and Rubbish, and to prepare a people for the service of God. In his
Proclamation ( May 30. 1660.) against Impiety and Licentiousness, Drunkenness,
Swearing, Railing at good things, etc. against Vicious, Debauched and Profane
people, who in in truth (says his Majesty) have discredited my Cause, and are
a discredit to any Cause they pretend to favor. Nothing so much polluteth the
House of God, nothing such a shame and scandal to our Church and Religion, as
the vicious Lives and lewd Conversation of too many that pretend to hold
Communion with us.

Thirdly, His Majesty's next care for the House of God, was in his Proclamation
( Aug. 20. 1663.) for better Sanctifying or keeping Holy the Lords Day, that
his Holy Service might be more frequented, and his House filled with the
Incense of Prayers, and the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving for all his
Mercies. The Lords Work must be done on the Lords Day, or else it is not his
Day, but ours.

Fourthly, His Majesty took care of Beautifying the House of God, in his Order
for Augmentation of small Benefices, for the encouragement of Faithful Pastors,
to adorn the House of God with sound Doctrine, and their Doctrine with Holy
Life. A worthy Member of Parliament (Sir B. R.) once told the House, that
Scandalous Livings make Scandalous Ministers, both in Life and Doctrine.

Fifthly, His Majesty's special care for the House of God, appeared in his
Gracious Condescentions to the Honorable Parliament. His Majesty's Invitations
of that Great Assembly to prepare Laws against the Growth of Popery, and to
prepare more severe Laws against Impiety and Licentiousness, are a sure
Evidence of his Pious Resolution to maintain the true Protestant Religion,
Piety and Virtue: And their Return of Thankfulness to his Majesty for those
Solemn Endearing Invitations, and their making such good Laws for securing our
Religion, Peace and Safety (whereto also the Royal Assent gave Life and Being)
give assurance of their Faithfulness, Piety and Zeal for the Glory of God, and
good of their Country. Blessed be God for this sweet Union; and let all the
people say Amen.

The Kings and Parliaments of England, from time to time, have always kept the
Papal Power at Staves-end: K. Henry 8. shook it quite off; K. Edward 6.
restored the true Protestant Religion that had been under Restraint. It was not
called by that Name, till the Assembly at Spires: but yet that Religion that
Protestants profess, was taught by Christ and his holy Apostles, and has
continued to this day. The Famous Qu. Elizabeth maintained the same against all
opposition, and raised a Fort-Royal out of Holy Scripture in our 39. Articles,
against the future Invasion of Heresy, Idolatry, and Superstition. The Noble
K. James, with his Learned Pen, gave the Adversary such a Deadly Wound that can
never be healed: Our late Dear Sovereign, like a Glorious Martyr, laid down his
precious Life n defense of the true Protestant Religion; and our Dread
Sovereign that now is, like a Royal Confesfor, made open and constant
Profession of it, in the midst of strong Temptations to the contrary.

And now our Pious Sovereign, insisting in the steps of those glorious Princes,
his most Noble Progenitors, has done like a Tender Father of his Country; and
the Honorable Parliament, like Faithful Patriots, in maintaining the Church of
England, and the true Protestant Religion, against the Encroachments of Popery,
and the Church of Rome; and that for diverse weighty Reasons, concerning both
our Temporal and Spiritual State.

First, Because the Church of Rome sets up a Power over Sovereign Princes, to
control them in their own Dominions, to the great disturbance of Public Peace.
Pope Gregory the Third Excommunicated the Emperor Leo, called Iconomachus;
which caused such a mischievous breach in the Empire, that proved the Ruin of
Christendom. But the Church of England teaches Obedience to Princes, according
to the Word of God: and we are bound by our Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance
to withstand the Papal Power, because it cannot stand with the Peace and Safety
of the Nation.

Secondly, Popery is stained with much Blood, and charged with Treachery and
Cruelty; whereof our Fifth of November is a Perpetual Memorial, and the World a
Witness. The Church of England teaches us to love one another, and pray for
our Enemies.

Thirdly, Popery is an Heavy Burden without benefit, in a long Train of
unnecessary people, who at once robbed the Church of her Patrimony, and
devoured the riches of the Land: Insomuch that a Noble King of this Nation used
to say, Monks have too much, and Princes too little. Hereupon they began to
fear him, and conspired against him; but were prevented by a very strange
Providence. The Ministers of the Church, at this day, live most upon their
leavings, and Starve themselves to Feed you.

Fourthly, Because the Church of Rome is such an hard Mother to her Children,
in locking up from them the Bread of Life, and true Food of their Souls, which
their Heavenly Father so freely gives them; and instead thereof, feeding them
with Trash, Fabulous Legends, Dreams, Visions, Revelations, etc. teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of men, and making the Word of God of no effect,
through their Traditions: But the Church of England lays open before you the
Holy Scriptures of Truth; sets before you the Bread of Life, and feeds you with
sincere Milk of the Word, drawn from the Breasts of the Old and New Testament.

Fifthly, Popery polluteth the House of God with Idols, and the Land with
Idolatry, in their Image Worship, Adoration of Saints, and their Relics, etc.
Pope Boniface the Fourth, who begged the Pantheon of Phocas the Emperor, in
place of the Heathen Gods and Goddesses set up the Images of the Virgin Mary,
and all Saints; changeing the Names of the Idols, but not the Nature of the
Idolatry. For (1) The Heathen had Tutelar Gods and Goddesses for Countries,
Cities, Hills, Dales, etc. so now there be Titular Saints for all places and
purposes; Vigilius, the Tutelar Saint of the Valley of Trent, etc. (2) The
Heathen acknowledged one Supreme God, accounting all the rest as Mediators of
Intercession; examples whereof may be seen in their Poets. The Saints are now
put in that Office: Prayer was made in the Council of Trent for Divine
Assistance, by the Intercession of Vigilius. (3) The Heathen were not so
brutish to take Idols of Wood and Stone for Gods able to help them; but in the
Idol, or Image, worshipped some Deity represented thereby. Our Adversaries, at
this day, make no other Excuse. Some wiser Heathens disliked Images for a
twofold Reason: (1) Because they drew men from the true Worship: And (2) From
the true knowledge of God. For this Reason, the Pagan-Romans at first had no
Images, accounting it Sacrilege, etc. (Plutarch in Numa.) The Council of Trent
has made some provision against the superstitious abuse of Images, Relics,
etc. but to no purpose: For we are exhorted (1 John 5.21.) to keep our selves
from Idols; not from Idolatry, but from Idols: For the holy Apostle knew well
the corrupt Nature of Man is such, that if Idols be in sight, Idolatry will
certainly follow. For this cause, not only the Adoring, but the very Making of
Images is expressly forbidden by the Law of God. Now the Church of England, as a
careful Mother, cast out the Worship of Saints, their Images, Relics, etc. to
keep her Children from the great peril of Idolatry; a Sin so heinous, that it
provokes the fierce Wrath of God against a Nation, and excludes for ever out of
Heaven.

Sixthly, The Church of Rome is very unreasonable, in requiring us to believe
things that they scarce believe themselves; to receive for Truth, that which
the Word of God says expressly is false; to agree with them, who could never
yet agree among themselves: They are angry with us, because we will not take
their bare word without proof, nor grant that which they could never yet show
us any certain ground for: for Councils have erred, Popes have been deceived,
and divided in thirty Schisms; have Condemned one another, Decreed one contrary
to another, and used one another very uncharitably, to speak the best: Their
last Council laid a Foundation of Religion that cannot possibly hold or stand
together. A Learned Carmelite warned them of it, and opposed it with such solid
Reasons, that the Council could not answer, but thought fit to stop his mouth
with a Check. And how can any man rest satisfied in the Judgment and Decision
of men, that understand not the matters in question? For in the Debate between
Soto and Catharinus about two most important Articles of Faith, some of the
Prelates confessed openly, that they understood not the differences. (Hist.
Coun. Trent) But the Church of England builds her Doctrine upon sure grounds,
even the Foundations of the Apostles and Prophets; upon the pure Word of God
contained in holy Scripture.

What shall we do now with Roman Catholics? Labor to outshine them in Holy
Life, and outdo them in Good Works; the best way either to win them, or put
them to silence, or force them to confess, that of a truth God is amongst us.
There would soon be less Controversy, if more Conscience were made of those
things that be without Controversy.

And now our Religion is secured and safe, what is there else that any man can
murmr at?

Is it Monarchy? that is asserted by its worst Enemies, who after they had
marched thorough all forms of Government, at last saw a necessity of retiring
back to a Single Person, who wanted nothing of a King but Right and Title.

Do any distaste our Liturgy? that is allowed for sound and good, in the
Doctrinal part at least, by Learned and Pious Adversaries.

Do our Laws dislike any? they are justified by our late Reformers themselves,
who after long Consultation could find nothing to amend, save only in the
practice, and that they made much worse; and so judged by a Learned Lawyer and
Commissioner of the Seal, who refused to act upon their new Rules.

Is Trade decayed? that is the complaint; raised, or made use of by some, to
bring a scandal upon the Government; whereof I could give you a notable
instance. But it may be real and true; and then whatever other causes may be,
there be two specially; one observed long since by that Noble Knight (Sir W.
R.) and both in Traders themselves, which they may amend when they will.

What is wanting now to make us an happy people? we have a Land flowing with
Milk and Honey, with plenty of all things; and whilst other Countries are in
great trouble and perplexity, we enjoy a sweet peace, and none makes us afraid.

Blessed be God for our Gracious Sovereign, under whose Shadow we enjoy these
comforts.

But if King and Parliament had every one of them the Heart of David, and the
Head of Solomon, yet could they never do us good, if we will not be good to our
selves: They have done their parts, now let us do ours; and I will show you in
few words what you are to do, that his Majesty may rejoice in his people, as
they have cause to rejoice in him.

1. Submit your selves to the Higher Powers; to the King as Supreme, to the
rest as sent by him; for they are the Ministers of God for your good; both
Temporal good of the Body, and Spiritual good of the Soul, and Eternal good of
both. Be obedient to the good Laws made by the King and Parliament, and
consider who has the benefit and comfort of your Obedience but only your
selves. The Kings Laws against Impiety, Licentiousness, Drunkenness, etc. are
but a Transcript or Copy of Gods Law, in keeping whereof there is great reward,
( Psalm. 19.) In keeping whereof you do good to your selves and your Children
after you, ( Deuteronomy. 4.40.) In keeping those good Laws, you glorify God, honor
the King and his Government, but do your selves most good: the King has the
honor, but you have the benefit; as I could show you in many particulars.

2. Submit your selves to them that have the Rule over you in the Lord, and
watch for your Souls: Be obedient to your Mother the Church of England, who
has bred you, and brought you forth to the first light and knowledge of
Christ, who has fed you with the sincere Milk of Gods Word; but now they are
grown up, some run after Painted Harlots, and follow New Lights, that darken
Counsel by words without knowledge, ( Job 38.) are weary of the Heavenly Manna,
longing after Onions and Garlic. O foolish people, who has bewitched you, to
forsake the Truth, and follow after Lies; to venture your precious Souls upon
such weak grounds; to build your precious Faith upon the credit of one sinful
Man! Popery can never settle your Conscience in peace; and those New Lights
will leave you in darkness and perplexity of mind, whereof I have known many
examples; but be not you Companions with them. In the Church of England the
pure Word of God is plainly taught, the Sacraments duly administered, the
precious Legacies that Christ has left you are faithfully delivered unto you;
nothing kept under Lock and Key in a Mystery; nothing of all the Counsel of God
kept from you, but all made plainly known to you, that ye may find rest unto
your Souls.

3. Let every man study to be quiet, and follow his own business (1 These.
4.11.) Keep within the compass of your own Calling, meddle not with things too
high for you. There were once Emendatores Apostolorum, as now there be
Church-menders and State-menders; men that speak evil of things they understand
not, to the great disquiet of the Nation. There was a late Cry, All undone; and
now we may be ashamed of our folly: for by the goodness of God things are so
ordered, that we may well say with Themistocles, We had been undone, if we had
not been undone.

4. Leave off all your unthankful murmures and complaints: It is a common thing
for men to complain the Times are bad, when they make it so themselves; and if
any calamity happen, blame their Superiors both unthankfully and unjustly. (1)
Unthankful they are to God and Man, to murmr at those whom God has made
Instruments of so much good to us. (2) Unjust they are, to blame those for
things whereof themselves are the cause. David was a Man after Gods own Heart,
yet fell into a great Error, for a Judgment on the people for their sins, (2 Samuel 24.) Again the Anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved
David to say, Go, number Israel and Judah. David 's Fall was the peoples fault.
If Princes stand, it is for our good; if they fall, it is for our sins: Begin
at home, amend your selves, and then all will be well.

5. Break off all your sins by speedy Repentance; all your Debauchery,
Drunkenness, Profaneness, etc. for ( Hos. 4.) it is sin that makes a Land
mourn, and the people languish. Vicious, debauched, and profane people are the
Troublers of our Israel: These are the Schismatics that make such a Rent in
our Church by their disobedience to her holy Orders, that may probably be the
most cause of our troubles. Let Ministers lead lives as pure as their Surplice,
and then that Garment will not be such an Eyesore: Let the people lead holy
lives, answerable to our holy Liturgy, and then that service will be better
accepted. It is our sins that dissolve the Bond of Peace, that disturb, and
will destroy our Nation, if not prevented by Reformation.

6. Learn of this Holy Scribe to bless God for these Mercies we enjoy, and for
them by whom we have received them. Unthankfulness stops the Current of Gods
Mercies, and provokes him to blast those we have: but Thankfulness preserves
those we have, and procures more, ( Psalm. 67.5, 6.) Let the people praise thee,
O God; and, then shall the Earth yield her increase.

Lastly, One thing specially we are commanded this day, to excite you to pity
the Poor in this time of scarcity: I never found, but most of you are ready
enough to this Duty; but take heed you do not relieve them with one hand, and
oppress them with another; as those do that keep in their Corn to make a
Dearth. There be men that slander Heaven and Earth with a noise of Dearth, when
there is no need of scarcity, but only the hardness of their own covetous
hearts. Take heed how you oppress the Poor, who are a part of Gods Great Family
as well as you; and you are but Stewards for them: Take heed, your time is but
short, your account is at hand; and then, those that show no Mercy, shall find
none. But do all what can be done, there will still be unruly people, and
disorderly; and those we must leave to the severity of Laws, for the Magistrate
bears not the Sword in vain.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS.
THat True Religion is the fairest Beauty of Gods House.

That True Religion is the Glory, Riches, and Strength of a Nation.

That his Majesty has many ways beautified the House of God, and advanced
Religion.

That his Majesty has done like a true Nursing Father of the Church; and the
Parliament like Faithful Patriots, in defending our Religion against the
Intrusions of Popery: With Reasons.

That our Government, Ecclesiastic and Civil, is justified by Adversaries
themselves.

That there is nothing wanting to make us happy, if we will our selves: With
ways and means to do it.


