THE Swearer's Doom; OR, A Discourse Setting forth The great Sinfulness and
Danger OF Rash and Vain Swearing.

By JOHN ROAST M.A. Rector of Offwell and Gittisham in Devon.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower
End of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chapel. 1695.

The PREFACE.
RASH and Vain Swearing is so Great and Heinous a Sin, and God has so plainly,
and solemnly, and in so dreadful a manner revealed his Wrath from Heaven
against it, that one would ^hink, that none but such as are confirmed and
hardened a Atheism, should dare to be guilty of it. And yet it is (...) very
common and usual, as if it were neither sinful nor ^angerous, but an innocent
and harmless thing.

If they were only the poor and ignorant, who are ad^icted to this Sin, we
might say with the Prophet Je^emy, chapter 5. v. 4. Surely these are Poor, these
are ^oolish, for they know not the Way of the Lord, ^or the Judgment of their
God. I will get me to ^e Great Men, and will speak unto them, for ^^ey have
known the way of the Lord, and the ^^dgment of their God.

But we shall find our selves no less mistaken than he ^as, if we think Oaths
are in use only among the mean^^ sort, for even the Court it self, yea the
Church it self, and the Universities, which should be Seminaries of ^iety, as
well as Learning, are not free from them; the ^obility and Gentry are as much
accustomed to them, (...) the meanest of the Commonalty and Mechanics.

But should we go into the Fleet, or Army, we should ^ar such Vollies of Oaths
and Curses, as would even ^ake the Hair of a Sober and Modest Christian, who
^areth an Oath, to stand upright, and we must conti^ally stop our Ears, as
Ulysses did those of his Men, (...) we would not hear them.

And is it not a most strange and unaccountable thing, ^t Soldiers, who carry
their Lives almost continually (...) their hands, and between whom and death
there is ^t a step, as David said to Jonathan, should have ^eir Mouths full of
Oaths and Curses? And that Ma^ers who, as Seneca says, do -- Tenui fidere
ligno,
Inter vitae mortisque vias
Nimium gracili limite ducto.
Sen. Medea.

That such (I say) who are constantly exposed to (...) many dangers both from
the Seas and Enemies, and wh^ consequently, one would think, should be always
at the^^ Prayers, should Curse and Sear as if they would bi^ open defiance to
Heaven, and even dare the Almight to consume and destroy them.

How it will please God to deal with us we know no^ certainly there can be but
small grounds to hope, that Go^ will give us Victory or Deliverance by the
hands of suc^ men; the destroying of whom from off the Earth, (...) almost the
only good that War does.

And as if all this were not bad enough, but that (...) were afraid we shall
want Swearers when these are gon^ little Children are taught it as soon as they
can spea^ and in many places they are far more ready at it th^^ at their
Prayers, and Catechisms, and several House even of the Nobility and Gentry,
seem to be but so man Nurseries and Seminaries of Swearers.

The serious consideration of these things first put (...) upon composing the
ensuing Discourse, without the lea^^ thoughts or design of making it more
public than (...) must be by Preaching it.

But having some reason to hope that it has had so^^ good effect upon some that
heard it, I confess I was t^ more easily brought to consent to the Printing of
it, f^^ which though I must expect to be censured or derided (...) some, yet if
it shall please God to make it instrument for the reclaiming of any Customary
Swearers (though but few of them) or preventing others from becoming suc^^ I will
say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 115.1. Not un us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy
Name gi^^ the Glory; which Name will never be Profaned (...) rash Oaths and
Curses, but Hallowed and Reverenc^ by all such as sincerely love, and fear him.

The Swearer's Doom.
St. James 5.12. But above all things, my Brethren, swear not, neither by
Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath: But let your yea be
yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation.
THere are two things which chiefly, and especially cause the Laws of Princes
to be most diligently heeded, and observed by their Subjects; the solemn manner
of publishing of them, and the Sanction, or Pe^alty threatened to such as shall
transgress them.

If they solemnly, and peremptorily require, or forbid any thing; all men will
conclude, that ^hey will be very much offended with such, as ^o not regard such
their Commands and Prohi^itions, though there be no particular Punishment
^hreatned; and who would willingly incur the sispleasure of such as have power
over him, if ^e could by any means avoid it?

But when there is also a severe Penalty an^ext to the breach of a Law, every
man that ^esires his own safety and welfare, will be care^ul to observe that
Law, if for no other reason, ^et upon this account only, because he would ^ot
be obnoxious to the said Penalty.

When God Almighty therefore did promulgate that Law from Heaven, which he
wrote with his own hand, in Two Tables of Stone, but which he long before had
Engraven on the hearts of all Mankind; that his People Israel might most
heedfully attend to it, and most religiously keep it; He caused it to be
published with the greatest Solemnity, and confirmed its Authority by the
greatest Sanctions.

As to the Solemnity of its Publication, we have a full account of it in
several places. Mose^ tells us ( Exodus 19.16.) that on the Third day (viz.)
after the people had notice given to prepare themselves, there were Thundrings,
and Lightnings, and a thick Cloud upon Moun^ Sinai, and the voice of the
Trumpet exceeding loud, and that all the people that was in the Camp trembled,
and ( v. 18) it is said that the Mount was altogether as a Smoke, because the
Lord descended upon it, and the Smoke thereon ascended, as the Smoke of a great
Furnace, and the whole Mount quaked greatly; after which God did most solemnly
proclaim that Law.

And we find the Levites upon a solemn Fast ( Neh. 9.13.) acknowledging this as
a great aggravation of the sins of the Jews, that they ha^ so wickedly broken a
Law that was so holy an^ just, and proclaimed by God himself in so remarkable a
manner; Thou came down also upon Mount Sinai, and spakest with them from
Heaven and gave them right Judgments, and true Law. good Statutes and
Commandments.

And though St. Paul calls the giving of that Law written and engraven in Stone,
the ministration of death, (2 Cor. 3.7.) and the ministration of condemnation,
( v. 9) yet he tells us that it was glorious (i.e.) it was published with great
solemnity, that the Israelites might receive it with the greater veneration.
But the Author to the Hebrews ( cap. 12.18.) gives us the fullest account of
it; For ye are not come unto the Mount that might be touched, and that burned
with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest, and the sound of a
Trumpet, and the voice of words, which voice they that heard entreated that the
word should not be spoken to them any more; and ( v. 21.) so terrible was the
sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake.

Which request of the Israelites does plainly imply, that they well understood
that the reason why God did proclaim his Laws after so dreadful and terrible a
manner, was, that they might receive them with the greater reverence, and
observe them with the greater diligence, which therefore they promised to do,
upon the mere intimation of his will to Moses.

And as God caused his Law to be promulgated after so solemn a manner, that it
might make the greater impression upon them; so did he also confirm and ratify
it with the greatest Sanctions for the same reason; ( i. e. as he did promise
the greatest blessings to encourage them to obedience, so he denounced the
severest Curses, Judgments and Penalties against such (...) ceeds from vanity
or lightness of mind, and want of the fear of God, and a true sense of
Religion; from fraud and hypocrisy in the Swearers, or the incredulity and
distrustfulness of some, who will believe no one without an Oath; and the words
are true in either sense.

Which Positive Precept serves only for the illustration, and confirmation of
the Negative one, Above all things swear not, etc. That men might have no
evasion, pretense, or excuse for the breach of it.

And here I must premise that the Apostle does not forbid such Oaths as are
Imposed by Magistrates, or used in matters of Weight and importance, for the
maintenance of truth and Justice, and deciding of Controversies among Men;
Which are either Assertory, when a man does Assert or deny that such or such a
thing was or is; or Promissory, which is a promise made with Solemn Invocation
of the Name of God; which if made to God, are called Vows, if to Men, Oaths.

Now these have not only been used in all Ages and Nations, but accounted
necessary for the support of human Society, and the greatest security that one
man can give of his Truth and Fidelity to another, as it is said ( Heb. 6.16.)
An Oath ((...)) for Confirmation is among men an end of all strife.

And we have several Instances of it, Abraham made his Servant Swear concerning
the chooseing of a Wife for his Son: ( Genesis 24.3. Jacob took an Oath of Joseph
concerning his Burial, ( Genesis 47.31.) As he did of the Israelites, ( Chap.
50.25.) And what a Solemn Oath, did there pass betwixt David and Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20.17.

But if there is any one to be believed without an Oath, certainly God is, who,
as he is Omniscient, and cannot be deceived; so is he so immutably Holy, as
that he cannotlye; and yet that we might the more firmly believe, and embrace
his Promises, he has been pleased to confirm them with an Oath, ( Heb. 6.17.)
God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the Immutability
of his Counsel, Confirmed it by an Oath.

The Apostle says [ v. 13.] That when God made the promise to Abraham, because
he could Swear by no greater, he Swear by himself. Why! what need was there of
God's Swearing at all: What would not Abraham the Father of the Faithful, that
great Pattern, and most eminent Exemplar of Faith, he of whom it is said long
before the making of that Promise, that he believed God and it was counted to
him for Righteousness, (Genesis 15.6.) and that he Staggered not at the Promises
through Unblief, (Romans 8.20.) but was strong in Faith, giving Glory to God.

Would not he (I say) have taken God's bare word or did God doubt whether he
would have believed him without his Oath? No certainly, 'twas far otherwise;
And yet for the greater Solemnity he Confirmed his promise with an Oath; Which
doubtless he would not have done had an Oath been morally Evil and unlawful

For tho God does often condescend to represent himself after the manner of
Men, yet he never does Imitate or comply with them in any matter or custom that
is in it self wicked, and Sinful.

Indeed there is a Sect sprung up among us, that utterly refuse, and condemn
all Oaths as unlawful at least under the Gospel Reformation, tho the use of
them might be Tolerated under the Law upon the same account that divorce was,
viz. because of the hardness of men's hearts: And in Compliance with their
Infirmity.

And their Opinion is professedly grounded on that precept of Christ, ( Mat.
5.33.) which seems indeed very much to Countenance it, being laid down in the
most large and comprehensive Terms; But I say unto you, Swear not at all,
neither by Heaven etc. Which is the same Law here, enforced by St. James much
after the same manner.

But this, as it is a very new and upstart opinion, so I think it was never
entertained by any one man of any considerable Learning or understanding, tho I
must confess there is scarce any error that has greater color or pretense to
countenance it in Scripture, so that its no wonder so many have embraced it.

I shall not Labor at present in confutation of it, my design being not to
discourse of what is not, but of what is forbidden in the Text; but only
briefly.

And first, It is certain that if such Solemn Oaths are sinful, they were
always so; For Christ, as he did not come to destroy the Law, or any part
thereof, so did he not properly make any Addition to it, only he showed the
true sense, and meaning, and the true extent and Obligation of it, he gave a
fuller and better interpretation of it then had been formerly made, and
confuted those false Glosses and comments that the Scribes and Pharisees put
upon it.

Before Christ's coming it was the duty of all men to avoid not only Murder,
but Hatred, Malice, Revenge, Envy, yea and rash and causless Anger; not only
the act of Adultery, but all unchaste Thoughts and lustful Desires. 'Twas not he
alone that made it unlawful for men to put away their Wives for every cause; it
was a sin from the beginning.

In brief, 'twas no more lawful before his time, than it was afterward for men
to resist evil, or to render evil for evil; it was always their duty to love
their Enemies, to do good to them that hated them, etc. Though indeed the
generality of the Jews did not so well understand what was commanded or
forbidden by the Law, until Christ did then expound it to them; though the
Scribes and Pharisees would not receive his Exposition.

And therefore it follows, that if it be now a sin to swear, or take any Oath
at all under the Gospel, it was so under the Law; and yet w^ find it frequently
used by good men, and tha^ not rashly, but deliberately, and with the greatest
solemnity.

Yea we find that God did in some cases expressly require it, as ( Exodus 22.10.)
If a man d^ liver unto his neighbor an Ass, or an Ox, or a Sheep or any beast
to keep, and it die, or be hurt, or dr^ven away, no man seeing it; then shall
an Oath o^ the Lord be between them both, That he has no^ put his hand to his
neighbors goods, and the Owne^ of it shall accept thereof, he shall not make
it good. And in like manner in the case of Jealousy the Woman was to clear her
self by Oath before the Priests, ( Numb. 5.19.)

Now, though it be certain that every Man, an^ especially every Christian, ought
to speak the truth, with that uprightness and sincerity, a^ that his Word may
be as good as his Oath, an^ then there would be no need of any such thing and
though it be very probable, that the Custom and Use of solemn Swearing was
occasioned by the want of honesty and fidelity amongst men there being many
whose Consciences startle a Perjury, who are not afraid to make a Lie.

Yet we cannot imagine that God would appoint one sin for the remedy or
prevention o^ another; or that he would permit, much less require that a man
should commit a certain sin to prevent one that was uncertain and accidental.

Again, that our Savior's Prohibition of Swearing is to be understood of Oaths
in common and ordinary discourse, of rash and heedless, presumptuous,
inconsiderate and irreverent Oaths, and not of solemn and religious Swearing
before the Magistrate in matters of importance, seems very evident from the
coherence, and the opposition that there is between these two Precepts, [ Swear
not at all, etc.] and (let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay) (i.
e.) in ordinary discourse do not use Swearing; for it is observable, that when
afterward in explaining the first Precept, he adds, neither by Heaven, for it
is God's Throne, etc. He does not at all mention the swearing by the Name of
God.

The reason of which is supposed to be this; The Jews in general, and
especially the Scribes and Pharisees were most religious and exact observers of
the Third Commandment, and would never mention the Name of God but with great
reverence and devotion, and upon some solemn occasion, as in prayer and reading
his Word, or when they were lawfully called to it.

Yea, whereas they did not read the word Jehovah as it was written, but
pronounced it Idonai: Some suppose that the reason was, because they thought
that name Jehovah too sared to be pronounced by the mouth of Man. and therefore
the Jews of latter times after ^e Captivity called the Tetragrammaton (i e.)
that Hebrew name Jehovah, which they accounted the proper and incommunicable
name of ^od, (...), the unutterable Name, and (...), the dreadful name; and the
letters which composed it, the (...), the sacred letters.

Yea Buxtorf says, that they held it unlawful for any besides the Priests to
pronounce that name, and that it was not lawful for them to do it, but when
they solemnly blessed the People in that name. And that this name engraven by
God himself, was kept in the most holy place to be seen only by the High
Priest, and that but or the day of the solemn Expiation.

Which name they called Schem Hamphorasc^ (i.e.) the explained name, or (as
others) the peculiar and separate name which they say Chrisstole out of the
Temple, and by which he wrought his mighty works.

All which, and much more to the same purpose mentioned by Buxtorf on the name
Jehvah, show what wonderful reverence they ha^ for the Name of God.

But then they thought they might lawful swear by the Creatures, as by Heaven,
an Earth, by Jerusalem, by the Temple, and the Gold of the Temple, the Altar,
and the Gi^ upon the Altar; and this they did commonl^ and customarily in their
ordinary conversation and thought there was no hurt in it, provide they did not
swear falsely.

Which error and mistake of theirs our S^viour confutes, showing the reason
why (...) would not have them swear at all, neither Heaven (says he) for it is
God's Throne, nor by t^^ Earth, for it is his Footstool.

As if he had said, you think you may lawfully swear in your ordinary
discourse, in your common conversation, provided you do not swear by the name
of God; But I tell you, you shall not Swear at all by any of these, for God is
virtually invoked in every such Oath, because he has a property and Right in
all the things you swear by; Do you swear by Heaven? it is God's Throne; and he
that swears by it, swears by him that sits thereon; do you swear by the
Temple, it is God's House, and you virtually Swear by him that dwells
therein: Do you Swear by the Altar? you swear by the Gift that is upon it, and
by that God to whom it is offered, ( Mat. 23.20.)

Do not think therefore that you do not break the third Commandment, because
you do not expresley mention the name of God; for you do virtually Swear by his
name, when you Swear by the Creatures, and especially when you swear by any
thing that is dedicate and sacred to him.

Now it cannot be imagined why, when our Savior said Swear not at all, and
afterward by way of Explication added neither by Heaven, nor Earth, etc. he had
not more especially made mention of Swearing by the name of God, if he should
have his Hearers take his words in the universal and unlimitted sense: In brief
were it utterly unlawful to Swear at all, God would not have given directions
how Oaths should be made and qualified as he does, ( Jer. 4.2.) In which place
it is observable that the Prophet does not use the word Elohim or Adonai, but
Jehovah its self, which the Jews (as I said) counted the most sacred and proper
Name of God, and which they scarce dared to pronounce upon any account
whatsoever; and propably they pronounced it Adonai here, as in other places.

I could add several considerations more to prove that the Apostle's words are
not to be understood of Solemn and religious Oaths, but I shall wave them, my
business and design being to speak of the sinfullness, and danger of rash,
vain, inconsiderate Swearing.

As to the first, The sinfullness of it sufficiently appears, not only from
this that its plainly and expressly forbidden, but it is in such a manner
forbidden, as if there were no sin so great or more carefully to be avoided
then that. Above all things Swear not.

Above all things! What! above Idolatry, and Blasphemy, above Murder, and
Adultery, above Theft and Drunkenness! Is Swearing a greater Sin then either of
these? Certainly the manner of Expression does plainly intimate as if it
exceeded these, and all other sins, and that it were absolutely the greatest of
all Sins.

Which precept likewise is prefaced, with the Loving and Winning Compellation
of Brethren; by which he would have them learn and understand, that it was out
of perfect Love and Kindness to them, that he so earnestly desires them above
all things to avoid Swearing.

Although we lie under many Obligations to Love, and to do good to all men, yet
ought we more especially to Love the Brotherhood; (1 Pet. 2.17.)

The word Brother is a word of a large Extent and is taken in many senses, but
in the more senses, or respects, any persons are Brethren, or the nearer they
are such the greater Love and kindness they ought to have for one another, and
to advise each other for their good. We ought to wrong and injust no man, much
less our Brethren, ( Acts 7.26.) Ye are Brethren, why do ye wrong one to
another? And (1 Pet. 3.8.) Love as Brethren, be pitiful, be courteous.

Many and various are the Offices of Love and kindness that Brethren owe to
each other, but amongst them all, I know none greater then that, ( Exodus
19.17.) Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart, thou shall in any wise
rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.

We cannot therefore do a greater act of kindness, or give a greater Testimony
of our Love to our Brethren, than to dissuade them earnestly from sin,
especially such as evidently bring them into danger of Damnation.

Brethren, says our Apostle here, ( v. 19. andp 20. If any of you do err from
the Truth, and one convert him; Let him know that he which converteth a sinner
from the error of his way shall save a Soul from death, and cover a multitude
of sins.

St. Paul writing to Philemon concerning Onesinus says thus ( v. 8.) Tho I
might be much bold in Christ to enjoin thee that which is convenient yet for
Love's sake, I rather beseech thee. Thus, tho St. James might peremptorily
require the Christians he writes to, yet he rather uses the kind importunity
of a Friend, then the Authority of an Apostle; Exciting them out of pure
kindness to themselves, and to their own Souls, above all things to avoid
Swearing.

Common and vain Swearing is so silly, foolish and Idle a thing, that me thinks
a Man that pretends to reason should be ashamed of it. And I verily believe it
will be difficult to give any reason, or guess how it should become so common
and usual, but because it is so very wicked and sinful, which is likewise the
only reason that can be thought of, why it should be accounted a Gentile
accomplishment and an Ornament of Speech.

But many Men are arrived to that hardness of heart and Searedness of
Conscience, that they think it a Low mean Spirited thing, and beneath a
Gentleman to be afraid of Sinning. But if they will own themselves to be men,
they must confess that if they are not afraid of Sin, they ought to be ashamed
of folly, for those that Glory in their shame, and think wickedness and
debauchery no blemish to their reputation, cannot endure, that any one should
think, or account them Fools.

And yet among all sins there is no one so vain, senseless and foolish as that
of rash Swearing; all sin, indeed is but folly and madness; But the common
Swearer is arrived to the Highest pitch of Folly, he is given up to a reprobate
mind, as St. Paul says of the Profligate Gentiles, ( Romans 1.28.) (...), to a
senseless mind, to a mind void of Judgment and Understanding, as the word
signifies.

For either there is really a God, or there is not; Is there certainly a God!
Does the Swearers believe it, and is he sensible who and what he is; And does
he think himself wise in Trifling with and abusing his holy, and sacred name by
profane and wanton Oaths?

Or if there is no God, is it not a Childish and Impertinent thing for those
that pretend to wit and reason to Swear by that which is not; Is this the way
for Men of Honor and Credit to be believed in what they affirm or deny? Or is
nonsense, vanity and impertinency so great an ornament of discourse? Is there
such pleasing Rhetoric, are there such taking Charms in insignificant Oaths?

But were Swearing only a silly thing, a childish and innocent folly, they
might be indulged and let alone in it till they grew wiser; they might be
Objects of Pity rather than Censure; for who is concerned to see Children taken
with Toys and Baubles. I shall therefore, as I promised, show that it is not only
a very foolish thing, but a most heinous and pernicious sin.

That it is exceeding sinful will appear if we consider, 1. That it is a sin
against the Law of Nature, and Reason; a violation of Natural Religion.

That there is a God, and that this God is infinite, eternal, omnipotent; that
he is omniscient, wise, just and good; that he is the most perfect and
complete, and also the Sovereign or Supreme Being: These things are not more
plainly revealed in Scripture, than discernible by the Light of Nature and
Reason.

For St. Paul assures us ( Romans 1.20.) that the Invisible things of him from
the Creation are plainly seen, being understood by the things that are made,
even his Eternal Power and Godhead. And does it not therefore plainly argue
want of due fear and Reverence, when those that have no sense, consideration or
remembrance of him, shall Idly and wantonly make use of his Sacred name in
profane and wicked discourse? The Heathens themselves held it unlawful for men
to Swear by the Names of their Gods, unless it were done religiously, awfully,
and in serious, and weighty Causes.

The Turks who are great Assertors of the unity of the Godhead, and
Irreconcilable Enemies to Idolatry; Yet give in a manner the same honor to
the name of God that they do to himself, of which that Learned Ambassador
Busbequins gives several Instances in his Epistles.

He tells us that he saw an Army of them when they were at their Solemn
devotions, and he observed that when in reading the Alcaron, (which is their
Bible) or of their Prayers, the Priest pronounced the name of Mahomet they all
bowed themselves very low, but when he pronounced the name of God they fell
flat upon their Faces to the Ground. And he says that they are exceeding
careful to preserve Paper from any filth or Defilement, and that if they chance
to see any lie scattered on the ground, they presently take it up, wipe it, and
put it into some safe place; and the reason they give for it is this that for
ought they know, the name of God has been, or is written upon it. And if any
one does tread, or sit upon the Alcaron, they esteem it an unpardonable Crime:
Because they look upon it as a contempt cast upon that Book, in which the Name
of God is so often written.

And shall Ignorance and Superstition make them more tender of the name of God,
and more fearful to abuse it, then true Religion makes Us?

Certainly the same Light of nature and reason that tells us that there is a
God, who is Almighty in Power, Terrible in Majesty, and who ought to be feared
and adored by us, will tell us also, that we ought not to be profane and abuse
his sacred name, or Attributes, by vain and Rash Oaths or Curses.

For what Slighting, Contemning and Undervaluing of God is it, when Men shall
Idly Swear by his Glorious name in most light, impertinent, triffling matters;
and yet many there are so void of the fear of God, that they Customarily Swear
to such vain and foolish Things as a wise and sober man would be ashamed barely
to utter with his Mouth.

2. It is a Sin plainly and peremptorily forbidden, and surely if we stood in
no other relation to God than that of Creatures to their Creator, his Command
is sufficient to oblige us to obedience.

If the Gentiles who had only the Law of reason, and light of nature to direct
them, thought themselves obliged to abstain from this Sin; how much more ought
those to dread it, to whom God has forbidden it by an express and promulgate
Law?

If we are not downright Atheists, if we have any belief that there is a God
who made us, and not we our selves, we cannot but confess that he has a
Sovereign and Undoubted power over us, that he has a right to command us, that
all his commands are to be answered by us with such an unlimitted obedience as
admits of no Exception or Reserve, that his will being made known and
discovered to us ought to be the rule of all our Actions, and his Law the
measure and standard of obedience.

A common and customary Swearer that owns there is a God, and who has strictly
forbidden men to take his name in vain, must needs be be the most wilful,
Perverse and Reprobate Sinner on this side Hell; for he does in effect say as
Pharaoh did, who is the Lord that I should obey him? He bids open defiance to
his Authority: Such an one is as obstinately wicked as were the Jews in the
Height of their Impiety, when they told God plainly that they would not obey
his commands, ( Jer. 22.21.) I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou
said, I will not hear: This has been thy manner from thy youth that thou
have not obeyed my voice.

That Prophet tell us, ( Chap. 42.2.) of some who desired him to enquire of God
what course they should take, promising faithfully that what ever God should
command them, they would certainly do it, but when the Prophet brought them
such an Answer as they did not like, they were so far from doing as they
promised that they railed upon him and abused him; This was a great Sin in
them, and yet they had some pretense for their disobedience, viz. they did not
believe that God had sent such an answer by him, but that Baruch and he had
conspired together on purpose to betray them into the hand of the Caldeans, (
Jer. 43.3.)

Certainly common and profane Swearers are far worse then those, more bold and
refractory, for they own that God has forbidden them to take his name in vain,
and yet they will do it; What is this but to say plainly as those, ( Job
21.14.) depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, what is the
Almighty that we should serve or obey him? They are certainly the most wilful,
stubborn, the most perverse and resolved Sinners upon earth: As for other
Sins, tho they are Great and Heinous, yet those that are Guilty of them have
some shame and modesty with them, for they endeavor to conceal and hide them,
but common Swearers are open and brasenfac'd, audacious, and impudent. The liar
will so tell his tale, and contrive his story, that it may (if possible) gain
belief, at least that it may not be contradicted or disproved; and rather then
it shall be so, he will add an Oath to his lie to preserve his credit, and that
he may not be accounted a liar; which plainly shows he is ashamed of lying,
though not of Swearing.

The eye of the Adulterer waits for the Twilight, saying, no eye shall see
me, and disguiseth his face: In the dark they dig through houses which they had
marked for themselves in the day time, they know not the light, for the morning
is to them even as the shadow of Death, ( Job 24.15.) the Adultress will (if
possible) so conceal her Lewdness, that there shall no more sign be seen of it,
then of the way of an Eagle in the Air, a Serpent on the Rock, of a ship in the
Sea: she eats, and wipeth her mouth, and says, I have done no wickedness,
(Prove. 30.20.) The Thief endeavors to conceal his Theft, as much for shame as
fear, and is as much ashamed as afraid when he is found out, and discovered (
Jer. 2.26.)

But the common Swearer has an Whores Forehead, that refuses to Blush; he
declares his sin as Sodom, and hides it not; ( Jer. 3.9.) and is arrived to the
same Pitch of Impudence with those ( Jer. 6.15.) who, when they had committed
all manner of abomination, were not ashamed, neither could they blush; which
shows they are hardened in it.

So that it is no abatement of the heinousness of this Sin that it does not like
others shelter it self under the cover of hypocrisy, but appears openly as it
is, but rather a great aggravation of it.

For God has not only forbidden men to make use of his sacred name vainly and
irreverently, but he has in several places required them when ever they use it,
to do it with the greatest awfulness and fear, the greatest Veneration and
Reverence, ( Lev. 19.12.) Thou shall not profane the Name of thy God; I am the
Lord, ( Deuteronomy. 28.58.) God Threatns thus, If thou will not observe to do all the
words of this Law, that thou may fear this glorious and fearful name, (The
Lord thy God) Then the Lord shall make thy Plagues wonderful, and the Plagues
of thy Seed, even Great Plagues, and of long continuance.

And this doubtless is the great reason why the name of God is so often in
Scripture put for God himself, That we may know, that he that by rash Oaths and
Curses prophaneth the former, does thereby affront and dishonnour the latter.

In brief; The Law of God is so plain and peremptory in this case, that it is
impossible that any should be guilty of the wilful and Customary Breach of it,
but must Sin against, and wound his own Conscience, if he have any.

3. This Law of God which forbids rash and vain Swearing is no hard or
difficult Law, but it is as easy as it is reasonable. If (said Naaman's Servants
to him) the Prophet had bidden thee do some great thing, would thou not have
done it? If God commands us any thing that is difficult, yet we ought to set
about it; and if he requires us to abstain from doing any thing, we ought not
to do that thing, how much soeve^ we are inclined to it; and can we not for his
sake forbear the doing of that which we ought not to do if he had not forbidden
it. When God commanded Abraham to offer up his only Son, he did not refuse to
do it, and shall not we leave a Foolish Sin, when he tells us how odious and
displeasing it is to him?

Of all the Laws of the Ten Commandments this is by far the easiest to be kept,
which forbids us to take the name of God in vain: at least as far as it
respects vain Oaths.

Considering how prone Mankind are to Idolatry, and how universally the world
was overrun with it; It was an hard matter to make the Jews observe the two
first Commandments.

The Law that concerned the Sabbath was looked upon then as burthensom, and
uneasy, and against their profit and interest as they thought, ( Amos 8.5.)

The Laws which forbid, Murder, Adultery Theft, Pride and Intemperance, are
very difficult to be kept, considering the great depravity of our Natures: it
requires great care, watchfulness, and self-denial to yield a sincere and
inward obedience to those Laws. The Sins that are forbidden by those Laws are
so hard to be avoided, that our Savior Compares it to the cutting off a right
hand, and plucking out a Right eye, but this is not such.

Had God commanded us to forbear Meat when we were hungry, or Drink when we
were thirsty, or Sleep and Rest when we were weary, we might seem to have some
cause to complain of the hardness and uneasiness of such Commands. But when he
requires us not to make use of his Name vainly and irreverently, is this such
an unreasonable Restraint, as not to be endured? Are such Bonds as these so
cumbersom, that we must needs burst them asunder, are these Cords so uneasy
that we must cast them from us? what is this but perverseness and obstinacy?

There was a time when God did impose upon the Jews burthensom and uneasy Laws
indeed: For so St. Peter calls the Ceremonial Law, ( Acts 15.10.) Why tempt you
God to put a Yoke upon the Disciples, which neither our Fathers nor we were
able to bear? St. Paul ( Gal. 5.1.) calls it a Yoke of Bondage, and says, that
whilst the Church continued under the obligation of it, it was as a Child in
its minority.

Yea, God himself calls them Statutes that were not good, and Judgments by
which men should not live, (Ezekiel. 20.25.)

And yet whilst that Law stood in force, there were never a zealous, godly and
conscientious Jew, that would break any part of it: The greatest Extremities
could not make them eat any thing which that Law forbad; and if at any time
they did touch any thing that was unclean, it was against their will.

And did they willingly abstain from every thing that was forbidden by that
Law, though the things forbidden were innocent and harmless, and tho they were
abridg'd of their Liberty, only that God might make trial of their Obedience?

And dare we with unhallowed mouths profane the sacred Name of God, which he
has declared he will have no man take in vain, when it is not only so
reasonable, but easy for us to abstain from it?

Now that the Law that forbids rash and profane Swearing, is not only a most
reasonable, but easy Law, will plainly appear if we consider further,

4ly. That no man can pretend he has any temptation to break it. There are very
few other sins, but men may have some temptations to commit them; but the
Swearer cannot possibly have any worthy of that name.

If a man murder his Neighbor, perhaps that Neighbor is his Enemy, or he
thinks him so, or he has wronged or injured him, and the sweetness of Revenge
tempts him.

Or perhaps there is a prospect of gain and advantage in the case; which
tempted those Robbers Solomon speaks of, ( Prove. 1.11.) who said, Come, let us
lay wait for innocent blood, etc. we shall find all precious substance, and
fill our houses with spoil.

The Adulterer gratifies his natural inclinations, his temper and constitution
prompts him to uncleanness, and when he meets with a pleasing and desirable
object, and a fit opportunity, he is drawn aside by his own lusts and enticed,
( James 1.14.) so that he cannot deny himself, nor resist the power; he is
allured with the sweetness of stolen waters, and the pleasantness of bread eaten
in secret; Prove. 9.7.) and the hope of taking his fill of love prevails upon
him, ( Prove. 7 18.)

The Drunkard perhaps has a dry and thirsty constitution, and the Liquor is
grateful and pleasing to him; or his love of Company and Merriment ingages him
in that sottish kind of Debauchery.

He that robs, or steals, or cousens, proposes to himself some advantage of
gain or profit.

If the ambitious man is guilty of Lying, or Dissimulation, it is to get honor
and preferment; if men are quarrelsom and contentious, it is their interest makes
them so. And it is hard to find out any sin to which men have not some
^emptation or other.

But Swearing is a sin of mere wilfulness and ^erverseness, for which no one
that is guilty of (...) can allege a reason, or justly pretend a (...)
passionate, when he will stab a man upon little or no provocation; And that he
is very ill Natured and Malicious, that will utterly ruin a man for an
inconsiderate word.

And it is a sign that Atheism, and Infidelity, Profaneness and Irreligion, is
deeply rooted in that man from whole mouth Oaths and Curses flow naturally, and
Insensibly, when there is neither temptation to it, nor occasion for it.

5ly. There are few or no other sins, which those that are guilty of them, may
not find some excuse for; But no man can have any for rash and vain Swearing:
He that is guilty of it, lying under no temptation of profit, pleasure, and
honnour, which are the three great and powerful temptations by which, or at
least by one of which men are drawn into most other Sins.

Indeed those that are guilty of this abominable sin are apt to alleadg some
trivial excuse in Mitigation of their guilt; but they are very Trivial ones
indeed.

The most common Excuse is Anger, passion, and provocation. But this is no
Excuse to many who are Usually, and Customarily guilty of this Sin in common
discourse, and that as well when they are pleased, as Angry.

But is Anger a Sufficient Excuse for it? what cannot a Man be Angry but he
must Sin; Suppose a man has just cause to be Angry; he is basely and
unworthily injured, and abused; What then must he revenge himself upon God,
must he fly in the face of his maker; What hurt or injury has he done him?

This is as foolish and unreasonable, as if a man that is injured by his Enemy,
should revenge the injury upon his best Friend; and unworthily revile and abuse
him, for that in which he had no hand or concern.

This is to Act like Brute Beasts, who when they are Chafed and Enraged,
Assault any Persons that stand in their way, not being able to distinguish who
did, or who did not injure or offend them, but take every one for their Foe.

Its said ( Isay. 57.20.) That the wicked are like to the troubled sea, when it
cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

It Is the violence and fury of the Wind, that disturbs the Sea, and makes it
unquiet, but the mire and dirt it throws up, is upon the shore, that is not
concerned.

Thus what ever it be that disturbs the Swearer, and puts him into a Passion,
he vomits up all the filthiness of his heart, and casts it upon God! Like the
Assyrian King who being offended and enraged against Israel, vents his malice
and spleen, and his Blasphemous Reproaches against his Maker; and in his rage
he abuses him most, that set him up, and who gave him all the power that he
had, ( Isa 37.23.)

If the Swearer in his passion does injure or hurt the person that provoked
him, it might look like something of an excuse; But if he were never so Justly
Provoked, and has never so much cause to be angry, is this a sufficient
Reason, or indeed a tolerable excuse, for his abusing the name and honnour of
God?

I said in my haste (says David) all men are liars, ( Psa. 116.11. when Saul
persecuted him, and his own People spoke of stoning him; he was ready to
conclude there was no trust in man; and yet even then, when the falseness and
treachery of men had put him into the greatest passion, he kept up an awful
reverence of God, he durst not let his Tongue loose against him; no, for, says
he, ( v. 12.) what reward shall I give unto the Lord, etc?

Men may unworthily abuse us, affront and injure us, and move us to great
impatience; but what, must we then curse and swear, as if God were the person
that provoked us? and yet this is the Swearer's case, who makes his passion and
anger an excuse for his sin, which is, and must needs be a very foolish
pretense, unless God were the person that had wrongfully and unjustly injured,
and provoked him.

Certainly anger and passion can be no excuse for Swearing, unless it be God
that gives the provocation, no more than it is for a man's revenging himself on
his Friend, because he is injured or affronted by his Enemy; as I have already
shown.

It was a rash and wicked speech of Jehoram the Son of Ahab, when Samaria was
straightly besieged by the Syrians, and the Famine was so sore, that the Women
slew their own Children to feed on, (2 Kings 6.31.) God do so to me, and more
also, if the head of Elisha the Son of Shaphat shall stand upon him to day;
why, what hurt had Elisha done him? had he called in the Syrians, or caused the
Famine? no; it was his own Idolatry and wickedness that brought those Judgments
upon him, and yet he swore he would revenge himself on the Prophet.

But he was a true Son of Ahab and Jezebel; for thus Ahab reproached Elijah as
his Enemy, who was indeed his best Friend; and Jezebel swore she would take off
his head, because he had slain the Prophets of Baal; when he was only an
Instrument in God's hand, and only said and did what he was commanded; which
they might have known and understood if they would; and probably they did but
God was too high, and out of the reach of their malice and spite, and
therefore they would wreck their revenge upon his Prophet.

When Corah and his Brethren the Sons of Levi, being full of spite and envy,
for that Aaron and his Sons engrossed the Priest's Office, and made them their
Underlings, who thought themselves as worthy of the Priesthood as they; Moses
thus reasons the case with them, ( Numb. 16.9. Seems it a small thing unto
you, that the Lord God of Israel has separated you from the Congregation of
Israel, to bring you near to himself to do the service of the Tabernacle of the
Lord, and to stand before the Congregation to minister unto them; and he has
brought thee near unto him, and all thy Brethren the Sons of Levi with thee,
and seek ye the Priesthood also?

For which cause both thou, and all thy company are gathered together against
the Lord, and what is Aaron that ye murmr against him? But this they would
not understand, that it was by God's appointment, that Aaron and his Sons had
the Priesthood, and that he had given them the Levites to be their
Underofficers and Assistants; but they pretended that 'twas Aaron's own pride
and ambition, that caused him to lift up himself above the People of the Lord,
who were as holy as he; They would not own that their Quarrel was against God,
but against Aaron:

But now Swearers are more bold and impudent in their Sin than these, who ever
affronts, injures, or abuses them, yea whoever does or speaks any thing that
is displeasing to them, they no sooner fall into a passion, but God is made the
Object of their fury, as if he were the person that injured them.

But be not deceived God is not mocked, let not man make anger or provocation
an excuse for Swearing; but let him take heed, lest he provoke God to Swear
too; (i. e.) to Swear in his Wrath, as he once did concerning the Israelites in
the day of their provocation, that they should never enter into his rest.

The other Excuses that Swearers have for their Sin, are so silly and idle, so
vain and foolish, that they are not worth mentioning, yea they are such as they
themselves do not openly allege, but rather leave others to guess at them;
and they are the commonness and the gentility of the Sins.

As to the first, it is true that such Sins as are most common and usual, are
little taken notice of; and men generally account them the smaller, for that
they are so frequent.

Such Sins as are rarely heard of, are much taken notice of, and they beget
wonder and Astonishment; But where they are rife, they are esteemed small and
inconsiderable.

The in of Sodomy in all Christian Nations is seldom heard of; But in Sodom no
one was ashamed of it and among the Turks small account is made of it.

The Romans were great pretenders to truth and could not endure lying: But the
Cretans who were always liars, and the Grecians their Neighbors (if the Romans
did not abuse them) rather gloried in it, then took shame at it. In all
Civilized Nations a Thief is most despicable and contemptible; and yet the
Colchians hardly think their Children good for any thing who are not cunning
and dextrous at it: Busbequins ( Epist. 3. p. 208.)

It Is well known that this Nation has been formerly admired, and mightily
commended for it is sobriety [Tu non bibis, Angle, etc.] and drunkenness as it
was rarely seen, so 'twas accounted so odious and shameful, that as St. Paul
says, (1 These. 5.7.) They that were drunk were drunk in the night; 'twas a sin
that did not dare appear barefaced, and in the light; he that was known to
have been drunk was forced to keep private, and was ashamed to show his face;
But now it is grown so common and usual, that many hardly think it a sin at most
a very small one.

But what then, does the commonness of a sin extenuate it, and make it less? No
certainly, it is rather an aggravation of it; shows the great decrease of Piety
and Godliness, and the great increase of wickedness, profaneness, and
debauchery.

It Is the commonness of a sin that makes it cry so loud for vengeance; Had
there been but ten Righteous Persons in Sodom, God would have spared it; and
had there been but ten guilty of those great sins, it is probable he would not
have destroyed it; 'Twas because those great sins were grown so common, that
God said, that they were very grievous, and the cry of them was come up before
him: ( Genesis 18.20.)

When great, and notorious sins do universally and generally prevail in a
Nation; And little or no notice is taken of them, and few are concerned about
them, it is a sign that the measure of it is sins are full, and that it is ripe
for vengeance: As when all flesh had corrupted it is ways, and the earth was
filled with violence, 'twas time for the Flood to come, and sweep them away: (
Genesis 6.11.)

Thus, when dolatry and Lewdness was grown so rife among the Canaanites, as
that there was hardly one to be found among them that was not guilty, their
Land was no longer able to bear the burden of their wickedness, but was forced
them to spue out.

And God charges the Israelites that they should take heed, that they should
not tolerate any of them, such as Idolatry, uncleanness, or the like, lest if
they should become customary, the same land should cast them out too, ( Levit.
18.28.)

Was Lying the smaller a sin or the more excusable in the Cretans because 'twas
universal; no, rather 'twas much the greater; for which cause St. Paul strictly
charges Titus that he should rebuke them sharply, ( Tit. 1.13.)

We ought not therefore to follow a multitude to do evil, ( Exodus 22.3.) for
'twere easy to demonstrate that the more common a sin is, the greater, and more
heinous it is in the sight of God.

Again to make Swearing a mark and token of Gentility is the greatest abuse and
highest affront can be put upon the Gentry. Gentility was designed as the
reward of virtue, and all Civilized Nations did ever justly expect that the
gentry should raise themselves to an higher pitch then the commonalty, and
signalize themselves by worthy and virtuous actions.

If Swearing be a Gentile accomplishment, Gentility will soon become ridiculous
and contemptible in the eyes of all sober men; And such Gentlemen, how much
soever they may be feared, will never be loved or esteemed by any; yea they are
the very scorn and contempt of the Rabble.

And if to be able to mouth an Oath gracefully (as some speak) shall be thought
a gentile qualification to swear like a Gentleman, will soon become as common
and scandalous a Proverb, as to be as drunk as a Beggar. How rhetorically such
graceful Oaths may sound in some men's ears, or what tropes or figures they may
fancy in them, I know not; sure I am, that Swearing is none of that Salt with
which ^t. Paul would have us season our speech to make it savoury and pleasing
to sober and good men.

Solomon tells us, Pro. 14.9.) fools make a mook at sin, but what egregious
fools are they that think it a Grace and Ornament; What Grace, what Ornament
can that be in which the meanest Beggar and the veryest fool that is able to
speak, can come up equal with them?

In brief; As Swearers are the most nonsensical among men; so all the excuses
they can make for it are idle, silly and impertinent; it being a sin by which
no man can gain any thing besides everlasting damnation, which brings me to
speak of the reason of the prohibition, why Christians should above all things
abstain from Swearing; viz. Lest they should fall into condemnation.

The reason why the Scribes and Pharisees looked upon the Obligation of the Law
to be chiefly external, and consequently why they were very careful to avoid
the outward acts of Murder Adultery, Theft, and false Witness; but made little
or nothing of Anger, Envy, or Malice (especially toward Enemies) or of Lust or
Covetousness, was, because they observed that there were no punishments
appointed for these latter by the Judicial Law.

They accounted the Tenth Commandment to be a Guard or Fence of the Laws of the
Second Table by way of advice or counsel, rather than properly any part of it;
and therefore they thought, that if a person did keep himself from doing
actually any hurt or injury to his Neighbor, he did not violate that Law though
he were guilty of the sins of Malice, Lust and Covetousness in his heart and
desires; or if they were sins, they esteemed them too small and inconsiderable
to deserve punishment, because God had not expressly threatened any punishment to
them.

And so in like manner here, they observing that though there were the severest
punishments denounced in the Law, and by the Prophets against Perjury, or false
Swearing, yet there were none against rash vain Swearing; they thought it but a
small and inconsiderable sin, or rather no sin at all, especially when they
swore by the Creatures.

Indeed they pretended to have that awful veneration of the Name of God, that
they very seldom swore by it but in the matters of weight and concern; And as a
solemn confirmation of some great and important truth, according to that, (
Jer. 4.2) Thou shall swear, the Lord Lives, in Truth, in Judgment, and
Righteousness.

Yea it is very evident from, ( Eccles. 23.9.) that the wise and devout among
the Jews did very much condemn rash and vain swearing, or taking God's Name in
vain, as very dangerous and inconvenient if not absolutely sinful and wicked in
and of it is self.

Where the Son of Sirach advises thus; Accustom not thy self to Swearing,
neither use thy self to the naming of the holy one: For as a Servant that is
continually beaten shall not be without the blue mark, so he that Swears, and
names God continually, shall not be faultless.

Yea so distastful and odious was common Swearing to the wise and religious,
that the same person says, ( Chap. 27.14.) the discourse of fools is irksome,
and their speech is the wantonness of sin; The talk of him that Swears much
makes their hair stand upright, and their braules make one stop his ears; As
it is a sin therefore displeasing to God, so 'twas odious to good men, 'tho it
does not appear, there was any bodily punishment, or Pecuniary Mulct annexed to
it by the Judicial Law.

But as our Savior shows ( Mat. 5.20. that not only Murder, but rash Anger,
and approbrious words, and whatever else proceeded from Malice, or envy was
prohibited by God's Law, and 'tho the Judicial Law made no provision, for the
punishment of such as were guilty of them if they did not actually injure their
Neighbors, yet God would severely punish them without repentance, ( Mat.
5.20.) Whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause shall be in danger
of the Judgment etc.

And as he declares ( v. 6.) That whosoever did look upon a Woman to lust after
her, had committed Adultery with her already in his heart, (i. e.) had broken
and violated that Law, the breach of which God had ordained should be punished
with death: And though because such inward Adultery of the heart is not
discoverable, neither does it actually hurt any one, the Magistrate had no
authority to punish such an one with death: Yet he shall not without repentance
escape punishment from God after death, as we may evidently collect and infer
from what follows; ( v. 29.) Therefore if thy right Eye offend thee, pluck it
out, and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy
members perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into Hell.

So in like manner in the case of Oaths; he shows that the Third Commandment
did not only forbid Perjury, but rash Oaths, and vain Swearing; ( v. 33.) Ye
have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear
thy self, but shall perform unto God thy Vows. But I say unto you, Swear not at
all, etc.

As if he had said, You have a Tradition that the Third Commandment, and those
other. Precepts concerning Oaths, do only forbid false Swearing; and that to
swear by the Name of God (provided the thing sworn to is true) in common
discourse, in light and trivial matters is hardly a sin, but to swear by the
Creatures is no sin at all

But I say unto you, that all manner of vain Swearing, whether by God himself,
or any of his Creatures, especially such as stand in any near Relation to him
is sinful, and a violation of that Law, which forbids you to take his name in
vain.

And his words imply, that though there was no outward punishment appointed by
the Law for such vain and rash Swearing, yet such as were guilty of it should
no more escape the Judgment of God then those that were angry with their
Brethren without a cause; that were Envious, Malicious, and Revengful, or those
who did commit Adultery in their hearts, none of which without Repentance
should escape the vengeance of Hell Fire.

Now the reason why the Judicial Law did not punish vain, Idle, and rash
Swearing, was much the same with that for which it did not punish Malice, and
Lust, (viz.) because it could not be certainly known who was guilty, and who
not.

The Lawyers say That the imagining, designing and contriving the death of the
King is Treason, but no man shall suffer for this, until it i^ proved by the
Overt act (as they call it) that is, till it be discovered and proved by some
word or action.

The sinfullness and malignity of the Searer, is the Impiety of his heart, the
want of the Love and fear of God, and of due reverence for his name and
Attributes, which is only knowable to God, and therefore only punishable by
him. Now the Law of God not only permiting men to swear by the name of God, but
in cases Requiring and Enjoining of it, though all the Jews and Pharisees
themselves owned that men ought to swear seriously, awfully and reverently, by
his name, and not vainly, presumptuously and wantonly, according to the second
precept of the Sons of Noah concerning Blessing the name of the Lord, (which
precepts the proselyites of the Gates were bound to observe) yet their being no
way to discern, when a man swore Reverently or Irreverently (as there was to
discover false Swearing and Blasphemy) therefore no punishment was appointed
for rash Swearing as there was for the Latter.

But I say, whosoever seriously considers the manner and method, the drift and
design, the connection and coherence of our Savior's discourse in that first
Sermon of his on the mount, in which he shows the true extent, and
indispensible obligation of the Law, and rescues it from the abuses put upon it
by the false Expositions which the Scribes, and Pharisees made of it, and their
ungodly traditions; Will easily preceive, that he does not only condemn such
vain Swearing as sinful, but dangerous; as rendering the person guilty obnoxious
to the penalty annexed to the Breach of the third commandment, (viz.) To the
vengeance of God and eternal Damnation.

And Indeed I am very apt to believe that this is the great reason why there is
a threatening added to that commandment, and no other, thou shall not take, etc.
For the Lord will not hold him Guiltless, etc.

As if he had said, take heed to thy self that thou do not vainly and
irreverently make use of my name thou must indeed often use it, it must be
frequently in thy mouth, and many times thou will have occasion to swear by it,
but for as much as men cannot certainly know when thou usest it reverently, or
irreverently, solemnly or vainly, I have not given the Magistrates or Judges
any orders about punishing vain Swearers.

However know, that as I am jealous of mine honor and of the honor of my
name: so I will severely punish all such as shall take it in vain; I will not
hold him Guiltless, though men cannot condemn or punish them.

And here it is worthy our observation that these words, (the Lord will not hold
him guiltless) are a (...), a figure very frequent in Scripture, and very
elegant, and such as Heightens the sense, and augments the signification, where
it is used, of which I could give many Instances.

I will only mention one, (viz.) That ( Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.) which I make choice
of, because it is a place most applicable to lewd and customary Swearers of all
other sinners. Lest there should be among you a root that bears Gall and
Wormwood, and it come to pass, when he hears the words of this curse, that
he bless himself in his heart, saying I shall have Peace, though I walk in the
Imagination of my own heart; the Lord will not spare him.

The Lord will not spare him! (i. e.) God will certainly most fearfully punish
him, he will power forth upon him the utmost of his wrath and indignation as it
follows; But the Anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that
man, and all the curses that are written in this Book shall ly upon him, and
the Lord shall blot out his name from under Heaven, and the Lord shall separate
him unto evil out of all the Tribes of Israel, according to all the Curses of
the Covenant that are written in this Book of the Law.

So here, when God says, he will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name
in vain, the meaning is, that he will hold him highly guilty, and that he will
esteem him one of the vilest sinners, of the profanest Wretches, and will be
sure to punish him with the greatest and utmost severity.

Which passage in Deuteronomy (I say) I made choice of to illustrate this
matter by, not only because these words [ The Lord will not hold him guiltless,
and these, The Lord will not spare] are the very same figure and Phrase, of the
very same Import and Signification.

But also (and that chiefly) because the whole Character that is there given of
a most vile and wicked man, of one who was arrived to the highest pitch of
wickedness, and who was hardened in his sin and Impenitence, does more exactly
agree to one that is a customary Swearer, then to any other sort of Sinners.
For where shall we find a root that bears Gall and Wormwood, but in that
heart out of which continually proceed abominable Oaths and Curses? Who is
there that is a greater contemner of the Curses which God has denounced
against obstinate Sinners then the profane Swearer; Who more apt to say in his
heart, I shall have peace, though he walk in the Imagination of his own wicked
heart, than he? Who more ready to add drunkenness to thirst then such an one,
for though perhaps there have been many drunkards, who have not been customary
Swearers, yet I believe there was seldom or never a common Swearer but he was a
common drunkard too. And therefore certainly of all such we may say, that the
Lord will not Spare them, but the Anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall
smoke against them, and all the curses and threatenings, that are written in the
Book of God shall light upon them. And therefore we may well apply all those
passages in which Swearing is forbidden indefinitely, and where the persons
guilty are threatened, not only to perjured persons, but to rash and vain
Swearers, as ( Hosea 4.2.) By Swearing, and Lying and Killing, and Stealing,
and committing Adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood. In which
place Swearing is not only joined with the greatest sins, but placed as the
Captain and Leader of them. And Jer. says, ( Chap. 23.10.) because of Swearing
the Land Mourns; and Zechariah says ( Chap. 5.3.) That the Swearer shall be
cut off by the Curse

And the Son of Sirach says (Eccles. 23.11.) that a man that uses much
Swearing shall be filled with Iniquity, and the Plague shall never depart from
his house, if he offend, his sins shall be upon him; And if he acknowledge not
his sin, he makes a double Offense, and if he Swear in vain, he shall not be
Innocent, but his house shall be full of Calamities; and ( v. 12.) he says,
there is a word that is Clothed with Death; God grant it be not found in the
Heritage of Jacob, for all such things shall be far from the Godly, and they
shall not wallow in their sins; By the word clothed with death, and which Godly
men dread and abhor, he means intemperate Swearing, as is evident from what
follows ( v. 13.) use not thy mouth to intemperate Swearing, for therein is the
World of sin.

So that we may say of Swearing as the Psalmist did of Cursing which is the
nearest of kin to it, for there are few Oaths (especially such as proceed from
rash Anger and passion) which may not be said to be at least virtually and
implicitly Curses likewise) viz. That it shall prove the greatest plague and
mischief to the person himself that is guilty of it, ( Psalm. 109.17.) As he
loved Cursing so let it come unto him: As he delighted not in Blessing so let
it be far from him; As he clothed himself with Cursing like as with a Garment,
so let it come into his Bowels like Water, and like Oil into his Bones, let it
be unto him as the Garment that Covers him, and for a Girdle wherewith he is
girded continually.

For as God has declared, that he is jealous of the honor of his name, and
that he will not hold him guiltless that takes it in vain i. e.) will look him
as highly guilty, as a most vile and abominable Sinner; So he will not fail to
punish him accordingly without sincere repentance, and deep Humiliation For as
he has revealed his Wrath from Heaven against all such profaneness and Impiety;
so the time will come when he will pour forth Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation, and Anguish upon all such as are guilty of it. And though the
Swearer may not draw down divine vengeance upon his head in this World, in
which all things happen to all alike, and there is one Event to the righteous
and to the wicked, to the good and to the sinner, to him that Swears, and to
him that fears an Oath; as Solomon says, ( Eccles. 9.2.) yet he shall not
without great repentance escape that most Tremendous curse which God will
pronounce against all impenitent sinners, Go ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; Where they may perhaps curse and swear
in the Anguish of their Souls, and bitterness of their Spirits, but it shall
not in the least Mitigate or Assuage their Torments.

The Application.
Having thus shown unto you the sinfulness and danger of this sin of vain and
rash Swearing, I shall press and enforce the Apostle's Dehortation by way of
Application.

Above all things, my Brethren swear not. Among all the gifts that God has
bestowed upon Men, there is hardly one more useful or wonderful than Speech, by
which Men communicate their minds to each other and discover the greatest
secrets; and without which Mankind would have no more society or commerce than
the Beasts of the Earth, or the Fowls of the Air.

The gift of Speech is a most divine thing, and full of wonder, and therefore
ought to be used for the praise and honor of him that made it; and it is the
height of folly and ingratitude to dishonor and abuse him by it.

The Tongue was designed to be an Instrument to set forth and celebrate the
praise and glory of God; Therefore, says David ( Psalm. 34.11.) I will bless the
Lord at all times; his praise shall be continually in my mouth; and ( Psalm.
51.15.) O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise; and
( Psalm. 71.8.) Let my mouth be filled with thy praise and with thy honor all
the day long. And therefore it must needs be a wicked and heinous thing for Men
to dishonor God by that most useful Instrument the Tongue, which was created
on purpose to set forth and celebrate his honor. Thus St. James having
asserted ( cap. 3.6.) That the Tongue (i. e.) a wicked, loose, filthy,
unbridled Tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity, that defiles the whole body,
and that it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison; gives this reason for it,
that it is oftentimes made an Instrument of cursing, when it was designed only
for blessing; ( v. 9.) therewithal we bless God, even the Father, and therewith
curse we men, which are made after the similitude of God: out of the same mouth
proceeds blessing and cursing; my Brethren, these things ought not to be so.
As if he had said, Is it not a most absurd and unreasonable thing, that things
so opposite and contrary should proceed out of the same mouth? Do you ever pray
to God, do you praise him, and give thanks to him; and do you not thereby
account that you honor his Name, and dare you with the same mouth to dishonor
and blaspheme it with wanton Oaths, and spiteful Curses?

Again, do you accustom your selves to say the Lord's Prayer? which is not only
a form and pattern to compose all others by, but it is in its self the best,
and most excellent of all prayers. Do you use it reverently, seriously and
devoutly; and did you never observe and consider this one thing, that the very
first Petition of all is this, Hallowed be thy Name? And do you pray there that
the Name of God may be honored, sanctified and reverenced by your selves and
others; that you may have an awful and reverent esteem of it, and regard to it;
and dare you not only to take this glorious and fearful Name in vain, but
profane it by unhallowed Oaths, and that with the very same mouth by which you
pray it may be sanctified and reverenced? This is a great wickedness indeed,
and ought to be looked upon by you that are Christians as strange and
monstrous, as it would be for a Fountain at the same place to send forth sweet
Water and bitter, ( v. 11.)

This most gross and absurd abuse of the Tongue does therefore discover the
filthiness and impiety of the heart. Whoever truly loves or fears God; whoever
does accustom himself sincerely to pray to him, or to praise him, will seldom
(I had almost said never) abuse his Name by rash Swearing. He that is
accustomed to use it reverently, will never abuse it presumptuously or
irreverently. He that has the fear of God in his heart, will ever take heed to
his ways that he offend not by his Tongue, ( Psalm. 39.1.) For it is certain no
man does less remember, or seldomer think upon God, than he that uses his Name
most by Oaths and Curses. Our Savior tells us, ( Mat. 12.34.) That out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. A good man out of the good treasure
of his heart brings forth good things, and an evil man out of the evil
treasure of his heart brings forth evil things. If the heart of a man be
piously and religiously disposed, it will cause him to set God always before
him, and to have awful and reverent thoughts of him; it will make him very
cautious and tender in every thing in which his honor is concerned; he will be
so far from being a common Swearer, that he will dread the very thoughts of it:
Whereas if a man's heart is impiously inclined, if it want the fear and love of
God, God will not be in all his thoughts, though his name be frequently in his
mouth; as his mind is atheistical and profane, so will his words and discourse
be; he will make nothing to curse or swear by the holy and dreadful Name of
God; yea, he will hardly know or perceive when he is guilty of it. Yea, I k^ow
no one sin in the World, that is so great and so certain a sign of an impious
and irreligious heart, as customary Swearing; it is so utterly inconsistent with
Piety, that those that are guilty of it, seem never to have any the least
impressions of it: They are all of them, as St. Paul said of Simon Magus, (
Acts 8.23.) in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, it is a most
infallible sign of hardness of heart, and searedness of conscience. And where
this wicked and ungodly custom prevails, it will draw Men into many other sins,
by hardening of their hearts, and does very often make them become guilty of
that sin, which all Mankind, (who pretend to honesty, honor or conscience)
confess to be most vile, heinous and abominable; I mean the sin of Perjury.

There are many men that pride themselves in Swearing, as a Gentile
Accomplishment, who will be ready to stab any man that shall give them the Lie;
and those that think Swearing a Grace and Ornament of speech, acknowledge it a
shameful thing to be, or to be counted a Liar. And yet there is no doubt, but
that the most common Swearers are generally the greatest Liars; and it is no
wonder, for those cannot pretend to forbear the latter out of conscience, who
make no conscience to be guilty of the former. And if Oaths do flow from a
man's mouth suddenly, and insensibly (as they always do, where Swearing is
become habitual and customary) why may they not Lie after the same manner? and
then they become guilty of Perjury before they are aware of it; for what is
Perjury, but a Lie confirmed and bound with an Oath? And if we should appeal to
the Conscience of a common Swearer, whether he has not often done thus, (i.e.)
sworn to what is false, as well as to what is true, in common discourse, I
believe he cannot deny it, if he seriously consider it: For it is certain that
such men do often in their passion oblige themselves by Oaths, swearing they
will do such things, as they do not in the least intend; or if they did intend
them, when they came to themselves they were quite of another mind, and forbore
to do them. And though some men have very exactly kept, and punctually performed
the things, that they have hastily and unadvisedly sworn to, yet they have seen
great cause to be troubled, yea, have been much perplexed, that they have thus
foolishly and hastily ensnared and entangled themselves by such Oaths.

Thus, when the Princes and Heads of the Israelites made a League with the
Gibeonites, without asking Counsel of God; though they doubtless sinned in so
doing, and though they did it upon a false Information, and though all the
Congregation murmured at it, ( Josh. 9.18.) yet having confirmed that League
with the Oath of God, they durst not break it, though doubtless they were very
much troubled, and displeased with themselves for making it.

So when Jepthah went out to war against the Ammonites, he vowed a Vow, That if
God would give him Victory, he would offer to the Lord whatever should come
forth of his house for a Burnt-Offering, ( Judge 11.31.)

It is much disputed among Learned men what the matter of Jepthah's vow was,
and whether he did really offer up his Daughter in Sacrifice, or only
Consecrated her to God, and confined her to perpetual virginity; And whether,
if he Sacrificed her, he did not greatly sin in so doing, and whether it had
not been better, and much more acceptable to God, if he had broken his vow,
then thus to fulfill it.

But this all are agreed in, that though he was a good man and his vow proceeded
from Zeal and Piety, yet it was rash and Inconsiderate: and though God accepted
the Pious, and good intention of his heart, yet his Wisdom saw fit to punish
the rashness and Indiscretion of his vow; for it brought him into a very great
straight as is apparent from ( v. 38.) For he rent his cloths, and said, Alas
my Daughter, thou have brought me very Low, and thou art one of them that
trouble me, for I have opened my mouth to the Lord, and I cannot go back. I
say, God probably punished the rashness and Inconsiderateness of that we might
might be a warning to others, that we might not be rash with our Mouths nor
hasty with our Lips to utter any thing before the Lord; As Solomon Advises (
Eccles. 5.2.) for as he says, ( Pro. 20.25.) It is a snare to a man after vows
to make inquiry, (i. e.) for a man rashly and inconsiderately to swear he will
do such or such a thing, and afterward to consider whether it be lawful, or
unlawful; Convenient or Inconvenient to do as he has sworn; or to swear he
will not do such a thing, and afterward to consider whether it be not expedient
to do it.

We have a famous example of this in Herod ( Mat. 14.6.) where its' said, That
the Daughter of Herodias Dancing before him on his birth day, and pleasing him,
he promised with an Oath, that he would give her whatsoever she should ask, who
being before Instructed of her mother, desired him to give her the head of John
the Baptist in a Charger; which request of hers when the King heard, it is said
(v. 9.) that he was sorry, he repented him of his rash and unadvised Oath,
nevertheless for his Oath's sake, and them that sat with him at meat, he
commanded it to be given her.

St. Mark who relates this story most largely tells us ( Chap. 6.26. that he
was [(...)] Exceeding sorry, he was mightily troubled, that she should ask such
a thing, as he never thought of, and which, had he foreseen, he would certainly
have excepted out of his large, and extravagant promise. Of this his sorrow
several motives have been Assigned: Some suppose that Herod having cast John
into prison, would have been glad enough to hear of his death, and might be
willing enough to put him to death at another time, but he was very loath to do
it then, because it was his Birth day, and a great Festival, and it was the
custom of the Romans never to shed Blood at such a time; In which they bestowed
Favors and Largesses, and used to release Criminals, who were not guilty of
Capital offenses; Yea and some that were.

But the great reason mentioned by the Evangelists why he did not put John to
death as well as imprison him, was because he feared the multitude, because
they accounted him as a Prophet; He was afraid of some Popular Tumult, or
Insurrection ( Mat. 14.5. Nevertheless for his Oath's sake, and of them that
sat at Meat with him, he caused it to be done.

Whether Herod made any conscience of an Oath or not, we know not; it is certain
he made no conscience of the greatest sins in other cases; he lived in Adultery
with his Brother Philips Wife, whom he procured to be banished (as some write)
that he might the more freely enjoy her.

And doubtless, had it not been for fear of the multitude, he would no more
have scrupled the Murdering John the Baptist, then his Father did to Murder
the holy Innocents.

But many who indeed and in truth make little or no conscience of violating an
Oath, Yet will keep it, when they have by it bound themselves to any evil
thing, only to maintain their honor and Reputation.

And this was plainly Herod's case, he had promised to give the Daughter of
Herodias whatever she should ask even to the Half of his Kingdom; And this
promise he had solemnly confirmed by Oath in presence of his Lords, high
Captains, and Chief Estates of Galilee; And therefore that he might not seem
guilty of any Levity, Temerity, or Inconstancy, by being worse then his word,
he was resolved that he would do as he had sworn, what ever became of it.

They must be very foolish and ignorant, who think that an Oath does oblige
them to do any wicked thing, and yet it is a common thing for some who make
light of violating their Oaths, when it obliges them to do good, to think them
selves bound in honor to keep them when they have Sworn to do that which is
evil, which is a great Error. But these Instances sufficiently show into what
straight perplexities, and troubles, men bring themselves by vain, rash and
inconsiderate Swearing.

Thus Saul would needs put Jonathan to death in pursuance of his rash Oath, had
not the people hindered him from it, (1 Samuel 14.44.)

Again; Consider how great a scandal and reproach such as are customary
Swearers do bring upon the Christian Religion in general, and upon that Church
or Society of Christians, whereof they profess and declare themselves Members
in particular; which consideration it self ought to work upon all that own
themselves Christians, and does always sway very much wi^h sober and serious
men.

If common Swearing were only a foolish and vain custom that some have gotten,
yet if it gives offense, we ought to avoid it; how much more, when there is
nothing more offensive and odious to good men? St. Paul exhorts us ( Phil.
1.27.) that our conversation should be such as becomes the Gospel of Christ,
that thereby we may invite and win others to that Religion which we our selves
profess, by rendering it lovely and amiable in the eyes of all men; and ( chap.
4.8.) that we should not only mind, and practice those things that are honest,
just and pure, but such as are lovely and of good report. We ought to deny our
selves, and abridge our selves of our liberty, by avoiding even such things as
are lawful, when they may scandalize and offend such as are weak; how much more
ought we to avoid such things as are apparently wicked, as all Christians
acknowledge vain Swearing to be, when by it we may encourage wicked men and
grieve and discourage such as are sober, pious and religious. You know that the
Scripture makes this one of the greatest aggravations of sin (viz.) the fatal
consequences and dangerous effects that it has upon others by encouraging them
in wickedness, or discouraging them from Piety, and such effects has vain
Swearing usually; for, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.33. Be not deceived, evil
communications corrupt good manners; and Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may administer grace to the hearers: But what grace or
edification can there be in that which is too bad in its self, but worse in its
consequences; for as it grieves and displeases all pious and sober men; so it
hardens and emboldens the wicked and profane, which is a great aggravation of
it. The sins of Ely's Sons were very great and heinous in themselves; but that
which made them much worse, was that they brought such contempt upon Religion,
and made the people out of love with it, (1 Samuel 2.17.) Wherefore the sin of
the young men was very great before the Lord, for men abhorred the Offerings of
the Lord. This was the great aggravation of David's sin, that it opened the
mouths of wicked men, and emboldened them to speak evil of God; and
reproachfully of his ways, (2 Samuel 12.14.) Howbeit, because by this deed thou
have given great occasion to the Enemies of God to blaspheme, the Child that is
born unto thee shall surely die.

It was a wonderful and unaccountable thing that the Prophets of Jerusalem, who
pretended that they were God's Prophets, sent by him to teach men their duty,
and to reprove them for their sins, that (I say) such men should be guilty of
such enormous Vices as are charged upon them. But that which made their
wickedness much greater (if possible was that it hardened wicked men in their
sins, ( Jer. 23.14.) I have seen in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible
thing, etc. They commit Adultery, and walk in Lies; they strengthen also the
hands of evil doers, that none does return from his wickedness. And surely thus
it is still; how will lewd and profane persons, hug themselves; how glad would
they be if they knew a Minister to be a common Swearer; how little will it
cause them to make of that sin? And as a common Swearer does mightily encourage
profane persons in their wickedness, especially if he be a person of any
authority, credit and reputation in the World; so he will discourage many plain
ignorant well meaning men from embracing that Religion which he professes. For
it is a most evident and apparent truth, that nothing has made more Dissenters,
or kept off such people from the Communion of the Church of England, than the
Debauchery, and Profaneness, and especially the intemperate Swearing and
Cursing of some who pretend to be the most zealous Patrons and Defenders of it.
For the common people judge of Religion according to the opinion they have of
the Piety and Honesty of its Professors; and therefore no wonder if they cannot
be persuaded to think well of that way for which such lewd Huffers, and vile
Swearers appear so zealously concerned. What shall we say in this case: shall
we tell them that the Doctrine of the Church of England is sound, its Worship
pure, and that no Church in the World does more condemn this sin than she does?
will this think you) satisfy them? No surely; as long as they see her Sons, or
rather those that impudently call themselves so, guilty of such things: Or
shall we recriminate, and say, that the Dissenters are guilty of as great or
greater sins than this; that though they will not swear, they will lie, and
dissemble, and cosen, and cheat; that they are guilty of Schism, Faction, and
Rebellion? It will be replied as to the first, that Lying is a sin which may be
concealed; Hypocrisy is a cover to its self, and it is unjust to charge either
of them upon a person when we cannot evidently prove it: As to the latter, they
will deny the charge, and plead not guilty. Whereas Swearing is so evident and
notorious, as to matter of fact, as not to be denied, so peremptorily
forbidden, as not to be justified, or excused. Shall we allege (as the truth
is) that in all Ages and Nations, all the lewd and profane, the vulgar and
common people have always complied with that which is uppermost, and followed
that Religion which is countenanced by Law, and that this is the case here; yet
this will not take off the scandal which lewd Swearers have brought upon that
Church, which is, as to its Constitution, the best Church in the World. If any
therefore that pretend a kindness to this Church are guilty of this great sin,
I would desire them utterly to forsake and renounce the former, unless they
will leave and forbear the latter; lest they involve themselves in the same
guilt with those mentioned (2 Pet. 2.2.) who by their corrupt principles, and
wicked lives caused the way of Truth to be evil spoken of. If all this will not
do, yet consider that if you are Christians, you ought to account no sin small,
but to avoid the very appearance of evil; how much more ought you to dread that
which God commands you above all things to forbear and avoid?

I will now conclude the whole with a few Directions how we may avoid this
foolish and wicked sin of Swearing.

1. Let us earnestly endeavor to beget, and keep up in our hearts awful and
reverent thoughts of God; for the fear of God is clean, as the Psalmist says, (
Psalm. 9.9.) it will cleanse and purify the heart from all wicked thoughts and
desires, and the mouth from all manner of evil speaking. If a man stand in a we
of any man, he will not let his tongue loose in his presence, or dare to utter
that which is unmannerly or undecent, lest he offend him. I have read of some
young Gentlemen, who were so accustomed to Swearing, that they scarce knew how
to spea^ without an Oath; who sitting at Table with an ancient grave Minister,
it was observed tha^ they forbore to swear all the time he was there and they
afterward confessed, that they had suc^ an awe upon them, that they had not
boldne^ enough to swear in his presence. And if the fea^^ of Men can lay such a
restraint, how much more would the fear of God keep us from whatever is
offensive and displeasing to him, as he has plainly declared Swearing to be.
Did men often and seriously think upon God, that he is always present with
them, and that his Eye is continually over them, that there is not a word in
their mouth, nor a thought in their heart, but he knows it altogether; that
he is a just and holy God, of purer Eyes than to behold iniquity, and who will
by no means clear the guilty; and who will hold all such as highly guilty who
take his name in vain. I say did men frequently and seriously think upon, and
consider these things, it would be in a manner Impossible they should be once
guilty of rash and vain Swearing, much less that they should suffer it to
become customary, and habitual. If therefore we come into the company of loose
and profane Swearers, we may say as Abraham did of Abimelech's Court at Gerar,
(Genesis 20.11.) Surely the fear of the Lord is not in this place But would we
whenever we mention the Name of God our selves or hear it mentioned by others,
raise in our hearts awful and reverent thoughts of him, it would be an
Excellent preservative against this sin.

2. Let us be watchful over our selves, Let us keep our hearts with all
diligence, and take heed to our ways, that we offend not with our Lips, (Psalm.
39.1.) The Government of the Tongue, does very much depend upon the government
of the heart; if therefore we would bridle our Tongues, we must keep a strict
watch, and guard upon our thoughts.

Therefore says David, (Psalm. 17.3.) Thou have proved my heart, thou have
visited me in the Night, thou have tried me, and shall find nothing, I am
purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. If men were sincerely desireous to
leave this sin, it would make them exceeding careful and watchful over
themselves, for this is ever the necessary effect of sincere purposes and
serious Resolutions.

The more men have accustomed themselves to this sin, the greater care and
watchfulness is necessary to keep them from it, because use and custom makes
Oaths flow forth suddenly, and undiscernedly, as to the Swearers themselves.

There are two sorts of sins, that easily get Dominion over a man, they are
difficult to be avoided, but much more difficult to be mortified, Conquered and
Subdued; Viz. The sins to which a man's temper, Complexion and Constitution do
naturally incline him; and the sins to which he has a long time used and
accustomed himself; and these latter are almost as strong and powerful as the
former, and therefore we say Use and Custom are a second nature.

These are the sins that do most easily beset men, and therefore they ought to
be most careful, and watchful against them; For it is true of all habits whether
good or bad, that they are difficult to be removed; But as use does increase,
and confirm them, so nothing but disuse can destroy, or weaken them. And this I
say, that the disuse of those things to which men have been long accustomed, is
no easy matter, but requires great Caution and Circumspection, especially if
they be wicked, and vicious; For as such are easiest to be acquired, so are
they always hardest to be left. For vicious customs (such as this is are like
weeds which spring and grow of themselves, and need no care or in^ustry to look
after them, but require much Labor and Pains, to extirpate and root them out.

Thus those, whose consciences did at first check them, when they used but any
Solemn Asse^^ration in light and trivial matters, cannot only dispense with
downright Swearing when they have been used to it, but they find it difficult
to avoid it, if they would; The sin therefore being so heinous to be continued
in, and the custom of it making it so hard to be left, every one (but
especially such as are addicted to it) ought the more diligently and carefully
to watch over themselves that they may avoid it.

3. Be careful to avoid all those things, which may be occasions of or
temptations to this sin.

It is most certain, that whosoever does sincerely desire to keep himself from
any sin, does most carefully endeavor to avoid all temptations to it; And it is
a sure sign that such sins have a strong and powerful interest in the heart of
a man the occasions of which are not dreaded and avoided. I confess that this
direction by it is self, will be of little use, to customary Swearers, who are
frequently guilty of that sin without any visible Temptation, or Occasion.

But there are many others, who are not arrived to this pitch of wickedness, to
that hardness of heart and searedness of conscience, as to mingle their common
discourse with Oaths (for such are the very dregs and scumm of Sinners) w^o yet
will pour out Oaths very plentifully at certain times and seasons, and upon
some t^rtain occasions: Now the occasions and Temptations that draw such men
into this sin are ^specially these three, Drink, Passion, and Lewd and profane
company: As to the first, There are many that seldom, or never swear when they
are sober, that make nothing of it, when they are heated and heightened in
Liquor. We usually say, when the Wine is in the Wit is out; Certainly never is
the folly or impiety of the heart so manifestly discovered by the Idleness,
Wantonness, and Extravagancy of the Tongue, as when a man is Intoxicated with
Liquor. Those that at other times have some sense of God and Religion; when
they begin to be Drunk, cast off all fear of him and Reverence toward him.
Lest I be full (says Agur) and deny thee, and say who is the Lord? (Pro. 30.9.)
And therefore those that would avoid the sin of Swearing must avoid
Intemperance.

I have shown you how those that are addicted to this sin ought to be watchful
over themselves, but so can no one be, that is not sober, he that is drunk is
more fit to be in bed, then to stand upon the guard. And therefore we find
these two, sobriety, and watchfulness, always in Conjunction (1 Pet. 4.7.) Be
sober and watch unto Prayer; and Chap. 5.8.) Be sober, be vigilant, because
your Adversary the Devil, as a Roaring Lion, goes about seeking whom he may
devour.

And indeed as there is no question, but the Devil by his private Suggestions
and Impulses, is a great promoter of this sin of Swearing; So he never fails to
provoke those to it in their drink, who seldom or never are guilty of it, when
they are sober.

Again many men are guilty of it when they are angry and in a passion, who
seldom swear at other times: For anger drowns reason, and silences Religion. No
doubt but Jezebel was in a grievous rage when she sent this message, to Elijah,
attended with an Oath (1 Kin. 19.2.) So let the Gods do to me, and more also,
if I make not thy Life like one of them (i. e.) of the Prophets of Baal) by to
morrow this time.

It Is an excellent thing for a man to be able to bridle his passion, and
restrain his Anger. Solomon tells us ( Pro. 14.29.) He that is slow to anger is
of great understanding, but he that is hasty of Spirit exalts folly, and (
Chap. 16.32. He that is slow to Anger is better then the mighty, and he that
rules his Spirit, then he that takes a City.

Now among many other great Advantages that a man of temper and moderation
has, this is none of the least, that he is not so apt to discover the folly
and wickedness of his heart by the virulency and rashness of his Tongue, as
those that are hasty and Passionate are.

St. Paul exhorts us ( Ephesians. 4.6. to be angry and sin not, which words imply
it is a very difficult thing for a man to avoid those sins in his Anger, to
which he is powerfully tempted, and how hard it is for a man, that is but in the
least addicted to the sin of Swearing to forbear it in his Anger, Experience
does too often show.

And he adds, let not the Sun god own upon your wrath, neither give place to
the Devil.

Which is a plain intimation that Satan has a great advantage over a man that
is wrathful, he has no fitter season to tempt a man, then when he is so,
certainly he that is Addicted to Swearing is never more powerfully tempted to
it then when he is thoroughly Angry.

It Is said ( Luke 11.53. That when our Savior had pronounced several woes
against the Scribes and Pharisees, they thereupon began to urge him vehemently,
and to provoke him to speak of many things, laying wait for him, and seeking
to catch something out of his mouth, that they might accuse him.

They thought that he was warm with zeal, and passion; And they hoped, that by
provokeing and exasperateing of him they might cause him to speak such things
as might give them matter of Accusation, and that they might entrap and
entangle him in his Discourse.

What advantage they thought they had against Christ, the same Satan really
has upon most men when they are angry, he takes that time to tempt them to
such things as at other times he despaireth of persuading them to. And that he
has (at such times especially) a fit opportunity to provoke those that are in
the least given to Swearing to be guilty of that sin, is evident from this,
that they allege their being in a passion to excuse, or at least to extenuate
their being guilty of it.

Again, as for such as are very little or nothing Addicted to this sin and
would avoid it let them carefully avoid lewd and debauched company (i. e.) the
company and society of such as customarily use it. It Is a common and usual
thing for persons who have been Civilly and Religiously educated when they go
abroad into the World, if they fall into ill company to be soon corrupted and
debauched, and to learn those vices, which at first they seemed to dread the
thoughts of 'Twas doubtless a very common thing in the Egyptian court to Swear
by the Life of Pharaoh, and Joseph himself when he became a Courtier, and
Associated with the Grandees of Egypt, that he might be modish had learnt it
too, ( Genesis 42.16.)

4. If we would avoid this sin of Swearing let us not accustom our selves to
vain foolish, and unnecessary Asseverations (such as Faith and Troth, upon my
word, as I am an honnest man, and the like) in which there may be more evil
then every one does imagine.

And indeed our Savior seems to condemn such forms of speech as well as
Swearing it is self ( Mat. 5.34.) for having said Swear not at all, neither by
Heaven etc. he adds, but let your Communication (i. e.) your talk or discourse
in ordinary Conversation be yea, yea; nay, nay; For whatsoever is more then
these comes of evil.

Now it is most certain and evident that such Protestations or Asseverations are
somewhat more then yea, yea; and nay, nay; (i. e.) then plain simple
Affirmations or Negations, and therefore must proceed from evil (i. e.) from
guilt and hypocrisy, or at least from Levity and inconsideration, and they
often tend to evil; for which cause St. James here would have that our yea,
should be yea; and our nay, nay; lest we should fall into Condemnation.

And perhaps the force of our Savior's reason why he would not have us Swear
by Heaven or Earth, by the Temple or Altar, or the like, may without straining
reach this very case.

Swear not by Heaven (says he) for it is ^od's Throne, nor by the Earth, for
it is his Footstool, (i. e.) because God himself is virtually invo^ed by every
such Oath. And is not every such Asseveration a kind of Appeal to God? and is
not the Design of it much the same with that of an Oath, (viz.) to gain the
greater Credit to what we say, though God's Name be not expressly and formally
invoked? For such Asseverations are either idle, and insignificant things,
proceeding from a foolish custom and habit of speaking that we have gotten, and
then they are to no purpose; or they are intended and taken as solemn
confirmations of what we say, and then they seem to be much of the nature of an
Oath, and upon both accounts they may be sinful to be used; but there can be no
danger or inconvenience in leaving and disusing of them.

But were those Asseverations in themselves never so harmless, yet I am apt to
believe the frequent use of them has drawn many into Swearing; for even those
who did once scruple the first, have in a little time fallen into the latter:
Even as those that often accustom themselves to those wicked words that are of
kin to Curses, are very easily drawn into Cursing it self.

If therefore we at any time use such forms of speech as are, or are taken to
be Asseverations or solemn Protestations; it is advisable that we do it very
sparingly, and only in serious and weighty matters.

Lastly; Let those that have not been guilty of this great sin, make their
humble Prayer and Supplication to God, that they may never fall into it, and
let those that have been guilty of it, Implore his grace, that they may avoid
it for the time to come.

I said I will take heed to my ways that I Offend not with my Tongue, says
David (Psalm. 39.1.) and 'twas a good and pious Resolution, and therefore he
earnestly beggs the Assistance of God to enable him to make it good ( Psalms
141.3.) Set a watch O Lord before my Mou^^ and keep the Door of my Lips.

Let us beseech him to make us sensible of the Sinfulness and danger of rash
and vain Oaths, as knowing that if for every Idle word we shall give an
account, much more for such sins as these of which whoever is guilty shall
without serious Repentance and great Humilation fall into the Condemnation, of
which the Apostle speaks in the ^ext.

And how light soever he may make of it now, he will then find it a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the Living God, who is a Consuming ^ire and who
has Solemnly declared that he will not hold him guiltless. that takes his
name in vain.

Nomini tuo da Gloriam.

FINIS.

