IMPRIMATUR,
Hic liber vere Christianus qui si Primaevam spectes pietatem, Summam
Eloquentiam, Rationum pondus nihil in eo deest quo minus possit nos Omnes
quales tam accurate describit, vere Christianos efficere; Puriori aevo sane
dignissimus est nisi quod tam potens sit qui vel nostrum Saeculum transformaret
in melius. Benedicat Deus Operi and Authori.

THO. TOMKYNS.
R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Domino Dno. GILBERTO Divina Providentia
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi a Sacris Domesticis.
THE CAUSES OF THE Decay of Christian Piety.

OR AN IMPARTIAL SURVEY Of the Ruins of CHRISTIAN RELIGION, Undermined by
Unchristian Practice.

Written by the Author of THE WHOLE DUTY OF MAN.

INIMICVS HOMO FECIT HOC. MATH: 13.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton for T. Garthwait, in S. Bartholomews Hospital,
near Smithfield, 1667.

THE PREFACE.
THOUGH this be the first appearance this Tract has made in the world, yet its
Being is of somewhat a more ancient date; it having received its lineaments and
perfect form some years since: when the Author not having partiality enough to
think it worthy public view; had adjudg'd it, if not to perpetual darkness,
yet at least to a long indefinite suspension from seeing light. In this
interval, it is more than probable some passages may have lost much of their
propriety to the present state of affairs, they having been adapted to
circumstances which may since have received some change: and herein I must be
speak the Readers candor, to make such allowances as the matter shall require;
of which yet I suppose there will not occur very many, or very important
occasions.

BUT would God I were to apologize for a yet far greater absurdity, that our
scene were so shifted, that the whole design of the ensuing discourse, might
become one entire impertinence, and that our more eminent conformity to the
rules of our Christian institution, might supersede these disquisitions above
our failances and aberrations. But alas, I find I have pitched upon a subject
not like to be out-dated; vice daily gaining not only strength, but impudence:
nay we are not only become witnesses against our selves by declaring our Sin as
Sodom, but we have forced God also to attest against us by punishing us in a
manner no less conspicuous and manifest. And surely then it is more than time
for us to take the Prophets advice, Hag. 1. 7. to consider our ways, to reflect
not only on those robust, gyant-like provocations which have thus bid defiance
to Heaven; but also to sift out those secret incendiaries that have inflamed us
to this mad daring; to examine what that (...), that inflamable bitumen, the
untemper'd mortar is with which we build our Babel, by discovering those
misperswasions and false confidences, wherein many of our other guilts are
founded: in order to which this slight Tract offers its feeble, yet well meant
aids; being forced out of its retirement, and like Craesus his dumb Son,
compelled to speak by impulse of the present exigent: and how despicable soever
the Mite contributed be in its self, yet if it may provoke the more wealthy to
cast in richer gifts, it may prove no unprofitable agent for the Corban. It Is
evident this is a season which not only warrants, but exacts the most
importunate endeavors of persuading men to those things that belong to their
Peace.

FOR although it is true that every state of sin, sets us also in a state of
hostility with God, yet our present condition seems to have advanced us beyond
the common degrees even of that. It Is we know, high insolence against a Prince
to despise and violate his laws, but when to that are superadded contumelies,
and designed affronts to his person, this is such an accumulated outrage, as
will vanquish the most resolved Patience. And this alas appears to be our
case: we have long indulged to our selves the breach of all Divine laws,
gratified every appetite, every passion and lust with the forfeiture of our
allegiance, and as if this would not serve to render us irreconcilable enough
to God, we are now grown to subjoyn malice to licentiousness; project not so
much to please our selves, as to displease him; profess a contempt not only of
his commands, but himself; and seek no less to dethrone Him, than abrogate
those. Thus have we made it a kind of personal quarrel, and by those impious
blasphemies we daily dart against Heaven, do as it were dare the Divine Majesty
to vindicate its self. Whether his great longanimity may have given our Hectors
a fancy, that they had vapour'd God (as they are used to do men) into a
tameness, I shall not examine: but his late proceedings with us sufficiently
testify that he means no longer to decline our challenge. He now appears to
avow the enmity as openly as we have done; and has already given us competent
essays, how fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God,
Heb. 10. 31.

IT IS true indeed that he has formerly owned his controversy with our Land,
and by a long series of great and heavy calamities attested himself the God to
whom vengeance belongs, Psalm. 94. 1. Yet as great Monarchs use to quell
lesser insurrections by their Lieutenants, and subordinate Officers, but when
the rebellion grows high and desperate, then to encounter it in their own
persons; so is it here observable that God then Chastised, and tried to reduce
us by inferior instruments, found us out Lictors among our selves, and made
one man's sin the punishment of another: but now as if he had the same
jealousy for his honor which Joab had at the siege of Rabba for David's, 2 Samuel 12. 28. as if he feared to be rivaled in the glory of our ruin, he takes
us into his own hand, marks us out, as he did Pharaoh, to be the Trophies of
his own peculiar vengeance, appearing signally against us in all the dreadful
solemnities of an enraged enemy.

FOR first, has he not as Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. 32. 41. whet his glittering
Sword? Nay, has he not moreover (in the Scripture style) made it drunk with
blood? by sweeping away multitudes of us in a raging PESTILENGE, which Marched
from one part of the Nation to another in a kind of Triumphant progress, as if
it had received the same mandate God gave Abraham, Genesis 13. 17. Arise walk
through the land, in the length thereof and in the breadth thereof, for unto
thee will I give it. Whether it may not thus fatally complete its course,
notwithstanding the halt it seems to make, and pass from our Dan to our
Beersheba, is a question that can with no probability be resolved in the
negative; for as it is not to be doubted but there were in Judea as great
sinners as those on whom the Tower of Siloam fell, Luke 13. that those who have
hitherto escaped have an equal share in the provoking cause of the Judgment:
So also that great unsensibleness many of us show of what others groan under,
is a very ominous abode; it being not only a dangerous symptom, but a probable
means of drawing that calamity to our selves. When God sees we will suffer
nothing by way of consent and sympathy with others, it is but equal we have our
part in a more direct and immediate infliction, and feel what we would not
compassionate. Thucydides mentions it as the effect of the great Plague at
Athens that it had extinguished humanity; brought in a kind of ferity and
barbarousness among them, rendering them openly villainous to men, and
blasphemous against God; (...), there was no restraint of law or religion, one
part being desperate upon prospect of their danger, the other presumptuous upon
the contemplation of their Escape; and sure if we look impartially, ours will
appear to have had somewhat of the same operation. Those compassions which the
novelty it seems at first gave us to sufferers in this kind, seems now quite
extinct; so unconcerned are we grown to every thing that touches us not in our
individuals, as if we owned no relation to the species of mankind, though backed
also with that closer tie, which the spiritual consanguinity has superadded. A
pregnant indication of this may, I doubt not, be collected (as from many other
circumstances, so particularly) from the great have has in many places been
made, to lay aside those public Humiliations and intercessions which were
recommended to us as well by the command of Authority, as the common distress;
but have been cast off without the substraction of either of those motives.
Whether we are duly mindful of the afflictions of Joseph, that cannot afford
one day in a month for a solemn reflection on them, I must leave to every man's
conscience to discuss. But sure we are no less wanting to our selves than them
in this neglect; the office being no less designed for Antidote than cure, to
prevent the Judgment where it is not, than to remove it where it is: and if we
will neither deprecate on our own behalfs, nor intercede on others; we are sure
as improvident, as uncharitable, and may justly expect the fatal event of both.

IN the interim, although the present respit from destruction, and our own
deceitful hearts flatter us and say Peace, Peace; we have all reason to
conclude that God is not attoned, the quarrel and hostility goes on, and his
hand is stretched out still, Es. 5. 25. And so indeed we find it in other dismal
events. Slaughter we know is not the only effect of War; which as it destroys
the lives of many, blasts the supports and Ioys of more. This consequence of
hostility we find well expressed by the Prophet Joel 2. 3. The land is as the
Garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate wilderness, and herein
also has the Lord of Hosts, the great God of battle showed himself mighty
against us, he has invaded us not only with Sword, but FIRE: and in so
stupendous manner desolated the glory of our Land, that no humane fury, could
have procured, or even have wished the like vastation and ruins. That City
which was great among the Nations, and Princess among the Provinces, Lam. 1. 1.
lies buried in her own Ashes, and is both Funeral-pile and Urne to her self,
and what neither foreign nor domestic enemies could in a succession of many
ages effect, one blast of the breath of his displeasure, Psalm. 18. has
performed in a moment. So verifying even in a literal sense the Apostles
affirmation, Heb. 12. 29. that our God is a consuming fire. Plutarch tells us
when Fabius sacked Tarentum, he took not away their Images, but said, (...) let
us leave the Tarentines their Gods that are offended with them. It Is our
Calamity to be signally under the indignation of our incensed God, which in
that great Captains judgment, was somewhat more dreadful than the worst
inflictions of War: for what industry soever has been used to entitle either
the negligence or designs of men unto our overthrow, yet sure never any
judgment had more legible marks of Gods immediate hand: such as show he meant
to revenge the abuse of his former gentle methods: that those who would not be
reformed by the slighter corrections wherein he dallied with them, might find a
judgment worthy of God, Wisd. 12. 26. And sure such was this, which both for
its greatness and irresistibleness does well own its Author, and shows his
wrath was accended to a very excessive heat, that thus poured out its self not
only like, but in Fire, Lam. 2. 4.

I shall not here assume the Politicians part, and weigh the detriment we have
sustained by it in our civil interest, of which perhaps nothing but time and
experience can give us a full estimate; it rather suits my design to observe
what relates to our spiritual concerns, whilst Gods dwelling places were
involved in the same ruin with ours; his own peculiar portion not exempted,
but as the Prophet complains, Es. 64. 11. Our holy and beautiful houses where
our fathers praised him are burnt with fire: this though perhaps least
considered, is sure not the least sad circumstance, had only the scenes of our
luxury, or our fraud been destroyed, it might have sent us with more fervency
to the places of our devotion, and we might have frequented Gods houses the
better, for being destituted of our own; but when these also are made parts of
the common heap, it is a sad testimonial that our very religion was provoking;
That that pageant-like piety which we deposited in our CHURCHES, only to make a
show with on holy days, served only to defile those holy places, and rendered
them so polluted as required no slighter purgation than that of FIRE. It Is we
know-not long, since those mansions sacred to the Prince of Peace, were even in
the vulgar obvious sense, made magazines for War; but yet more so in reference
to that Pulpitwild-fire, which set the Nation in combustion; whether that
strange Fire which some of our Nadabs and Abihu's introduced there, may not
(even at this distance) have done its part to the drawing down this FIRE from
Heaven, I leave to their serious reflection. But neither the Hypocrite nor the
Seditious must ingross the guilt of this ruin: The Atheist vyes with both; for
alas what should God do with Temples among those, who pay him no worship? or
why should he let those sacred monuments remain among them, to whom all
memorials of him serve but as occasions, and incentives to blaspheme him? They
have long said with those in Job, Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways; and now it is but equitable (I had almost said Civil) to
take them at their word, and no longer reside among those who so avowedly
disclaim him.

AND this, it is much to be feared, may be the portent of this dismal vastation:
we know men use not to deface those houses, where they intend to inhabit: and
sure this abhorring his Sanctuary, and casting off his Altar, Lam. 2. is a
dreadful sign, that he means no longer to continue his residence among us;
indeed we find in Scripture that his promise of cohabiting is always limited to
those who own themselves his people; and therefore when so many of us have
openly renounced that relation, we can with no justice expect the blessing
appendant to it.

BUT perhaps this will seem to such no formidable thing; Gods so withdrawing of
himself is but agreeable to their wishes, a kind of quitting the field to them,
and so rather matter of complacency than regret: but it is to be considered that
there is another presence of God that will infallibly succeed this; when he
removes that of his grace, it is to make way for that of his anger; like the
Philistines we shall know the God of Israel is among us by his Plagues, 1 Samuel
5. or to make a yet more dreadful comparison, we shall like the damned in hell,
discern his presence only in the punitive effects of it, and read his nearness
in our sufferings. And sure this will be but an ill exchange, even to the
profanest of us, those that have most despised or loathed the soft breathings
of his Word and Spirit; will find it yet harder to endure the whirlewinds of
his wrath, which will snatch from us those secular advantages for whose pursuit
we have neglected the better part, Luke 10. 42. and leave us as little of
worldly enjoyments, as we desired to have of spiritual.

OF this our late Calamities have given us a sad Preludium, and God knows how
soon we may see the last scene of the fatal Tragedy, it being too probable that
this is Gods last Experiment upon us, like the Causticks and Scarifyings to a
Lethargick patient; if this bring us not to sense we are like to sleep on to
destruction: And alas what uncomfortable symtomes appear even in this point
also. Who is there that (unless awakened by his personal concernments) seems at
all to startle at the noise of public ruin? When God in displeasure threatened
the Israelites that he would remit their conduct to his Angel, and not go
himself with them. The text says, they mourned and no man put on his ornaments
on him, Exodus 33. 4. or as the LXX, (...), and the Syriack, (...), they stripped
themselves of their Armor, their ruffling garb of War, and appeared in the
penitential dress of sackcloth and ashes: but now that we are given up not to a
conducting but destroying Angel, what signs of remorse do we show? What vanity
(I fear I may ask what vice) have we subtracted, upon the sense of Gods anger?
What nicety in clothes or diet have we cut off in sympathy with the nakedness
and hunger of our afflicted brethren? Nay, do not the unreasonable Iollities of
too many among us, look as if we triumphed in their miseries, found Music in
the discordant sounds of their groans, and our own laughter; and emulated that
infamous barbarity of Nero, who played while Rome burned? It Is mentioned by the
Prophet as a most preposterous thing, a kind of impious Solecism to revel under
the menace of judgments. Thus says the Lord, A sword, a sword, it is sharpened
to make a sore slaughter, it is furbished that it may glitter, should we then
make mirth? Ezekiel. 21. 9, 10. and certainly it less befits us against whom God
has not only prepared, but used his sword; who are not only under the threats,
but actual Execution of his vengeance, and what is it but interpretatively to
prompt him, to yet sharper inflictions, by showing him that these have not edge
enough to penetrate us? With how much indignation God resents this perverse,
this contumelious behavior, we may read, Esaias 22. 12, 13, 14. In that day did
the Lord call to weeping, and mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with
sackcloth, and behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen and killing Sheep, eating
Flesh and drinking Wine; eating and drinking for to morrow we shall dye: Upon
which follows, that severe denunciation: Surely this iniquity shall not be
purged from you till you dye. Of so deep a tincture is this guilt, that it is as
lasting as our lives, and like the fretting leprosy in the house, Levit. 14.
45. can be removed by nothing but its dissolution.

O then let us not add this to the heap of our other provocations, mistake
impudence or desperation for courage; and frantickly defy that omnipotence
which we are sure we can not resist: but since it has pleased God even in wrath
to remember mercy, let us transcribe his copy, be as kind to our selves as he
has been to us, and stop in our career as he has done in his; not so madly
affect a full parallel with Sodom and Gomorrah, as to force him to destroy that
remnant, Es. 1. 9. which alone distinguishes our case: but rather take pattern
from Nineveh; cry, and cry mightily to God, join humiliation to our prayers,
and reformation to both. And could we be persuaded to do this with the same
sincerity, and universality, we might hope it may be with the same success
also: would every one who has contributed to the accending, as industriously
contribute to the appeasing of Gods wrath: would all who have brought their
firebrarnds bring also their tears to quench them, as there would be no dry
Eyes in the Nation at the present, so might it prevent as great a Generality of
weeping ones for the future; secure us such a tranquillity here, as may calmly
convoy us to that impassible state, where all tears shall be wiped from our
eyes, where there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain,
Rev. 21. 4.

THE TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. THe character of Christian Religion, demonstrating its aptitude to
plant exemplary Virtue and Sanctity. Chap. 2. The character of Christian-mens
practice, showing their multiplied failance, both from the rule of that holy
Profession, and its genuine effect. Chap. 3. A survey of the mischiefs arising
from Inconsideration. Chap. 4. From partial Consideration. Chap. 5. From carnal
Consideration. Chap. 6. From partial Obedience. Chap. 7. From mistakes
concerning Repentance. Chap. 8. From mistakes concerning Almighty God, and the
methods of his Providence. Chap. 9. From disputes in general. Chap. 10. From
its supplanting Charity. Chap. 11. From its engaging upon ill Arts and
Scandalous practices to sustain the espoused cause and party. Chap. 12. From
its ill effects on Civil peace. Chap. 13. Of the causes of disputes. First,
Pride. Chap. 14. Secondly, Curiosity. Chap. 15. Thirdly, Interest. Chap. 16.
Fourthly, Passion. Chap. 17. Fifthly, Zeal. Chap. 18. Sixthly, Idleness. Chap.
19. The Conclusion drawn from all the Premises. Chap. 20. The Close.
CHAP. I. The Character of Christian Religion, demonstrating its aptitude to
plant exemplary Virtue and Sanctity.
THE holy Psalmist gives it as part of the Character of Pious persons, and
therewithal a description of their felicity, Psalm. 92. 13. That they shall
bring forth more fruit in their Age: and what he thus observes of the members
disjunctively and apart, reason suggests to be in a higher, and more eminent
manner appliable to the whole body united: And it being as well the mark as
duty of every single Christian to grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. we may by all
rules of Proportion, conclude that the collective mass of such, the whole
Church is by this time near attained to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 3. And indeed this is so regular an inference, that
whilst the premises stand firm it is impossible to shake the conclusion, the
entire body must necessarily augment answerably to the growth of its several
parts. And if we should so far let loose to speculation as to forget our
experience: If we measure the effect only by the power and energy of the cause,
we should surely be as far from doubting the premises also. Christianity is in
its self of so prolifick a nature, so apt to impregnate the hearts and lives of
its proselytes, that it is hard to imagine, that any branch should want a due
fertility that is engrafted into so vigorous a stock.

FOR first, in its spring and original it is most supernatural and divine,
derived immediately from him, who had nothing more of man than he purposely
assumed to draw us the nearer to him as God. He it was that disseminated this
doctrine, and that in order to the purifying to himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works; and certainly his choice abundantly justifies its
propriety to that end, and his descent from Heaven on that errand puts so
venerable a solemnity upon it, that though his descent were very astonishing,
yet it will be much more so, that it should fail of the designed effect.

AND indeed did our Faith give us no clue to lead us to the author, yet its
composition would speak it to be of no humane extraction, its precepts are so
excellent and refined, so agreeable to the more spiritual part of our temper,
and so apt, as to forestall, so to cleanse and sublimate the more gross and
corrupt, as shows flesh and blood never revealed it. Nay farther, so
effectually providing for all those advantages to mankind, which the wisest of
men's laws have in vain attempted, that methinks they all stand before it like
the Magicians before Moses, and by their impotence tacitly confess it to be the
finger of God. 'Twere too large a Theme to confront them in the several
instances, let it suffice to observe one which has a common influence on all;
and that is the immaculate cleanness of heart, which Christ's, and only Christ's
law requires. This is the only proper basis on which to superstruct, first
innocence, and then virtue, and without this the most rigid exactors of outward
purity, do but transcribe the folly of him, who Pumps very laboriously in a
Ship, yet neglects to stop the Leak: or the worse tyranny of Pharaoh in
requiring Brick without Straw: so far is it from a severity in our lawgiver,
thus to limit and restrain our thoughts, that it is an act of the greatest
indulgence: by no means the laying on a new burden, but the furnishing us with
an Engine to bear with ease that weight which otherwise the stoutest Atlas must
sink under. And were but this one precept sincerely conformed to, it would not
only facilitate but ascertain the obedience to all the rest. If the first
sparks of ill were quenched within, what possibility is there they should ever
break out into a flame? How shall he kill that dares not be angry? Be
Adulterous in act, that did not first transgress in his desire? How shall he be
perjured that fears an oath? Or defraud that permits not himself to covet? In
the like manner all positive acts of virtue, are but the natural effects of the
interior habit. Where the love of God is seated in the Heart, 'twill operate in
all the faculties, keep them in a busy endeavor of doing acceptable service:
when fear is planted there, it will break forth in outward reverence and duty;
and so proportionably 'twill be in every other instance. It Is therefore an
advice well becoming the wisdom of Solomon, Prove. 4. to keep the heart with all
diligence: but then it is withal the work of him who is greater than Solomon,
to teach us how to do this: for unless he keep that City the watchman waketh
but in vain. If he instruct not to secure those issues of life, they will
betray and ruin, appear indeed the savor of death unto death. Now of this
divine art of Tacticks and defense, Christianity is the only School, and
therefore most fitly qualified for the producing all those supernatural
excellencies to which the timely prepossession of the heart, is the rudiment
and principle.

AND as the preceptive part enjoins the most exact, and elevated virtue, so is
it most advantageously enforced by the Promissory, which both in respect of the
kind and value of the rewards; and also the manner of proposing them, is most
exquisitely adapted to the same end.

FOR first, if we consider the nature of the things promised, we shall find
they are not gross and carnal, such as may court and gratify the bestial part
of us; but such as are proportioned to the supreme and leading principle, as
feast a Soul, and suit with the capacities of an intelligence. All the
beatitudes the Gospel tenders to its votaries, either relate to the purity or
peace of the mind in this life; or else to its completer felicity hereafter.
And though it is true, the body is not wholly unconsidered, though the addition
of all temporal necessaries be promised, yet even those are for the Souls sake,
either to secure it from the sin of solicitude and distrust, or to preserve it
a useful instrument for the others service. And as for the future glory in
which the body is to partake, it is to be observed, that flesh and blood can not
inherit it; that load of earth which now engages to corruption must be put off,
must be calcined and spiritualized; and thus made glorious, be clothed upon
with Glory. So that in all the Gospel dispensation, there is no provision for
the flesh, its lusts and sensualities. And then sure there cannot be a more
unanswerable argument against our providing for it, than to see it left out of
Gods care. Indeed had we proposals of a Mahumetan Paradise, were we to expect
our bliss only in the satiating our appetites, it might be reasonable here to
whet them before hand, to stretch them to the utmost wideness, or in the
Prophets phrase, to enlarge our desires as Hell, and by frequent antepasts
excite our gust for that profuse perpetual meal. Or were we only to have our
portion in this life, to enjoy an uninterrupted affluence of outward comforts,
'twere but good husbandry to improve them to the height, and the Wise man's
advice would then cease to be Eirony, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice O young man, and
let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy
heart, and the sight of thine Eyes. Had we only the prospect of a Canaan, such
an eternal inheritance as a conquering Sword could give, as the salvation of a
Joshua, and the affluence of milk and honey could produce. 'Twould be no wonder,
if we never voluntarily endured the thirst and famine of the wilderness, but be
always as they desiring meat for our lust, projecting the gratifying those
desires in whose repletion we placed our happiness. But when our Religion makes
us no such tender, when all its hopes are of another make, invite to those
Diviner joys of which sensuality has no capacity or taste. What pretense can we
have to cherish that here, which we must wholly be divested of hereafter, those
immaterial felicities we expect, do naturally suggest to us, the necessity of
preparing our appetites, and hungers for them, without which Heaven can be no
Heaven to us: for since the pleasure of any thing results from the agreement
between it and the desire, what satisfaction can Spiritual enjoyments give unto
a Carnal mind? Alas, what delight would it be to the Swine to be wrapped in fine
Linen, and laid in Odours: his senses are not gratified by any such
delicacies, nor would he feel any thing besides the torment of being withheld
from the mire. And as little complacency would a brutish Soul find in those
purer and refined pleasures, which can only upbraid, not satisfy him. So that
could we by an impossible supposition fancy such a one assumed to those
fruitions, his pleasure sure would be as little as his preparation for it was.
Those Eyes which have continually beheld vanity, would be dazzled, not delighted
with the Beatifick vision; neither could that Tongue, which has accustomed its
self only to Oaths and Blasphemies, find Harmony or Music in a Hallelujah.
It Is the peculiar privilege of the pure in heart, that they shall see God; and
if any others could so invade this their enclosure, as to take Heaven by
violence, it surely would be a very joyless possession to these men, and only
place them in a condition to which they have the greatest aversation and
Antipathy. So that holiness here, is not only necessary to the acquiring, but
the enjoyment of Bliss hereafter: and therefore unless men will contrive to
annihilate their joys, and affect the monstrous riddle of being tormented in
Heaven, they cannot but from this Spirituality of the promises, infer a
necessity of purifying themselves, and being capable at least of innocent
Celestial joys: and since that only can be done by virtuous practice here on
Earth, the Obligation thereto must needs be very pressing and indispensable.
And as the nature of the promises directs to this, so does the great
transcendent value encourage and animate. Hope is the grand exciter of
industry, and as the object of Hope is more or less desirable, so is the
endeavor more intense or remiss; and upon this ground we must conclude the
Christian has all reason to be the most indefatigable, seeing his expectations
are the noblest and most encouraging. That they are so, we cannot but
acknowledge, if we admit of the description which the Spirit gives: that Spirit
which as he seals us to it, so is himself the earnest of that Inheritance. He
in the Sacred Scriptures has drawn us a Map of the Country which we are to
enter: and sure we may say of it as Caleb and Joshua did of Canaan, Numb. 14.
7. the land is an exceeding good land. For first, if we consider the Negative
advantages it has, we shall find there is an absence of all the Ills,
destructive or affrightful unto humane Nature. There shall be no more death,
nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, Revel. 21. 4. Here alas we are infested by
all these. Sorrow and Pain, prey and insult on all the comforts of our lives;
leave us not a Gourd, which is not like that of Jonah, smitten with these
Worms: and then comes death, the grand devourer, and spares not life it self.
Nay, those little respites which we have from these, are so embittered by
unpleasant expectations and Presages, that we are sad before we are afflicted:
in pain without a disease, and in death in the midst of life: and then a State
exempted, not only from the Calamities but the Fears of these, may well deserve
to be looked upon with appetite.

BUT Heaven is designed for our reward, as well as rescue, and therefore is
adumbrated by all those positive excellencies which can endear or recommend. It
is a Crown, and that not of thorns, such as our Saviors was, and such as the
more affected Diadems of the world often prove unto the wearer, but one of Glory:
nor is that Crown, nor that Glory like our sublunary splendors, which suddenly
vanish, and leave the possessors to the greater obscurity and contempt: but
it is permanent, such as fades not away, 1 Pet. 5. 4. or in St. Paul's phrase, an
eternal weight of Glory. But to give you its more comprehensive Character, it is
a being with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Nay, it is a possessing even God himself.
He shall be their God, Rev. 21. 3. and what can he want who possesses him who
is all things? How can he fail of of the most ravishing delight, that stands
before him in whose presence is the fullness of Joy, and at whose right hand are
pleasures, and those not short or transient, but for evermore? So indefeisible
is our estate in those Ioys, that if we do not like mad prodigals sell it in
reversion, we shall when we are once invested, be beyond the possibility of ill
husbandry, not have it in our power to undo our selves. Now surely these are
great and precious promises, such as may well sustain the weight of that
inference the Apostle builds upon them; and engage us to cleanse our selves
from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and to perfect holiness in the
fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. for they address to that Principle which is confestly
Predominant in our Nature; so that if the love of Christ cannot, yet the love
of our selves may constrain us. How must it then affront and baffle the
enticements of sin, when we compare its empty vanishing pleasures with those
solid and durable joys? What a forestalling will it be of Satan's markets, that
God bids so much fairer for us: offers us that to which his (...) all this will
I give (could he make such a wholesale) can bear no proportion, and how then
shall we ever barter it away for those little petty commodities he retails to
us; or make any other reply to his profers, than a get thee behind me Satan?
For alas! can we remember that we are candidates for a Kingdom, and yet retain
the abject spirits of slaves? Do we expect to reign hereafter, and yet depose
our selves before hand here? Suffer every the vilest lust to rule over us? Is
so glorious a prize annexed to the victory, and will it not animate the faintest
heart, and feeblest hands to the combat? What Lions can we fear in the way
which this hope is not Sampson enough to encounter? How light are our heaviest,
how momentary our most lasting Afflictions, if balanced with that eternal
weight of Glory? Are we spoiled of our goods, here is a reserve of treasure
which no Thief, neither the slye, nor the avowed, the pilferer, nor the
sequestrator can invade. Are we reduced to our Saviors destitution, not to
have where to lay our head, yet we have a building of God, an house not made
with hands eternal in the Heavens. Are we reproacht for the name of Christ,
that Ignominy serves but to advance our future Glory, every such Libel here,
becomes Panegyric there. Nay, are we persecuted to death, that sends us but to
take possession of the Crown of Life. Upon such sure grounds does our
Christianity set us. While we make good its condition it pulls out the sting of
all that is most deadly. And in a more comprehensive sense, possesses us of the
privilege promised the Disciples, that nothing should by any means hurt them,
Mar. 16. The most adverse chances being but like the ploughing and breaking the
ground, in order to a more plentiful harvest. And yet we are not so wholly
turned off to that reversion, as to have no supplies for the present; for
besides the comfort of so great and certain an expectation in another life, we
have promises also for this. Even of all those internal and spiritual
satisfactions which attend the practice of piety. The feast of a good
Conscience is the true Christians daily diet, and sure whatever the rich men of
the world think, he only can be said to fare deliciously: nay, he has yet more
supernatural food, Manna rained down immediately from Heaven: the Holy Spirit
sent on purpose to refresh and support him: those Joys which differ rather in
degree than kind, from those which are to be his final portion. And that the
Soul may not be too much incommoded in her house of clay, there is provision
made for that also, such necessaries secured to the body, as may keep it in
Tenantable repair: we have Christ's express promise for it, that to those that
seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, all these things shall be
added: if not that superfluity which may oppress and load, (render the body
rather the Tomb than Mansion of the Soul) yet such as may sustain and support
us: and sure it is easy to decide which is the happier lot. In short, we are
sure of enough to defray the charge of that voyage, which lands us at Eternal
Bliss: and certainly he must be of a very sluggish or querulous humor, that
shall demur upon setting out, or demand higher encouragements.

AND as the nature and value of the Promises render them most proper
engagements and incentives to all virtue; so if we consider the manner of
proposing, we shall find them in that respect also highly contributive to the
same end. For first, they are clear and express, not wrapped up in dark
enigmatical insinuations, wherein men must exercise their sagacity as well as
their faith: but revealed with that plainness, that it is impossible for any who
knows but the letter of the Gospel to be ignorant of the Eternal rewards it
proposes. And herein the difference belongs to Christianity above all other
Religions, some whereof have left men so much in the dark, that many Sects
among them have denied the immortality of the Soul, and sure they were but
faint encouragements they could propose unto that virtue which was to perish
with them. What should animate them to the rugged severe tastes of restraining
appetites, subduing passions, eradicating habits who discerned no rewards for
blameless Souls. It Is true indeed virtue is in her self perfectly amiable,
though she brought no dowry, but experience shows us she has not many Platonic
lovers: and when so few are ambitious to wed Her, when she brings an Eternal
inheritance with her, we may easily guess how little she will be sought without
it. When men once conclude that their Spirits shall vanish into the soft Air;
the inference is very obvious, Come on, let us use the creatures as in youth;
as we find it elegantly pursued, Wisd. 2. But of those who acknowledged a
future being, their preceptions were very misty and obscure. The Heathens had
such confused notions of their Elysium, that the Epithet of shades belonged
more properly to the darkness than the refreshment, and was a reward fit for
the votaries of those ambiguous Oracles they consulted. And proportionably to
the obscurity of their hopes were the Exercises of their virtue: their Piety
was even overwhelmed and confounded by the multitude of their Deities; nay,
which is yet stranger, their Gods themselves seem to have been lost in their
own crowd: else sure the Athenians would never have inscribed an Altar to the
unknown God: and indeed their offices were generally such, as if they had been
devoted to no other, they having as little discerning of their Worship as of
their God. 'Twas wrapped up in clouds and darkness; had mysterious recesses to
which the common worshipper had no admittance; such as were to acquire a
veneration only by not being understood: and though this must needs deprive
their services of that spirit and quickness, which constitutes the virtue of
devotion, yet alas their Religion had more than that negative contrariety to
Virtue. Many of their worships being nothing but a solemnity of the foulest
vices: and their Divinity taught them to violate Morality. A deceit Satan could
not probably so long have triumphed in, had they had the Gospel notion of
Heaven, for sure they could not have supposed their Gods of such mutable
inclinations, as to affect purity in their cohabitants, and pollution in their
Votaries: or such incongruous dispensers of rewards, as to apportion an
impeccable state hereafter to the most flagitious criminals on Earth.

AS to the Jews it is true, they derived their light from a clearer Fountain,
were under the Economy of immediate Revelation, and therefore might be
supposed to have had a freer prospect into that Heaven, from whence their Law
descended, yet even they were in this, as in many other particulars, under
Moses his veil, had rather dark adumbrations, and those too overwhelmed with
the multitude of express temporal promises. The earthly Canaan lay so fair and
open to their prospect, as easily intercepted their view of the Heavenly; and
their faith must remove, at least overlook, that mountain before it could come
to any sight of the Horizon and extended Sky. Nay, when it is remembered that the
Sadduces a great and learned part of their Doctors denied all future being, we
must think the intimations of it were very obscure; it being scarce imaginable,
that any considering men should think the Souls expired with the Body upon any
other ground, but that they knew not what after State to assign it. So that
though they wanted not figures and shadows, or as the Apostle calls them,
patterns of Heavenly things, Heb. 9. 23. yet they seemed not to have been well
understood, and the generality of men were not only in their Persons, but their
Understandings denied entrance into the holy of holies; penetrated not that
mystical representation, which was within the Veil: and answerable to this
dimness of their perceptions, was the whole systeme and body of their Religion,
which rather entertained its self in those external bodily performances, which
affected the sense, than in those Divine and Spiritual raptures, which purified
and elevated the Soul. It Is the Apostles affirmation, Heb. 9. that the
sacrifices there offered could not make him that did the service perfect, as
pertaining to the conscience, and he gives the reason in subjoyning, that they
stood only in meats and drinks, and carnal ordinances. Alas what propriety had
all their legal purifications toward the cleansing of the mind? That might be
in the Mire while the body was in the Laver: and while the surface of the man
was sprinkled with blood, the heart might be more beastial than those creatures
who lent the ablution. And indeed if we consider their morality, we shall find
that outside formal ceremony had proceeded to infect and poison that also. The
outward restraint, the bare forbearance of an actual commission, being by them
thought a full compliance with all the Negative precepts: so that we see Christ
is fain to assert the Internal part of the Obligation, and extend the duty to
the thoughts and inclinations. Besides, those acts of virtue they performed
were commonly such as had an Aspect, rather on their temporal well-being, than
distant and unseen rewards their Justice, and Charity confined to their own
Nation, directed to the flourishing of their own Commonwealth: whereas Aliens
were devoted to their rapine and despite; so that if they were virtues, they
were rather Political than Moral, and indeed while they placed so much of their
hopes on Earth, looked on secular plenty and tranquillity as their reward, 'twas
but consonant they should square their endeavors by that measure, and consider
things not simply in their native properties of good or ill, but according to
their tendency toward that they esteemed their felicity.

BUT God has provided, as the Apostle says, Heb. 11. 40. better things for us,
has not only made a better Covenant with us, but has established it upon better
promises, Cap. 8. 6. given us clearer revelations, not only of our duty, but
our recompense, the veil in Christ is done away, and we all with open face,
Behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. The Gospel puts the
evidences of our inheritance into our own hands, sealed by his explicit and
direct promise, who cannot lie: and that not only engaged by way of
munificence, but bargain and contract, as the purchase of that price, which our
Redeemer fully paid in our behalf. And sure this is in the Apostles phrase
strong consolation; and if so, it must be forcible encitement likewise, he
cannot but run alacriously, who has the prize in his Eye, nor can S. Paul use a
more pressing argument to his Corinthians, To be steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, than this assurance, That their labor shall
not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

AND as this clear proposal of the promises is most proper to encourage and
inspirit our endeavors, so is the conditionality most efficacious to
necessitate and engage them. Had Heaven been only promised as a largess, and
with a blind promiscuous bounty dispensed without discrimination, how much it
might have raised our gratitude, I know not, but sure it would not have excited
our industry, which in all instances we find is whetted by interest: and where
that is otherwise secured, men generally estimate it a part of the benefit that
their labor is superseded; and please themselves no less in a lazy bequest,
than a full enjoyment. So that indeed it is this circumstance of the promises
that must give life to all the rest, and make them operative toward the
producing of good life; for admit the joys we expect never so Divine and
Spiritual for their kind; never so great and transcendent for degree, and these
also represented to us in the most clear and convincing manner, yet if they be
tendered not as objects of our choice, but the certainty of our fate,
felicities which we are only concerned to enjoy, but not to acquire, they may
make us glad, but surely not diligent; it being but a cold inducement to any
undertaking to be assured it is perfectly needless: we have therefore all reason
to confess it our greatest advantage toward virtue, that God has so linkt our
hopes and our duty together: and indeed when we consider the great
disproportion between the one and the other; the infinity of the reward, with
the despicableness of the service, we must resolve that he had no other design
in making his promises conditional, than to engage us by our interest to that
holiness, to which he saw our inclinations did not bind us: that it was an
artifice of his love to ensnare us into two felicities by proposing of one,
enforce us to take one good in the way to another, virtue in passage to glory.

AND indeed who would not think this method so invincibly efficacious, as might
supersede the necessity of any other, but God who understands our thoughts,
long before, Psalm. 139. 1. foresaw, that notwithstanding this proposal of a
Canaan, there would be Rubenites and Gadites, who would set up their rest on
this side of Jordan; so intent on the commodity of their Cattle, as to be
content themselves to be part of the Herd, and become like the Beasts that
perish: That there would be men of so ignoble, disingenuous tempers, as none of
these cords of a man would be able to draw; and therefore there is another part
of the Gospel-Oeconomy fitted to their capacities; the threats and
interminations, those terrors of the Lord, which as Goads may drive those
brutish Creatures who will not be attracted: that those who think themselves
perfectly unconcerned in David's question, who shall ascend unto the hill of the
Lord, Psalm. 24. 3. may yet startle at Esays, who among us can dwell with
everlasting burnings? Of so formidable a kind are those menaces, as is
sufficient to awake the most drowsy stupid Soul, and are most apt to operate
upon that part of their temper, which evacuated the gentler method: that very
sensuality which made them despise Heaven, may help to enhanse the dread of
Hell; the lack of a drop of water will be most insupportable to him who fared
deliciously every day; those flames will be yet more scorching to those bodies,
who by studious effeminacies and softness have superadded an artificial
tenderness to the natural; nor will the gnawing of the worm appear more
intolerable to any, than those who here make it their business to tie up its
Iaws, gag or stupifie that Conscience which would now admonish, but will there
torment. And when to this is added the perpetuity of these pains, that the worm
shall never die, the fire never be quenched, certainly this puts such an edge
upon the terror, as may well make it in the Apostles phrase, quick and
powerful, searching even to the dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit, the
joints and marrow. When we are assured that the Axe is thus laid unto the root
of the tree, and that every tree that brings not forth good fruit must be hewn
down and cast into the fire, we shall sure be warned to bring forth meet fruits
of repentance, and fly from the wrath to come.

BUT because neither invitations nor threats can avail with those who are any
way invincibly impeded to apply them to their benefit: since the most glorious
prize, the most formidable danger, is insignificant to him, who wants power to
run unto the one, or from the other; it has pleased God to inspirit and actuate
all his Evangelical methods, by a concurrence of supernatural strength, makes
it not only eligible but possible, I may say easy and pleasant for us to do
whatever he commands us: and notwithstanding our natural debility, makes us
through Christ which strengthens us, able to do all things: by his Spirit he
prevents, assists, restrains, excites, comforts, convinces; gives grace and
adds to that the happier largess of a will to use it, and knowledge to discern
the want of more: infusing to the Soul an ardent thirst of greater powers, and
readier means of service, which the performance actuates to greater strengths,
and yet enflames to new desires, and more importunate pursuits, whilst God at
once bestows and crowns his own donations; still giving unto him that has, till
that at last he gives himself; and grace is swallowed up in glory. And to
assure us of this aid, he has been pleased to oblige himself: descends to the
solemnity of a Pact and Covenant; has indented with us, and constituted it a
principle part of the new and everlasting Covenant made with mankind in the
blood of the Son of God, to send the comforter, his Holy Spirit, to be with us
till the end of the world, and do all this. So that the Gospel is at once the
assigner of our tasks, and the Magazeen of our strength; so much Spirit goes
along with that Letter; so much internal grace is annexed to its outward
administration, as will to all, who do not resist it, infallibly render it the
power of God to salvation. For it is not the sole privilege of a S. Paul, but
the common portion of all Christians, That Gods grace shall be sufficient for
them; which is sure a more Gospel-like promise, than that it should be too
strong for them: so violent and irresistible as to commit a rape upon their
Spirits; such a mighty wind as drives them headlong upon duty. Indeed this
competency is of all other proportions the most incentive to industry; we see
in Temporals, too little makes men desperate, and too much careless; and
certainly 'twould be the same in Spirituals: but now when we have stock enough
to set up with, and that too of so improvable a nature, that is capable of
infinite advancement, and yet on the other side no less capable of total decay
also, it being given with this express condition, that upon neglect it shall be
withdrawn: so that our own sloth may make us poor, but nothing else can keep us
from being abundantly rich: what can be imagined more animating to diligence
and endeavor? And this being the condition wherein our Christianity has placed
us, added to the former considerations, will beyond exception or subterfuge,
evince its perfect aptitude and fitness for the End to which it was aimed, the
Planting and nourishing all true Virtue among men, the introducing the tree of
life into the world again, and so forming us a Paradise even amidst the briers
and thorns of our Exiled state.

CHAP. II. The Character of Christian-mens Practice, showing their multiplied
failance both from the rule of that holy profession, and its genuine effect.
AND now who can suspect that a cause so rightly disposed, should miss of its
effect? That this so auspicious Planet should be counter-influenc't by any
malevolent Star? Or that what has so many tenures in us, should be finally
disseis'd? For, admit we have not the Piety to be prevailed upon by the
reverence of the Author; yet the excellency of its composition does so much
recommend it to our reason, that we must put off the best part of our Nature to
evacuate the force of our Religion: nay, supposing us to have done that too, to
have struck our selves out of the list of Rationals, yet if we keep but the
rank of Animals, if we have not extinguished passion and sense, it descends even
to them; addresses to our hopes and fears with most importunate solicitations,
and convincing motives: So that unless we have the absurd ill luck to have much
of the Stoic, and nothing of the Philosopher, 'twill be impossible to resist
its impressions, and sure he that comtemplates this, will be apt with some
confidence to conclude Christendom to be the Goshen of the world, not only in
respect of its light, but of its immunity from all those Locusts and
Caterpillars, those swarms of mean and sordid Vices which both cover and devour
the rest of the Earth.

BUT this must be the inference of a mere contemplative, a Recluse that
converses only with his own meditations: for let him be so much secular, as
once to look abroad, the most transient glance will serve to unravel all this
hopeful speculation, and show him that Christendom may be as much Heathen as
America: whereas it is usually said, that ill Manners produce good Laws, we have
reverst the Aphorism, and our good Law has introduced the most corrupt manners.
Our holy faith which like a foundation should support good works, has like a
gulf swallowed them up. And so universal a depravation is there among us, that
we have scarce any thing left to distinguish us from the most barbarous people,
but a better name and worse vices.

AND here, what terms of wonder or of grief can be significant enough to
express or to bewail, so strange and so perverse degeneration, that the light
of the world should thus darken it: the salt of the Earth be the means of
putrefying and corrupting it: that those who were by God drawn out from the
Heathen world should so outvie the Gentiles crimes, as if they had forsaken
them, only because they were too innocent. This indeed is one of Satan's
subtillest stratagems, to fill Christ's Camp thus with his Soldiers, by whose
intestine treacheries, he has been more triumphant than by all his open
assaults and avowed hostilities. What a late Statesman said ( Prophetically,
if we may judge by the event) of England, that it was a vivacious animal that
could never dye except it killed it self, is no less true of the Church, which
has always been invulnerable against all darts, but what have been taken out of
its own quiver. Of this the Primitive times were pregnant testimonies, where
all the most witty cruelties, the most bloody persecutions, never made any
breach in her: but she stood firmer for all those batteries, and like an Arched
Building, became more strong and compact, by that weight which was designed to
crush her: but the Vice of Professors undermines her very foundation, and does
as much exceed the destructiveness of the most hostile assaults, as intestine
treachery is more ruinous and fatal, than foreign violence.

AS long as the lives of Christians were the transcripts of their doctrine they
rendered it venerable to all, and gave a presumption there was something more
than humane in it, that could work such signal effects, that could so transform
men as to make the adulterer chaste, the drunkard temperate, the covetous
liberal, the contentious peaceable. This, this was the way to adorn the
doctrine of God our Savior in all things, as the Apostle speaks, Tit. 2. 10.
And then the rule of contraries directs us to conclude very distant effects
from our now so distant practices, that our very religion should partake of the
infamy of our lives, and be thought rather a mystery of iniquity than godliness.

THUS is Christ wounded in the house of his friends, and has more reproach cast
on him by those that profess his name, than by the loudest blasphemies of those
that oppose it. For when those who have not opportunity to examine our faith,
see the enormousness of our works, what should hinder them from measuring the
Master, by the disciples? it being scarce imaginable that any one Sect of men
should so universally run counter to all the rules of their profession: For let
any sober Heathen look upon Christendom, as it is at this day weltring in the
blood, not of Martyrdom but War, and will it be possible for him to think it
owns a Gospel of Peace; or that those who so perpetually do those outrages they
are unwilling to suffer, profess obedience to the the Royal Law of love thy
neighbor as thy self, Jam. 2. 8. Can be see the violence and oppressions, the
frauds and underminings, the busy scramblings for little parcels of Earth; and
yet believe we count our selves strangers and pilgrims in it, and have laid up
our treasure in Heaven? Can he observe the strange and almost universal
distortion of speech, whereby it has lost its native property of being
interpreter of the mind, and under intelligible words so far exhibits the Babel
confusion, that no man understands another meaning? And can he imagine we have
any such Precept, as lie not one to another, or any such penalty upon the
infringer, as exclusion from the new Jerusalem? Shall he hear our God mentioned
more frequently and earnestly in our imprecations than our prayers, and every
part of our crucified Savior, recrucified in our horrid oaths; and shall he
not think that his second executioners bear him as little reverence as his
first: or that he has given no such command as swear not at all? When he
discerns self preservation bowed to as the Supreme Law, can he ever dream of
another so inconsistent obligation as that of taking up the cross? Or that
suffering for righteousness sake is one of our greatest felicities when he sees
us run so affrighted from it, that no crime, perjury, rebellion, murder, is
block enough in our way to stop our flight? In fine, when he considers how much
of our business it is, first to excite, and then to cloy the flesh, to spurr it
on to riots even beyond its own propensions, that the whole year is but one mad
carnival, and we are voluptuous not so much upon desire or appetite, as by way
of exploit and bravery: when I say he considers this, can he possibly guess our
institution directs us to beat down the body, to mortify the flesh with the
affections and lusts, interdicts us all rioting and drunkenness, chambering and
wantonness, and all provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.
Certainly all rules of discourse will direct him to the quite contrary
conclusion. And when he sees a Set of men that have enhans'd the common humane
pravity, he will be apt to infer their Principles have taught them the
improvement: And upon that supposal he wanted not temptation to his Option that
said, Let my soul be with the Philosophers.

AND while we thus misrepresent our holy profession to others, it will be no
wonder if we finally do it to our selves, that we forget its native shape, and
look on her only in the ugly dress our selves have put on, and that effect
seems already too visible among us: our lives have so long confuted it that we
triumph over it as a baffled thing; and like Amnon loath it because we have
ravished and defiled it. Many of us take notice of the better Morals of Turks
and Infidels not in reproach of our selves but our Religion, and because we
have so many Lepers, think Abanah and Pharphar, better than all the waters of
Israel, this is openly in the mouths of many, but is so prodigiously irrational
as well as unjust, that one can scarce think it possible to be in their hearts,
unless they be pursued by the fate of habitual liars, that at last come to
persuade themselves.

CERTAINLY there is no other parallel instance wherein men conclude so
perversely: he that shows a man that precipice upon whose brink he stands, that
entreats, yea importunes him to retire from the danger; nay bribes him with the
greatest rewards to choose safety, has done all that can be expected from a
friend, or charitable man: and if after all, the wretched person so advised,
shall cast himself headlong upon ruin; assuredly no Inquest would return his
murder in any other form than that of Felo de se. And why then should our
Christianity be accused of those ills which it would infallibly averr, if our
obstinacy would permit it: indeed the charge is so wild, that it seems rather
designed as an artifice of diversion, a sprout of that first fig tree which was
to hide the nakedness of lapsed Adam. Men think it policy to transfer their
guilts, and are willing, the violence of their lusts should pass for the
impotence of their religion. Like irregular patients blaming their Physician
for those ill accidents which they know owing only to their own unruliness. A
pregnant testimony of the reproachful nature of sin, that men are content to
betake themselves to the most forlorn shifts to avoid the owning it: but the
consciousness is so pressing and intolerable, that with many it drives on to
yet higher outrages: it is not enough for men to decry their Christianity as a
feeble insignificant thing, but they load it even with contradictory
imputations, and that which sometimes they call the foolishness of preaching,
to bring it in scorn and contempt,, shall at another be styled an Art and trick
to bring it into suspicion and hatred, be arraigned for imposture and deceit, a
project of imposing upon credulous souls, and gaining real advantages to the
managers while they feed the silly Proselyte with imaginary ones. How
groundless a calumny this is, as it appears from the sanctity, and eminent
simplicity of Christian Religion, which above all things excludes fraud and
falsehood; so also from the designments and aims of its first promulgators, who
as they can not be supposed dextrous enough to lay such a scene of taking
Pageantry; so all their visible acquests were scourgings and imprisonments,
persecutions and death. If this were the case it would indeed go near to
reconcile the before mentioned contradictory imputations, whilst the imposing
upon credulous souls at this dear rate, would be in very deed the foolishness
of Preaching, the greatest madness in the world. Men of common reason would be
ashamed to use such frivolous cavils: but who can without horror hear them from
professed Christians? that while Infidels are modest in their reproaches, look
upon our Doctrine only as erroneous, Disciples should be bitter and charge it
as insiduous and treacherous. Thus does the Church experiment the truth of her
blessed Lords Predictions, and finds her foes are those of her own house: and
though she be Christ's Dove, yet is subjected to the fate of the Viper, and has
her bowels torn out by those that spring from them.

THESE are the growing consequences of resolute impiety, he who will not be
kept within the bounds of duty, seldom contents himself with that bare
violation: he not only breaks the bonds in sunder, but casts them away too; is
impatient they should keep a reputation to upbraid him, when he has robbed them
of the power of restraining him: and this sure is the bottom of all that deep
reasoning, by which men have learnt to argue themselves and others out of their
Creed: And though this be indeed the great Arcanum the Philosophers Stone they
aim at; yet they have met with another good experiment by the way: and have, by
I know not what Chimistry, extracted a reputation out of these most unapt
materials. He passes for a considering man that disputes principles, and is
thought most to own his reason that least owns his faith: and then 'twill be no
wonder if this success animate, and give them not only confidence, but vanity
to avow what is thus creditable.

Indeed Satan is too subtle a manager to lose this advantage, and the event
sadly shows, he has not neglected to improve it, as appears not only by the
number of such pretenders unto reason, but even by their advancing to higher
degrees. The voluptuary who likes his portion in this world, and fears that in
another, is at first only prompted by his interest to quarrel the last Articles
of the Creed, and so in his own defense denies the life everlasting: but when
he finds his necessity made a virtue, and himself struck into the repute of a
wit; upon that account he doubts not, his fame will increase with his
irreligion, and so proceeds still to unravel farther, till at last he leaves
not so much as I believe in God, that many have advanced so far is too evident:
and by some so owned that they will not thank his charity, that shall hope
better of them.

'TWAS once the triumph of infant Christianity, that it silenced all the
Heathen Oracles, and within a while demolished even the Synagogue too: but
alas its mature age gives us that effect in a most inverted sense, it now has
served to suppress even the common notions of a Deity, turned out the one as
well as the many Gods, and instead of Polytheists and Idolaters has made
Atheists, and that which Christ tells us was designed to perfect and fill up
the Law, has by the strange pravity of its professors at once obliterated both
Law and Lawgiver out of men's minds, thereby exemplifying the old Axiom,
Corruption optimi est pessima; and the Saint as well as the Angel, if he desert
his innocence, commences Feind and Devil. These are such sad, such direful
transmutations as excite not so much wonder, as grief and lamentation; and what
rivers, what Oceans of Tears are competent to bewail such unutterable evils.

THE removal of the Candlestick is so formidable a judgment that the
threatening of it, is used by Christ as the most awaking menace to the Seven
Churches Revel. 2. 3. but the removing it by our own hands is yet an enhansment
of that highest calamity; when men are come to such an insensate obduration,
that they court their Plagues, become their own Lictors and make that their
choice which is their extremest punishment, they are certainly too secure of
that ruin they call for; And may we not fear it may prove general, and involve
us all: that while so many cry out to be delivered from their Christianity as
their load and pressure, and so few express their dissent to that demand: God
may in judgment grant it, hearken to those that cry loudest, rescue his Gospel
from our profane and impious violations and give it to others that may bring
forth the fruits of it.

NOR is this to be feared only from the explicit importunities of the
blasphemous, for it is interpretatively the vote of many others; whoever give
themselves up to the dominion of any lust, do implicitly renounce their
obedience to Christ, and say we will not have this man to rule over us. And
when he is thus deposed from his regal and directive power, we have reason to
believe he will despise a mere titular sovereignty, not suffer the Scepter of
his Word to remain as an Empty Ceremony among those, who pay it no real
obedience: nor be again clothed with Purple, crowned, and saluted King to
advance the triumph of his scorn and crucifixion.

Nor will the fawning Professions of the demure hypocrite avert, but accelerate
this Fate: He that makes the Golden Scepter in Christ's hand, a rod of iron in
his own, that thinks his Saintship licenses him to all the severe censures, and
the yet severer (because more effective) oppressions of others, he is certainly
to be looked on not only as a Rebel, but an Usurper too, and is of all others
the highest provoker. He that tramples under foot the Son of God, does not so
much violate him, as he that pretends to erect him a Throne upon blood and
rapine, on perjury and sacrilege: nor does he that accounts the Blood of the
Covenant an unholy thing, so much profane it, as he that uses it as a Varnish
to paint over his foulest lusts. The Apostle has long since told us, there is
no concord between Christ and Belial, and can we think he will be patient thus
to be made subservient to his enemy: or suffer his Ark to be set for the
support, which should be the confusion of Dagon. Do we find him so severely
upbraid the hypocrisy of the Jews, that stole, murdered, committed adultery,
and swore falsely, and yet came and stood before him in his house, Jer. 7. 9.
and shall we hope he will connive at it in Christians? Was it intolerable
profanation in them to account his house a den of robbers, and shall we be
permitted to make it so: they are sent to Shiloh to read their own destiny, and
surely we are as likely to find ours there too; to be deprived of those
advantages which we have so unworthily abused: nor can we expect, that though
God cause the natural Sun to rise still as well on the evil as the good, yet
that the Sun of righteousness shall continue to shine on those who will only
bask themselves in his Rays, grow Aethiops from his neighborhood; but will not
work by his light.

WHEN all this is considered, what a sad abode does it make? When the
blasphemies of the Profane, the sensualities of the Voluptuous, and the
mockeries of the Hypocrite, send, as it were, daily challenges to Heaven, we
cannot but look it should at last overcome its long-suffering, awake God to
vindicate the honor of his Name, and not suffer it any longer to be thus
prostituted and polluted: that when he sees his light serve only to aid us the
more subtly to contrive our deeds of darkness, he should withdraw it, smite
us with blindness like the Sodomites, whom he finds in such impure pursuits:
and were that blindness such as our Savior speaks of, Io. 9. 41. that inferred
the no sin, 'twere a desirable infliction, but alas it has none of that
property: That which is designed for the punishment can never be the
extenuation of our guilt; but as in Hell there is an happy Separation of
effects, the scorching of the flame without the light, and the blackness of
night without the rest: so in this nearest approach to it; this Portal to those
Chambers of death, there is the ignorance without the excuse, the darkness
divested of its native quality of hiding: and when we are entered among
Heathens here, we must yet expect the sadder portion of Apostatized Christians
hereafter.

AND O that this consideration might at last have its proper operation, rouse
and awake us timely to prevent those evils which it will be impossible to cure.
That by bringing forth some more genuine and kindly fruits, we may avert that
dismal sentence, Cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground. That men would
generally lay to heart both the sin and infamy of being promoters of public
ruin; and quench that fire with their tears which their sins have kindled,
that the fasting and prayers, the sighs and groans of the Primitive Christians
may supplant the profane luxuries, the carnal Jollities of the Modern: and that
Sackcloth and Ashes may become the universal mode, the only fashionable dress
among us. This both Reason and Religion suggest as matter of our most
importunate wishes; would God our hopes were but half as pregnant.

BUT the less appearance there is of this universal reformation, the more
jealously ought every single person to look on himself, lest he be one that
obstruct it: for so he does who stays till it be a fashion, but neglects to
contribute his part to the making it so. Men are willing to discourage
themselves from attempts of this kind, and with an unseasonable modesty can
reflect what a nothing one man is to so many millions, when alas all that vast
Empire Vice has got in the world, is founded in the pravity of single persons,
and would certainly be ruined by their reformation. The more reasonable
Collection would be, that he who considers himself but as one, should not
suffer himself to grow into less; to fall from that Unit to a Cipher, by
permitting sloth or cowardice to enfeeble and Emasculate him, but on the
contrary should recollect his spirits, actuate all his strength, and therefore
be sure to do his utmost, because that utmost is but a little.

AND to this certainly there want not encouragements, we see in common affairs
the wonders that industry and resolution are able to effect, and a single
courage being exerted has often without Romance, overcome giantly difficulties.
It Is a great prejudice is cast upon virtue by the pusillanimity of those that
like, but dare not abet her. When most men commit all impieties daringly* and
openly, and those few that do mourn for it, do it but in secret, the example of
the one is contagious, but the other has no means to diffuse its self. Would
men stoutly own duty, and not like Peter, follow Christ afar off, they might
yet hope to make a party and gain ground in the world. And how noble an attempt
were this, thus to encounter Satan in his highest triumph, and recover a lost
field: and methinks those who have any warmth of Piety glowing within, may
easily thus improve it into a flame, (...) add to their faith virtue, as that
signifies courage: and then readily would succeed, that train of Christian
excellencies reckoned up by St. Peter, 2 Ep. 1. 5. knowledge, temperance,
patience, godliness, and superstruct on these, as it there follows, brotherly
kindness, and the most comprehensive charity. We should be not only devout
toward God, but zealous toward Men, endeavoring by all prudent means to
recover them out of those snares of the Devil, whereby they are taken captive.
And since among all those snares there is none more entangling, than the
creditableness and repute of customary vices, to set themselves especially
against that overgrown covering and ornament; those Locks wherein its great,
its Sampson-like strength lies: and strive to render it as contemned as it is
base: and to this purpose nothing is so apt, as the exalting its competitor,
fetching virtue out of the Dungeon, that darkness and obscurity wherein it has
long lain forgotten, and by making it illustriously visible in their own
practice, put it into the possibility of attracting others. Indeed there only
it appears in its true splendour, they are but dead colors the Sublimest
speculation can put on it, he that would draw it to the life, must imprint it
upon his own. And thus every pious person may, nay ought to be a Noah, a
preacher of righteousness: and if it be his fortune to have as imperswasible an
Auditory, if he cannot avert the deluge, it will yet be the providing himself
an Ark, the delivering, yea advancing his own soul, if he cannot benefit other
men's.

NAY, this being a Noah may qualify him to be a Moses too, give him such an
interest with Heaven, that he may be sit to stand in the gap, to be an
intercessor and Mediator for a provoking people. And God knows never any
generation more needed that office: nor any part of this more than our sinful
Nation, which having long been in the furnace, is indeed now come out, but so
unpurified, that we have all reason to expect a return, and that not upon the
former frustrated design of refining; but upon that more infallible and fatal
one of consuming us. This is so dreadful, but withal so just an expectation,
that if there be any Jacobs among us; any, who can wrestle and prevail with
God, there never was so pressing need of their intercession. O let all that are
thus fitted for it, vigorously undertake this pious work, let no Moses's hands
ever wax heavy, but be always held up in a devout importunity, let them
transcribe that holy Oratory, which he so often effectually used, plead to God
his own cause, with a what will thou do to thy great Name, and when there is
nothing in us that can pretend to any thing but vengeance, ransack Gods bosom,
rifle his bowels for arguments of compassion, repeat to him his own titles,
that he is long-suffering and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity, transgression
and sin, Numb. 14. 18. And by these solicit, yea, conjure him to pity. And how
great an ardency is required to this intercession? What strong cries must they
be that shall drown so loud a clamor of impieties. And how does it reproach the
slightness of our sleepy heartless addresses? Can we hope to bind Gods hands
with Withs and Straws? To arrest his vengeance with such faint and feeble
assaults? And when nature and danger suggest to Heathen Nineveh, not only to
cry, but cry mightily to God, shall the superaddition of our Religion damp ours
into a whisper, a soft unaudible sound. A storm will teach the profane Mariner
to pray in earnest, and alas, we have not wanted that discipline. It Is not long
since we might have said with those, Acts 27. No small tempest has long lain on
us, neither Sun nor Stars in many days, nay in many years appearing, nothing
but black and dismal portents of a final wreck to a poor weather-beaten Church,
and then sure 'twas time to be importunate, to learn so much of instruction
from the waves that tossed us, as to make our prayers keep pace with them, in
swift uninterrupted succession, in loud and not to be resisted violence. That
we did so then I dare not affirm, but sure I am the necessity of it is not yet
out-dated; for though the Sky however black with clouds carry no thunder in it,
though the impetuous winds that blow from every quarter, should not break out
in tempest, and bring shipwreck to us; yet we too fully exemplify the truth of
the Prophets Axiom, That the wicked are like the troubled Sea, that cannot
rest: we have within us a principle of ruin, which can operate though nothing
from without excite it. A tempest is not always necessary to sink a Ship, one
treacherous leak may do it in the greatest calm, and what security can there
then be to our torn Vessel, whose rents our continued divisions do still keep
open. Indeed our preservation must be as our restoration was, the work of
Omnipotence; thither therefore let us address with St. Peter's pathetick Prayer,
Save Lord or we perish. O that all who are concerned in the grant of that
Petition, would qualify themselves to present it. Lift up such pure hands,
that God who hears not sinners, Io. 9. may yet hear them, afford a gracious
ear, and give an answer of Peace.

CHAP. III. A survey of the Mischiefs arising from Inconsideration.
THE last Section having defeated all the promising hopes of the former, by
showing us how sadly we have frustrated all the designs and engagements of our
profession, enervated all those apt and powerful methods, and how perfectly
contrary our practices are to our rules, mere curiosity would more prompt us to
enquire what are the hidden causes of those so strange effects, what unhappy
propriety there is in the soil, that after so much culture and husbandry it
should produce nothing but wild Grapes: and by what arts and wiles Satan has
not only evaded, but even retorted those blows which were aimed at him. But as
in diseases the pains and languishings are obvious to the grossest sense, but
the springs and originals of them most frequently lie deep, and are so
complicated and interwoven, that they require much art to search and to
distinguish them: nay, do often mock the most subtle inquisitor, and send him
back with mere conjectures and uncertain guesses: so in this Epidemick
Spiritual distemper, the malady is notorious and visible, but the causes of it
not so easily determined, yet that not so much from the darkness as the number
of them; so many do pretend, and that with very good color, to this unhappy,
this monstrous birth, that a Solomon himself must have made the proposal of
dividing it, as not being able to have assigned it entire to any one Mother.

INDEED so many are the concurrents toward it, that it would far exceed the
limits of this little Tract, but to point at them: I shall not therefore
undertake any such exact enumeration, but shall only take notice of those which
either for the generality or degree of their efficacy appear the most eminent.

AND first the great and stupid Inconsideration which most men have concerning
their Religion, may well pass for a main cause of its frustration. Christianity
may make Archimedes his challenge, give it but where it may set its foot, allow
but a sober advertence to its proposals, and it will move the whole world: it
comes with most invincible and controuling arguments, but still they are
arguments, and those must first obtain attention, before they can force assent;
they will most infallibly weigh down the scales, though the whole world were
the counter-balance, but then that must presuppose their being put into those
Scales: being entertained with so much of deliberation, as may try and examine
their weight. In a word, they address to us as men, that is creatures endued by
God, with rational Souls and discursive faculties, but if we will suppress
these, and set up only the brute to give audience, we must not expect Balaams
prodigy shall be every day repeated, that the beast should be wiser than the
rider, and consequently cannot wonder if the Success vary with the Auditors.

AND it is to be feared, this is the state of most of us, that all the
convincing Logic, that demonstration of the Spirit, as St. Paul calls it: and
all the persuasive Rhetoric of the Gospel, find us so stupid and unconcerned,
that they can make no impression: all the avenues are so blockt up, that they
can find no way of approaching us. We are like the Indian Serpents Phylostratus
mentions, proof against all charms, but such as with their glittering splendour
assault our Eyes: nothing moves us but what courts our Senses, and what is not
gross enough to be seen, we think too nice to be considered. The form and name
of Christianity men find ready to their hands, and it costs them no labor to
put it on: but should they be interrogated of the import and significancy of
it, I fear many would be at a loss what to answer. Men call themselves
Christians as they do French or English, only because they were born within
such a territory, take up their Religion as a part of their fate, the temper of
their Climate, the entail of their Ancestors, or any thing most remote from
their choice, the profession of it descends to them by way of inheritance, and
like young careless Heirs, they never are at the charge to survey it, to inform
themselves either of the Issues, or Revenues of it; what burdens it lays or
what advantages it promises. Every man sees they are vast multitudes that have
entered the Baptismal vow, and I fear no small numbers of them, that weigh it
as little when they should perform it, as they did when they made it. Have no
other notion of Baptism, but as a custom of the place, or a time of festivity:
consider no farther significancy in these spiritual bands, than they do in the
Swadling-cloaths of their infancy, and can give no better account why they took
on them Christ's livery, than why they wear such garments as the common fashion
of their Country prescribes them.

THIS is in many the effect of gross ignorance, that really know nothing that
borders upon Religion: and where that is the principle, we cannot think it
strange to see their practices proportionable; this returns them into the state
of Heathenisin, and while they walk in that darkness, it is no wonder if they
often fall: the only matter of admiration is, that there should be any such
darkness among us; that the glorious light, as St. Paul terms it, of the Gospel
of Christ, should not long ere this have dispelled it out of our Horizon, and
certainly that it has not, must be owing to some very great guilt, so that
concerning such persons the Disciples question, Io. 9. is very pertinent, Who
did sin, this man or his Parents? Where men are so ignorant it must necessarily
infer their Parents negligence in infusing, or their own stubborn perveseness
in resisting instruction, but it is more probable to conclude the former, since
if Children were early instituted, knowledge would insensibly insinuate its
self, before their years had armed them with obstinacy enough to make head
against it: but when by the Parents remisness the proper Seeds-time is lost;
the soil grows stiff and untractable; the labor of learning averts their
Childhood, and the shame of it their Manhood, and so they grow old in their
ignorance, are ready to leave this world before they come to know any thing of
that which is to succeed it. This is a common, but certainly a most deplorable
case, and as it loudly accuses those Parents, who thus wretchedly hazard their
Childrens greatest concernments, so certainly it reflects not very laudably
upon those, who by slighting that excellent Order of Confirmation in this
Church, have besides all other advantages of it, robbed them of that happy
reserve, which the care of their Spiritual Parent, had provided to repair the
negligence of their Natural; but guilt has a miserable kind of infinity, and
lessens not by being communicated; and therefore though these unknowing persons
may with justice enough accuse others, yet can they never the more absolve
themselves. Indeed they cannot tax others omissions toward them, without a
tacit reproach of their own: for if it were a fault in the Parent, to let
their infancy want those necessary infusions, it is surely so in themselves, to
let their riper years continue in that destitution. And sure it is not probable
there could be a more irrational motive to the former, than that which prevails
with the later; to wit, the fear of shame, which certainly much more properly
belongs to him that lies stupidly under his want, than he that industriously
sets to cure it: so that while they go thus preposterously to avert reproach,
they invite it; nay, and do besides betray one of their most important secrets,
discover themselves more solicitous about appearances than realities; to be
thought knowing than to be so. A strange kind of speculative Hypocrisy, which
yet leads to all the practical profaneness incident to those, who live without
God in the world.

BUT would God the unchatechiz'd were the only persons we had to complain of in
this matter: There is another sort as ignorant, who have not that plea; who by
a wretchless Inconsideration, have made a shift to unlearn what they had once
been taught. That this is naturally very possible no man can question, that
observes how desuetude will rob a man of any Science, or other habit. But in
this case there is yet a farther concurrent toward it, Christ's parable tells
us of Fowls that devoured the Seed, which himself interprets to be the wicked
one, which catches away the word sow'n in men's hearts: When that spiritual
seed lies loose and scattered upon the surface, and is not by deep and serious
meditation, harrowed as it were into the ground, it offers it self a ready prey
to the devourer, and God knows the event is too ready to attest the truth of
the observation: For do we not see many whose childhoods have wanted nothing of
Christian nurture, that have had all advantages to the making them wise unto
salvation, yet suffer their manhood to wear out and obliterate all those
rudiments of their youth; and that not only out of their practice, but even out
of their memory too: this (would we be patient to have the experiment made)
would, I doubt not, be found too true in diverse, and they would appear less
able to approve themselves not only to the Confessor, but even to the Catechist
in their adult age, than they were in their Minority: as having scarce ever
thought of the principles of their religion, since they conn'd them to avoid
correction; and then it is no wonder if they pass into the same forgetfulness
with other the occurrences of that slippery age.

BUT if with some the memory have been so invincibly faithful, as not to have
resigned its depositum: if it do happen obstinately to retain those early
impressions which were made on it. Yet alas that alone will be of little
avail: it is true that is the storehouse, and it is good to have that well
replenisht; but if its plenty be only within its self uncommunicated, if the
granary though never so full, be sealed up, it gives no security against a
famine: a man's remembrance of his Creed may tell him there is a God, and that
he is Almighty; but if his reason be so much a sleep, as not to infer from
thence the necessity of reverencing and obeying him who is all powerful to
revenge our contempts: he may repeat the Article every day and yet never the
less Atheistically. In like manner he may go on to the Birth, Death, and
Resurrection of Christ, but if he weigh not the obligations to gratitude and
duty which devolve on him from thence he may remember his Birth, and yet never
be regenerate: his Death, and yet not dye to sin: and his Resurrection, and yet
lie rotting in his own corruption, and not rise with him to newness of life. So
he may proceed to his coming to Judge the quick and the dead, but if he reflect
not on his own particular concernment in it, if he consider not that for every
the secretest thing, Eccl. 11. God will bring him, as well as others to
judgment: he may talk of Doomsday as men do of such Assizes as they have no
trial at, but it will never set him a trembling, or give him the providence to
anticipate his sentence; so judge himself here, that he may not be judged of
the Lord. And so proportionably in all the parts of our Christian Faith: he
that does not extract from them their proper and just inferences, shall never
feel their efficacy. He has indeed in that excellent Systeme, a most infallible
Catholicon, against all his spiritual Maladies, but it is a Medicine, not a
Charm; to be taken, not laid by him; and if he fail in application, he will as
certainly miss of the cure: and this gives us one too clear a reason, why so
many, in the most fatal sense, are weak and sick among us, and fallen asleep; are
first lethargick, and then stark dead in trespasses and sins. Men do not by
sober consideration suck out the virtue which would heal them: they look on the
Creed as Christ's badge, and so long as they bear that they think none must
question their Christianity: whereas it is indeed more properly his Military
Symbolum, or recognition of the cause, and General they fight for; an engaging
them to all the obedience, fidelity and constancy of resolute soldiers: and to
this purpose it is that we stand up at the recital of the Creed, as owing our
Baptismal promise to fight manfully under our Saviors Banner against Sin, the
World, and the Devil; and if we do not thus, it is not material what professions
we make, we are the same desertors whether we stay in our own Camp, or run over
to the enemies; throw away our Arms, or not use them; renounce our Christian
faith, or not improve it. Sloth is as mischievous in war as treachery or
cowardice, and he that keeps his sword in the sheath, is as unformidable an
enemy, as he that brings none into the field.

AND how many such insignificant combatants are there in the Christian Camp:
that only lend their Names to fill up the Muster-roll: but never dream of going
upon service. It Is certain there are as many such, as there are careless
unconsidering Professors: and these it is to be feared make so great a number,
that were the Church put to estimate her forces, and examine what effectively
her strength is, she would find the deceit of false musters as great among the
Spiritual as the Civil Soldiery. It is indeed a most amazing thing to see,
that that which is the one great and important interest of all men, should of
all other things meet with the least regard. If we make a proposal of worldly
profit, though encumbered with many difficulties and liable to many
uncertainties, we shall not only have an attentive hearing, but active care and
diligent pursuit of the design, it will be driven to the last glimpse of hope
and if the first attempt miscarry, the next occasion is laid hold of; but here
where the prize is so rich, the conditions so easy, the acquest so certain,
yet (as if these were deterring, averting qualities) we cannot be got to take
the matter into our deliberation. Alas, what stupid folly has possessed men? and
by what measures do they make their estimates? how are their precious Souls
become so vile in their eyes, that they are the only part of them, which they
think below their regard? In an Epidemick disease every man looks out for
Antidote or Medicine for his own peculiar, and does not acquiesce in that silly
confidence that he shall do as well as other men: yet in this greater danger,
that is their avowed comfort, and keeps them as cheerful as if they had the
most solid grounds of security. Alas, can numbers outface damnation, or do men
hope that by going in troops to hell they shall master the native inhabitants,
subdue those legions of tormentors, and become conquerors in stead of
sufferers? This is sure too wild an imagination for any to entertain, yet what
more sober one can any pretend, in favor of so stupendous an improvidence?

BUT 'twill be much more seasonable to reform than Apologize or Rhetoricate;
and therefore 'twill import those men, who like the inhabitants of Laish, dwell
careless, quiet, and secure, to look about them: to enter into serious
consultation how they may avert that ruin which waits upon such a supine
temper, not to suffer themselves to perish in the midst of such possibilities,
nay solicitations to be saved: but at last afford an audience to that Embassy
which is sent them from Heaven. Ponder well those easy terms of reconciliation
which are proposed: the inestimable advantages consequent to the embracing that
amity; and the as inestimable detriment of refusing it: in a word, not to
please themselves with the empty title, but to penetrate the full purport and
significancy of their Christianity, and when they have done this soberly and
attentively: having removed this first and most general obstruction to piety,
they will find themselves assaulted by such force of reason that they must
either be very ill Logicians, or very good Christians.

CHAP. IV. A Survey of the Mischiefs arising from Partial Consideration.
NEXT to the stupid and merely vegetable state of total incogitancy: we may
rank that partial and peece-meal consideration, by which Christianity is
mutilated and deformed, deprived of all its force to attract and subdue men's
hearts: for as in artificial Movements, there is such a dependence of one part
upon another, that the substracting of any one destroys the whole frame: so in
this spiritual Machin designed to raise our dull mortality to heaven; the
divine wisdom of its maker has combined its several parts, that he who severs
ruins, he that applies it not in its united strength will find no aid from its
unjoynted scattered particles. S. Paul tells us 1 Cor. 12. that in the natural
body the making it all Eye, or Hand, the reducing the many members to one is
destructive to its being (if they were all one member where were the body v.
20.) and we in reason must expect the same event will follow here. If we
advance one part of our Christian Faith to the annihilation of the rest, it is
impossible that should supply the place of the whole; but the more that member
is swollen above its native size, the more unwildy, not the more strong it grows:
and loses that active vigor, which it received by a social communication with
the other parts.

IT IS Gods charge against the Priests, Mal, 2. that they have been partial in
the Law, (...) lifters up of faces in it; preferred some more agreeable parts,
and discountenanced others; were not only judges of the Law, but unjust judges
too. And I fear the enditement may now run more generally against the People
also; that they have been partial in the Gospel: culled and chosen out those
softer and more gentle dictates which should less grate and disturb them: like
well the Oil that makes them have a cheerful countenance, but are not so
forward to deal with the Wine which should search and cleanse their sores. We
make all our addresses to the promises, hug and caress them, and in the interim
let the commands stand by neglected. A divinity indeed fitly apportion'd to the
devotion of these times, which loves to make an offering to God of that which
costs them nothing, and yields a preference to that way of worship which
assures Salvation best cheap, and at the easiest terms; but would men consider,
they would find, that the commands are the supreme and most eminent part of the
Evangelical Covenant, the promises come but as handmaids and attendants: an
honorable retinue to invite the more respectful entertainment, and it should
be remembered that of this sort are the threatenings too; and therefore they have
surely an equal right to our regard especially when many of them have the
accession of Gods Oath, to bind and strengthen their performance. And what a
scandalous and absurd partiality is this, that when the precepts come with this
solemnity the more to command our reverence, we single out this one part of the
Train and pay our homage unto it; lay hold on the Promises, not those that
speak damnation to impenitence, but the other half of them which give
assurances of favor. And like the Benjamites to the daughters of Shiloh, run
away with them, possess our selves of these by rape, in spite of all the
incapacities we lie under; though God has sworn, that no disobedient provoker,
shall enter into his rest.

THAT this is really the case of many is more than probable, for by what other
artifice is it possible for them to reconcile their large hopes, with their no
purifying, their confident expectations of heaven, with their greedy rapacious
pursuits of Earth: their secure dependence on the Blood of their Savior with
their remorsless effusions of that of their Brethren? did they consider the
inseparable connection between the Precepts and the Promises, 'twere hard for
them to be so wicked, but impossible to be so sanguine. Did the unclean person
believe that none but the pure in heart shall see God, if he could be so much
Swine, as still to choose the mire: yet sure he could not expect to be Rapt from
thence into heaven. Did the Drunkard consider the sentence of the Apostle
excluding all such from the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 10. if he can be content
so sadly to oberbuy his sin; as to pay that Kingdom for his shot: yet certainly
even he cannot be sot enough to expect the possession of what he has so sold,
or hope that from one of his drunken trances, he shall awake to glory: did the
Covetous extortioner observe that he is involved in the same sentence, remember
that such Violents shall take not heaven, but hell, by force; if the terrors of
the Lord could not have force enough to melt his bowels, to unclutch his
griping hand, or disseize him of his prey: yet sure it must discourage him from
grasping of heaven too, from hoping to defraud God as he has done men, and
striking himself into an estate in the land of the living; and in like manner
all other hoping sinners if they would ruin, yet must cease from flattering
themselves, must choose damnation barefaced, and not fancy that their posting
on in the broad way shall ever bring them to life. And sure this discovery of
their estate, were a very good step to the curing it: for though it is possible
some few may be of so sturdy an impiety as to choose their sin with all its
consequents, yet sure all sinners are not of that strong complexion, and
therefore Satan is put to his wiles and artifices, is fain to hoodwink those
that are apt to start: and disguises the danger when he sees the true
appearance of it will terrify and avert. This was his old policy with our
first parents; he dazles their eyes with the glorious but abusive proposal of
becoming like Gods, that they might not discern how near they were approaching
to become like Devils: and this under the pretense of confidence and
friendship, discovering as it were a secret to them, that God envied them that
promotion, which his greater kindness was solicitous to procure for them. And
as if the ruin of mankind, in Massa had been too slight a Trophey for that one
Stratagem, he repeats it again to the individuals, persuades men that the path
of obedience which God has chalkt out is strait, and narrow, rugged and
encumbered; that there is a shorter cut, an easier passage to life: that they
may be led into Canaan a nearer way, step into it immediately from the flesh
pots of Egypt, and escape the tedious weary March in the Wilderness: never so
much as call at Mount Sinai, or be affrighted with the Thunders of the Law. In
a word, they need not work out their Salvation, but be they never so slothful
they may inherit the promises, Heb. 6. 12. this is his one grand Conclusion,
though he has several mediums to infer it by: wherewith as with so many tools
and Engines he furnishes men for the filing or breaking of that sacred link
between duty and reward; and of these he has great variety fitted to the hands,
and skill of those that manage them. I shall not undertake to ransack his
workhouse, or give an inventory of his utensils, but shall rather in general
beseech all those, who have made this unhappy separation to remember from whose
Forge they took their Instruments: and then consider whether his officiousness
in supplying them, can argue any thing but that it is his work they are about.
Can any think that he whose eternal pastime it will be to torment men, can
really be solicitous of their ease that he would choose out for them the
pleasantest paths, were it not that he knows they lead to the chambers of
death? when Christ whose sole business it was to save men's souls, has
prescribed us a course which shall assuredly conduct us unto happiness, what
can it be but frenzy to resort to Abaddon, the destroyer for an easier
method, or expect more gentleness and compassion from the roaring Lion than
from the Lamb of God.

NAY indeed this is not only to attribute to him more tenderness, but fidelity
too: to believe him in opposition to all the express affirmations of God; and
when he who is truth its self has told us, that except we repent we shall all
perish, Luke 13. 5. and that without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb.
12. 14. to disbelieve this only upon his bare credit, who was a liar from the
beginning: This indeed is a prodigious composition of blasphemy and folly: a
strange contumely to God, but fatal treachery to our selves: For alas Satan
entertains us all this while but with a trick of Legerdemain, and as Iuglers
make us believe we have cut the string, which yet presently after they show us
whole: so he persuades us he has thus severed the Condition from the Promises,
when to our grief it will finally appear their union was inviolable. It Is not
all our vain confidence that can reverse the immutable divine Law, we may, it is
true, delude our selves, keep up our spirits high; in a secure jollity eat and
drink, and rise up to play, and so not only loyter, but revel out our day, till
the night overtake us wherein no man can work, but we shall never be able to
propagate the deceit, where only it could avail us, to persuade God to pay the
hire to those that have been no laborers, or give the prize to any who have
not run to obtain it. Let every man therefore in a just tenderness to his own
Soul, strictly examine his hopes, try not how high they tower, but how deep
they are founded; whether on the sand or on the rock; the flattering delusions
of Satan, and the dreams of his own Fancy, or on the Promises of God: for
though all pretend to build on the latter, yet God knows, a multitude of
foolish Architects there are, which mistake their ground, take that for
assurance that is not: and this truly is a thing deserves to be soberly
considered, they that most greedily catch at the Promises, do often embrace a
cloud instead of the Deity which they so eagerly grasp, and thereby think to
enjoy. But faithful obedience, and not insolent hopes, commend us unto God. The
Gospel indeed describes to us great and inestimable felicities, but he that can
think this gives him Title to them, may as well pretend to the whole World,
because he has the Map of it in his house: for though it mentions them to all,
yet it promises them to none but the obedient. And those Israelites which fled
from the sight of Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. 25. might as reasonably challenge the
reward proposed to the victor, as men can pretend to enter into life without
keeping the Commandments: this then is the one Criterion, by which a man may
judge of his hopes; if they be but proportionable to his obedience, they are
then regular, and such as will not make him ashamed, but prove incentives and
engagements to every good work. Let him obey as much as he can, and then he
need not deny himself the comfort of hoping as much as he can too. But if his
hopes exceed this measure, and square themselves only by his wishes; if he look
for Heaven, not because he is qualified for it, but because he wants or covets
it; this is rather to dream than hope, and such whimsies will as soon invest
the beggar in wealth, the defamed in honor, the sick in health, or any man in
any thing he has but a mind to, as compass Heaven for the bold Fiduciary.

IT is indeed like those Lunacies wherein men's fancies adopt them Heirs to
those Kingdoms, they know nothing more of, than the names: and sure the Analogy
holds as well in the cure as the disease; let these Patients awhile be kept
dark, taken from the dazzling contemplations of their imaginary privileges, to
the sad reflection on their sins: and as God expostulates with Israel, Ezekiel.
33. 26. Ye stand upon the sword, ye work abomination, and ye defile every man
his neighbors wife, and shall ye possess the land? So let them recite to
themselves the Catalogues of their impieties, and then ask their own hearts,
whether these be the qualifications of those that shall rest in Gods holy hill?
Whether these marks of the Beast can ever rank them among the followers of the
Lamb? And let these Considerations be pressed home, reiterated so often, till by
repeated strokes they have made good the other part of the method, made their
Souls bleed, and by that Spiritual Phlebotomy, tempered their swelling veins,
allayed the over-sanguiness of their constitution: and then there remains but
one thing more to complete the course, and that is bringing them into the
Workhouse, setting them really to work out their salvation with fear and
trembling, which they had so near played away by confidence and presumption:
And when they have done thus, they have verified their hopes, and then may
safely reassume them: They are returned again with advantage to their first
point, and are that in soberness and reality, which they then were only in
fiction and imagination.

AND now would God men would once be content to be thus disabus'd, that they
would not be so in love with deceit, as in the Prophets phrase, Ier. 8. 5. to
hold it fast: that they would not choose Chymaera's and fantastic Images
before real and substantial Felicities: and prefer that hope which will be sure
to shipwreck them, before that which will be an Anchor of the Soul, sure and
steadfast, Heb. 6. 19. and if this so reasonable a proposal may be embraced; if
the World should, as the Spaniard said, but rise wise one morning, what a deal
of dead merchandise would Satan have upon his hands: Many of those they call
the comfortable Doctrines would want vent, which are now the staple commodity
of his Kingdom. What those are, it is no part of my design to examine, it will
be every man's particular concern to do it for himself; which he may do by this
one test; whether they more animate men to hope well, than to live well?
Whether they bring Alexanders sword to cut asunder the Gordian knot, to sever
between the promise and the condition? Or the sword of the Spirit to subdue all
to the obedience of Christ? If the former, we may expect the fruits of such
will be all that licentiousness which St. Paul describes, as the works of the
flesh, Gal. 5. 19. it being not to be imagined, that the precepts of the
Gospel, which they divide from the promises only, that they might fall off,
shall then be voluntarily taken up in mere good nature and heroic Generosity;
that those who are so industrious to avoid the necessity of Christian practice,
will make it their free-will-offering. If there should happen to be some few of
so ingenuous a gratitude; yet it is certain, that is not our common mould; few
men will be better than they think their interest bids them be, and therefore
such principles are dangerous Seminaries of Libertinism: and it is men's very
important concernment not to admit them. Let not then their cheerful aspect
recommend them to our embraces; men may be killed with too much Cordial; that
which seems to refresh the Spirits may inflame the Blood, and though cold
poisons have gotten the fame of being the most malignant, yet there are hot
that are as infallibly mortiferous. Let it be our care in opposition to both,
to keep our selves in that moderate, equal temper, which belongs to healthy
Souls: and since that is the vitallest heat which is gotten by exercise, set to
our business, employ our selves diligently in all those duties the Gospel
exacts, and then we shall not want such an hope as may warm our hearts, keep us
in a cheerful expectation, till we come to the glorious fruition of that
Eternal Salvation which God has promised to all them, and only them that obey
him. And till we do thus, till we consider as well what we are to do, as what
we are to receive: there will be no hope of restoring Christianity to its
native vigor; we shall make it evaporate all its strength in unsignificant
hopes, convert it into Air, to bear up our Bubbles, instead of that firm
ground, whereon we should build virtue here, and glory hereafter.

CHAP. V. A survey of the Mischiefs arising from Carnal Consideration.
AFTER the disadvantages of partial Consideration, may fairly be subjoined the
ills of that advertency, which is impregnated by sensuality and sloth, and
makes pretense unto right reason, but tends indeed as much as any thing to the
frustrating the design, and enfeebling the force of our Religion: such close
reserves of deceit and malice have men to their own Souls, that when they quit
one strong hold of Satan's, it is only to retreat to another. When they are not
so brisk and Aerial, as lightly to skip over those precepts, that lie in their
way: they are so gross and unwary as to fall at them; if they may not pass for
Straws and Chafe, such as every blast of vain confidence may blow away, they
shall then be improved into Heaps and Mountains, become stones of stumbling and
rocks of offense; and when they are called upon to Consider them, they do it in
so perverse a manner, as if they meant to revenge themselves on that unwelcome
importunity: their consideration is worse than neglect. They look into them
insiduously, not as Disciples, but as Spies, not to weigh the obligeingness,
but to quarrel the unreasonableness or difficulty of the injunctions, not to
direct their practice, but excuse their prevarications.

FROM this unsincere kind of inspection it is, that the Precepts have got so
formidable appearance with many, that they have fallen under such heavy
prejudices, as to resolve them intolerable yokes, insuperable tasks: that this
Canaan is a land that eats up its inhabitants, wherein there is so little of
enjoyment that it scarce affords a being. Men count a life under such
restraints, so joyless and uneasy, that it differs from death only, by being
more passive. They think Zeal like a Hectic Fever, in a slow but certainly
fatal Fire exhausts and consumes the Spirits. Mortification and self-denial
macerate and decay the body; and liberality dissipates and wastes the estate:
and with these Apparitions which themselves have conjured up; men run frighted
from duty, resolve the burden is unsupportable, or at least grievous to be
born, and therefore, as our Savior says of the Pharisees, will not touch it,
no not so much as with one of their fingers, Mat. 23. 4. never make any attempt
to try what indeed they are; but take their measures from their own, or perhaps
other men's prejudicate opinions, and thence take out an Authentic Record and
Patent for sloth, fancy the journey too long for them, and therefore sit still;
first call Christ's commandments grievous, and then improve that slander into a
manumission; absolve themselves from obeying them. And unless they may have the
Gate to life cut wider, made capacious enough to receive them with all their
lusts about them, will never essay to enter it.

BUT if the Prince of darkness have enacted it a Law, that difficulty shall
pass for excuse, yet if real uneasiness may be admitted to be as deterring as
imaginary ones, his own decree will retort the most ruinously on himself, and
men may plead it as their discharge, from all those base drudgeries, those
tyrannous impositions wherewith he loads them. The Drunkard may experimentally
tell him, the pain of an aching head, of an overcharged stomach, the ruin of a
wasted Estate, and claim a dispensation from pursuing that uneasy and costly
sin. The Wanton may bring his macerated body like the Levites Concubine Iud,
and urge it as an evidence how cruel a Master he serves; and from thence
emancipate and free himself: and indeed every sin carries in it so much of
visible toil, or secret smart, as would by force of this rule supplant and
undermine its self; and sure Satan would never have armed men with so dangerous
a weapon, had he not discerned them so in love with slavery, as secures him it
should never be used against him; for if it should, nothing could give him a
more mortal wound, more irrecoverably shake his Kingdom. Nor would only that
infernal Region feel the force of that destructive principle; it would make as
strange confusions in secular Regiments.

FOR if such pleas as these may be admitted, they will easily cancel all
Humane, as well as Divine Laws, and every malefactor will transfer his guilt on
the severity of the Legislator: the Thief may say it is too great a difficulty
for him to resist the temptation of an apt opportunity; a rich prize that his
fingers are too slippery even for himself, and he cannot restrain them, and
then quarrel the strictness of the Law, which has raised so high a fence about
men's properties, that he who climbs it must endanger his neck. The Rebel may
complain that the bands of Allegiance are too strait, the yoke sits too close,
galls and frets his tender flesh, exclaim loudly at the Tyranny of those that
laid it on, and in that outcry drown the noise of his own Treason. And so
every other transgressor may accuse the rule, as accessory to his swervings,
till at last the Laws be made the only Criminals.

I leave every man to judge both of the equity and consequencies of such
discoursings in Civil matters, and shall only desire he will apply them to
Spiritual also, where certainly they are neither more just, nor less ruinous;
and whilst such absurd pretenses as these pass current, no wonder if
Christianity languish and grow impotent, want strength to impress its self on
the lives of its professors. The most infallible receipt can work no cure on
him, who upon the suspicion of its bitterness, refuses to taste it. The most
excellent Laws must look their regulating power, where the execution of them is
obstructed; and we may as reasonably look for the efficacy of Christianity
among those who never heard the name, as among those, who owning the name, do
yet disclaim its precepts; and so all those interpretatively do, who by
accusing them of too great rigor, avert both themselves and others from their
Obedience.

THAT the Charge is scandalously unjust will appear to any, who shall allow
themselves the just means of information; but alas the way of Process men take
in this affair is so inequitable, as certainly presages the partiality of the
sentence, what Person ever was there so innocent, so excellent, who if
arraigned at the Tribunal of his mortal enemy could be acquitted, Christ
himself shall be pronounced a Blasphemer, when a Caiphas is to examine him: and
no wonder if his precepts find proportionable dealing, if they be decried as
impossible, tyrannical, perhaps ridiculous too, where the scanning of them is
referred to those, whose interest it is to defame them. Men enthrone their
lusts, set them up in the judgment seat, and none can expect they shall pass
such a sentence, as shall include their own condemnation: if they own the
Commandment to be holy, just and good, they must tacitly accuse themselves to
be impure, unjust and wicked, and as such to be consigned to wrath and judgment.

HERE then we have the true account how Christ's commands, which are in
themselves so far from grievous, have gotten so unkind a reputation among us;
this is so direct a course for it, that we may cease our wonder, though not our
grief to see it, for we behold them stand to the award of those with whom they
have a professed enmity: the Goal gives sentence on the Bench; the Bar arraigns
the Judgment Seat. Certainly when that Law which is Spiritual is submitted to
the arbitriment of gross carnality, the Law of liberty is taxed and rated by
those worst bondmen who are sold under sin; it is impossible to find any fairer
treatment. That which comes on purpose to dethrone sin, dispossess it of the
Empire it has usurpt, will certainly be entertained with the same exclamation
the Devils used to Christ, Why art thou come to torment us? But as if this
general Antipathy were not enough to ascertain the rejection of Christ's
command; as if the National feud, as I may call it, between Heaven and Hell
were not thought irreconcilable enough, men offer yet harder measure, call in
the aid of personal quarrels, and when the precepts come to be considered,
refer each of them single to that particular Vice to which it has the directest
contrariety.

THUS when Christ's command of meekness and forgiveness, of loving enemies, and
turning the cheek, bearing the Cross, or self-denial calls for audience; they
consult (as Rehoboam did with his young hot-spurs) with their anger and malice,
their rankor and revenge, and they soon give their Verdict; that to be meek is
to be servile, a temper fit only for the abject. That to forgive enemies is a
principle of cowardice that would Emasculate the world; to love them a piece of
Spaniel-like fawning; but to turn the Cheek; not only to hazard, but invite new
injuries by owning them as benefits, paying blessing for curses, kindness and
good-turns for hatred, is such a ridiculous patience, as must expose to the
insolence of many, and the scorn and derision of all men. And then the
resolution is ready they will be no such fools for Christ's sake. So when the
precept of humility and lowliness comes to be considered, their Pride is
deputed to hear its plea, and then though it bring the authority of Christ's
example as well as his command, it will be judged invalid: Christ indeed took
upon him the form of a Servant, and to that humility was a proportionable
Adjunct; but what is that to them whose aspiring humor abhors subjection, it is
not calculated for their Meridian, they are of another manner of Spirit, and
would not have it embased by the admission of so mean a quantity: and though
Christ have put poverty of Spirit among his Beatitudes, they resolve he shall
not ensnare them with that artifice, they will not take his measures of
felicity; or resign that pleasure they have in valuing themselves, for any
thing he proposes in exchange. In like manner the precepts of temperance,
sobriety and chastity, are not permitted to the judgment of sober reason, nay,
nor of mere natural desire; but to appetites vitiated and inflamed, by
radicated habits; and then the Glutton thinks to eat moderately, is to be
starved; and will as soon put a knife, Prove. 23. to his throat, in the vulgar
sense of cutting it, as in Solomon's notion of restraining his excess. Thus the
Drunkard with his false thirsts looks on sobriety as a kind of Hell, where he
shall want a drop to cool his tongue, and thinks the abandoning his debaucht
jollities is an implicit adieu to all the comforts of life. The Unclean person
when his blood is high scoffs at Chastity as a religious kind of impotence, and
only so far considers the precept of pulling out the Eye, as to infer that it
were as easy literally to part with it, as to restrain its lustful range: not
look at all, as not look to lust. And proportionably it fares with Charity and
bounty, which though our Savior recommend, Mammon arraigns of robbery, and
stigmatizes as a Thief that picks the Purse, and riffles Coffers. But amidst
all these the taking up the Cross, suffering for righteousness sake, and the
doctrine of self-denial, fall under the heaviest prejudice. These are opposed
not by some one single vice, but the confederate arms of all; even those whose
interests are flatly opposite do here unite: Herod and Pilate, Saduces and
Pharisees accord against Christ, and all are freely suffered, nay invited to
exhibit their complaints against these Mandates. Covetousness cries out that
this is the most ruinous prodigality, casts away an estate in a lump, and lays
all open to forfeiture and confiscation: and Prodigality takes it as ill to be
forestalled, and have nothing left for it to dissipate. Profaneness avows a
contempt of it as a folly, and most open madness to part with real pleasure for
an empty name, or profit for that Bankrupt thing called Conscience: and
Hypocrisy has a more secret hatred of it, as its detector; that which will
bring it to a Test which it cannot pass. Malice puts in a Caveat, that this is
to gratify enemies, and lose the satisfactions of revenge: and Self-Love puts
in another, that it is to destroy ones self. In short, every limb of the body
of sin discharges a blow at this innocent and Divine Sanction; as if they meant
it should exemplify its own doctrine by assuming that passive temper it
recommends.

BUT alas, who can expect any more upright verdicts from such pact, such
corrupt Juries, and why may not Christ be permitted to claim the common benefit
of our Laws, to make his challenge and exceptions against this so incompetent
impanel. It Is the counsel of the Wise man, not to advise in common affairs with
those whose tempers may be supposed to biass them, consult not, says he, with
a coward in matters of war, nor with a sluggard of much business, Eccl. 37. 11.
and sure if they be ill Counselors, they must be worse Judges: but why then do
we set pride to judge of humility, lust of purity, covetousness of liberality:
and make our vices the arbitrators of those Laws which should restrain them?
This is such a gross injustice as common humanity abhors; we deal by other
measures with men, the most notorious and flagitious criminals: and reserve
this way of process for those things only wherein our God may be concerned.
It Is a severe exprobration of a profane people, Malach. 1. 8. Where God
accuses them for treating him with less reverence than they would do a mortal
Prince. Offer it now to thy Prince: but alas we shall force him to descend far
lower in his expostulation, so far we are from paying him the duty and regard
belonging to a Prince, that we yield him not the rights of common men: force
him to stand to those measures which we think too unequitable to press upon a
murderer, a thief, or rebel at the Bar.

BUT this waving of common rules is a plain confession that we need more
indulgence, than those will allow: when men's lusts thus usurp the Tribunal and
judge in their own cause, it is a palpable discovery they dare not remit
themselves to any more equal determination. And indeed in this point of their
interest, they pass a right judgment: for it is certain were the case referred
to any competent Judge, indeed to any but themselves they would inevitably be
cast; and sure it is high time that some should assist oppressed virtue in its
appeal; find it out some Court of equity where its plea may be heard: and we
need not travel far for that purpose, every man may do it in his own breast,
where in his little Commonwealth he shall find a Court of Gods erecting: let
him but draw the Cause thither, discuss the matter in his own conscience; and
he will soon find the former unrighteous sentences reversed: let him but
seriously reflect on his violations of those sacred Precepts of Christ; and
observe what a sting and secret remorse every such breach leaves within him:
and that will be a competent attestation of the equity and obligingness of
those Mandates: for from whence else can the regret arise? those things that
are either impossible in their nature, or unconcerning to us cannot beget it.
No man accuses himself for not flying in the air, or walking upon the water:
nor owns himself guilty in the non-observance of any Laws, but such as have
power to oblige him: and therefore these close pangs and checks of Conscience
are an irrefragable evidence, that men do inwardly assent to the justice and
authority of those divine rules; which their actions, yea often their words
too, do most oppugn.

BUT over and above the throws and afterpains of conscience, when sin is
brought forth, the self-accusation of the Criminal, when none beside controuls,
nay many flatter and commend: I say beyond this secondary and reflext Apology,
for Christ's Law, owed to the foregoing prevarication of it; there is an early
and immediate verdict past in its behalf, in the esteem and liking which those
documents command, where ere they pass: creating an assent and veneration not
only when obeyed, but from professed despisers; who cannot choose to think well of
that virtue they desert, and the necessity of their affairs compel them to
speak ill of. An event visible in the condemnation of our Savior, where the
Judge who gave Sentence against him, at the same moment washed his hands, and
openly professed he found no fault in him.

AND indeed this very reflection on the Author of these precepts, if well
considered would supersede all other arguments. The Mandates of the Gospel on
this one score, that they are Christ's, are certainly both pure in themselves,
and possible to us: and so most worthy not only of all Obedience, but all Love
too. He who is our Lord upon both the titles of Creation and Redemption, may
certainly with all justice impose what laws he pleases on us. Yet he, who laid
down his life for the redemption of the transgressions which were under the
first Testament, cannot be imagined so inconsiderate of our frailty which
himself had smarted for, as to introduce another of equal rigor, or be so
prodigal of his blood, as to pour it out for those who by a new set of
impossible commands should infallibly reforfeit themselves again: and if this
cannot be supposed, the contrary may be concluded, that he has so far
condescended to our imbecility, as not to prescribe us any thing which he
either finds or makes us not able to perform. It Is true indeed, his Laws are
above the reach of our corrupt and debased nature; and they were unfit to be
his, were they not so: but when he by his grace offers to elevate and refine
this nature, bring it up to the pitch and purity of those Laws, this is a far
greater mercy than if he had descended to our corruption; so he might have
contaminated himself, given laws unworthy of him: but alas what advantage
would it be to us, to have the Blasphemy mentioned, Psalm. 50. so verified to
have our God in this sense, such a one as our selves? but by this other Method
he purifies, and exalts us: puts us in a capacity of being like unto him, in
which is summed up at once, all both virtue and felicity.

AND on this glorious end every particular command of his, has a direct aspect,
every one of them tending to re-impress on us some part of that divine image
which was razed out by the first sin: and this one would think enough to
recommend them to our highest value. Certainly, if Conscience may be Judge, it
will be so: there being in this case no middle between devout reverence, and
horrid blasphemy; for he that despises such an assimulation, must necessarily
also despise him who is so resembled: he who thinks meekness, purity, humility,
etc. unamiable qualities, can have little esteem for him, in whom they are so
transcendently eminent, but will take the Prophet at his word, and say, there
is no form nor comeliness in him, Es. 53. But this sure can never be the
Verdict of Conscience; he that can thus pronounce, must be supposed to have
suppressed and silenced that. It being one of the most indelible notions there,
that all that is in God, is sublimely excellent. But because it is indeed too
possible that conscience may be put under such an undue restraint, suffer the
violence of a Prisoner, when it should sustain the place of a Judge: because
many men dare not permit their consciences to speak, lest they should say more
than they are willing to hear. And lastly, since these persons make their
appeal to reason, pretend the aids, and boast in the advantages of that, it may
not be amiss to bring the Cause unto that Bar: whose Empire and Authority none
must disclaim that own the Style, and least of all those Scepticks in Religion
with whom we have to do: who will allow of no conviction but from it.

AND God, who as the Apostle says, leaves not himself without witness, has so
tempered and disposed his Precepts as to qualify them to pass even this Test
also, they being not the contradictions but improvements of natural Reason: and
so most apt to recommend themselves to all that is Man, not Brute about us.
Indeed they have the very same aim and design with that. It has ever been the
grand business of sober reason first to discover, and then to attain that one
supreme good, which would give rest and felicity to the soul: in this
inquisition have the Philosophers and greatest Masters of Reason, laid out
their most serious studies and deepest contemplations; and in their
indefatigable pursuits seem jointly to sigh out David's question, Who will show
us any good? and now the Gospel comes a solution of this so important a Query,
brings these glad tidings of joy to all people, and that not only in its
credenda, by informing us what that Good is: but in its agenda too, by tracing
us out the Way to it: beating us a path which will certainly lead us to that
summum bonum which our very Nature implicitly gasps after; and sure Reason can
never jar with this, which comes thus as a happy Auxiliary to succor its
impotence: as an infallible Guide to conduct its steps: and as a glorious Light
to give it a clear view, of what it before blindly groped after. It Is a certain
Indication of Madness, to tear and mischief those things that would be useful
to us, to curse and revile a friend, or fly in the face of those whose charity
brings them to our aid; and therefore it is most evident that Reason must first
cease to be reason, and commence Phrenzy, before it is possible it can set its
self in defiance of those Laws of Christ, which are thus accommodated to its
greatest Interests.

AND as the accord is thus observable in the ultimate, so is it in the
intermediate design also. Reason had by its twilight discerned that, that
Sovereign Bliss it aimed at, would never be hit by an unsteady hand; by him who
was perpetually tossed and agitated by his turbulent inordinate appetites.
Therefore young men, yet in the heat and ferment of their blood were solemnly
proscribed and banished from the Schools and Lectures of Philosophy; therefore
lustrations and Catharticks of the mind were sought for, and all endeavor used
to calm and regulate the fury, if not extirpate (which some contended for) the
very being of the Passions: that so a preparation might be made first for the
knowledge and then the attainment of felicity: Now the Gospel Precepts have
visibly the same end and purpose: every one of them expressly singling out some
irregular affection to combat and subdue: so that right Reason and They are
evidently of a Sect and Party, insomuch that several of the ancientest Fathers
of the Church attributed the excellent documents of Heathen Philosophers to the
Divine (...), the reason and essential Word of God which after was incarnate
upon earth; and brought auxiliary strengths of Grace, to aid the weaknesses of
Nature. The blessed Jesus whose bare word Checked the Sea in its highest fury,
and by that Miracle attested his Divinity; as much exerts himself in silencing
the louder Tempests, and calming the intestine storms within our breasts. And
certainly Reason will not quarrel to have been thus relieved, it being the
property only of proud Folly to choose rather to lose a victory than owe it to
the aid of an Allie.

FROM this general view, it were easy to descend to observe the exact
concurrence of particulars. God loves a reasonable service, and has so tempered
his commands, that every Act of obedience we perform may be so qualified: and
gain unto its votaries the Elogium promised in the Law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. 9.
Surely this people is a wise and understanding People. And first that the
command of Meekness is a most rational Precept can never be doubted by any who
remember but the common definition of Anger, that it is Furor brevis, and sure
it is very reasonable not to be mad, and he that has observed the unmanly
transportations of that wild passion, how that the first violence it offers is
to the man within him, will certainly think it the interest, not only of his
Religion, but common prudence, and right Reason to suppress it. And the like is
to be said of the more solemn Frenzy of deep malice and deliberate Revenge,
where the fury wants the allay of being transient and short lived, is embodied
into Complexion and temper, and grows inveterate into Nature. Anger indeed is a
fire, and he that touches it though but lightly, will find it scorch him: but
the Malicious lays himself as it were to roast at it; prolongs and spins out
his own Torment as if he meant to anticipate his Punishment in his very crime,
and commence his Hell here, in unquenchable fire. Truly no sin does more
represent that state of horror to which it tends; it gives a man not only a
certain Title, but an ample Earnest, pays him part in hand of those dismal
wages. This was so well understood even by the Heathens that we see the Poets
knew not how more Emphatically to describe the future torment of an envious and
malicious person, than by the representation of his sin. Prometheus Vultur
begins her quarry in this life; every malignant Thought, every spightful Wish
preys upon his Heart that harbors it: every revengeful project puts him in the
pangs of labor till it be brought forth; and when it is, it commonly rebounds
so mischievously upon the Parent, that the birth seems like that of Agrippina
when she bare Nero that murdered her. And surely not only reason, but common
sense, will say this is a state to be detested, and consequently must give its
suffrage to those Laws of Meekness and Charity which are the only expedients to
prevent it. Peace is deservedly reckoned among the highest blessings of
communities, and sure it has a proportionable value, in every single member of
those greater bodies, it being that which is indispensably requisite to the
enjoying of any other good. A War we know interrupts at once all the profits
and pleasures of a Nation: and this hostile Temper in a man's mind does the very
same, and like Choler in the stomach, takes off all gust of the most delightful
things, and so becomes a Hell in the poena damni, as well as that of Sense: and
then how absurd an impatience is it, for men to think every the slightest
injury from another insupportable, and yet heap such heavy pressures upon
themselves, like froward Children roar out for the least touch from another
hand, yet knock and batter themselves without complaint: as if their only
contention were, that they may be the sole Authors of their own Calamity. And
that which adds yet more, if it be possible, to add to so vast a folly, is,
that Revenge never repairs any Injury: if I have been reproacht or defamed,
it is not the wounding of my enemies body that will heal my fame, I may by that
means help to spread the Libel by inviting many to enquire the cause of our
quarrel: but that is no Medium to prove him a slanderer, the world being too
well acquainted with the nature of revenge to imagine it an argument of his
innocence that acts it: so far it is from being such, that it gives a most
violent presumption of guilt, according to that notable Observation of the
Historian, Convitia spreta exolescunt, si irascare agnita videntur. In like
manner suppose me hurt in my body, Retaliation brings no balm to my sores: my
pains abate not by his having the like or greater; nor would my Wounds fester
the less though his should Gangrene. So if I am endammag'd in my goods, I may
contrive to repay him that ill turn, and yet not recover my own loss; and
generally the spightful spoils that are made, are of that nature. It Is true,
the Law may in some cases repair the injured person: but then that is owing to
the Justice of the Law, not to the malice of the Plaintiff: for he that sues
upon the naked intuition of recovering his Right, without any aspect of Revenge
on the invader, has as fully the benefit of the Law (and indeed none can
innocently have it otherwise) and then to what serves the vindicative humor,
what increment or advantage can the superaddition of his revenge bring him in?
It Is sure in all these instances it often does the quite contrary: plunges him
in farther troubles and dangers, and when all this is considered, we may
certainly pronounce Christ's precept of Meekness, partakes as well of the
Serpent as the Dove, is as well prudent as innocent: nor is this Conclusion at
all shaken, by that Objection which men make from the danger of inviting more
injuries and affronts by this tameness: for first suppose there were truth in
it; that hazard could not balance the many certain mischiefs which have been
evinced inseparably to follow the contrary temper: and it were certainly less
penal to endure multitudes of light and transient Abuses, than those far more
uneasy ways of Redress, which men's revenges suggest to them: and then 'twill
be perfectly reasonable, of these two evils to choose the less. As for the
greater and more important violations, there are legal ways which may prove
redress in some cases, or prevention in others: He that is slandered or
impoverished, may take a course to clear his Innocence, or recover his Goods:
he that is hurt or maimed, though he is incapable of reparations, yet the Law
provides for his future security, by awarding such Penalties, as may discourage
the Offender from repeating the violence: and to these aids, a man may resort
with these Proviso's, first, that he abstract from all design of Revenge; and
secondly, that the matter be of Weight; and certainly he that by these legal
means cannot be secured, can be much less so by any private attempt of his own:
For he that despises the coercive power of Laws, will much more contemn the
enmity of a single person. The only difficulty in this case is, when a state is
in such a confusion that there is no lawful Judicature to appeal to, but that
implies so many sadder miseries, than the want of such a redress amounts to,
that every man may patiently enough cast this into the heap of greater evils;
and not consider that one pressure, when so much weightier calamity exacts his
grief: But sure the Suspension of Law in this particular does no more qualify
a private person to be his own Revenger, than it invests him in any other part
of Authority, and he may with as good right place himself on the Bench, and
become a Judge in other men's causes, as thus become both Judge and Executioner
in his own.

BUT in the last place, the ground of this objection seems weak and sandy; for
that meekness is not the way to expose a man, generally speaking, to more
suffering: it is possible indeed through the barbarity of some few insulting
cowards, who love to vapor good cheap, that they may trample on those who give
least resistance; but this is not the common bent of humane Nature, (which
ought to be the measure in this case) we find men usually exasperated by
Opposition, who are calmed and appeased by Gentleness. Anger is not of the
nature of that monstrous Fire the Historian tells us of, which nothing but
blows could extinguish. It is the Observation of the wisest of Men, that a soft
answer turns away wrath, and men's Passions are like Bullets which batter the
walls which stand inflexible, but fall harmlesly into Wool or Feathers; and I
doubt not common experience will attest it, that none do generally fall under
fewer of these storms than they, who are thus prepared to bear them. Let a meek
and an angry person cast up their Accounts together, and compare the number of
affronts and contumelies they have met with, and I believe the Odds will be as
great, as between Saul's thousands and David's ten thousands. It Is certain that
the return made to the first injury provokes a new one; men being so partial to
themselves, that he who receives a harm by way of Retaliation, never reflects
on his own first guilt, but looks on it as a naked Injury, and so pursues his
Revenge, which has again the same effect on the other, and so this wildfire
runs round, till it have set all in a flame; made the saddest vastations, not
only in men's Minds, but their outward Concernments too, in the many fatal
outrages, which these eager contentions occasion, all which would be avoided by
a meek disregard of the first provocation: So that although some injuries may
fall upon the Passive man, yet infallibly there would be no broils and
quarrels, which are alone the great accumulators and multipliers of injuries;
which alone demonstrates how unjustly Meekness is charged with so much as an
accidental production of them; and vindicates that precept of Christ which has
fallen under so much, not only Cavil but Scorn; it appearing that to abstain from
revenge, and refer the hazards of that to Gods providence (which is the
importance of his command to turn the Cheek) is the greatest even moral
Security against Violence, and so approves our Lawgiver (in this so decried
particular) to be as well the wonderful Counselor, as the Prince of Peace.

IN the next place, if we weigh the precept of humility and lowliness in the
balance of sober discourse, we shall certainly find it hold a just weight.
Indeed Pride is nothing but Deceit, a mere cheat and delusion, and so every man
can discern it in another, we there are able to trace the windings of this
Serpent, and say this man thinks himself more wise, this more learned, a third
more holy than he is: yet alas in our own breasts we discern not the Abuse,
suffer him to persuade us what he but promised to our first Parents, that we
are as Gods, something so super-excellent, that all must reverence and adore:
And herein we take him at his word, never suspect these glorious Attributions
may be no more than Complement or Flattery; or what is no less obvious,
Derision and Scorn. To a considering man 'twould be a shrewd presumption
against whatever Pride suggests, that it is attended always by self-love, which
is, as it were, the common setter to all those cheats which circumvent and fool
us: But there want not also more convincing proofs of its deceit and
unsincerity. When e're we overween and believe well of our selves, it is in
contemplation of some imaginary or else real good; somewhat a Man has not, or
somewhat that he has: If we do it upon the former account, that is undeniably a
gross Delusion; a kind of deceptio visus, a filling the Eye with fantastic
Aerial Images, which have no solid Being: And God knows, such Phasmes, such
Apparitions are most of those excellencies which men applaud in themselves;
things conjured up by the Magic of a strong imagination, and are only seen
within that Circle in which the Enchanter stands: And though Satan be the grand
Master of this black Art, yet his Pupils are now grown so dextrous, that he
seldom needs to be called in; our own partialities and fondnesses to our
selves, are abundantly sufficient for the purpose. But if in the second place
we suppose the things to be really existent in us, yet Pride runs us upon an
other error no less dangerous than the former, for it betrays us to mistake the
true Owner of them, emboldens us to set our own mark upon those rich Wares, in
whose acquest we have not been so much as Factors; God is the one great Author
and proprietor of all that is or can be valuable in us; to his Providence or
his Grace we owe all the accomplishment of our outward or inward man, and
though he allows us the use and benefit of them, yet the Glory is a special
Royalty, which (as the Gold or Silver Mines of a Nation) is reserved to his
Crown, an incommunicable piece of his Regality. And how woefully does our Pride
befool us, when it brings us in such false Inventories of our goods, makes us
dream our selves rich by another wealth; like Children that call every thing
theirs which looks splendidly, or the mad Athenian celebrated by Horace for his
happy frenzy, that resolved all the Ships and Wares his own that came into
the Cities harbor: But how more sadly does it betray us, when it thus puts us
upon the invasion of his propriety, who is not as the impotent Monarchs of the
earth, unable to assert his own Rights, but can certainly Vindicate himself to
our Confusion, against whom no rebellion can be any longer prosperous than he
willingly permits it, and who has solemnly avowed he will not give his glory to
another: And when our Pride makes us thus both ridiculous and miserable, when
it seduces us not only into the folly of Children and extravagancies of
Lunaticks, but at once into the guilt of bold, and punishment of improsperous
Rebels: Certainly Reason can never become its Advocate, or put in any demur to
that Sentence which excludes so treacherous a guest out of men's hearts; which
is the sole aim of those laws of humility which Christ has given us.

NOR will the Precepts of Temperance and Purity find any worse doom at this
Bar, the contrary Vices being such indignities and contumelies unto humane
nature, as can never find any countenance from this Supreme part of it: It Is
the prerogative of our Reason, that it discriminates us from, and elevates us
above beasts: Nor can it ever be brought to resign this so glorious a
privilege, assent to the admission of those brutish appetites which would
overrun the Soul, level its superior with its inferior faculties; confound the
distinction of Rational and Sensitive, and in a word, render the Beast so
ravenous as to eat up the Man. Yet thus it is in those sordid Sins of
Intemperance and Uncleanness, unless perhaps they are so much worse than
Beastial that I wrong the generality of the Brutes in the comparison, it being
only some few of them, the very Beasts of the Beasts that are guilty of any
such Excesses, for generally their Appetites do not transgress the regular ends
of Nature, they know no such disease as Surfeiting, but eat to satisfy Hunger,
and couple at such seasons as best tend to preserve their kind; and then it is
to be considered how base, how degenerous a descent it is for us to stoop, not
only below our own nature, but theirs; what a solitude these vices reduce us
to, that not so much as the nobler sort of Beasts will bear us company, we must
wander upon the mountains to court a Goat, we must rake the mire to find a
Swine, before we can furnish our selves with any Associates: And sure all this
so open an Hostility against-Reason, that it can by no means be her interest to
abet it. Ask her whether she would be pressed to death with loads of meat,
whether she would be drowned in floods of drink, whether she would be
suffocated with the noisome vapors of putrefaction and rottenness, and the
answer she gives to these tells you her sense of Gluttony, Drunkenness and
Uncleanness: Alas she suffers from them the most barbarous outrages, is invaded
not only in her Authority, but her very Being, and therefore even upon the so
celebrated principle of selfpreservation, must muster all her forces to
vindicate the injury and defend her self. And then certainly Christ's Commands
of Sobriety and Purity must needs be entertained with all Alacrity and
Gladness, as an accession of strength to her party, an aid to assist her in
that just and necessary War.

AND as Reason thus pronounces against the sins of the Flesh, so in the next
place does it certainly against those of the World. Mammon himself will not be
able to bribe this Judge, but when Christ's Precept of Charity and liberality
comes before this Tribunal, it will infallibly be not only acquitted but
magnified and applauded, be called from the Bar to the Bench, Commissioned like
the Jews, Hest. 9. To bear rule over them that hated them, to dissipate at once
the wealth and the covetousness of the Worldling; have the Keys put into its
hand, that it may have free access to his Coffers; this certainly must be the
event of this trial, for it is confessedly the part of Reason to dispose every
thing to those uses which are most proper and advantageous, such as may bring
in most real benefit to the owner. Now what other employment of wealth is there
(after competent accommodations are provided) which can contribute to a man's
Felicity? If it be laid out like the Rich man's in the Gospel in delicious Fare,
or Purple and fine Linen; certainly it makes no least approach toward it.
First, for excessive Fare, if a man be not excessive too in the eating, what
does he enjoy of it? Meat has no natural propriety to the Eye, and can make no
impressions of pleasure there; but if he be voracious and intemperate, it is
then so far from making him happy, that it dejects him into the forlorn
condition, even now mentioned, sets him at odds with his reason, his very
manhood, nay, I may add with his very sense too; the displacencies that he
receives by the consequencies of his excess, far outweighing all that is
grateful in it. This is well described by the Wise man, Ecclus. 31. 19.

AS for the gayety of Apparel that can never in sober judging be thought any
advantage, it is that which only Youth and Folly puts a value upon, and as we
out-grow the one, so we do the other: All that is convenient in Clothes is as
well, nay, better provided for without it: A rich suit is only heavier, not
warmer than a plain; and it is a kind of prodigy to see how heavily vanity,
which is in its self so light, sits upon some men; who are content even to make
themselves Porters, so their Tailors may lay on the burden: And thus in many
other instances the fineness of Clothes destroys the ease, so that it often
helps men to pain, but can never rid them of any; the body may be languishing
and infirm under the most splendid cover: Herod's royal apparel secures him not
from being eaten with Worms; and Lazarus his Ulcers would have been never the
less painful, though they had been wrapped in Dives his fine Linen.

OR if the Wealth be laid out on any other part of that the world calls
greatness, as an Honorable retinue, Troops of attendants, and the like; the
return will be no less empty: Multitudes of unprofitable Servants being a geat
burden, but no degree of advantage; alas does my Meat relish ever the better,
because my Table is surrounded with Waiters; or when I go out, does my train of
followers make the Air the more refreshing to me, does not rather the Dust they
raise make it less, annoy and stifle me? As for matter of business, the number
of Servants tends rather to hinder than advance it; daily experience attesting,
that in crowds of domestics every one of them thinks his idleness will be hid:
The care of doing and the guilt of omitting is transferred from one to another,
and none has any farther thought, than how he may quit himself either of the
burden or the blame; so that upon the final account all that accrues to a
Master by the greatness of his family is the increase of his care in the
regiment of it: A great deal of vigilance and circumspection being required, to
keep it in any tolerable order, and if it be not so kept, his House becomes a
wilderness, and himself a prey to the Beasts he feeds: The licentiousness of
the Servant redounding more ways than one to the damage of the Master.

IF we should now proceed more minutely to every other single expense which
vanity and pride suggests, we should certainly find the like success of our
inquest; nothing of real felicity, but on the contrary the vanity so interwoven
and incorporate with vexation of Spirit, that it is impossible to sever them: So
that thus to employ ones riches is rather to suffer than enjoy them; but if we
suppose a man on the other side such a Reverer of his wealth, that he dares not
employ it at all, unless it be at the bank, for the bringing in of more, that
keeps it as men do beasts reserved for breed, manumit them from all work but
that of propagation. Such a person is surely of all others, the farthest from
receiving any advantage by it: he converts it from a Servant into a Tyrant, and
sad experience shows us the calamity of such a transmutation. It has been
always hold the severest treatment of Slaves and Malefactors damnare ad
Metalla, force them to dig in Mines; now this is the Covetous man's lot, from
which he is never to expect a release, as being his own remorseless and more
than Egyptian task-master: and the parallel holds too, in the gainlesness as
well as laboriousness of the work; Those wretched creatures buried in Earth and
darkness were never the richer for all the Ore they dug, no more is the
insatiate Miser, he has no power to dispose of any of his acquests; and though
he calls them his, yet alas he possesses them no otherwise than a Prisoner
does his Goal, a Madman his Chains, they are only Instruments of his Thraldom,
and the getting more serves only to add more weight to his Shackles; and
certainly Wealth can be no way worse disposed, than thus to buy so base a
Servitude.

AND now since neither the luxurious spending, nor the covetous keeping can
advantage us one step toward any thing that can be called happy; but do on the
contrary engage us upon toil and misery: Wealth seems to be a very oppressive
burden, such as we can neither cast off, nor safely bear; and truly so it is
till Charity comes into our Aid; which as the proper Element of Wealth, renders
that light which gravitates elsewhere, and as the Elixir unto Metals transforms
them into Gold, stamps purity and price upon them: by freely giving, endows the
Donor with what ever he bestows; enriches him, and what is more, enriches
wealth its self. Without this Art of using, and disposing our estates, we are
those Indians who change their Gold for Glass: that silly Fisherman, who
having found a Mass of Ambergreece, employed it to the liquoring of his boots;
are foolish to the height of Midas in the Fable, who being promised to have
what ever he would wish, made his demand that every thing he touched might
presently be Gold, and run the hazard that he did of being starved by our
unhappy affluence: men say indeed that Gold by preparation becomes a sovereign
Cordial, but certainly it never does rejoice the heart so much as when Charity
is the Chemist, the poor man's hand is the best Limbeck to extract this
Magistery and tincture, the flames of love will really perform those Miracles,
they of the Furnace boast of, and would they employ themselves in this
laboratory, they would find the omnipotent efficacy they dream of, sooner in
this way of dissipating, than in all their Arts, or rather Fancies of
generating Gold. It Is certainly a most generous and enlivening pleasure which
results from a seasonable liberality: When I see a man struggling with want, his
very spirit as well as body stooping under the pressure; if I then relieve him,
the humane nature within me which is common to us both, does by a kind of
Sympathetick motion exult and raise up its self, but if I have any piety that
must do it much more; for as the former showed me my own image in my poor
brother, so this shows me Gods; and how transcendent a satisfaction must it be,
to have thus rescued him who bears so divine an impress, to have paid some part
of gratitude to my Creator for my own being, by making my self in my low sphere
the giver or preserver of that life, which he first breathed into another.
This, and this only is the way to raise a felicity out of wealth; and surely
since the attaining of happiness, is the one grand pursuit of our Reason, that
must even before it has subjected its self to the Faith of Christ, give assent
to the Prudence of his Command in this as well as the former instances.

BUT there remains a Precept of our Saviors allied to this; which seems by no
means to comport and hold a correspondence with the dictates of right Reason:
the taking up the cross, and suffering for righteousness sake; which
contradicts the fundamental law of self preservation; and the great end of
being, felicity and happiness. But this suggestion, how specious soever it
appear, is utterly fallacious; for it is no good consequence, that because
Reason aims at our being happy, therefore it forbids us all voluntary
sufferings, since that the case may be so set, that such a suffering may be the
fairest medium left us to our happiness. It Is a known rule that of two evils,
the least is to be chosen; and the election of the lesser ill, though it be no
absolute, yet is a comparative good; and its attainment as far as the necessity
of our affairs permit, is our felicity: and reason can provide no farther. Now
this is the estate of the present instance: two evils are proposed, a Natural
and a Moral; the Natural, though in its self to be averted, yet much inferior
to the Moral, and then Reason soon resolves the Dilemma, that the Natural is to
be chosen: all that can be questioned in this affair, is whether Reason define
the moral evil to be the greater, but this can bear no long dispute with any
who consider but the Nature of Reason, which being seated in the upper soul of
a man, is no way concerned in those Ills, which make their impression on the
sensitive part, but Moral ills strike higher, invade the mind, cloud the
reason; nay, often depose it from its regiment, as is too frequently
exemplified in the force of vicious habits, and therefore by how much our
reason is superior to our sense, so much are those to be accounted the greatest
evils, which assault that nobler part of us. This certainly will now be the
determination of Reason, if she may be permitted the freedom of her vote: for
thus was it formerly where she bare the most sway, and uncontrouled rule: The
wisest and best considering of humane, as well as divine Authors having
established it as an undoubted Aphorism, that honest is to be preferred before
both gainful and pleasant: so that nothing renders a man so deplorable, as that
which violates his integrity; nay they have generally gone higher, exhorted men
to become volunteers in virtues warfare, not to suspend their sufferings till
they were forced out by the competition of a crime; but offer themselves free
oblations. Thus to suffer for ones Country or ones Friend, was thought so
worthy, so heroic a thing, that noble and ingenuous spirits were aemulous of
it: and it was so stated a case that Epictetus forbids a man, on such an
occasion to consult with the Oracle, whether he should do it or no, it being
necessary to be done, what ever ill success or ruin be predicted, (...), and
how serious they were in these persuasions, some of them have practically
evidenced, as having suffered very inconsiderable pressures, nay death its self
rather than they would bow to the praedominant vices of their Age, or omit the
occasion of eminent virtue. Aristides would be just in spite of Ostracism.
Regulus observant of his Oath made to a faithless Enemy, though Death and
Torment attended the Performance. Lycurgus to perpetuate to his Citizens the
benefit of his good Laws, as subtly designs perpetual Banishment unto himself,
as others use to contrive for Honor and for Empire there. Codrus redeems the
safety of his Army with his own Death: Curtius makes himself a Martyr for his
Country, and Socrates in the stricter sense becomes one for his God: laid down
his life in attestation of that most fundamental truth and leading article of
Faith, (...), the belief of one God. And yet we find not that those Times,
which were so ill as to shed his Blood, were yet so bad as to defame his
Memory, he is not recorded either as fool or hypocondriack; nor have his
sufferings struck him out of the list of Philosophers: but he stands there the
more conspicuously in those bloody Characters; and however the credit of the
Oracle may be otherwise disparaged, it never was on this account, that it had
declared Socrates to be the wisest of Men. And yet both he and the rest, had
either none, or very imperfect confused apprehensions of a future reward, when
they engaged on present Suffering, and death its self: So that we might be
tempted to imagine, that some strange change and transmutation has now befaln
Virtue, that it has put on so much a distant appearance from its ancient self,
that the accession of new obligations, and higher hopes, should absolve, avert
and utterly dispirit us; insomuch that what was Constancy in a Heathen, should
be Folly in a Christian. Certainly this is a Metamorphosis of our own making,
we look through deforming optic glasses, such as our Avarice or effeminate
Sensualities convey into our hands, which give not only strange and ghastly, but
withal ridiculous shapes; but if we would consult our Reason, that would show
us things in their proper forms. Virtue and Reason are both the same they were
so many hundred years ago, and where the Object and the faculty admit of no
mutation, it is impossible there should really be any such variable appearance.
If Socrates were so zealous for the one God, that he chose rather to relinquish
his life, than to consent to, or but connive at the profane rivalry of
Polytheisme, and yet be no Fool; certainly we may as sucurely transcribe his
copy: and though the particular Article may not be the same; yet if it be any
thing wherein virtue is concerned, the cause is no less warrantable: he that
suffers for a practical Point, is no more a prodigal of his pains, than he that
lays them out on the highest Speculative. The Commandments may have as good
Martyrs as the Creed; for the same Authority has required our Obedience to the
one, that exacts our Faith of the other. Nor is there any necessity of Heathen
or Jewish Tribunal, to convert our sufferings to Martyrdom; we may receive that
crown from the hands of those that own the same faith with us. Those that say
with the most seeming vehemence let the Lord be glorified, may yet hate and
cast out their brethren for his name sake, Isa. 66. 5. He that tells me I fear
not God so much as he, may yet persecute me for honoring the King more; and my
Blood poured out upon that account, becomes an acceptable Sacrifice to him, who
has commanded my Subjection to the Higher Powers. He who calls Christ his Head,
may yet rend and tear his Body; and if I love its communion so well, as to take
my share in the Massacre, I approach toward that dignity and comfort S. Paul so
glories in, of filling up that which is behind, of the afflictions of Christ in
my flesh, for his bodies sake which is the Church, Col. 1. 24. He that mulcts
the more Indeliberate Oaths, may yet enjoin a solemn Perjury: and if I choose he
should rather make havoc of my Goods than my Conscience; my Spoils become not
more monuments of his rapine, than my piety; they plead my Innocence before him
who will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain: and how profanely
soever my Wealth is disposed by him that seizes it: it is accounted to me as
cast into the Treasury; and so it is possible I may at once vie with the
Rich-men in the greatness of the oblation, and with the poor Widow too in that
higher circumstance of its being all. In sum, the opportunities of Martyrdom
are not restrained to those points wherein Christians differ from Jews or
Heathens, but extend to all wherein we Christians differ from our rule, the
commands of our blessed Master. If I suffer for my Constancy to any of them, I
have certainly my place in Gods Martyrology, as well as if I had fallen under any
of the ten Persecutions. God was not so partial to the primitive Christians as
to allow them the Monopoly and enclosure of that dignity; if they as our elder
Brethren had a double portion, yet there is still a child's part left, for every
one of us enough to testify our Legitimation, and secure us from the brand of
Bastardy, Heb. 12. 'twas S. Paul's indefinite Affirmation, and all times since
have born witness to the truth of it. That all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer persecution. Some unfashionable Virtues there have been in
every Age, which have whetted, if not the Swords, yet the Tongues of men: and
those that happen not to fall under Abels persecution, must not hope to escape
that of Isaac: if they meet with no Cain to kill, they will undoubtedly with an
Ishmael to mock them. But in what dress soever our Sufferings appear, a good
Cause divests them of their frightful shape, pulls off the ugly vizard, and
shows us a Beauty that lay there concealed; and that not only to the Eye of our
Faith but our Reason too. Fortitude was a Virtue before Christianity had a name
in the world; and the very instinct of our Nature whispers within us, the
baseness of being baffled out of a Truth or Virtue; yet such a despicable
Coward, is every man that wants this passive Valor, without which the active
must find another name, Rage or Frenzy it may be, in some perhaps natural
Courage, or sanguineness of temper in others, but true Valor it is not, if it
knows not as well to suffer as to do. That mind is truly great, and only that
which stands above the power of all extrinsick violence; which keeps its self a
distinct principality independent upon the outward man, so that it is not
subjected to its fate, that can be free, when the body is fast bound in Misery
and Iron, sound and healthy when that groans under torture, and is never more
strong and vital, than when that languishes and expires; and this is so
desirable, so transcendent a privilege, as Reason cannot but aspire to: and
this is it to which this excellent Precept of Christ advances us when we thus
suffer for righteousness sake, our Minds are all light what darkness soever
involve our exterior part, and is like Goshen exempt and secure, when that
falls under all the Plagues of Egypt.

'AND what reason thus embraces for its self, it is not imaginable that it
should reject, because it is richly clad, that the Race should seem the more
tedious, because there is a Crown within view; or that the glorious Rewards our
Christianity proposes to our constancy, should be esteemed as Menaces and
Threats, Temptations to desert or turn Apostates. No certainly, Reason cannot
dispute, and make an Inference so utterly Illogical, but will rather use it as
an enforcement of its former Conclusion, establish it the more firm and
immovable by having the Basis thus enlarged, having Reward added to Virtue, and
Happiness entailed on Duty. If in the competition between two Evils, Reason
pronounce the lesser eligible: Much more will she resolve, when the contest is
'twixt good and evil, the greatest Evil and the greatest Good; and choose that
Excellence which though Superlative in its self, is more endeared and heightened
by Comparison. If I violate my Reason, if I renounce Virtue, though bare and
naked, then surely I do it yet more when she is thus accomplished and adorned;
when beautified on purpose to allure the eye and take the Heart. When over and
above the positive donation of Happiness, she adds a rescue and release from
Misery, and equally obliges by the distant prospects of a Hell and Heaven. So
that not only the Gospel promises, but even menaces and threats become a Weapon
in the hand of Reason, when she stands upon her guard, and fights for Virtue.
If sin present its self as my Protector from a temporal Calamity, Reason will
tell me hence, that the profer is insidious, it exposes me to that which is
infinitely worse than what it pretends to save me from; and that not only in
the former respect of Guilt, but in that of Punishment also. What a cheat is it
to keep me out of the Dungeon, and send me to the bottomless Pit, to save me
from a temporary Fire, and thereby mark me out as Fuel for eternal Flames; to
take me out of their hands who can kill the Body, to put me into his who can
destroy both Soul and Body in Hell. Reason tells me I am to abhor the Turpitude
and foulness of a Crime; and it tells me too, I am to dread the Misery and
Smart of it also. It would not have me wallow in the mire, though it were safe,
much less when it is full of Asps and Vipers, which will infallibly sting me to
death. It cries out with Joseph, How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin
against God? And it cries out with Esaias too, Who can dwell with everlasting
Fire? In a word, by the domestic native light of the Candle of the Lord set up
within our breast, it shows the ugliness of Sin; and shows it too by the
affrightful dismal blaze of those unquenchable flames it kindles: Thus by the
different Arguments of terror and endearment, of love and fear, of interest and
duty, Reason asserts this scorned, decried, neglected Precept: Take her as mere
Paynim abstracting from the expectation of reward or punishment; or take her as
a Proselyte to Christ, contemplating his promises and threats, if there be
Honesty or if there be Religion, in either instance the Soul must still
conclude, that Affliction is to be chosen rather than Iniquity.

AND if it be reasonable thus to resist even unto blood striving against sin,
if Reason blow the Trumpet, sound the Alarm to this solemn War, then surely it
prescribes something of Martial discipline to prepare and dispose us for those
Combats. No expert General will bring a company of raw untrain'd men into the
Field, but will by little bloodless skirmishes instruct them in the manner of
the Fight, teach them the ready managery of their Weapons; and of this sort are
all those voluntary Self-denials, and lighter austerities which Christianity
commends to us, which become necessary not simply for themselves, but as
instruments toward a higher end. The Military fame the Romans had in the world
was achieved by the exact discipline of their Camps, enuring their Soldiers
to labor and hardship. And, as Tacitus tells us, when a long Peace had
slackned the reins of discipline, that active Humor, which was wont to be
spent on the Enemy, recoiled, and flew in the face of their Commanders, begat
nothing but Mutinies and disorders; and certainly 'twill be the same in our
Christian warfare, if we abandon our selves to Ease and Sloth, never attempt to
wrestle with a difficulty, but keep our selves in the posture the Israelites
Camp was in at Moses's descent from the Mount, eating and drinking, and rising
up to play; our appetites will grow licentious and insolent, past our control
and guidance. If we treat them with such an indulgence as is recorded of David
to Adoniah, never say so much as why have thou done this; it is not to be
expected but they will Rebel though a Solomon sit in the Throne. For alas, how
is it imaginable, that he who never denied himself any the smallest or most
trifling pleasure he had a mind to, shall on a sudden deny all in the gross; he
who has projected many, but never waved one Opportunity of showing his Wit, how
shall he find in his heart to become a Fool for Christ. He that has gratified
his Palate with all that pretends to be gustful to it, how shall he descend to
the bread of Affliction; or he that never tried to miss a Meal, how will he
entertain the unwelcome contrariety of not knowing where to get one. He who has
never abated any thing of the utmost Pomp he could reach, how will he brook the
want of necessaries; or from his House seil'd with Cedar, and painted with
Vermilion, be content with his Saviors Lot, not to have where to lay his head.
In short, how shall he who never could pare off any of the Excrescencies, the
mere Vanities and Gaieties of an estate, part with it all; or lay down that
life for Christ's sake, from which he never subtracted one smallest Pleasure.
Suffering is a thing to which the sensitive part of us has an Innate Aversion,
and Aversions are not to be subdued at once, but by gentle and easy degrees;
and custom must have introduced a second nature, before that original part of
our temper will be supplanted. As it is therefore highly reasonable for every
man to aspire to the Dominion of himself, to keep his Affections within his own
Power and Command; and though he have no Interest at all in the greater, enjoy
a sovereignty in the lesser World: So in order to that, it is as reasonable to
discipline and tame them by some voluntary Acts of restraint, like Hannibal,
sometimes to pass by that water to which his thirsts do most importunately
invite him. To try by little skirmishes what strength and skill he has, before
he runs the fatal hazard of a Battle. To deny himself in the lesser instances,
that so when the greater come, they may not have the disadvantage of
Uncouthness and perfect Strangeness to inhanse their Difficulty; and this must
certainly be acknowledged reasonable, or else we must condemn almost all the
received Rules of humane transactions, which generally have this for their
groundwork, that men must pass through the first Principles and lowest
Rudiments of any Art, before they can arrive at its height. Men serve
Apprentiships to Trades, and think not themselves the first day Masters of
their craft; we advance in Learning by leisurable and slow steps, and skip not
from the ABC to the Metaphysics: And certainly the skill of Christian
suffering is not the easiest of all Trades or Sciences; but will require some
time of Initiation, many repeated Trials and Essays to bring us into an
acquaintance with it: To convince our Understandings, and persuade our Wills,
that to lose our lives is to save it; and to be faithful unto the death, is the
best way to gain a Crown of life.

IF I should now proceed to every other Precept of Christ, and examine it by
the Rules of sober Discourse, we should infallibly find them so rational as
befits the Laws of him who is the eternal Reason, but having made these Essays
in some of the most opposed Instances, I shall presume these may pass as the
Representatives of all the rest; and the acquittal these have received at the
Tribunal of Reason virtually involve them all.

AND now since both Conscience and Reason have pronounced the same of Christ's
Laws that Pilate did of his Person, that they find in them no fault at all;
methinks Judges should have the same privilege that is allowed to private Men,
that in the mouth of two every word may be established: But if any man be so
scrupulous as not to rest in the sentence of less than a Triumvirate, let him
in Gods name bring in a Third, and when his vicious Appetites (which were
before excepted to as parties) are set aside, he cannot be distracted in his
Choice, there being but One more that can possibly be called in, and that is
Experience, which being a Judge that himself must create, he can not fear it
should be prejudiced against him; so that he may entertain full confidence of
its Integrity: And no less may he do of its Ability, this being the most
infallible of humane determinations, such as often corrects the error of
Speculation; and shows us the vanity of concluding what is practicable in
matter from being demonstrated in the Scheme or Diagram: The guidance of an
illiterate Traveller in the way that he has gone, being far more useful to a
Stranger in his journey, than the best Maps and most exact Descriptions of
Geographers. But then it must be indeed Experience, and not only some slight
and transient Essay. We call not him an experienced Physician that has had one
Patient, or a Lawyer that has pleaded one Cause. Experience is the daughter of
Time, and is made up of many successive Trials, as a Habit is of multiplied
Acts: And to the Verdict of such an Experience Christ's Precepts will not fear
to stand; let a man put himself into a settled course of Obedience to them,
abstain so long from all prohibited Commissions, as may wear out the rank Taste
wherewith his Palate has been seasoned, and leave it free and disengaged, and
then infallibly he will find such a savor and sweetness in those virtues, that
he will wonder how he came to be cheated into an opinion of their being bitter
and unsavory; and will have no appetite to return to his Onions and his Garlic
after he has thus been fed with Quails and Manna. That this will be the event
of this experiment there is all ground of certainty, and when the trial is once
made, so irrefragable an evidence will follow, that it will not leave a man the
power to doubt: Only in the interim so much belief is requisite, as may let him
in to the demonstration, make him set to that Practice from whence he is to
reap all this: And if any man be so much a Sceptick, as not to have faith
enough to put him on the adventure, I should at once for his conviction and
punishment, wish but that he might a while extend the same distrust to Affairs
of common life: Let him doubt whether his meat be savory and refuse to eat;
whether his clothes be warm and so go naked; whether his house be firm and lie
without doors: and when he has a while thus smarted under his own discipline,
let him but apply the wisdom he has thus bought to the present instance, and it
will unquestionably resolve his scruple; or if he be still too Impatient to
attend the ripening of his own Experience, let him make use of other men's. Let
him appeal to any who has inured his neck to Christ's yoke, and ask him whether
it be galling and pinching, or whether it be not easy, nay gracious. Let him
ask one who by repeated restraints has subdued and tamed his natural rage or
pride, how he likes the change, and undoubtedly he will tell him, it is no less
happy than a calm is after the noise and danger of a violent Tempest, or the
ease of a broken Imposthume, after the painful gathering and filling of it. Let
him ask one who has divested himself of all his sensual sins, whether by their
absence he now discern not their necessity, and he will tell him, it is but the
same the primitive Christians had of those Beasts skins wherein their
persecutors had clad them, whose only use was by deforming to fit them for
devouring. Let him come to the converted Mammonist, and ask him which he finds
the better Treasury, his own Coffer or the poor man's Bowels, and he will be
able to assure him, he is become much richer by having less in store. Let him
come to the devout Ascetick, and ask him what taste he finds in Daniels
unpleasant bread, Dan. 10. 3. and he will tell him infinitely more than ever he
did in Dives delicious fare, that cloyed and surfeited the flesh, this
nourishes and supports the spirit. Nay finally, let him come to him that is
actually suffering for righteousness sake, and he will exemplify to him the
Beatitude which Christ has pronounced of such: Let him visit Paul and Silas in
the prison and he shall hear them singing; Peter and the other Apostles after
their stripes and beating, and he shall find them rejoicing: And Stephen amidst
the Throng of his murderers and Tempest of their stones, and he shall observe
him overlooking them all, and entertaining himself with a more pleasant
prospect, seeing the Heavens opened and Jesus standing at the right hand of
God; and why should not other men's successes animate our endeavors here? In
temporal affairs it seldom misses to do it. The Trophies of Miltiades at
Marathon disturbed Themistocles his sleeps, till he had raised unto himself and
Country more glorious ones at Salamine: Caesar while he views Alexanders Image
upbraids his own slackness with the memory of his conquests, and inspirits
himself to great attempts. He that returns with a rich freight from a
New Foundland encourages others to Trade thither also: Nay, even a beggar
speeds not well at an Hospitable door, but he is able to send sholes upon the
like hopes: Much less does he that has found a treasure need to use his Oratory
to invite partakers; and why then should those few that have made this more
precious discovery be forced to monopolize it, as not being able to draw in
partners; yet God knows, thus it is, those that hear of no rarity but they long
for it, as David after the waters of Bethlehem, can yet hear the same David cry
out, how sweet the Lord is! and yet have no curiosity to taste it: Those whom
the very name of Liberty so captivates, that they sacrifice all that is really
valuable to that Chimaera; can hear the Apostle speak of the glorious liberty
of the sons of God, and yet like hardened Gally-slaves despise the Manumission.
Those that hunt after pleasures till the very pursuit become an unsupportable
pain, can be told of those rivers of pleasures wherewith God offers to quench
their thirst, and yet inflict on themselves the rich man's torment, and deny so
much as to dip the tip of their finger toward the cooling their own flames.
Good God what strange infatuation is this, that while there is so much of
vicious envy in the world, there should be nothing of virtuous emulation: That
men's heat and vigor should all spend its self in childish pursuits, and leave
them thus cold and stupid to their great and serious concernments. And what
remains to him that ponders this Epidemick folly, but to breath out Moses's
Wish; O that men were wise; or if that be too hopeless a vote, O that men were
not so destructively foolish; that their rashness and Error might be confined
to their lower interests: And as fools are treated, be kept from dealing in
things of consequence; that they would not govern their Souls by such an absurd
kind of managery, as they will not trust with the meanest of their outward
concerns. And if this might but be obtained, if this fatal Oscitancy which has
benumbed and frozen them were but cast off, they would then from the report of
the good Land be animated to their journey; and rather choose to make the
concurrent Testimonies of others arguments to encourage them, than leave them
as Hand-writings to appale, or Witnesses to condemn them. And he that shall
thus borrow other men's experience with this design of copying it out, and lays
it as a foundation for his own, thereby possesses himself of one of the
greatest advantages of the communion of Saints; kindles himself at their fire
till he grows bright and high as it; combines his flame with theirs, and so
increases the Ardors of them both; follows Example till himself grows
exemplary, and in one Act receives and gives. But he that thus sets out, must
remember, that it is more than the Journey of one day he has to go; he must not
think (as I said before) that every little superficial attempt is that
Experience which he is in quest of: He that thus phansies will be exposed to a
very dangerous deceit, for it is sure there is in all habits such a force, that
they are not to be dispossessed but by a contrary violence, and therefore he that
has been under the power of any vicious custom, enters at first into a state of
hostility, has such a tough opposition, as rather finds him Work than Pleasure:
Now if he shall upon this first Essay pronounce, he is like to pass a very
unjust sentence: Let him fight on a while till he have got some ground, and
then though the War afforded him little pleasure, the Victory will yield him
much. Every repeated defeat he gives his Adversary will be a new triumph to
him, and what the Romans courted as so great a Dignity he may every day enjoy.
But then as he advances farther to the completing of his victories, so he does
of his Pleasures too: when his irregular appetites are so subdued, that they
rarely make insurrection, this is such a state of tranquillity as gives him
leisure to discern, and enjoy the delights of Christian virtue, and will teach
him to reproach the highest Panegyric he ever heard of it as flat and
imperfect: so infinitely will he find it exceed the utmost description, that he
will say with the Queen of Sheba, the one half was not told him. This is the
rich prize which they shall obtain that run the race, but it is not awarded to
the first step; and hence it is so many fail of it, that when they find the
uneasiness which attends the breaking off a custom; this is such a Giant, a son
of Anak, as turns them back discouraged from the Canaan they went to view. But
alas this discovers how small a stock of Resolution they carried out with them;
for where men set out with heart and appetite, it is not such little
difficulties that will dismay them: if it be but their sports they are engaged
in, it serves to deceive the sense of many uneasinesses, nay often dangers, he
that is but in chase of a silly Hare is so keen upon it, that he feels not the
weariness of a whole days motion, and if he meet with a hedge in his way will
rather leap it with hazard than be diverted from his Game. But it is sure in
their sins they suffer far greater hardships without discouragement. The puny
drunkard is not disheartened by the first qualm, but repeats his excesses till
he have overcome his queasiness. The cast Litigant sits not down with one cross
verdict, but recommences his suit, passes it through all Courts, and considers
not his own pains, so he may either weary or force the other out of his right.
The Unclean person falls not out with his sin, how sadly soever it has
macerated him, but steps out of the hot-house into the Stews, and shall men be
so indefatigable in their pursuits of Infelicity, buy one Torment with another,
and drive on the year in a circle of such woeful Traffic, and shall virtue and
pleasure be thought not worth the smallest labor? Can they keep themselves in
a perpetual contention with their ease, their reason, and their God; and can
they not endure a short combat with a sinful custom, which if it have some
uneasiness, yet its both infinitely short of what they have suffered in the
contrary compliance, and besides carries its remedy in its hand: For if the
Difficulty arise only (as doubtless it does) from the confirm'dness of the
Habit, every Act of resistance as it weakens the Habit, so it abates the
Difficulty. It is therefore a most unreasonable inference, from the trouble of
the first opposition, to conclude the Impossibility of the future; for if the
first were but troublesome and not impossible, the second will have yet less of
the trouble, and so be yet farther removed from impossibility, and the third
than the second, and so on till the difficulty vanish and disappear. And if men
would but assume such a moderate courage, as but to keep the field, and not to
run away upon the first gunshot, they would soon find how impotent Assailants
they had to deal with, who can never subdue any man by strength, who is not
first Emasculated by his own fears. Let us therefore to shun the reproach of so
dishonorable a Defeat awake and rouse our selves, put us in a posture of
defense: And Satan, who is as cowardly as any thing in the world but we, will
as St. James assures us, fly from us. Let us upbraid our selves with our
unseasonable hardiness and resolution in our impieties, till we have changed
the scene, grow impatient of those servile drudgeries, and ambitious of these
honorable adventures. And to animate us the more, let us fix our eyes upon the
glorious prize of the victory; and that not only the final and eternal in
future Glory; but that Intermediate which offers its self as the earnest of
That, the calm and pleasure of a conquering piety. The Roman story tells us
that the Flavianists had so possessed their minds with the spoils of Vienna, that
they grew insensible of all dangers in the way to it, and even forced their
General Antonio to put them upon those hazards, which his wiser conduct would
have declined. And why should not our more worthy Hopes excite as great an
earnestness? why should not we have as great an Appetite to the pillaging of
Satan's Camp, plundring that infernal Magazein of all its Engines both of Mine,
and battery, its stores of arms and Ammunition, leaving him naked and
defenseless, unable to make any impression upon us? and this he certainly does,
who by a steady practice of virtue, comes to discern the contemptibleness of
those baits wherewith he allures us. He that seeks only the praise of God,
looks upon the applause of men as a blast of Air, which possibly may demolish
and destroy a glorious building, but cannot give foundation or Materials to it;
and therefore will not seek for, or solicit its unhappy courtships. He who
desires to be great only in the Kingdom of Heaven, laughs at the busy
Aspirings to secular greatness, and wonders at the force of that enchantment,
which engages men with so extreme toil, to climb a tottering pinnacle, where
the standing is uneasy, and the fall deadly. He that covets to be rich toward
God, and has inured his eyes to that divine Splendour which results from the
beauty of holiness, is not dazzled with the glittering shine of Gold: considers
it as a vein of the same earth he treads on, and despises that absurd
partiality whereof the Prophet accuses Idolaters, to employ one part to the
meanest uses, and fall down to the other. In a word, he that looks on the
eternal things that are not seen, will through those Optics exactly discern
the vanity, and inconsiderableness of all that is visible and temporary; and so
will be equally unmoved with the terrors or allurements of the world, and
neither frighted nor flattered out of his duty. And he that is thus fortified
discourages and wearies out his Tempter, deprives him not only of weapons but
of heart too, and drives even Satan himself to desperation; and when the Enemy
is thus beat out of the field, there remains nothing but to enjoy the victory.
When that reluctance and resistance of the corrupt Appetite is so weakened and
subdued that a man acts with freedom, he acts with pleasure too. A heart thus
set at liberty, alacriously runs the ways of Gods commandments: it faring with
it as with a Patient that is prescribed exercise for health; who at first
perhaps finds lassitude and trouble in it: but when the obstructions are
removed, and nature disburthened of those noxious humors that encumbred her,
that which was at first his task, becomes his recreation. For we are not to
think, that it is any innate harshness in piety that renders the first essays
of it unpleasant, that is owing only to the indisposedness of our own Hearts.
We are in the Prophets phrase bullocks unaccustomed to the yoke; and if we be
galled and fretted by it, it is because of our impatient strivings, and
irregular motions under it, the yoke is really no heavier than it is afterward
when it is more tamely born: and yet the Ease is very different and unequal.
And this teaches us a short way to that felicity we now speak of, to wit, That
we compose our selves to such a submiss and malleable temper, that Christ may
come only to govern us as sheep, not to be put to tame us as Tigers, let us
withdraw all supplies from our lusts, and not by any secret reserved affection
give them clancular aids to maintain their Rebellion, and then they will not be
able long to make any vigorous opposition, nor consequently much to disturb the
tranquillity of those who have thus resigned themselves to the government of
the Prince of Peace: and if this cannot be done in such an instant, but that
there will be some previous displacencies, and uneasy struglings, yet even
those like the Scorpion, carry Antidote against their stings, when it is
considered that they are but the pangs of the new birth, they will become very
supportable by the expectation of that Joy to which they tend. An enslaved
people think themselves fairly advanced to happiness, if they can get but to
make head against their oppressors, though they must expect many sore conflicts
and sharp engagements before they become Victors: and certainly it is matter of
inestimable joy to him, who has been under that sad spiritual slavery to be set
thus upon even terms, with his sword in his hand against those, who once had
him in such vassalage that he durst not lift up a thought against them; but
especially when it is remembered with what invincible aids he is backed, such as
will ascertain him of victory, if he do not treacherously defeat himself. And
surely he must be of a strange phlegmatic temper, whom all these
considerations will not enliven, convey into him so much spirit as to make an
attempt, and engage him to do that upon so pressing, so great a concern which
mere curiosity prompts men daily to in common affairs. And he that is not
molded of this cold and stubborn clay, he that has not lost one of the
elements of man's composition, and has but a spark of fire in his temper, will
surely have some warmth toward this so inviting an experiment: and when he has
once made it, I doubt not, it will then join with the suffrages both of reason
and conscience in approbation of Christ's Laws, and will with Solomon pronounce
of this spiritual wisdom, her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths
are peace, Prove. 3. 17.

AND now it must be a strange Violence of impiety, that must break this
threefold cord, that shall disannul the joint sentence of all that are
competent Judges in this matter. This is not the strength of Samson that brake
withs and cords, but of the Legion that pulled in pieces fetters and chains;
and though too many men make it their own work; yet certainly it is only the
Devils Interest: he aspires to the rule and government of us; and to that end
nothing can be more contributive than these prejudices we take up against
Christ's conduct. A Soul like a Nation, can neither bear two Legislators, nor be
without one: And Satan having but that single competitor, our quarrelling with
Christ's Laws, is virtually an embracing of his. When we send Christ that
rebellious message, Nolumus hunc regnare, we say to the other as the Trees to
the Bramble, Jud. 9. 14. come thou and reign over us. And to this defiance of
the one, and invitation of his opposite, he very nearly approaches, that thus
defames Christ's commands as irrational or severe. The traducing of a government
being, we know, the immediate praeludium to the casting it off; libelling the
forlorn-hope to rebellion. But would God men would soberly weigh whither such a
mutinous humor tends; and when our outward Condition has given us so many
pregnant and costly Proofs of its ruinous effects, take caution that it make
not the like wrack within us: that we do not madly exchange Christ's gentle
service, and glorious Rewards; for Satan's cruel bondage, and crueller Wages:
the golden chains of the one which do more adorn than tie us; for the Iron, the
Adamantine links of the other, which bind us till they deliver us over to those
Chains of darkness, where our captivity shall be irreversible. If this so
reasonable, so necessary a care may be admitted; 'twill certainly confute the
profane sophistry of our Age, silence our impious Cavils, and instead of
providing us of the color of an austere Master to excuse our sloth: will
engage us to that diligence that shall supersede the use of such shifts, and
then we may hope to see Christianity have a Resurrection day again, assume a
Body somewhat of solidity and substance; which now wanders about like a ghost
or spectre, a shade or vanishing apparition which leaves no footsteps behind
it: and to the reunion, O let us all emulously contribute, take up every one
of us his dry Bones and bring it to the Prophet, or rather to Him who spoke by
that Prophet, to breath upon them, till at last they be cemented and inspirited
in active Duty to show forth the Praises of that God who has called us out of
darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9.

CHAP. VI. A survey of the Mischiefs arising from Partial Obedience.
ANOTHER sort of preposterous Considerers there are, by whom the power and
force of Christianity is no less obstructed: and those are they that contrive
not how they may most comply with it, but how they may best bend it to comport
with them. That rebate its edge, or turn it only against such of their
corruptions as they have least kindness for. That weigh the Precepts with no
other design but that of taking the lightest: those to which their
constitutions or other circumstances carry least repugnance; and come unto the
Gospel not to as a law, but to a Market; cheapen what they best like, and leave
the rest for other customers.

THAT thus it is with, many needs no other proof than the variety visible in
the lives of several professors. One man behaves himself modestly, and tells
you his religion commands him humility, yet at the same time transgresses the
as strict precept of Justice, and will defraud him he bows to. On the contrary
another is Just but Insolent, and though his Sentence do not bend, expects his
Clients should. That man owns the purity of his religion in visiting the
fatherless and widows, yet disclaims it again by not keeping himself unspotted
of the world. This person is Abstemious but Uncharitable, will drink no wine
but thirsts for blood. He prays much, yet curses more; whilst he is meek but
indevout. Now while the Rule is one and the same, how should it come, that men's
Practices should so vary, were it not for the unequal Application: did they
take it entire, though there might be difference in the degrees, yet sure not
in the kinds of their Virtues, and as men would not differ so from one another,
so neither would they from themselves, there would be then no such thing as a
charitable Drunkard, a devout Oppressor, a chaste Miser; Monsters engendered by
this unnatural commixture of light with darkness, but Piety would be uniform
and extensive, and bring into captivity every thought unto the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. And till it be thus, Christianity can never be thought to
have achieved any part of its design, which was not aimed against any one
single limb, but against the whole body of sin. Alas, it is not the lopping off
one of the remote members, that will render the remaining ones any whit the
less vital, the having a part less to animate, will rather serve to concenter
the spirits, and make them more active in the rest: as we see the pruning of
Trees, makes them more prolifick. And this effect is very obvious among men: he
who has no general dislike to vice, if he repudiate one, it is commonly that he
may cleave closer to another; and what he defalks from some dry, insipid sin,
is but to make up a Benjamin's Mess for some other more gustful. If the Wanton
be sober, it is odds he thinks excess a Rival to his lust, if the Proud man be
liberal, it is because covetousness is inglorious; such unevennesses are caused
not by an unkindness to any Sin (unless possibly that aversion which natural
constitution raises in some) but by a partiality to one or more favorite
Vices, for whose better accommodation, and securer reign, not only Virtue, but
other Vices also must give place.

AND this it is much to be feared will upon a true account, be found to be the
sum of many men's piety, something they think they must pay to the importunity
of their Religion, which upbraids them so loudly that they are willing to stop
its mouth, but yet would do it with as much frugality, and good managery as may
be, and so consider what it is they can best spare: what refuse Sin which brings
them in little of satisfaction, and is perhaps in competition with some other
more agreeable: and this they can be content to devote to the slaughter, set it
to receive all the impressions of the sword of the spirit; and so use it as a
buckler to their darling lusts, to ward off those blows which must else fall
heavy on them; but alas this is not to obey, but to delude: to ransom a greater
Sin with a less, and to transcribe in this matter the Counsel of Caiphas: to
let one die for the People, that the whole nation Perish not. To make one
forlorn guilt a Patriot to the rest, whilst in the tempest which threatened a
general shipwreck, the precious wares are preserved, by throwing the less
valuable over board.

AND truly that is commonly the event, men are so jolly and triumphant when
they have worsted a trivial inconsiderable sin, as if they had defeated the
whole army: this poor despicable spoil, is set up as their Trophe, and must
they think witness for them both to God and man, that they are good soldiers
of Jesus Christ: they can like Saul with full confidence meet the Prophet, and
tell him they have fulfilled the Commandment of the Lord, 2 Samuel 15. 13. though
Agag and the best cattle, the reigning and fattest sins be spared: and while
they are thus secure, their sins will certainly be so also, have no disturbance
or disquiet from them, but lie at Ease and rest, feed like Canibals upon their
own kind, be nourisht by the carcasses of those unlucky vices, on whom the
exterminating lot happened to fall: and by that means grow to a prodigious bulk
and corpulency. And upon these terms Satan himself will allow us to mortify
some sins, nay will himself cast the first stone at them: and like a rooking
gamester purposely lose these petty stakes, that he may afterward sweep the
board.

FOR if men should give themselves up universally to all sorts of Ill, if they
should set themselves in a total opposition to all the documents of their
profession, he would lose one of his most useful engines; there could be no such
thing as a false delusive hope: they might possibly by obstinacy harden, or by
diversion gag Conscience, but they could not bribe and corrupt it, make it sit
down well pleased and satisfied with its self. For when the threats against
disobedience shall occurr to the mind of one who has in all instances
disobeyed, it is impossible he should find any salve, any way of Evading the
Threats, they make so directly at him: but he who can allege for himself that
he obeys in some things, confronts that to all Objections, and resolves he is
not in the list of the disobedient: One or two such comfortable instances are
as mighty; as God promised the Israelites should be, Deuteronomy. 32. 30. one able to
chase a thousand, and two to put ten thousand to flight; all fears and
misgiving thoughts are dissipated and fled before them: and as once the French
King in his return to the numerous swelling titles of the Spaniard, thought the
bare repetition of France, France, France, was a full balance to them all; so
when whole files of great and scandalous Crimes present themselves, one single
virtue is thought a sufficient counterpoize. He whose Conscience upbraids him
with all Profaneness toward God, and in Sobriety toward himself: yet if he
can but answer that he is just to his neighbor, he thinks he has quit scores,
and fears no farther reckonings: he who is immerst in all the filthiness both
of flesh and spirit, has abandoned his Mind to pride and envy, his Body to
lust and intemperance; and so sacrificed both those to Devils: yet if he cast
but some grains of this estate upon the Altar; devote any small part of that to
God, for the uses of Piety or Charity; he concludes that Incense will send up a
Cloud thick enough, to obscure the other from the Eyes of Divine Justice, and
yield so sweet a savor as will perfume him in spite of all that Noisomness:
so extending old Tobits words beyond his meaning, that alms, though alone,
delivers from death, and cleanses from all sin. He who is deep in sacrilege
and rebellion, that can daringly swallow repeated deliberate perjuries; yet if
he can get but the demure tenderness, to fear a sudden oath, he is Chemist
enough to extract a confidence out of that fear, and presumes that formal
Civility to Gods name, shall expiate all the real Violations and Contempts of
him: and while men make such use of their partial peecemeal obedience, it can
never be the Devils interest to disturb them in it, to awake them out of their
pleasant dream, or to exact of them to deposite those poor unsignificant
remains of their Christianity, which serve only to make them more Supine, not
more Safe.

NAY indeed his affairs are so stated, that to some he can and does, and
without danger allow a yet far greater indulgence, he can permit them to bid
much fairer than this for Heaven, and yet knows the purchase is far from being
made; he can see them cashier not some one single sin, but whole troops
together, and yet not fear the sinking of his Cause: He can trust them so far,
that as the young man in the Gospel, they may be pronounced, Not far from the
Kingdom of God: yet as long as there is but one unmortified Lust, that can send
them away sad from Christ, his tenure is firm enough. Herod may hear John
Baptist gladly, nay do many things upon it, yet let him but keep Herodias, and
she will soon be able to secure both her self and Satan against the danger of
that Competition. This is indeed his main advantage that he can hold fast by
the smallest thread; and whereas to our bliss a conspiration and union of all
Virtues is required; our ruin can spring from any one solitary Crime: many
rounds make that Ladder wherewith we must scale heaven: whereas one step serves
to precipitate us into the Abyss; so sadly verifying the Poetical Axiom,
Facilis descensus Averni. In sum, while there is but any one single sin
indulged to: that is the Devils tedder; and though it should be imagined so
loose, as to give men scope to range over all other sorts of Virtues, to taste
the sweet and feed liberally on them; yet still the beast is in the power of
him who has fixed the line, not only to be finally led away to slaughter, but
also to have the length shortened, and be either put out of the reach, or quite
removed from the view of those pleasant pastures.

FOR though the security raised by such an ununiform piety is in many so
exactly apportioned to Satan's interest, that he has no cause to wish the change
of his tenure; yet where the circumstances are such, as will make it useful, he
can easily twist his thread into a Cable. When he thinks one Monarch Lust too
mild a regiment, he can set up an Athenian Tyranny, or which is yet worse, let
in the whole populacy of Sin upon the Soul, which like the Egyptian Locusts
shall overrun and devour it, not leave any green thing on the ground, and that
this is in his power we have too much reason to conclude. He is we know a
cunning sophister, and if he has abused us so far as to impose one sin upon us,
he may thence very regularly deduce many more, as one false Premise admitted,
may be improved into thousands of false Conclusions. Indeed supposing a man
resolute to adhere to one sin, he may with very good Logic persuade him to
multitudes of others. There are but two Objections usually made to any
Temptation; either the offense, or the danger; and these are usually objectable
to one sin as well as to another; so that this dilemma readily offers its self:
either it is reasonable to buy a pleasure at that price, or it is not: If it
be, then contrive that the crime be pleasant, and that brings its dispensation
with it: If it be not, then why do thou live in this one sin in despite of
both guilt and punishment; the later part of the Dilemma it is no part of Satan's
business to press, but the former he has too much advantage of pursuing
successefully; if he can but dress up a temptation to look invitingly, the
business is done. So ridiculous a thing is an uneven Piety, that it even laughs
it self out of countenance, and wants only temptation to become uniform Vice.
How absurdly looks it, to see a man run away with Joseph from the embraces of
his Mistress, and yet with full as great a speed accompany Gehazi in the
pursuit of a bribe; and how obvious is it to conclude that the former assault
was improsperous only because not managed with the right weapon; that he might
have been hired that would not be woed? What a mockery is it for a man to be
zealous for God, and rebellious against his King? as in the reverse, for a man
to be true to his King, and a rebel to his God: and who can but think, that had
either of the averted Crimes been cookt to their Palats, they might have
changed Messes. Indeed it is not imaginable by what rules of discourse, he that
embraces one sin should reject another: if it be done only upon fancy and
humor, as the repulst vice will have reason to complain of great partiality,
when as bad as its self is received and cherished; so it points out a way to
attacque him more prosperously: let it shape its self to the fancy, and sure
Satan, who can transform himself to an Angel of light, can soon work that easy
change: let the younger Brother get on the clothes of the favorite Esau,
transform its self into the shape and interest of the darling sin, and it need
not doubt of a free admission. But all this while to pretend conscience for
such an abstinence, is of all other pleas the must absurd, for why should he
scruple at one, that abandons himself to another. As S. James argues concerning
the guilt, so may we for the act of Sin: He that said do not commit adultery,
said also do not kill; and it is abusive mockery, the Soldiers Ave Rex, to bow
to his authority in the one, and resist it in the other. Thus unhappy is the
case of him who entertains one sin, his enclosure is broken down, and he is a
common for all: he is left destitute of a reply to any temptation, and like a
bashful person will be in danger of yielding, because he is ashamed to deny:
and this I doubt not, many have found experimentally true, some sins have been
committed not so much upon the force of inclination, as to be consentaneous to
themselves, to silence the upbraidings of their understandings for acting so
unevenly, it being impossible to give a reasonable account, why this and not
that, or that; for when by one bold wilful sin a man entered into a state of
hostility with God, it is not a tenderness in all others will make up the
breach: and then they think the rule of known enemies takes place, where all
civilities are disclaimed, and the quarrel managed to the most advantage. The
resolved Adulterer could perhaps without much difficulty be just, but when he
considers that that one Helena of his, will certainly make a war, he thinks
it is an impertinent niceness to lose a good prize, or dismiss his covetousness
while he resolves to retain his lust. The incorrigible drunkard could perchance
easily enough be chaste, but when he remembers that drunkenness excludes him
from the Kingdom of Heaven: having made that sale of his eternal inheritance,
he thinks it is but good husbandry to get as much as he can for it: So
treacherous a guest is any one Sin admitted, and lodged in the heart, it
despoils it of all its armor of defense, leaves it nothing wherewith to guard
its self against any assailant; and be it never so small a one, it is like those
little thieves which being put in at the window set the doors open to all the
rest.

BUT perhaps this danger may be thought in some degree warded by the natural
temper and constitution of men, which necessarily renders them unapt to
contradictory vices, and so will secure them at least from so many as are
disagreeable to their Temper: but if this should be granted, yet it confessedly
leaves them open to all others, and that were certainly bad enough: he that is
as wicked, as his complexion can not only incline, but permit him to be, will
not want much of the utmost number of sins: but whatever we can suppose that to
strike off from the tale; yet in the second place, it is very much to be feared,
that will defalk nothing of the weight; he that sins to the height of his
appetite, perhaps power, shall he be ever the more innocent because there were
some nauseated sins which he had not Self denial enough to commit. God absolves
us in proportion to the rectitude of our Wills, not the niceness of our
Complexions: he that wills to pursue whatever he can find gustful, how impious
soever; shall it be virtue in him that some Sins are unsavory and disagreeing
to his Palate; if it should, there may so many extrinsick things be by Analogy
brought in, either to swell or abate the accounts of our sin, that we shall be
much to seek in the estimate of it.

BUT in the third place, even these very aversions are no infallible
preservative, for if they happen to be more moderate and remiss, than the love
of some other sin; that predominant inclination will subdue those dislikes,
when ever its interest is to be served, by those otherwise not gustful
commissions. There is nothing more ordinary than to see one appetite pursued to
the violation of another. A man perhaps hates drunkenness, not only as a
bestial, but uneasy vice; yet if his love to Gain exceed his dislike to that;
when that is requisite to make up the price of a good bargain, that aversion
must stoop, and give way. A man despises swearing, as an insipid impertinent
Sin, yet if he set any great value upon being in the mode, and complying with
the gentile Dialect, that will soon debase him to what he so much contemned:
and truly there is scarce any other account to be given of that great and
foolish sin. But in no other instance is this so notoriously visible as in that
of duelling. I need not single out any one man's particular inclination, the
nature of mankind does certainly avert both killing and being killed: yet when
that Phantasm, that Chimera honor, has once possessed the mind, no reluctance of
humanity is able to make head against it: but it commands as uncontroul'dly, as
the Centurion in the Gospel, says to this man go and he goes, to another come
and he comes: nay as Tyrannically as the great Cham of Tartary, who as an Essay
of his Sovereignty commands whole troops to ride down precipices; nay these
Aversions are not only thus violently subdued by some foraign lust, but are
many times destroyed even by force of that very vicious principle which gave
them birth: for we mistake if we think they are always virtuous, or so much as
innocently founded; Vice is often at civil wars with its self; and the vehement
inclination to one, ingenders a displacency to another; but yet such a riddle
is this mystery of Iniquity, that upon the very same basis is built both the
abhorrence and commission of the same Sin. For example, a Proud man as much
hates to fawn and flatter others, as he loves to be flattered himself; yet let
his pride but once work the other way, and set him upon an ambitious project,
then all the mean condescentions imaginable are with ease digested, he can
crouch and prostrate, and as the Psalmist speaks, fall down and humble himself,
that by that descent he may rebound to the height he aims at: but still pride
is the common cause of these so distant effects. In like manner the Riotous
Prodigal detests covetousness, looks upon it as so sordid and base, that he
brands even prudent frugality as approaching too near it; yet let him but once
find the springs to grow dry which should feed his luxury; when he feels his
Riot begins to exhaust and prey upon its self, then even that despised
Covetousness shall be called in to its aid, to dig metal for the Furnace to
melt, and so by a strange Antiperistasis, prodigality shall beget rapine. Thus
unhappily prolifick is every Sin, that it carries in its bowels the seed and
principle even of those that seem the most Heterogeneous; and then how shall a
man that has admitted but any one such teeming lust be secured that it shall
not thus propagate, till his Soul become a mere desert, filled with all sorts
of wild and noxious creatures.

THERE is but one hope imaginable to interpose, and that is that Gods grace
shall prevent this exorbitant growth of impiety in him, and I acknowledge that
is sufficient to do it, where it may have its kindly operation; but where it
has so, it will uniformly suppress all sin, and therefore where any one
continues in Force and Vigor, it is manifest that operation of Grace is
obstructed, and such a man I should desire soberly to consider what assurance
he has, that he who has so evacuated Gods grace in one instance, shall not do
so in another? If in spite of that grace he can be lustful, why shall he not
be as able to resist it in favor of Drunkenness, Sacrilege, Rebellion, or any
other crime to which he shall at any time have appetite. Can he imagine that
God sends forth an irresistible strength against some sins, whilst in others
he permits men a power of repelling his Grace? That were to transcribe the
Syrians absurd Fancy, that he is a God of the hills and not of the valleys:
No certainly, he who has his own unhappy experience to attest the possibility
of frustrating the Divine succors in one particular, has too sure grounds to
infer the like in others. Nay alas, it does not only infer it by way of
argument and deduction, but it is very apt to produce it by way of cause and
efficiency: We gain a readiness to any thing by custom and assuefaction, and he
who has habitually opposed Grace in the defense of a Lust, has delivered
himself from that modesty which makes the first defiance uneasy, and so runs
on with ease and boldness to future resistance. It faring with men in this
violation of Gods grace as it does in that of his Patrimony, the first
Sacrilege is looked on with some horror, and men are fain to devise arguments
and colors to delude their relucting Consciences; but when they have once made
the breach, their scrupulosity soon retires; one draught of that impious gain,
has such a stupifying effect, that they can without check swallow on, till the
Sin flame so fiercely, that nothing but mere want of Matter can extinguish it.
But admit it were possible for a man to be secured of his own compliance with
some parts of restraining grace whilst he impugnes it in others, yet who shall
ascertain him of that grace? It being Gods, implies it is not in our power, he
may surely do what he will with his own, and though his promise has made a sure
entail of it to all those, who humbly seek and diligently use it: yet it no
where engages that it shall be the portion of any other; much less that it
shall importunately and endlesly renew its assaults on those who have often
repulst and put it to flight: In that case Gods resolution concerning the old
world becomes appliable, My spirit shall not always strive with man; and Christ
who forbids us to cast our pearls before swine, will certainly never prostitute
what is infinitely more precious, his Grace to those, who have so long trampled
it under their feet; and so those must be concluded to have done, who have
persevered in any one sin: for Grace is uniformly opposite to all, and
therefore the cleaving to any is defiance and affront to it. But we need not
the help of inferences and deduction, the threats of God are express in this
matter: The Talent is decreed to be taken from the unprofitable servant, who
has not employed it to the proper use, and such infallibly is every man who has
not actuated the Grace given him to the subduing of every reigning sin; and the
reprobate mind mentioned in Scripture as the most dismal of all Plagues, the
(...) which yields not to the melting and the purging force of Fire, and
therefore does consign to that of Hell, is founded upon the voluntary rejection
of God in particular instances, Romans 1. How then can he, that in any one single
thing so rejects him, assure himself that shall not be the event of it: That he
who would not have Christ rule entirely in his heart, shall at once be put out
of his Government and protection: have all those spiritual aids withdrawn,
which should either assist him to good, or fortify him against ill; and like
an outlawed person be exposed to the outrage of all that will assault him.

AND now would God this might be sadly pondered, that men would not be their
own Sirens, and entertain themselves with those deceitful melodies, which will
end in howlings and gnashings of teeth; that they would not think their having
some few virtues, and but some few vices will serve to satisfy the design, or
procure them the rewards of their Christianity: for if they should continue in
this posture, and not be tempted to grow worse, they may certainly conclude
it is because Satan finds they need not. And can they be proud of that Virtue
which the Devil himself will allow them? And think themselves good enough when
they are as bad as he wishes them? But even in this they have no other tenure
than his Will. When he pleases for his interest* or even for his divertisement
and recreation he may hurry them to all that is most enormous; convert their
Hypocrisy to profaneness, their partial Piety to universal Ungodliness; they
have nothing to interpose in their own Defense, not so much as a reasonable
Argument to oppose to him, they have made a voluntary sale of themselves for
one or more beloved sin, and now as his vassals he may impose on them what
others he pleases: and by their doting affection to their Rachel take advantage
also to obtrude the despised Leah upon them. And how wretched, how deplorable
is this state? What a Piety is this that we must owe to the Devil, while we can
be no better than he will let us?

YET this is without Hyperbole, the condition of every man that is not
sincerely uniformly Christian; every indulged sin gives Satan livery and seisin
of his heart, and a power to dispose of it as he please. I know men are apt to
flatter themselves with other hopes, and think that those obediences they pay
to God shall like a pre-ingagement disannul all after contracts made by guilt,
and put them into the possession of Him who is able to bind that strong man.
But God will not be accessory to such a fraud, even toward the Devil while
they keep the price, enjoy that pleasure or profit wherewith he bought them,
God will never interpose to defeat him of his purchase.

AND as God will not thus forcibly wrest them out of his hands, much less will
he descend to a capitulation and composition with him. God is a jealous God,
and what jealous husband did ever by compact divide his right with the
Adulterer. Where he finds a persevering disloyalty he gives a bill of divorce
and disclaims his relation. Yet so besotted are men, as to hope God will
ratify that alienation they have made of one part of their heart, and
contentedly enjoy the rest; and as competitors use sometimes to do, share with
his Rival. But alas that immortal quarrel will not be thus taken up, the
difference between these irreconcilable Antagonists will not be so compremised.
God disdains such a Treaty, nor will ever come so much as to an interview with
his enemy, within the lists and recesses of one Heart. And while men labor
such an accord, they are but combining with Satan against God and their own
Souls: he knows well that while he holds any part, God will have none, and so
the whole falls to him, and then he may very safely be modest, and demand but
moderately, and by that seeming difference and yielding, gain more than by all
his most eager contendings. I suppose every man will disown the having this
ridiculous design of compounding the strife between Heaven and Hell; but
certainly it is the natural interpretation of such partial obediences, when two
Litigants contend for something which I have in my keeping, if I divide it
between them, is it not obvious to conclude I desire to compose the dispute and
satisfy both parties, and is not this the very case here? It Is true indeed, it
carries a very absurd sound, but then how more absurd is it for men to act at
such a rate, that when it is represented to them in the truest colors,
themselves are ashamed to own what they have done? And this calls loudly upon
them to put themselves out of the lash of their own discipline: to recover such
an innocence that they may not be forced with David to sentence themselves,
when that their crimes appear in the light disguise of a Parable.

AND this indeed is the only proper use of all these considerations, the danger
and folly are as unuseful as unpleasant speculations, unless it be in order to
the reforming that wherein both are founded. Let men consider themselves, as
engaged in those wild projects which even themselves look on with scorn; as
ensnared in that unhappy contract which has rendered them part of the Devils
possession, and contrive how they may obliterate that reproach, and disentangle
their Mortgaged Souls.

AND for this there is but one way imaginable, and that is by quitting their
hands of that which they took as the valuable consideration in that mad
bargain; restoring Satan's coin to him, not only principal but use also: casting
away the main sin and all the little appendages, which like offesets have shot
out from that root; retaining nothing that has his mark and impress upon it,
that so he may not pretend to any thing of theirs by right of barter or
exchange. This, and this only is the way to disseise him of his Estate, to
cancel those fatal Indentures which bound them to him, and till this be done,
as long as they keep any part of his wages of iniquity, his title remains in
full force, they are still his servants, his vassals.

EVEN that redemption of Christ has no efficacy toward the enfranchizing of
such, for though it proclaim a universal Iubile, yet it forces liberty upon
none, he that will nail his Ear to the door-post and defy a manumission, may
continue his slavish state still, and indeed though Christ's death was designed
to rescue us from the power of Satan; yet the first essay of that rescue was to
redeem us from our vain conversation: And where that is not done, which is so
essentially fundamental to all the rest, it is not possible any other part of
that Redemption should be achieved, unless we will confound the order of
Nature as well as Grace, and make the consequent precede the antecedent.

LET no man therefore upon any vain hopes delay the one only expedient to his
security, but pay back the earnest-penny he has received from Satan, fling away
his sin, how pleasant or profitable soever, with the greatest Abhorrence, as
knowing it is the price of blood, and that not only his Saviors, but his own
too; and this immediately, lest the forfeiture be irreversible. We know the
danger of lapsing time in case of Mortgage, but here our danger is greater,
because the time is so uncertain, for though God had nothing else to do in the
whole transaction ('it was wholly our own work) yet it is he that assigns the time
of forfeiture: he alone knows how far we may go in sin, before we pass the
possibility of a retreat; how long he will be provoked before he suffer his
whole displeasure to arise; and how many repellings of his Grace, and
quenchings of his Spirit they are to which his desertions are apportion'd.
Pharaohs heart was hardened by God after the Eighth resistance, and we have no
security but ours may be sooner: yet if that should be taken as the standing
measure, how dreadful an abode would it make to many of us? Who is there that
has espoused any one beloved sin, that has not much oftener repeated the acts of
it, every one of which is a resistance and a contumacy against God? Who is
there that has not done it against so many express warnings and loud calls of
God in his own Conscience, which renders it yet a fuller parallel, and it is to
be feared, too many agree with it even in the last and highest circumstance,
that of the Plagues too, by an obstinate persisting after so many Judgments
sent to mollify and reclaim them; and then where the premises are the same,
it is too likely the conclusion may be so also.

I SHALL not wish any Person so strictly to apply this case, as to conclude,
that he is already in this state, but I should wish all men would apply it so
far, as to infer how possible, nay how probable it is, that the very next
resistance shall put them in it. It Is not Pharaohs being a Heathen and they
Christians that will give them any security; it being no part of the
Gospel Covenant, that men shall be ever the longer allowed to trample upon
Grace. All the difference it makes is rather on the other side; the contempts
are enhans'd to a higher guilt, and consequently, the fewer acts may now serve
to fill up the measure. And if their experience testify to them, that in their
particular God has used a greater long suffering, than he has given any grounds
to expect, if the guilt of their Consciences testify that they have committed
many more acts; and yet some remaining tendernesses and regrets witness also,
that they are not yet given up to an utter hardness and obduration, O let them
not presume themselves safe, because they are not utterly desperate; but lay
their hearts open to be stamped and impressed by grace, before they grow utterly
inflexible; timely consider what is the design of this long animity, and
without any more struglings and resistance suffer it to attain its aim and lead
them to repentance.

FOR though their Souls be not yet wholly petrified, yet how know they in what
an instant that unhappy Metamorphosis may be wrought, or if it should not be so
sudden, yet it is certain every act of sin makes gradual approaches toward it:
so that if God should not inflict it by way of punishment, yet the mere force
of Habit would produce it by way of natural efficacy: And to be convinced of
this, I should require no more, but that men would reflect, and see what
effects it has already wrought, how far it has advanced toward that fatal
point. Let them send their thoughts back through every stage and period of
their sin, and observe whether as that has grown, so their tenderness and
reluctance of Conscience has not abated and decreased: Let them but recollect
what regrets and disquiets they had, when they ventured upon the first unlawful
commission, and compare it with their present, and I doubt not they will
discern a great inequality; they will find that every act of sin has allayed
somewhat of the sharpness of those pangs, and proportionably to the frequency
of the repetition they approach toward insensible: and then let him whose older
Habit has multiplied those Acts, sadly consider how few steps he has to the end
of his unhappy journey, though no extrinsick concurrent should hasten his pace.
But when Gods desertion shall, as for ought he knows, it may the next minute
supervene: that as a full and violent Wind drives him in an instant, not to the
Harbor, but on the Rock where he will be irrecoverably split.

NOR let any man fortify himself against these terrors, by hoping that his one
single (perhaps small) sin shall not have this destructive force; for if it be
wilful it carries in it that which is properly the malignity of all sin, to
wit, a resistance and opposition against God, and this is so mortal a Venom,
that the least Dose of it is deadly, as a man may as certainly be poisoned by a
dram of Arsenick, as with the largest draught.

THE more natural inference lies the other way, if it be but a single or petty
sin, it is so much the easier to part with; he that is bound with a strong
Cable, or with a multitude of lesser Cords, may pretend some necessity of his
Captivity from the strength of his bonds; but he that is tied with one slender
string, such as one resolute struggle would be sure to break: he is prisoner
only to his own sloth or humor, and who will pity his thraldom, where it is so
apparently his choice? Do not therefore say my sin is inconsiderable and
therefore I need not relinquish it, but my sin is inconsiderable therefore I
need not keep it. So slight a pleasure I may part with and find no miss: this
pedling profit I may resign and 'twill be no breach in my Estate. And if Christ
require a renunciation of those sins which are as the Hand and Eye, shall I
scruple to deposite those which are but as the Hair or Nails.

NAY he may yet argue higher, and from the smalness of the sin deduce the
enhansement of the Guilt: great acquisitions carry some temptation in their
face, but despicable prizes do rather avert than tempt. 'Twas the sign of a
common harlot to be hired with a Kid, Genesis 38. and sure he must be of a strange
prostitute Soul, that can adulterate for such low trivial wages. To dishonor
God, though the whole world were to be acquired by it, were great impiety, but
to do it for handfuls of Barley and pieces of Bread, Ezekiel. 13. 19. himself
brands as a yet higher pitch. And sure it argues a very light esteem of God,
when one poor contemptible lust shall be able to overpoize him in our hearts.

NOR is the folly less than the profaneness, when there is but one Jonah to be
cast overboard, it is the greater madness to hazard a wrack; and let such a man
pretend what he pleases in extenuation of his sin, make that appear never so
minute and despicable, yet it is apparent all the love which other men scatter
and distribute upon several, he has united and concentred in this one lust. The
most doting affection when it is summed up can amount to no more than this,
that it makes a man expose himself to the greatest pain, the greatest loss for
the thing beloved. And this is most visible here, Hell is as certainly
acquired, and Heaven as certainly forfeited by one sin as many; and then though
there may be odds in other respects, yet what is there in this, between this
more modest and the most licentious Sinner, but that the former puts the same
value upon one, that the other does upon many sins, and sells his Soul so much
the cheaper.

AND now would God such men would review their bargain, soberly consider what
there is in this Idolized sin of theirs, which should exact such costly
sacrifices. Let him whose long intimacy and experience has given him access to
its most secret recesses, that has rifled its bowels, and knows the utmost
whether of pleasure or profit that lies there concealed. Let him I say, that is
thus qualified for it, make an exact inventory of its wealth, and then let him
compare it with what he is to pay for it; weigh its flat and momentary
Pleasures, with those most transcending and perpetual Ioys which are at Gods
right hand; its base and perishing commodities, with those unfailing treasures
in the Heaven; and then judge of his purchase in respect of that part of his
prize: And if that be not convincement enough, let him weigh the other also;
those sad pains which are too intolerable to be suffered, and yet so eternal,
that they can never cease to be suffered, and think whether that be not too
dear a rate for that pleasure, whose gust is so little, and whose duration is
less: or what profit he will have in the revenue of his sin, that Gold and
Silver which will finally eat his flesh as it were fire, Ia. 5. 3. and prove
the unhappy fuel of his flames.

FROM all these premises, certainly Reason and Religion do equally infer the
same conclusion, to wit, that men should not tolerate themselves one minute in
any known sin of how small a size soever it be; nor so impertinently betray
their Souls to ruin for that which they call light and trivial; and is so
indeed in respect of the acquest, but overwhelmingly ponderous in regard of the
effects and pernicious consequents. And O that men's practices might evince them
to have made this just deduction, that those who have in many things preserved
an innocence, would not be so ill husbands as to forfeit all the advantage of
that Care for want of extending it a little farther, nor suffer the whiter
parts of their Soul to be discolored or tincted by the reflection of one
crimson sin; but rather let their tears wash that into a whiteness, that they
may be uniform and of a piece. For though Jacob clad his darling Joseph in a
party-colored garment; yet God owns none either for favorite Son, or so much
as Servant that he finds so arrayed. The followers of the Lamb are all clad in
white, and in that attire we must be sure to put our selves if we mean to go in
with him to the marriage. And since the Gospel is the invitation to that feast,
let none imagine he has complied with it till he have thus fitted himself: till
then he affronts and baffles his Christianity, sends it away empty without its
errand; nay, which is worse prostitutes and profanes it, makes it serve only
for a Gourd, that he may sit under the shadow of it, and commit his sins the
more undisturbed; but let him remember that he is all this while breeding that
worm, which will smite this Gourd, and leave him unsheltred to that scorching
wrath of God, which will make the improvement of Ionahs passionate Wish, that
God would take away his life, his most rational Desire; render not Death only,
but Annihilation also, as eligible as it will be impossible.

CHAP. VII. A survey of the Mischiefs arising from Mistakes concerning
Repentance.
ANOTHER dangerous Underminer of Christian Practice is the many affected
mistakes in the business of Repentance. Men look upon that as the grand recipe
of the Gospel, an infallible Catholicon against all their spiritual maladies;
and so far they judge right, for so indeed it is. But when they proceed to
compound this sovereign Medicine for their own use, they do it most
deceitfully; leave out the principal and most operative ingredients: and by
being such ill Apothecaries defame the Gospel as the Dispensatory, and Christ
as the Physician, and likewise ruin themselves as the Patients. But of those
who make this imperfect and Defective composition, all do it not alike; some
leave out one part, some another, and some so many that they retain nothing of
its substance and reality. Eat out all the heart and virtue of it, and leave
only an empty shell, the gilding as it were of the Pill, the Form and mere
outside of Repentance.

IN this later rank I place those who suffer repentance to pass no farther than
their Frontiers, and Outworks; assign it its quarters in the superficies of the
man, the Face, or Tongue, or Gesture; but if it attempt to penetrate any
deeper, if it send but one serious thought to alarm the heart, then like the
Edomites against Israel, Number. 20. all the forces are mustered to impede its
passage; such formal Penitents as these all ages have produced. Christ tells of
those who disfigured their faces, Mat. 6. 16. put on as it were a vizard only
to act this part: and Esaias 58. 5. long before describes them, by the bowing
down the head like a bull-rush, and certainly the race of them is not worn out
in our days; a demure or rather a lugubrious look, a sad or whining tone,
makes up, it is to be feared, the sum of many men's Humiliations. Nay as the
world has of late gone, that alone were but a modest pretense: such theatrical
forms stickle hard for the prize, not of that one part but of all religion: a
distorted countenance is made the Mark of an upright heart, and none is thought
to speak the Language of Canaan, that dresses it not in an uncooth sound: and
then what wonder is it that they are impatient others should worship God, as
David invites, in the beauty, while themselves choose to do it in the Deformity
of holiness.

BUT others make somewhat a fairer advance toward repentance, by taking in
some of those things which are indeed its necessary concomitants; of this kind
is in the first place confession of Sin: and this after some sort is stuck at
by few; no man who has not herded himself with the worst sort of Fanatics,
imagines himself sinless, or pretends to be thought so by others, but will very
readily acknowledge to all the world that he is a sinner: and as to men, so
especially and more solemnly to God. Every man that but offers at praying at
all, thinks confession a necessary Branch of his devotion: all public forms
have ever carried that in the front, as supposing it the most principal,
universal, and daily requisite to the lapsing state of humane corruption: And
perhaps it is the general innate persuasion of this, that has secured that part
of our Liturgy, from those impertinent cavils, which have particularly aimed at
most other members of it. And I suppose this is as frequent in the Closet as in
the Church: the only fear is, that there it is as loose and general too: that
those private and particular guilts which are neither fit nor possible to be
distinctly inserted in public, do many times lose their place even in private
Confessions also. The shortness and the ease of general forms being very likely
to recommend them to those whose numerous sins threaten too great a length, and
whose confused snarl'd consciences render it difficult, thus to pull out thread
by thread: but where Sins are thus molded up in a lump, they will like great
masses of Pills or confections keep the more undecay'd, retain more of their
strength and vigor. So that such Confessions are very indulgent to Satan's
interest, who fears not the impressions that can be made upon him, while his
body remains entire: the great execution then beginning when it is broken and
scattered, and each sin is singled out for a particular pursuit: and where that
is not attempted, the war can never be successful, nor thought in earnest.

BUT suppose this be done; and by exact enumeration, each sin is parted from
its fellows, as when a conqueror pursues the flying troops of routed Enemies:
yet if this be all, if quarter be allowed, and any mercy given, no real prize
is gained by this achievement. He who recounts his sins with milder purpose
toward them than utter excision, he makes no approach toward the essential
part of Repentance. He may bring out large Catalogues of his sins, and call
them confessions; but he may better express his own sense, if he term them
rather inventories of his goods, for such it is apparent he reckons them,
whilst he resolves to keep them. Indeed there is not a more absurd piece of
Pageantry, than these formal Confessions, and such as shows how little, God is
considered in his great Attribute the searcher of hearts. It Is certain no man
would hope to atone an offended superior, by a submiss acknowledgment of his
fault, did he know that his purpose of reiterating it were discerned: and what
a tacit blasphemy is it then, to treat God at such a rate as presumes him as
deceivable as a poor Mortal; and sure this were a strange Ingredient in
repentance. We look on it as a high pitch of impiety boastingly to avow our
sins, and it deserves to be considered whether this kind of confessing them
have not some affinity with it. Should I tell a man I have injured and provoked
you thus and thus, and so I resolve to do again at the next opportunity: I
refer it to common construction, whether this were not to justify, not retract
the unkindness. Now what I suppose thus said to man, is in the secret purpose
of our heart, no less articulately spoken to God, who needs not our words to
discern our meaning. Therefore whoever intends to repeat his sins, nay does not
seriously intend to forsake them, does in truth maintain and defend his vicious
practice, how loudly soever his Tongue accuses it. And such clamors are but
like the feigned Quarrels of combined cheats, in order to delude some third
person. But alas, the scene is here unluckily laid, for God will not be
mocked, nor will the Mercy promised to him that confesses and forsakes, ever
reach him that confesses and retains. Confession is no farther acceptable
than as it either flows from, or tends to beget an abhorrence of Sin, and
abstracted from those qualifications it becomes loathsome and distasteful to
God. Alas, can we think our Historical vein so pleasant, that he shall be
delighted with the narrative of those crimes, whose perpetration he detested.
Can it be Incense in his nostrils, to have our Dunghils displayed? or can his
pure eyes be gratified with such polluted prospects? True indeed, he gladly
descends to all this as a Physician; nauseats not our foulest ulcers, when we
bring them for cure: but when like beggars we make them openly our form of
address, and dread nothing more than their healing; certainly their View will
only excite his indignation, not his pity. And this, it is to be feared abodes
sadly to many of us, it is our vulgar Objection to the Romanist, that they make
their confessions contributive rather to their confidence than to their
reformation: what their share is in that guilt, I shall not here examine, but I
may too truly pronounce they have not enclosed it, that black circle of Sin and
confess, Confess and sin, encompasses as well Protestants as Papists; if
possibly not quite so many, the cause it is doubtful is (what we need not boast)
not that More of us confess aright, but that Fewer confess at all. But of those
that do, if we may but cross, examine, and interrogate their actions against
their words, these will soon confess (and that not auricularly, but in a loud
and audible voice) the invalidity of their solemnest Confessions. When we see a
man that yesterday kept a Humiliation, to day trampling on the necks, invading
the possessions of his Brethren, we need no other proof how vainly and
unprofitably, if not how hypocritically and provokingly, he confessed his
Pride, or Covetousness; and the like we may infer when we see any man persevere
in any gross wilful sin. And of such, God knows there are such multitudes, as
will give us instances more than enough, how wide a difference there is,
between a mere Confitent and a true Penitent.

BUT in the next place, a passionate regret at Sin, a grief and sadness at its
Memory, more speciously pretends to enter us into Gods roll of Mourners: Sorrow
has (in vulgar acceptance) so engrost the whole notion of repentance, that men
are apt to secure themselves, that the Wind of a penitential Sigh is so mighty,
as will blow away the guilt of the most mountainous Sin: that if they have but
wept a little upon their crimes, they have quite extinguished the wrath they
kindled: but alas these are vain dreams, God who delights not to grieve the
children of men, does not project for our sorrow, but our innocence; and would
never have invited us to the one, but as an expedient to the other. It Is
natural even to mere Animals to shun that by which they have smarted, and
therefore sorrow for sin is a very proper means to avert our appetite from it:
but if we have learnt the unhappy skill of separating the effect from the
cause, if our Grief abate not our Love; if we can cast kind looks at our sins,
even through those Tears wherewith our Eyes are glas'd, this will sure be as
far from accomplishing our design, as Gods: leave us equally unpardoned, as
unreform'd.

NAY alas, such Sorrows as these will rather serve to enhanse than Expiate our
guilts; they are loud witnesses against us that we know the malignity of those
sins we commit; that we have poised them, and find them as a talent of lead
upon our Souls, and yet prefer them before Christ's light burden: that we have
outvied that perverse Election wherewith Elihu charges Job, and chosen
affliction rather than innocence, Job 36. 21. and though we have felt the
gnawing of the Worm, yet still resolve to cherish it, till it gain its woeful
Concomitant of unquenchable fire, and sure this resolvedness, this high
fortitude in Sin, can with no reason be imagined a preparative to its
remission, 'twill rather serve to list us among Satan's Martyrs, than Gods
Penitents.

AND indeed if we examine the original of this kind of Sorrow, what is there
that an with any face pretend to an acceptance? alas, it is apparent there is
no dislike to the sin; for the natural effect of that, would be the abandoning
it. If I have fallen into the mire, common reason directs me, not to sit down and
cry that I am so defiled; but to cleanse and wash my self, and beware of such
another misadventure. Now Gods enmity is purely with the sin: and if we think
to contract a league with him; we must espouse his quarrel, hate what he hates:
But in this case it is quite otherwise, we dislike only the consequence, not the
crime; are dissatisfied to see that what is so pleasant, will not be safe:
detest those temporal or eternal miseries, which God has annexed to it: which is
upon the matter to grieve, not because we are guilty, but God is just; and to
avert only that part of the evil, of which he owns to be the author, that of
Punishment: whilst that of Sin, as our own creature we dandle and caress. And
can we think it sufficient to atone an incensed Majesty, that we love our own
ease, while yet we love our sin so much better? is it a virtue to have some
ineffective regrets to damnation, and such a Virtue too, as shall serve to
balance all our vices? this were indeed a compendious course to block up Hell
gates, and leave none a possibility of ever getting thither, but those who
scaled the wall and desperately resolved to possess themselves of that place of
Torment. But alas, they are other fruits of Repentance that must deliver us
from the wrath to come: for though I deny not, that the apprehension of Danger,
is extremely both reasonable and useful, yet it is only by way of preparative:
it is like the Trumpet that gives the Alarm, and sets us to the battle, but it
must not pretend to be like those of Gideon that achieved the whole victory.
To see our danger, may occasion, but does not cause, or necessarily infer an
escape. I may madly leap into that pit which I see gaping to swallow me, and
then my foresight serves only to render me my own murderer. In short, if that
formidable aspect of our Sins, make us run from them, it has done us the
happiest office; plucked us as S. Jude says, out of the fire: but if our love be
so doting, as to counter-charm our fear; if we be so bewitched with the
deceitfulness of sin, that we will have its Embraces, though we know them
deadly; if we weep that we have sinned, and yet go on to sin; our wilful Guilt
will defile our Tears, but our tears will never cleanse our guilt. We only
assist in the judicature against our selves; and to Gods condemnation add our
own: and what we call our Penitence, becomes a sad Attestation of our
Incorrigibleness.

AND as this mere Sorrow will never avail, so neither will a partial and
imperfect reformation, and that whether it be defective in respect of the kind,
or of the Duration: to the former we have spoken elsewhere, and shall not need
to repeat: but of the later there will need no less caution; men being apt to
obtrude fallacies on themselves in this as much as in the other. Every
transient gleam of Piety is concluded to be that flame in which the Holy Ghost
descended, and though it want the main circumstance of resting on them, yet
serves to personate the Comforter. He that whilst the soreness of his late
pangs of conscience remains, finds himself a little indisposed for a new carier
in sin, presently concludes repentance has had its perfect work in him, made
that change and transmutation, which certainly denominates him a new creature,
and pronounces his vicious appetites extinct and mortified: when alas they are
but strewn over with a little penitential Ashes, and will as soon as they meet
with combustible matter, any apt temptation, flame out as fierce as ever, and
God knows the event does too often actually attest this after all the
ablutions, and purification of their repentance, their next work is to divest
themselves of their white robe, and those whom yesterday you saw in the laver,
to day you shall find wallowing in the mire: and as with far the more guilt, so
sometimes with much the greater confidence, for having been so washed: yet so
strongly are some men's phancies possessed with their imaginary purity, that they
are the last that take notice how the scene is changed: they comfort
themselves, that sin and they have had some little skirmishes, though but
preparatory to a closer league; that they had fixed good purposes, though there
remain nothing visible but their violation; and so will call themselves Christ's
Sheep, though their notorious impurities witness them to belong only to that
herd into which the Legion entered.

THIS is a deceit which one would think should immediately detect its self, but
it is strange to see, how our wishes can prescribe to our faith; and what a more
than omnipotent power our selflove has in reconciling contradictions: yet I can
scarce think this innate strength of corruption had been sufficient for the
purpose, had it not had the auxiliary aid of some commodious doctrines. My
present design is so far from controversial, that I am loath to point out any to
which I must express unkindness: yet upon this occasion, I shall refer it to
consideration, whether that method which has been used to quiet some
Consciences, be not very apt to stupifie more. When I see one who from his
present reigning sins, regularly infers the illness of his state; that is yet
by his Casuist, diverted from that prospect, and bid look back to see, whether
no part of his life afforded any Evidence of true Grace, and if he can but
remember any such time; is warranted to make that his Epoch, from whence to
date his infallible assurance; is told that that immortal seed, though it may
be covered, yet cannot be choked; but will most certainly spring up unto
Eternal life: When I say I see this easy remedy prescribed to his fears,
'twill be obvious for me to compound my self an Antidote from the same
Ingredients: To fix my Eye upon some mark of Regeneration which at some time or
other, I either have, or phancied to have had upon me, and with the steadfast
beholding of that, as of the brazen Serpent be fortified against all the venom
of my fiery lusts. Cast in this one stick, and with it sweeten all the waters
of Marah, secure me against all the bitter effects of my present guilts. How
fatal an influence such discoursings as these are apt to have on practice, is
too obvious both in the cause, and effect: I need not examine the authority of
that grand Principle on which they are founded; since if that were admitted,
yet it will not justify the before mentioned Superstructure: for suppose it
received as an infallible truth, that grace if true can never be lost: yet
it is, by the confession of all, so easy to be deceived in judging what is so,
and our partialities to our selves are so likely to betray us to that deceit;
that these Corallaries men deduce thence for their personal assurance, can
never partake of the supposed infallibility of those premises they derive from,
and consequently are much too slight a basis for men to trust with so great a
weight, as is that of their present comfort and future state.

SEVERAL other pernicious errors there are in the matter of Repentance which
men fall into, shall I say, or rather aspire to; make it their ambition to be
under their covert and patronage, and with extreme Violence to their reason as
well as religion, climb up to those castles in the air, and there fortify
themselves impregnably against all the sacred Artillery of Divine threats.
Their false confidences serve them as feather-beds, not only to sleep securely
in, but to dead all bullets that are shot against them. But of all those
deceitful refuges, there is none more treacherous, and yet more confidently and
universally resorted to, than that of a Repentance in reversion, to commence no
body knows when, some months or years hence, when this business is dispatched,
that lust satiated; or indeed to bear the same date (if not a later) with their
last Will and Testament. This is that unhappy retreat to which thousands fly as
the routed Syrians to Aphek, 1 Kings 20. 30. till they are entombed in that
wall, whose shelter they solicited: How desperate the hazard of such
procrastination is, has been so convincingly demonstrated by better Pens; that
trumpet has been blowed so loud by all our spiritual watchmen, that there
remains nothing seasonable, but to wonder whence men have got that Lethe which
secures them their sleep in spite of that Alarm: and certainly it is matter of
the greatest astonishment to observe the stupid, yet common boldness of men,
who so fearlesly expose themselves to this most formidable of perils; who yet
in things of far less danger and lighter consequence are so nicely timorous,
that no security is thought enough, every the remotest danger to their outward
concerns, excites their present vigilance to avert it: but here that order is
most absurdly inverted, and the present eminent danger is assigned and put off
to their future care. Let the Physician tell them he observes some Symptoms of
a latent Malady, some aptitudes or first Causes of a Disease; what have is
there made to meet that Enemy in the frontiers, before it advance too far? All
Arts of prevention are used, and such uneasy remedies submitted to, as perhaps
out-bid the pain of the Disease. In like manner let a Lawyer tell them he has
spied some defect in an entail, which may perhaps in the next age give some
interruption to their design of having their houses endure for ever, Psalm. 47.
how solicitous are they to repair that error, and leave nothing to the mercy of
a Law-quirk? And in both cases thank the vigilant care of their informer that
gave them notice of their danger: but let the Divine tell them he sees their
Souls languishing under the most mortal diseases; that they have actually
forfeited their inheritance in the land of the living, they can hear it
unconcernedly; say, or at least think those cares are to be remitted to Felix
his more convenient season, that when their Bodies are as infirm as their
Souls, then care may be taken for both together. That it is enough for their
spiritual Life to commence when the natural is expiring, and then to provide
for everlasting Habitations, when they are putting off their Earthly
Tabernacle: as for the thanks they give their Monitor, it is generally the same
that St. Paul received from the Galatians, to count him their enemy for telling
them the truth, Gal. 4. 16. but alas he has no reason to resent the injury,
since it is but the same they offer to their nearest and most intimate friend,
that Angel guardian which God and Nature has placed within their own breasts, I
mean their Conscience: let that at any time whisper the same admonition, and
immediately they cry out as Ahab to Eliah, Have thou found me O my Enemy. All
arts are used to convey themselves out of its Reach, Business, or Company, or
Drink, or any thing is solicited to come in to their rescue, that in that
throng they may deceive its pursuit, or at least in that louder noise drown its
voice; and is not this to look on it as their Enemy, while they shun it as a
Malefactor does the Officer. Yet I appeal to the breasts of those, who lean
upon the broken reed of a late Repentance, whether this be not the case with
them: let them tell me whether they dare trust themselves alone with their
Conscience, give it opportunity of speaking freely to them, of laying before
them the mad adventure they make of their precious Souls; which they do not
only expose to as many hazards of a swift damnation, as there are accidents
which may surprise their bodies with a sudden death; but do besides by this
resistance repel and quench that Spirit, without which they can never hope to
effect that so necessary, so difficult a work; nay, I may, I fear, ask some of
them whether they have not so often shunned these parleys, that their
Consciences like an abused Friend, has at last given them over, ceast to pursue
them with more of those unwelcome importunities; and by its silence left them
secured from all noise which may disturb that treacherous sleep into which they
have lulled themselves. To those who are thus given up to the spirit of
slumber, I cannot hope to speak loud enough to rouse them; but to those that
are but of the former rank, that have not yet so prosper'd in their unkind
design against themselves, as quite to have alienated their bosom friend, that
are yet within the reach of those amica verbera, the stripes and reproofs of
their own Conscience; to such I would address with this most affectionate
petition, that they would not seek to remove themselves from that wholesome
discipline; that they would not fly that Chyrurgion whose Lancet threatens none
but the imposthumated parts; but rather choose to be showed the formidableness
of their Danger, than by a blind embracing it, to perish in it. And if they
have but any general confused inclinations to this so reasonable a request, I
shall then put on more solemnity, assume to come as an Envoy from those dreaded
Consciences of theirs, to mediate an enterview, to propose the fixing some time
of parley, and bespeak their patience to hear it out: And let them but grant
this, let them but dare to do so much in order to their own safety, and I can
scarce think it possible they should after retain that daring, which only tends
to their ruin. In a word, let men seriously and attentively listen to that
voice within them, and they will certainly need no other medium, to convince
them either of the error or danger of thus procrastinating their Repentance,
which themselves acknowledge must not upon their utmost peril be finally
omitted, and yet nothing but an immediate dispatch can secure it shall not.

'TWILL be needless to descend to a particular view of more of these deceits,
they will easily be detected by this one general Rule, that whatsoever falls
short of a present, universal, permanent Change, falls as much short of
Repentance. All the pretenses that are made upon any other score are but the
Garments of the elder brother put upon the back of the younger, which though
they might delude a blind Isaac, will never be able to deceive an all-seeing
God. All that remains is to offer to the Readers consideration, how nearly he
is concerned to guard himself against all delusions in this so important an
affair. It was an ancient Stratagem of War to poison the waters in an Enemies
Camp, that so they may drink their own deaths: but Satan has here far out-vied
that Policy. Were but our Nourishment infected, we had still a recourse left us
to Medicine, but here he has envonom'd our very Physic, and what cure remains
for those whose very remedies are their disease: when that Bath which was
designed to cleanse us, is its self polluted, we may well cry out as Dyonisius
of the corrupted River of Alexandria, (...) what Flood shall cleanse these
Waters? Where can we be secure, when our Repentance (which the Apostle, 2 Timothy
2. 26. supposes the Means of disentangling us) is its self become our Snare.
This as it loudly proclaims our danger, so surely in all reason it should awake
our care, teach us not to suffer our selves to be abused with delusive
appearances and shadows of Repentance, lest we finally find that Ixion-like we
have embraced a Cloud. What an amazing defeat will it be to him, who presumes
his Tears have blotted out the handwriting against him; to find the full Bill
brought in at the great Assize, and those he called his penitential sorrows
here, to prove but the Prologue to that Tragedy which ends in weeping and
gnashing of teeth. And therefore let every one timely provide against that
fatal surprise, use this excellent receipt, not as a Cosmetick only to
beautify the face, give him some fair appearance to himself, but as Medicine
to restore health; reduce him to such an Athletick vigorous Habit, as may
evidence its self in all vital Actions, which will prove the best evidences in
our last trial, where the inquisition will not be so much upon our Mouths or
Eyes, as upon our Hands: not how many confessions we have made, or how many
tears shed, but what acts of Virtue we have substituted in the room of our
Vices: whether we have broke off our Sins by righteousness, and our Iniquities
by showing mercy to the Poor, and without this it is infallibly certain, our
Christianity will be as ineffectual to our Bliss, as it is to our Piety: if we
will not permit it here to bring us to the obedience of Servants, it shall
never instate us hereafter in the inheritance of Sons.

CHAP. VIII. A survey of the Mischiefs arising from Mistakes concerning
Almighty God, and the methods of his Providence.
TO these Mistakes of our selves and interests, we have added others also
concerning God, which are no less destructive to Christian Practice, for as the
right knowledge of God is by our Savior, Io. 17. 3. put as the Epitome and
sum of all that leads to bliss, so our misprisions and misapprehensions of
him, are no less remarkable for the contrary effects; nor can we suppose it
otherwise, when we remember that this is the grand work and basis of all
Religion, and therefore if this foundation be deceitfully laid, the
superstructure must necessarily sink and perish: and in this sense it is
possible for us at once to build on the Rock and the Sand too, we may fix our
faith intentionally on God, and yet by absurd notions and unwarranted conceits
of him, defeat in the particulars what we established in the gross: represent
him so utterly distant from what he is, that under that disguise he will not
much appear, either an Encourager or Rewarder of our Piety, and then we may
guess how it is like to flourish, since the Apostle gives it as a Fundamental
Axiom, Heb. 12. 6. That he who comes to God must believe that he is a rewarder
of them which diligently seek him.

OF these Mistakes concerning God, there are diverse; many more than the
designed brevity of this discourse will admit me to examine. I shall only
mention three, those are, First, concerning his Decrees, Secondly, his
Attributes, Thirdly, his Providence.

BY his Decrees, I mean not those standing rules which he has in his Word set
forth as the measures by which he will distribute rewards and punishments; but
those secret purposes of his Will, which he neither commands us to search
after, nor will permit us to know. That there are many Mistakes concerning
these, the numberless Disputes that have been raised about them will
sufficiently attest, it being impossible for two Contradictory Opinions to be
both true, though in things of this abstruse nature it is very possible both may
be false. It Is not my purpose to wade into those bottomless controversies,
which like a Gulf have swallowed up so much time and industry of learned men:
I shall only in general commend it to the Readers consideration, whether it be
probable or indeed possible for those Opinions to be true which infer falsehood
in God: And then let the second enquiry be, whether that be not too evidently
the result of those discourses, which set an Opposition between his revealed
and his secret Will, his Commands and his Decrees, making the one a blind for
the better execution of the other, as if all the Transportation and Zeal he
expresses for us, all the passionate enamoring invitations he makes to us, were
only to sport himself with our credulity: like the divertisement of those Men,
who court them for Wives, whom they would abhor to marry: nay, as if all the
protestations and most solemn oaths of God, were designed but to advance the
delusion, and raise expectations merely to defeat them. This is such a severe
sort of Irony, as we would all think not only unkind but unjust in a man; and
it is not possible that God, who appeals to us concerning the equality of his
ways, should fall short of the strictest measures among us, or exemplify to us
an unsincerity he forbids us to follow.

HOW very inauspicious influence such doctrines are apt to have on practice is
too visible, for since it is as well the instinct as duty of our nature to
aspire to an assimulation with God, even that most laudable and generous
ambition shall by this means become our snare; for when God shall be thus
misrepresented to us, drawn out by the black Lines, not only of severity, but
deceit, rendered a Falsifier of his Word, nay Oath; 'twill give not only
temptation but warrant to the like Practices: we shall easily swallow up all
the particular commands of God, in that fundamental one of being like him; as
we are taught himself has done both his commands and promises in his hidden
Decrees. This is so natural a piece of Logic, that it is very unsafe men should
be trusted with those premises whence it is derived. And though we are not over
apt to transcribe that Copy God does really set us, yet this spurious one will
not miss to be taken out: that pravity of our nature which hinders in the one,
exciting and spurring us on in the other. This is a way to reconcile our Vices
with our reputation, and sin cum Privilegio; and there is little doubt of men's
aptness to use that advantage, we see it in lower instances. The Vices of a
Prince draw shools of followers, when his virtue leaves him the more eminent,
because single, and renders him rather revered than imitated: And certainly
'twas none of the Devils slightest stratagems on the Gentile world, to give
them such Gods as might exemplify to them all those odious crimes, wherein he
desired to immerse them. Whether this may not be a branch of the same Illusion,
I wish the Propugners of this doctrine would seriously consider.

AND as several ills are hereby countenanced and authorized, so is all virtue
in general discouraged and disheartened; this benumbs us in our Christian
course, substracts that spirit and vigor, which should carry us through the
weary stages of duty: indeed it cuts the very sinews of Industry, baffles and
makes ridiculous all purposes of Labor; for what should invite a man to strive
for that, from which he knows he is either irreversibly precluded, or else so
infallibly ascertained, that his negligence cannot defeat him. These are such
extremes as afford no middle, wherein the virtue of industry may exist, hope
being equally out-dated by the desperateness or unnecessariness of an
undertaking: and how necessary hope is to excite endeavor we may learn of St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 5. where he presses his Corinthians to the constancy of
Christian Practice upon this ground, that their labor shall not be in vain in
the Lord. But according to some men's doctrine, it is scarce possible for a man
to know whether his labor be in vain or no; since the effect of it depends not
upon the revealed promise but secret purpose of God, and who knows whether
there may not lie some dormant Decrees against him, which when he thinks he has
run his race shall yet defeat him of his Crown. Whether a reward thus stated
will much animate men's diligence, I may leave every man to judge by the like
circumstances in their secular concerns; and if they find they would there damp
their courage, dispirit and dishearten them from attempting, there will be sure
more reason to conclude it in these spiritual Affairs, wherein our industry is
commonly much less indefatigable.

BUT I shall not farther insist on the ill consequences of particular mistakes;
there is one fundamental error, which if it could be cured, would supersede all
the rest, I mean our bold Folly in meddling with Gods Decrees, which we call
hidden, and yet ridiculously confute that Epithet by pretending to know them.
This is so much an insolence as forfeits the comparison, which might belong to
it as an error; we see secular States jealously reserve their private Councils,
and shall we think God so scrutable, or our selves so penetrating, that none of
his secrets can escape us: or if we think him, as indeed he is, unfathomable,
why do we thus madly attempt what we confess impossible; especially since we
shall not only lose the thing we so vainly pursue, but others which we might
else enjoy. It Is as if a man should be so transported with a busy earnestness
of knowing his Princes Secrets, as quite to forget his Laws, and incurr capital
punishment. God has given us rules of life, which upon the severest penalties
he requires us to study and practice; and we divert from these, and make it our
business to trace his Counsels. We are gazing at the Stars to read our destiny,
and look not to our feet; and by that negligence experiment the worst fate they
could have portended: for I think we may say our wild Phancies about Gods
Decrees, have in event reprobated more than those Decrees upon which they are
so willing to charge their ruin, and have bid fair to the damning of many,
whom those left salvable. And indeed it is to be expected from Divine Justice,
that such bold Inquisitors should find nothing but their own Destruction. That
Ark which devoutly reverenced brought blessings, when curiously pried into
diffused Pestilence and Death, 1 Samuel 6. 19. Nay the very Poets will tell us,
that if we will have Prometheus his Fire, we must take Pandora's Box also: and
sure Industry cannot be worse laid out than thus to fetch home Plagues, and
while so much of it runs waste to such unhappy purposes, it is no wonder if we
want for better; forget our calling by contemplating our predestination; and
let the Opinion of our fate be at once the Encouragement and Excuse of our
sloth, than which nothing can more evacuate the purpose and design of our
Christianity, which Divines have truly defined to be not a contemplative but
active Science.

TO the same unhappy Effect concur our Mistakes of Gods Attributes, if I may
call them Mistakes, which seem to be rather wilful Nescience, they being so
delineated to us both in his Word and his Providence, that it is not want of
light, but winking against it that must leave us ignorant. What the speculative
errors are in this matter concerns not my present design to examine: but there
seem to be some Misperswasions concerning the Divine Attributes, which do
remarkably tend in their consequence and effect, to the corrupting men's
manners; nay, look as if they were designed, and affectedly chosen for that
purpose; I mean especially those concerning his Justice and Mercy, which being
the Attributes in which we have the most immediate Concern, the Errors in them
are the more noxious and destructive. Of this sort is that narrow scanty notion
too many have of Gods Justice, which we measure not by him but our selves, and
therefore proportion it not according to his infinity, but our own concerns.
That is an Attribute from which we promise to our selves no advantage, and
therefore we are willing to contract and shrink it up, make it serve only as a
Cipher to advance mercy, but are unwilling to understand it in its proper
Extent; think it a word of form put in to complete the greatness of Gods Style,
rather than any intrinsic part of his nature, which he must deny himself to
put off.

THUS do we sacrilegiously steal from God a part of his being, and while other
Sacrileges invade only his patrimony, this commits a riot upon his very nature,
yet as if we meant the Proverb should indemnifie us, and Exchange extinguish
the Robbery, we add to another attribute what we have defaulct from this, and
amplify and extend his Mercy, as much as we confine and limit his Justice;
that is the one infinite Ocean, wherein not only we, but himself must be
swallowed up. We will think of him under no other notion, nor allow him to be
any other thing, but what shall be in subserviency to this: we will have him
Powerful to relieve our Distresses, but not to revenge our Crimes; Wise to
defeat the machinations of our Enemies, but not to circumvent our own indirect
or impious Policies; All-seeing to behold our Wants and Griefs, but not to
discern our closer Guilts; True to perform his Promises, but not his Threats.
In short, we model all that is in God to our own wishes; and instead of
believing him what he is, fancy him what we would have him. Like Micha, Jud.
17. 5. making us a God for our own peculiar use, and forming the Deity we mean
to worship. A strange bold Inversion, for Creatures thus to fashion their
Creator, put their own stamp and impress upon him, and shape him to their
Phancies. And indeed it is nothing but Fancy that has to do in this Attempt,
and accordingly it must vanish as the operations of that illusive Faculty use
to do. We may represent God to our selves as we please, but that has no more
real influence on him, than a deforming Optick-glass has on the Object it
disguises, he is still the same amidst all our wild conceits of him, and will
always make good the title, by which he delivered himself to Moses, Ex. 3. 14.
I am that I am. All that is in him is equally immense and infinite, his mercy
need not invade his justice to gain its self a larger field of action, which is
already (as the Psalmist speaks) over all his works; neither his justice
encroach upon his mercy, that having also a Province wide enough; all
impenitent sinners being within its Verge, and God knows how much soever we
streighten it in our opinions, we do (...) indeed too much extend it in its
real force, by rendering our selves the proper objects of it. In short, God who
is the author of order and peace, cannot be supposed to be in confusion within
himself; the divine Attributes are not in strife, but perfect harmony; it is we
only that have raised this more than Gygantick war, not only against Heaven,
but in it. The several Luminaries pursue the regular motions of the Spheres;
but we confound at once the Laws of their Creation, and their Author too,
strive to eclipse and darken the father of light. But if the removing of an
earthly Landmark be a crime punishable both by God and man, what Thunderbolts
belong to those who thus attempt to set new Boundaries in heaven, to limit and
measure out even the divine Nature by the proportions of their own Phancies,
and indeed such temerity as this, is too like to confute its self, and feel
that Justice it will not believe: yet as great and daring a crime as it is, I
fear there are few that can totally acquit themselves of it: for though all
avow it, yet he that shall narrowly search his own heart, will scarce find it
clear from all degrees of it: We are all apt to cherish a flattering hope, that
God is not so severe as he is represented, or that if in respect of his Justice
he be a consuming fire, yet that Mercy will be sure to snatch us out of the
burning; like the Angels to Lot, assist our Escapes, and provide us a Zoar,
that our souls may live: and this Hope though founded only in our wishes, is
very apt to slide into our faith, and make us believe what we would have: by
which means this becomes a kind of Epidemick Heresy, the most frequent and
common misperswasion that occurs concerning the divine Attributes.

IT would be a work more long than useful to recite the several errors that
have sprung from this one. That of Origin, that the Devils should finally be
saved, is a noted and pregnant Instance, which could be derived from nothing
but this unequal apprehension of Gods Justice and Mercy: And besides all other
ancient, we have many branches of a later growth, that spring from the same
root, a set of plausible falsities, which would quench the unquenchable Fire,
and kill the never dying Worm; I mean those allaying softning descriptions some
of this age have made of Hell, some changing the kind, others abating the
intensness, or at least the duration of those Torments, each substracting so
much from this Tophet, that they have left Atheism an easy task to take away
the rest: and may give suspicion they mean to visit that place, which they are
so industrious to make easy.

BUT whatever they do themselves, it is sure this is the way to send others
thither, to take off their fears of it, to make them think it not so dreadful a
place as they once supposed, and consequently less careful to decline the ways
that lead to it. It Is indeed too obvious that such persuasions do mightily
impugn Christian practice, and embolden men in sin: and God knows we need no
such encouragement; the more general fallacious hopes of Mercy being too
sufficient for that purpose without these supernumerary deceits: but between
the one and the other, Libertinism is like to outgrow all restraints, and the
Opinion of Gods goodness instead of leading men to repentance, will slacken
those reigns wherewith our brutish Nature should be bridled and restrained,
and we thus left unto the sway of lust and passion, must run headlong upon
ruin, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle. For alas, we are not so generous
as to do well for Virtues sake, nay nor so provident as to do it for Reward,
it is our fear that is the most prevalent incentive, and accordingly we find
religion generally makes her first impressions there. They are the terrors of
the Lord that do most usually, and most effectually persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. 11.
our Hearts must be pricked, and at those Orifices piety enters. Now when all
these terrors shall be superseded by the opinion of an overwhelming mercy, when
Hell shall either be annihilated, or supposed so to annihilate us, that we
shall lose our passiveness with our being, and be as incapable of suffering, as
even Heaven its self can make us, what will be left to engage us to virtue, or
deter us from vice: Alas, do we not often see a daring Lust bid battle to all
the artillery of Heaven, meet God in his loudest Thunder, and venture on
damnation in its dreadfullest form? and can we think it will be more modest,
when it shall be told that they are only edgeless weapons it has to encounter?
that Gods Thunder amidst all its noise carries no bolt? and that the Flames of
the bottomless pit, are but a painted fire, that at a distance may fright but
not hurt us, or at least so hurt us, that we shall not feel it? When those rubs
which fear interposed are thus removed, there is nothing to stay the course of
headlong riot, but precipiciously it will on, where ever strong desire shall
drive, or flattering lust allure: he that loved his sin, even when it threatened
him ruin, served it assiduously, when it promised no other wages than death,
Romans 6. 23. how will he hug this viper when he thinks it is stingless, and give
up his ear to be bored by that Master, which affords him present pleasures
without future stripes: we see even in Civil matters the presumption of
Impunity is the great nurse of Disorders, and if it were not for the coercive
power of Laws we should soon see how little the directive would signify; and
doubtless it is the same in spiritual or rather worse, by how much we are more
bent upon the breaking of Gods Laws than men's, and consequently will be the
more apprehensive of any Encouragement.

OF the truth hereof our experience gives too sad proof, none rushing so boldly
upon Gods justice, as those who have most fortified themselves against the
dread of it, as if they meant their practice should experiment the truth of
their speculation, and make the utmost trial whether God can be provoked or no.
Indeed men use mercy as amazed Passengers sometimes do a plank in a shipwreck,
lay so much weight upon it, as sinks both it and themselves; so perishing by
too great a confidence of their rescue, and finding a Gulf where they expected
an Ark: not that I suppose Mercy unable to support the weight of all the
Persons, nay, and of all the sins in the world, which have not the one
ponderous adherent of Impenitence superadded; but that is a burden which even
the divine Clemency sinks under, refuses to plead such a cause, and refers it
to Justice as its proper Court: And therefore to sin on, in hope of mercy, is
to undermine our selves, and commit a folly as absurd as ruinous, I wish I
could say 'twere not also as frequent: but God knows it is every where too
apparent; men openly avow it, so that it is become the vulgar Answer to every
convicting Reproof, that God is merciful: And surely they that observe the
growth of vice, since our new descriptions of Hell came abroad, will have cause
to think the one has had no small influence on the other, and that while some
have made it borrow the uneasiness of our humane state to make up its torments;
they have taken care it should be just, and lend us back sins of a greater
magnitude: This miserable traffic have these Factors settled, between the
present world and the infernal region, that Hell should have Earths pains, and
Earth Hells wickedness; the later alas we are too fully possessed of, which is
like to send too many souls to discover the deceit of the other. In fine, our
groundless confidences of mercy, and those other Chimera's we forge out of
that, are certainly the most frequent and dangerous underminers of Christian
practice: these like the Sun give heat and vigor to those inordinate lusts,
which a just fear of vengeance would as a winters frost nip, and destroy: And
till we lay by these easy slight thoughts of God, and consider him in those
more awful attributes which exact our reverence, his mercy will only serve to
ripen us for his judgment, that smooth and gentle property in God, which to all
who abuse it not is indeed the oil of gladness, will thus perverted acquire the
more fatal quality of Oil, serve only to intend our flames, and remove us as
far from the rewards of Piety, as our bold phancies have done from the practice.

A third sort of mistakes there are by which Piety is obstructed, and those are
such as concern Gods providence, about which the world has long since had many
disputes; some entirely denying it, as presuming God so wholly taken up with
the contemplation and enjoyment of his own felicity, that he was utterly
inconsiderate of that of his creatures, and an unconcerned spectator of humane
affairs; others limiting and restraining it to those things only which
themselves were pleased to think worthy of the divine inspection and conduct:
But these questions have been more bandied among Philosophers than Christians,
and therefore are beyond our present enquiry. Yet give me leave by the way to
express my fears, that these errors have yet some secret rooting in too many
hearts; that there are many who rather formally say, then cordially believe,
that God governs the World, and disposes as well of humane as divine things; a
suspicion that is rendered too probable by those indirect arts men use, to
possess themselves of secular advantages; for did they seriously think that all
those things are in Gods hands, from whence they are neither strong nor cunning
enough, either to wrest or pilfer them, it is scarce imaginable they should
attempt such painful impossibilities, disquiet themselves in vain as the
Psalmist speaks, and which is worse, forfeit all title to them as Gods gifts,
by thus assuming to make them their own. But this is a disquisition I must
leave every man to make in his own heart; only let me say, that he that has
there any doubt of Gods universal or particular providence, has also in it the
root of all unchristian Sins, of Distrust, Solicitude, and Fraud: there being
nothing that can effectually supersede our own carkings and contrivances for
our selves, but the assurance that God cares for us. Men being still apt to
scramble, where there is none from whom they expect an orderly and sufficient
distribution, and therefore this error where ever it is found, may well be
reckoned among the impeders of Christian duty.

BUT besides those who thus doubt of Providence, there are others liable to
great mistakes, I mean those who to their just belief of Gods Providence,
superadd a groundless confidence of their own skill in fathoming it, that are
not content to know it in its product and event, but pretend to discern it in
its most secret designments and purposes; and do not so much revers* Gods
dispensations, as interpret them: I do not here mean to condemn all particular
applications of providential Events, which are sometimes so extraordinary and
remarkable, that they are their own expositors, and point out the construction
we are to make: and an humble advertence unto such, is not only innocent but
necessary: but when men shall attempt to read every line in Gods hand, to make
their own inference from every efflux of Providence; these pretenders to divine
Palmistry, seem to differ only thus much from those who make a trade of the
natural, that they Cheat themselves as well as others.

YET there want not some who have gone yet farther, and think not only to
understand Providence, but assist it: not only trace it in all its intricate
windings, and concealed intendments, but help it in the execution, and give
birth to its conceptions: Of this sort especially are those, who having possessed
their brains with some conjectural expositions of obscure prophecies, will
administer to providence, and call out those events they expect: and as if they
were conscious that God would not make good their dreams, endeavor to do it
themselves. This Age has afforded too many instances of this, when the
fulfilling of Prophecies has by some been made the solemn summons to rebellion
and blood: and in order to the hating and destroying the whore, Rev. 17. 1. Men
have been animated to hate and destroy all who were not infected with their own
Frenzy. This we know has been called the helping of the Lord against the
mighty, and something more than votive Curses awarded to those who refused to
assist. Thus have they first wildly mistaken, and then no less wildly outrun
Gods designs: as if like Baal, Iud. 6. he were unable to plead for himself, to
vindicate his own cause, or effect his purposes without their help: and having
resolved what he shall do, obtrude themselves upon him as his instruments; how
repugnant such anticipations of Providence are to the interests of Christianity
is too apparent from the many detestable effects they have produced.

BUT setting aside these, let us return to those we spoke of before; who
presuming to expound providential Events, make them the Criterion by which to
judge both of persons and of causes, concluding the one loved or hated, the
other approved or disallowed by God, according to their prosperous or adverse
Success. The first of these was by our Savior exploded, as an undue way of
process in the Jews, in the case of the Galileans, and before him Solomon had
given it as a Maxim, that no man could know love or hatred by all that is
before him: Eccl. 9. 2. And if under the Jewish Economy, where temporal
Blessings made up so great a part of their Promises, it was so; much more is it
under the Gospel, whose frame and composure is quite distant; which instead of
proposing secular prosperities to its proselytes, assures them the contrary;
sets up the Cross as the Standard under which they are to fight, and affords no
temporal Hopes but with an allaying proviso of Persecutions and Afflictions;
nay, the Apostle to the Hebrews goes farther, makes them not only incident but
necessary to Christians, the badge and cognizance of Sonship, whilst the no
chastening is the fatallest Sign, a token of bastardy and abdication, Heb. 12.
7, 8. And doubtless the experience of every Christian asserts the doctrine; we
are all apt with the Prodigal to forsake our fathers house, and as long as we
can have the riot and not the wants, shall never think of returning; we must be
famisht into consideration, and our husks alone will send us home to the fatted
Calf. And can there be a greater indulgence in God, than thus to make our
Iniquity our Punishment, that it may not be our Ruin; to embitter those
sensualities whose lusciousness serves to intoxicate us, and to clip those
wings which he sees carry us from him. Stories tell us that the Trojan Wives
after the destruction of their Country, being wearied with their restless
vagrant life, necessitated their Husbands to a settlement by burning their
Ships. And the same kind stratagem God has upon us: he sees that our worldly
accessions do rather enlarge than fill our appetites, and carry us on to
farther pursuits, and by drawing us still more from him the Center of rest,
exposes us to endless wanderings, and then what can be kinder than to rescue us
from such a condition, that Curse of Cain, to be a fugitive, and a vagabond in
the earth, to deprive us of our treacherous prosperities, and fire those Ships
wherein we are preparing like Jonah, to fly from the presence of the Lord: so
by a happy necessity forcing us to fix our selves on him. And this is the worst
God designs us in every adversity: and did we mean but as well to our selves,
we should not miss of receiving the happiest Effects, even that peaceable fruit
of righteousness the Apostle speaks of, Heb. 12. This holy men so well
understood, that we find them dread nothing so much as an uninterrupted
prosperity; they like the Muscovite Women, grew jealous of Gods love when he
forbear to strike, upon which score it is, that in the Ancient Fathers, there
are so many solemn petitions for stripes; such importunate solicitations for
those medicinal corrections, wherein they judged both Gods kindness and their
own safety to consist.

AND then how perverse, how preposterous are our measures, when we conclude
quite the other way, estimate Gods love only from outward successes, and think
he is never angry but when he smites: a Persuasion, which as it is very false
in its grounds, so very pernicious in its effects, and creates hopes and fears,
as fallacious as its self. For first, if we apply it to our selves, it produces
mischiefs proportionable to the diverse states under which we are. If a man be
full and prosperous, it makes him proud and secure, for when he has not only
the possession of those things the World values, but takes them as an
attestation of Gods peculiar kindness and approbation, what should make him
either consider or reform his guilts? If he have sanctity enough to possess him
of Gods favor, and all these profitable effects of it, he will not easily be
persuaded he needs more: and any man that shall tell him he does, shall be
heard with the same indignation wherewith Craesus entertained Solon, when he
found him question that happiness, which he expected he should have admired.
Prosperity is in its self an emboldening thing, but when backed by this Opinion
of it, grows into all insolence, till at last it even recoil in the face of the
Donor, and dare God by all those enormous riots, to which it enables Men.

ON the other side, this Opinion presents a less merry, but not less dangerous
Temptation to those in adversity; for when they shall look on themselves only
as the Anvil for Gods strokes, they will be too apt to complete the parallel by
answering it in hardness and inflexibility; have the (...) as the Father calls
it, which reverberates the blow on him that gave it. Persevering wickedness is
so naturally the issue of Desperation, that we find the Jews take up the one
merely to countenance the other, pretend hopelesness to avoid reformation: Thus
we find it, Ezekiel. 33. 10. Our iniquities are upon us, and we pine away in them,
how should we live? And again more plainly, Ier. 18. 12. There is no hope, and
then the Inference is ready, let us walk every one in his own ways. Endeavor
is the child of hope, and we attempt not to atone one whom we conclude
implacable, so that Wrath may consume, but will never melt us, it is Love only
that has that softning, dissolving Power, and unless we discern a mixture of
that in Gods inflictions, they will never render us malleable to his
impressions. We kiss a Fathers hand and rod, when an Executioners stroke we
suffer rather than bear. St. John tells us we love God because he loved us, 1
John 4. 19. I wish all men would make good the Inference; but it is sure they
are too apt to do it in the reverse, and will hate if they apprehend themselves
hated; a state which at once exemplifies, and anticipates the worst part of
Hell to us, yet very incident to those who interpret every stroke of Gods, as
the effect of enmity and utter aversion. This is to do that to our selves which
the Devils so deprecated from Christ, to torment us before our Time, it being
peculiar to the vengeance of the other World to be merely punitive, that here
being rather discipline than vengeance designed to reduce, not destroy us: and
indeed besides the pain of sense which this Error creates, it does (to perfect
the Hell) give that of loss also; deprives us of one of the great Evangelical
felicities, that of rejoicing in Tribulations, which our Savior thought so
considerable, as to insert amongst his Beatitudes; and his Apostles frequently
mention triumphantly as the great privilege and prerogative of a Christian.
For if all adverse successes be a note of Gods disfavour, there will be no
place for joy even in the most pious sufferings. St. Stephens ravishing
prospect will be intercepted, and a Martyrs death be as uncomfortable as a
Malefactors. But if these were the only sufferings to which joy were annexed,
there would be but too few concerned in the deprivation; those wherein we are
more universally interessed, are those Chastisements of God which our Guilts
provoke; which though in respect of their cause they are Matters of the
greatest sadness, yet in regard of their significancy and effect, they are
Grounds of comfort, they signify that God (however displeased) yet has not
abandoned the care of us; thinks us worth his correction, and designs our
reducement: and the Effect will (if not obstructed by us) be answerable to that
design: our Chastening here rescues us from the sins, and consequently the
condemnation of the world, 1 Cor. 11. 32. and this is sure no slight motive of
rejoicing; and we are very unjust to God and our selves, if we will exchange it
for the sullen murmurs of a desperate incorrigibleness.

AND as this persuasion is thus pernicious in reflection on our selves, so
neither is it more innocent when applied to others; for first, if we look on
the men that prosper in the world, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 73. 12. we
shall too often find them answer the character he gives them in the former part
of the Psalm, and when from their temporal affluence, we shall conclude Gods
favor to them, 'twill be hard resisting the temptation, which (without that
Argument) the Psalmist was under, of thinking it vain to cleanse our hearts, or
wash our hands in innocence. Nay, we shall be apt to join our suffrage to those
in Malachy 3. 15. and call the proud, happy: and if we esteem them so, it is
natural to desire to be like them; so we shall quickly grow to despise a poor
or afflicted Innocence, and embrance all thriving prosperous sins.

ON the other side, if we look on others in an adverse calamitous state, this
Opinion suggests hard and severe sentences concerning them, inclines us to
judge where we should succor, and how great an accumulation of Misery that is,
we may learn from Job, whom we find not so often nor so passionately
complaining of any of his pressures, as of the unkind censures of his Friends,
who weighing in this deceitful balance of temporal successes, made very false
judgments of him, and as if they were to Glean after Satan, endeavored to
despoil him of that only comfort his malice had left, the Conscience of his
Innocence. This is as the Psalmist speaks, to persecute him whom God has
smitten, and to talk to the grief of those whom he has wounded; a thing
repugnant to the common temper of humanity, and much more to that tenderness,
those affections and bowels Christianity requires; and therefore in this
respect also, we may reckon this persuasion very injurious to Christian duty.

NOR is it less so when applied to Causes, in which it is full as deceitful a
Rule as it is in Persons: God has designed us another measure of our
undertakings; his word and law, by the general proportions whereof, we are to
square and accommodate our particular actions: he sends us not to his
providence, and the various distributions of that, or allows us to judge of the
Justice, by the Success of our Attempts. If that were the trial, 'twere
impossible for any enterprise to be lawful, since that which should legitimate
it, is subsequent to it, and can have no influence on it, to the making it good
or bad: and as it does not make, so neither does it infallibly signify it to
be either: and of those who presume it does, I should ask whence it came to do
so? If by any assignation of God let them produce it; and if not thence, I Am
sure it can make no pretense to certainty, God having no where obliged his
Providence to make good our phansies and conjectures. Nay, if we look into
Scripture examples, we shall find this irrefragably confuted; the same Cause
having at several times differing success. Thus the Israelites were discomfited
at their first assault upon Ai, and yet succesful after; 'twas something
extrinsick to the cause that made the variation, that still continuing the
same. The like we find in the case of the Benjamites, who though in as ill an
engagement as can well be imagined, had yet two victories over the other
Tribes, Judge. 20. But there is one instance that may serve for all, and that is
the taking of the Ark by the Philistines, he that shall contemplate that, will
sure never think fit to measure causes by success, unless he will give the
difference also to Dagon, who then triumphed in the spoils of the God of Israel.
In short, it is evident victories are not so entailed upon the justest causes,
but that they may be, and often are cut off, either by the guilts of the
undertakers, or by some other secret disposal of the Divine wisdom; but the
former is so frequently the obvious cause of it, that we are not often put to
resort to the later. It Is no strange thing to see all Israel troubled by an
Achan, or have the Ark taken captive from off the shoulders of a Hophni and
Phineas, nor will it ever be possible for the best cause to secure its self
from the blasting influence of its Abettors crimes.

THIS is so clear and evident a Truth, that it is matter of some wonder, how the
contrary persuasion should ever insinuate its self; and indeed it is not
probable it ever had, if Interest, that grand Sophister, had not introduced it.
Men engage in designs not on intuition of their lawfulness, but profit, and
when they are such as nothing can warrant a priore, their only reserve is to
make them good a posteriore; to bring a license after the fact, and justify
their beginning by their end; which how ridiculous soever it may seem to sober
reason, yet such is the natural shame, or secular inconvenience of owning an
unjust Act, that men will wrap themselves, though in the thinnest and most
diaphanous veils, make use of the absurdest pretenses, and faintest colors to
shadow their Guilt, and whilst consciousness bids them say somewhat for
themselves, and the case affords no solid plea, they are driven to these
deplorable sleights and subterfuges. Indeed this is an argument that stands
single, and is seldom used but in those causes that admit of no better; which
we may reasonably conclude to be the reason, why it was so much insisted on by
our late disturbers, who in such abundance of light, as they owned, could not
be supposed ignorant enough to believe themselves: 'twas certainly the
destitution of better arguments that cast them upon this, forced them to
ransack the Alcoran, and rifle a piece of Turkish Divinity to make good their
Saintship. They now discern the unskilfulness of that plea, which a little time
has converted to an accusation. The great change it has pleased God to make
among us, retorting their conquering Syllogismes, and making them need a new
success to justify their vaunts of the old. God grant we may not here relieve
them again, and by our personal sins, help them to that which the justice of
their Cause never did, nor is like to acquire them.

BUT though this plea of success be frequently urged in policy, yet it prevails
with many who know not that it is so; indeed the vulgar are so much subjected
to their senses, that generally the conclusions drawn thence are easily
embraced, when those from Reason and Conscience have a double difficulty, first
to be understood, and next to be admitted, and the most elaborate discourse
shall not convince them of the right of that cause, which in the last appeal to
Gods Tribunal by War, has been openly condemned; whilst the spoils of victory
as much satisfy the Understanding of the justice of the Prize, as the Desire
with the wealth or glory of it. And this is it which renders such kind of
arguings very pernicious, they being so fitted to the common temper, that they
seldom miss to be effectual; and engage the heady multitude in the Prosecution
of the worst designs, that are recommended to them by the one Catholic virtue
of Success. This is indeed as the Prophet speaks, Ez. 13. 22. to strengthen the
Hands of evil doers, that they turn not from their wickedness; to dazzle their
Eyes so with the splendour of prosperous iniquity, that they can never come to
take an exact view, and discern it in its true form: And doubtless this was
none of the less-prevailing arts of seducement among us, and drew in many to
abet those seditious practices, which all Laws of God and Man prohibited, and
whereby Christian Religion has at once been violated and defamed; has not only
her precepts broken, but her self asperst with the foul consequences of that
disobedience, and so buys one injury with another; the contempt of her
Authority with the loss of her Reputation.

WE have now seen the ill consequences issuing from these mistakes of Gods
Providence, but we must take notice that there remains yet as great or greater
danger on the other side; and that a total neglect is worse than an erroneous
construction of it. For though God have secluded us from that more exact minute
discerning of his purposes, yet he means not his dispensations should be looked
on as wholly insignificant, and therefore has given us the general scope and
meaning of them, according to which we are to limit and restrain our wandering
guesses, and also judge of particular events. Now as Gods original and primary
design in the creation of Man, was to render him a subject capable of eternal
happiness; so also have all his subsequent Acts toward him aimed at the same
end: and because there is nothing removes man so far from that grand purpose of
his being as Sin; therefore God has made the suppressing of that, the universal
intendment of his disposals concerning us: so that the most different
dispensations do severally pursue that one end; prosperity and adversity in
their successive changes are sent to reclaim us from the error of our ways,
with this only difference, that the one leads, the other drives. This is
asserted by St. Paul, who tells us, that the goodness and long-suffering of God
is to lead us to Repentance, Romans 2. 5. And also that when we are judged, we
are chastened of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the World, 1 Cor.
11. 32. And indeed the whole Scripture runs in the same strain; and both from
prosperous and adverse successes urges the obligation to obedience. This is the
notice God expects we should take of all his dealings toward us. And the want
thereof we find often sharply upbraided by God to the Jews: how often does he
recount his redeeming them from Egypt, his enstating them in Canaan, and all
his wonderful works for them, with an accusing reflection upon their
ingratitude; and that we may know his Judgments are no less to be accounted
for than his Mercies, we find him, Amos 4. making a Catalogue of them, and
closing every period with this Pathetick reproof of their obstinacy, Yet have
ye not returned to me says the Lord. In short, God requires that we should
observe every turn of his hand, in order to the reforming our own lives, and by
the several mediums of Gratitude or fear, infer that necessary Conclusion of a
sincere universal Obedience; and the neglect of this is the crime the Psalmist
mentions, Psalm 28. 5. with so severe a menace. They regard not the works of
the Lord, nor the operation of his hands.

AND as this is required from single persons, so also from societies and
communities, which as they are in their public capacities the most eminent
subjects of Judgments or Mercies, so are they the most eminently accountable
for both. And though the Neglect and Abuse of Gods methods be a very provoking
guilt when it is only personal, yet is it much more so, when it becomes
national: And therefore as it is every man's concern for his own peculiar to
examine how he has answered Gods methods toward him, so is it an enquiry very
pertinent in relation to the Public also; especially where the dispensations
have been remarkable and extraordinary; in which respect the Inquisition cannot
appear more necessary for any than this Nation; upon which consideration I hope
the Reader will think it no unpardonable digression, if we awhile turn aside
after it.

IT is the affirmation of our Blessed Savior, that where much is given, there
shall be much required; a thing so consonant with natural Equity, that we all
give our suffrage to it, by making it the measure of our expectations in
secular things, wherein every man looks for returns proportionable to his
expense or Industry. The Husbandman expects a Crop answerable to his Seed and
Labor: and in the nobler cultures of the Mind, we justly exact of our Pupils
to let their manners attest the discipline they have been under: According to
which estimate we must resolve* that Gods expectations from us of this Nation
cannot but be very high, there being no people under the Sun, whom he has more
signalized as his own immediate care, on whom the Divine Economy has more
constantly and even solicitously attended in all the variety of seasonable and
powerful applications.

I SHALL not assume the work of a Chronicle, by giving a series of all those
mercies, we received in the loins of our Ancestors; and of which we have
provided one unhappy memorial, I mean our nauseating and despising them; it
having been the business of our days, to disentail those two most inestimable
Blessings, of a pure Religion and outward Peace, which our immediate
Progenitors left us; and to derive to our posterity the contrary mischiefs of
impiety and confusion.

BUT not to ravel so far back, I shall confine my reflections to so late a
date, that I shall not need to bespeak the faith afforded to Historians; scarce
any that can be my Reader, but is qualified to be my witness too; and must
acknowledge that there has on Gods part been no Method wanting, that might
purify us to himself a Peculiar people zealous of Good works. To that end of
refining and cleansing us it was, that he kept us so long in the furnace,
permitted us to those many Fiery trials of our late calamitous days. 'Twere
impertinent here to give a Description of those sufferings, which every man's
Memory can so readily represent to him; or to paint that Flame whose scorchings
we have felt; it is enough to say, that God appeared in them, earnestly
industrious to have reduced us; like a skilful Captain besieged us closely,
straightened us so in all our interests, that it was scarce possible for us to fly
any where but to himself. Indeed he that would make up an exact Catalogue of
our Calamities must calculate in how many instances humane nature may be
passive; there being scarce any of our suffering capacities, to which they were
not liberally apportioned, our Estates, our Persons, our Friends, and which is
more than all our Consciences, all groaning under the weight of that Yoke,
which our own Sins prepared, and other men's sins put on. Which way soever we
looked, we saw nothing but that which might consume our Eyes and grieve our
Heart: If on the Church, we saw that torn by Schism, spoiled by Sacrilege; the
abomination of desolation standing in the Holy place, and the house of Prayer
made in the most literal sense a den of Thieves. If on the State, we saw the
breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord taken in their Pits,
Imprisoned, and Arraigned, and barbarously Murdered, by those who slew him like
the Heir in the Gospel, that they might seize on his Inheritance. We saw this
and all other Mischiefs established by a Law, and made as irreversible as
powerful malice could render them. And now in such a distress, who would not
think that such a necessity should have become our virtue? And so perfect a
destitution compelled our resort to the Divine aid. And as little oppressed
States used to make themselves homagers to the Romans, to engage their
protection; so we should have made an entire surrendry of our selves to God,
that we might have gained a title to his rescues and deliverances.

THIS genuine and kindly effect I doubt not but it had in some, I would fain
think in many; but we are not now considering particulars, but the community;
and therefore how sincere soever such personal reformations were, they must not
come under the account of public and general, unless for their Number and
Eminency they had been sufficient to have overwhelmed the contrary perverseness:
Many there might be whose hearts (as it is said of Iosiahs, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27.)
did melt, and yet the far greater number of the obdurate, still justly
denominate us a stiff neck'd people; an Epithet wherewith God often reproaches
the Jews, and sure we have no less evidenced our title to it; for alas, as if
we had meant to revenge the inexorableness of our oppressors toward us, in our
obstinacy to God; as if when we could keep nothing else, we had yet reserved
this sullen comfort, of having our hearts impregnable, we made a shift to hold
out against all these batteries; there was little appearance, and less reality
of Repentance; and if some of our lusts were at all less raging, 'twas only
because they were starved into a little tameness, the supplies cut off which
should maintain our Riot: but when any recruits could be had, they were devoted
that way, and even in the worst of times we mist not to be as luxurious as we
were able: and as though we resolved that vice like the Sea, should gain in one
part what it lost in another; we took order that what was thus inevitably
defalkt from those expensive Sins, should be made up in the cheaper: we could
curse, and swear, and blaspheme in spite of Sequestration, and this wretched
Immunity we made abundant use of, till we even became Proverbial for it; and
gave our enemies pretense, to fasten it on us as our distinctive Character. Yet
to show our selves generous sinners, there was one vice we bought at a dear
rate, I mean our as imprudent, as unchristian animosities, and picques among
our selves; a sin that helped to revenge all the rest: and was as well upon a
humane, as divine account a grand instrument of our ruin. To these we may add
our impatient murmurs at our sufferings, which did in some work so
preposterously, as to reconcile them to the inflicters, made them unworthily
desert that cause, they found chargeable to maintain, and contrary to the
advice of Solomon, Choose the ways of those oppressors whose prosperity they
envied, Prove. 3. But of these real Apostates the number I hope was not great, I
wish I could say so also of those seeming desertors, whose knees bowed to Baal,
though their hearts did not: who belied their own loyalty, and in a show of
compliance prostituted conscience in several Engagements as inconsistent with
each other, as they all were with duty; and such as they pretended no excuse
for their taking, but their resolutions of breaking. I was indeed a sad
spectacle to see what shouls every menacing Edict brought in; while men ran in
as much haste to take the opportunity of Perjury, as the primitive Christians
were wont to do of Martyrdom: Indeed herein we seemed to invade our enemies
peculiar, would not suffer them to enjoy those marks of distinction, they had
framed to themselves; so that as far as Oaths could signify we were all one
Party. And yet while we thus disclaimed Gods reliefs by these indirect attempts
of our own, we took it very ill that he left us to the success of them: That he
prosper'd not those methods he had interdicted, and made us Triumphant, not
only over our Enemies but himself too: and upon this score many mutinous
blasphemies were uttered and perhaps some more thought, though I confess,
generally we were not so modest, as to stick at saying the worst we could
think, and indeed they that heard the frequent doubts men owned of Gods
justice, providence, nay his very being, would not think they suppressed any
thing as too ill to be spoken: we laid boundless expectations upon the justice
of our cause, and as if we had extremely obliged God by not being Traitors, or
Schismatics, thought he wronged us extremely that he made us not Victors.
Samuel tells Saul that Rebellion was like Witchcraft, but we seemed to think
Loyalty was so; that like a spell it was to keep us invulnerable, not only
against our enemies but our Selves: and so countercharm all our crimes, that
they should only be active to please, not hurt us. But if in the last place we
reflect on our selves even in relation to that cause in which we so much
confided, it is to be feared all men will not be able to evince they suffered
for God and the King, though they did it in their quarrel: it is the Intent must
denominate whose Martyrs they were, it being too frequent for private passions
and interests, to march under the banner of conscience; and we call that
sometimes taking up the Cross, which is only the taking up an animosity or
humor. Indeed it is not possible for any to be Gods Martyr, who is not first his
Servant: none of us will suffer the greatest things for a person for whom we
will not do the least; and it is absurd Hypocrisy for a man to pretend he has
left all for God, who we see cannot be woed to leave the most despicable lust
for him. He that will not part with the noise of a loud Oath, the pleasure of
an intemperate Cup, the applause of a profane Jest for God, will surely much
less expose his liberty, his estate, his life for him: and therefore what
hazards soever any man ran in any of those, he can with no justice set it upon
Gods account, unless he can produce such other acts of obedience, as may
witness this to be true and genuine. And upon this trial, I fear God's party
will appear to have been but small among us, and perhaps the King's not much
greater, it being not very probable that those should have any great sense of
duty to him, that had none to God: or that those should religiously revere one
Commandment, who despised the other nine. But we need not the help of inference
and probability in this matter, the mutinous and insolent behavior of many who
professed loyalty, did too clearly evince it: And as it is said of Ioab, that he
turned after Adonijah, though he turned not after Absalom, 1 King. 2 28. and
some of ours had little private rebellions of their own even while they opposed
the more public. I love not to pass censures on men's thoughts, yet I doubt
some would be too conscious to confute me, if I should say there wanted not
those, who owed their zeal to their Spleen, and did not so much love those they
fought for, as hated those they fought against. And it may perhaps deserve
enquiry, whether that demure pretense of holiness their Adversaries had put on,
did not more avert some of our Libertines from them, than all their real
crimes: They perhaps so far mistook them, as to suspect they might be in
earnest, when they professed to advance the power of Godliness, and at that took
an Alarm, and such Men (if such there were) contended not for the Liberty of
their Country, but their Lusts; and could with no justice, expect either a
reputation, or success from that cause which they at once helped to defame and
defeat. I am loath to go farther, and suspect that even some of the devouter
sort were inspired more by the Spirit of opposition than Piety; yet I confess
it is hard to resist that surmise, when it is considered that our Liturgy never
had its due veneration, but when the Directory was set up against it. Indeed he
that shall remember how our private Oratories were then thronged and crowded;
and shall now compare it with our empty Churches, will be tempted to think our
devotion was of that sort, which is excited by interdict, and deadned by
invitations; a perverse kind of Zeal kindled only by Antiperistasis or
collision; none of that pure flame which descends from heaven. And then as our
Savior in another case says, if the light that is in thee be darkness, how
great is that darkness, Mat. 6. If this fairer and more specious part of us
were thus reprovable, how obnoxious were the other? and if our Earnestness in a
righteous cause, by its Sinister motives or adherencies be unable to justify
its self, how shall it bear that heavier task we laid on it, and plead for our
other Guilts.

THIS is the true though not full account of our behavior under Gods
Discipline, thus did we fructify upon his pruning us; brought forth indeed,
nothing but degenerous fruit. The holy Writ leaves it as a brand of most
inveterate Impiety upon Ahaz, that in the time of his distress he sinned yet
more against the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. and sure we have too just title to the
same Character of infamy; those sufferings which were sent to chastise our
sins, served but to increase them, and like the Israelites in the Brick-kilns,
they multiplied the more for their oppression; we debaucht even our
Executicners, and made every new calamity supply us with some new vice. And now
when Gods rod was thus despised, we were in all reason to expect he should draw
his sword, revenge our resistance of his methods, by somewhat we could not
resist, make our Plagues as obstinate as our selves, and involve us in hopeless
inevitable ruin. This certain fearful looking for of Judgment, Heb. 10. 27.
was all we had left our selves, of all the rich patrimony we were once possessed
of; and our present misery seemed impossible to expire any way but by dying
into greater.

BUT as great artificers are used to magnify their Art, by choosing the most
unlikely materials; so did it please God in this total indisposedness of ours,
when we were so unapt subjects to illustrate his mercy, and as if he designed
this national deliverance should (in its proportion) be the Transcript of our
more universal redemption, he visited us not only in this state of misery, but
enmity; when we had set our selves in defiance of his judgments, he laid as it
were an Ambush of mercy for us, and surpised us with safety: by such
undiscernible ways returned the captivity of our Sion, that we were indeed
delivered like them that dream, Psalm. 126. 1. gave us a victory without a war:
without the intervention of garments rolled in blood, Esa. 9. 5. invested us in
our Triumphant robes, and in a word, made us insensibly to glide into our long
forgotten prosperity.

AND now who can imagine, but this miraculous Mutation without us, must also
work a Change within us. Indeed they must have a very ill opinion of humane
nature, that can think it possible it should have perverseness enough to resist
such endearments; such kindly Heat must needs be supposed to melt us; and if
before our Pride disdained to be compelled, yet even that stubbornest part of
us can not object against the being courted into amendment. So that when God
has thus yielded to our terms, left us not so much as a Punctilio in our way to
Piety, it is but a reasonable expectation we should embrace it with as great an
Earnestness, as it was formerly rejected by us.

AND would God we could say we did so; but alas, we still affect prodigies,
take a kind of wanton Joy in defeating Gods designs, and as if we aspired to
vye Miracles with him, have made our returns as unparalled as his mercies; so
that the sum of our account is this. No Nation was ever more signalized by Gods
goodness, or its own perverseness, it being hard to determine in which of those
respects it is most eminent. That this is in the general perfectly true, there
are too many particulars ready to testify, indeed a whole cloud of Witnesses
do concur to the proving the charge, I shall not undertake to examine all, yet
some of the principal it will not be amiss to take notice of.

BEFORE we enquire into the use we have made of Gods Mercies, let us a little
consider what our sense of them is; and sure of all the interrogatories we can
put to our selves, this appears the easiest, the most gentle favorable Test,
that even our own partialities could elect for us; it being so natural to men
in misery to value a rescue, and celebrate their deliverers, that the contrary
would be the only wonder: we see even the Jews, who were none of the most
malleable people, yet deliverances made impressions on them, set them to their
devout processions and solemn hymns in praise of God: nay such a piece of
native Religion is this, that the Heathens exemplify it to us. The Philistines
when they had taken Samson, magnified their Dagon, as having delivered their
enemy and the destroyer of their country into their hands, Judge. 16. 24. So
upon the victory over Saul, 1 Samuel 31. 9. they sent round about to publish it
in the house of their Idols. And in all stories we find, the Heathen Altars
were never so laden with Sacrifices, as upon such occasions: and the Gospel
tells us that those on whom Christ bestowed miraculous cures, were so
transported with them, that their gratitude supplanted their obedience, and
made them notwithstanding his prohibition proclaim the wonders he had done for
them: But I fear if we reflect upon our selves, we shall not be able to match
any of these instances. It Is true our late change was entertained with a Joy
profuse enough, but not enough religious. We saw that great things were done
for us, and thereof we rejoiced, but we did not so much consider that the Lord
had done them, Ps. 114. and so were rather affected with the rarity and
profitableness, than the mercy and kindness of the Dispensation: and though the
care of our Governors have provided for the religious part also, assigned days
of Purim for the perpetual commemoration of our deliverance, yet our slight
observance of them does too fully evince our Joy was merely secular; and surely
he that observed the numerous and loud acclamations in the streets, and the few
faint Hallelujahs in the Temple, must needs say they were very
disproportionate, and that how much soever the most of us rejoyc't, it was not
in the Lord: and then we are not to wonder that it was so transient; since it
was merely earthly it must needs partake of the fadingness of its original:
whereas had we derived it higher,, it would have been lasting and durable; it
could not so suddenly have expired, had we fetched it from him, in whose
presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.
But alas, our transports were such as exhausted themselves in their own noise,
we expressed our Joy in Bonfires, and it vapour'd away in the smoke; there wanted
that mixture of Piety which should have fixed that volatile passion, and we who
at first were much more glad than thankful, within a very short time ceased to
be either.

AND then as violent Heats when once expired, are succeeded by the extremest
Cold, so has it fared with us; we fell from our Ecstasies not to the mean, but
the contrary extreme; our vast complacencies at their parting, carried with
them, even ordinary contentation, and left us not only joyless, but impatient.
It was indeed matter of Equal shame and wonder, to see a scene so suddenly
changed, wherein as in many other instances, we seemed to have transcribed the
copy of the mutinous Israelites, who we find in the very same Chapter, Ex. 15.
triumphing and repining; and no sooner were the Timbrels out of their hands,
but Complaints were in their mouths, verse. 24. What shall we drink? and in the
beginning of the next, with the same querulous importunity they require meat.
But not to wrong them in the comparison, their Murmurs had some extenuating
circumstances which ours have not; they looked indeed with some appetite upon
Egypt, and made some proposals of Return, but it was while they suffered the
hardships of the wilderness; they preferred a repleted slavery, before a hungry
freedom; but even they were not so frantic in their mutinies, as to make any
such offer in Canaan, or have any Emulation to the Garlic and Onions, amidst
the affluence of Milk and Honey: No it is we Alone that have the unhappy skill
of reconciling the sins of Canaan, and the Wilderness; murmur as much under our
Vines and Fig Trees, as at Rephidim, or Marah, and make all the outcries of
want and slavery, whilst we wallow in the utmost luxury of plenty and freedom.
I need not hear specify the particulars of our Murmurings, this discourse
being not likely to find many whose innocence will need that information, this
malignant humor having spread so, that it is now become almost a scandalous
(because a singular) thing to be contented. And certainly a considering
Foreiner, that should come among us, could not but be astonished to see a Nation
so full of all those things which use to create temporal satisfactions, and yet
to find no body in it satisfied; to see so many parties among us, and none
prosperous. This is such a riddle as would tempt a man to suspect his senses,
and think we had all this while but dreamt of a restoration: been under the
delusion the Prophet describes of the hungry and thirsty man, that at his
waking, finds he is empty and his soul has appetite, Esaias 29. 8. It Is a sad,
but visible truth, that all that God has done for us, has been so far from
filling our desires, that it has only served to enlarge them: for I appeal to
any of our loudest mutineers, whether if some years since the present state of
affairs had been represented to them, dressed in the worst circumstances they now
complain of, they would not then have thought it extremely amiable, worth
Rachels prize of seven years more hardship; nay whether they would not
willingly have made some abatements, relinquisht part of what they now enjoy,
to have had the rest secured? And when God has granted us all we then asked,
shall we murmer because we could now perhaps ask something more; and like
ingrate Debtors, pick a quarrel to evade payment? Was it not enough that he
engaged his Omnipotence for us, but must his Omniscience also be pressed upon the
same service? and provide all he could foresee we would wish? Alas, do we think
we have the same hank upon God that some Gallants have on their trusting
Merchants, that upon Peril of losing all former scores, he must still go on to
supply us? shall we think nothing fit for oblivion but our obligations, and in
this perverse sense transcribe S. Paul, Phil. 3. 13. forgetting those things
which are behind, reach forward to the things that are before: this indeed too
fully speaks us the offspring of our first Parents, we can find no gust in all
the fruits of Paradise, if any one be denied us; and still look not on what we
have, but what we want; and as it is observed of the greedier sort of creatures
that they relish not one bit for the vehement expectation of another: So is it
with us, we devour, but do not enjoy our Blessings; and to require him to
satisfy us, is to assign him the Poets Hell, set him with Belus daughters to
the task of filling a sieve with water, or rolling Sysiphus's stone; our
growing appetites still keeping us empty and restless amidst all endeavors to
make us otherwise; so that whereas God uses to commit his favors to Men, as
seed to the Earth, in expectation of an harvest, some fruits of gratitude and
obedience; they seem with us rather to be flung into a Gulf, whose property is
only to swallow never to fructify.

I KNOW men's Minds are so possessed with their discontents, our daily mutinous
blasts have puffed up and swelled our grievances to such a vastness, that he must
expect to be very impatiently heard, that shall attempt to represent them in a
lesser size; yet sure 'twere not impossible even upon a direct view, to
demonstrate them very light and moderate: but upon a comparative, perfectly
trivial and inconsiderable; and it is a little strange, that we who bare our
late suffering estate with so much Impatience, should not have impressions
enough left in our memory, to confront to all our present regrets. Do we not
quietly now possess the fruits of our own, or our Progenitors industry, without
danger of any Sequestration, but what our own Luxuries inflict? Are not our
Persons at freedom; delivered from that kind word, and unkind thing, SECURING?
So that when we rise in the Morning, we need not fear our next lodging shall be
in the Goal or dungeon; nor when we sit down to our Meal, suspect the intrusion
of armed uninvited Guests, who, ere whiles we know, were wont to surprise us,
as the Plague did the Israelites, even while the meat was yet in our mouths;
are not our Lives under the custody of known Laws, so that no man is in danger
that will but keep himself within those Boundaries; nor need fear to be mocked
into his grave by shows and Pageantries of Justice? And besides these real
escapes from slavery, are we not rescued from the most imbittering circumstance
of it, the having servants rule over us, a thing which rendered our subjection
as mean and servile, as it was sharp and pressing, and which we were then so
sensible of, that it never mist to bring up the rear of our Complaints. Lastly,
if we reflect upon our higher spiritual concerns, are we not freed from those
boistrous robust temptations, which with the violence of Famine and Sword,
Beggary and Death assaulted our constancy, and left no mean between Martyrdom
and Apostasy? Are we not also restored to all those spiritual advantages which
we once professed so much to value? That well of life now lies open before us,
after which we once panted like the Heart after the water-springs; our ancient
worship is revived, and wants only our attendance to make it solemn; whereas
the abomination of Desolation stood in the holy place, our prayers were turned
to sin; needed, but were denied the Liturgy to pray against them, or atone
their guilts. We have no longer stones given us for bread, nor experiment that
sad riddle of being at once cloyed and starved amidst excess of preaching,
suffering a Famine of the Word. And now are all these worth no regard, if they
are not, why did we exclaim so loudly when we wanted them? if they are, why are
we still as querulous now we have them? It Is sure, these include all our great
and substantial interests as men, and Christians, and those being provided for,
it is not easily imaginable what others we should have important enough to make
us querulous, unless it be those of Passion and Humor. One man's ambition
perhaps wants a satisfaction, another man's avarice, a thirds spleen; and this
discord makes up the very unmusical Harmony of our murmurs. If we see but a
Mordecai in the Kings gate whom we wish removed, we can like Haman find no gust
in any thing we enjoy. If we see some, who we think have born less of the
burden and heat of the day, rewarded equally or perhaps above our selves, we
are sure to make out the Parable, by murmuring at the good man of the house: Or
if Nineveh be spared, if all be not executed to whom we have denounced
destruction, we like Jonah sit down in a sullen discontent, and grow weary of
our lives, because others are permitted to enjoy theirs. To these and other
heads of the like nature, it is apparent our grievances may be reduced; and then
if the balance be put into any dispassionate hand, it is sure they can never
become a counterpoize to the other real benefits we enjoy, but will in the
Prophets phrase, appear lighter than vanity and nothing.

BUT I suppose some will say, it is not only present uneasinesses of which they
are impatient, but the possibility of future, a fear of relapsing into our
former estate by the ill managery of our present: To these I shall answer, That
admit it were so, yet sure 'twill be no wisdom to anticipate our miseries, to
forestall discontents, and make foresight as painful as actual suffering. In
other forbidden instances we choose to enjoy the present, and with an Epicurean
Indifferency cry, Let us eat and drink for to morrow we dye, 1 Cor. 15. 32. How
is it that we here become so unluckily sagacious, unless it be that murmuring
is a Sensuality we count equivalent, nay superior to all rational
satisfactions; and therefore that we may have no intermission of that delight,
suborn our phancies to find occasions, and fetch in from the future those
supplies which the present affords not: But besides this, I should in the
second place ask these great Diviners, why they do not also foresee, that this
very mutinous temper of theirs is the most direct and infallible means of
bringing those mischiefs they pretend to fear; that it is so, is most evident,
and so well observed by our Adversaries, that there is little doubt, they have
not only pleasure, but designs upon it; and to that purpose have their Engines
on work to blow up the hot Spirits among us, in expectation from thence to
raise a flame. So blind a thing is Passion, that it hurries on to the things
which in their issue we most abhor; makes us our Enemies drudges, and the
forgers of our own shackles; and whilst we cry out of petty Indulgences, we
our selves give them in the lump, what we grudge them in parcels: This is a
miserable infatuation, and while we act thus unreasonably, we are sure no
competent declamers against ill managery. But besides this natural effect of
our murmurs, we are also to remember that there is a Divine vengeance attending
it: when bounties and largesses are quarreled at, we necessitate God to
another Method, nay indeed, not only his vengeance, but even his kindness seems
to suggest it, when he sees our constitutions such, that his gentle
applications work contrary effects: it is very apposite for him to try whether
the Antiperistasis will operate on the other side; if we smart thus under
lenitives, it is but fit to essay, if corrosives will ease us; and the only
remaining experiment for the making us happy, is to make us miserable.

BUT would God we might yet prevent the need of such unkindly expedients, and
by a sober estimate, and thankful sense of what we have, provide to conserve
it: not fastidiously despise great and eminent blessings, because perhaps they
come not home to every part of our wishes. Alas, those plenary satisfactions
agree not with the nature of Earthly things: it is an observation long since
raised from the Globular and Triangular form of the World and our Hearts, that
it is impossible the one should be filled with the other, there will still be
some angles, some vacuities left; our very accessions create new wants, and
like an unsound limb, the healing of one Sore is the breaking out of another.
Every thing under the Moon partakes of her vicissitudes, augments and decreases
only with this Difference, that though their wains be to as low a degree as
hers, they never are perfectly at the full. There never was, nor never will be
a State here completely happy: And as the Philosopher handsomely reproacht the
impatience of the Persian King for the death of his Wife, by undertaking to
revive her, if he could help him but to the names of three men that had never
grieved to write upon her Tomb; so surely we may make the like offer to our
malcontents, and engage to redeem all their uneasinesses, if they can point us
out (I say not three, but) one age wherein there were no complaints. What then
are our clamorous Repinings, but so many loud invectives against Gods decree; a
Desire to subvert his fundamental Law, and confound the distinction he has
irreversibly set between our Earthly and our Heavenly state: and alas, What mad
insolence is this, to expect that the whole Economy of the world must be
changed only to humor us? that God must replant us a Paradise, pluck up every
one of the Briers and Thorns which were our native curse? nay, bring down
Heaven to us, and enstate us in undisturbed unmixed felicities? This is indeed
simply considered a very wild expectation, but yet more so when it is considered
how we qualify our selves for such a privilege: for let me ask, are we as
eager to anticipate the holiness, as the happiness of Heaven? Do we as
passionately desire to do Gods will, as that God should do ours? And aemulate
the Angelical obedience and purity, as much as bliss? These are Interrogatories
which need no verbal Answer, our lives do too fully resolve them in the
negative, and then how shameless a partiality is it, thus to carve to our
selves, and choose out of either state what we best like, reserve all the
sensualities of this world, and yet cry out for the impassibleness of the next;
but alas, these are pretensions as inconsistent as they are bold, our vices
having such a native inseparable adherency of pain and vexation, that it is not
the most dexterous managery of a sin that can ever sever them, but if we will
retain the one, we must the other also: A Truth which might be exemplified to
us throughout the whole Catalogue even of sensual sins; but it is most
eminently visible in this of murmuring, which stays not as others do to take
Pain at the rebound, and by way of result, but has it as its first Element and
principle; it being its self almost as great a pain, as any it can betray us
to: and yet to secure an advance and perpetuity of Torment, every Event serves
to foment and heighten it, and the most desperate things are equally
combustible to that flame. Indeed he that is possessed with that humor, has a
kind of fury within him, that will never let him rest: And alas, what Legions
of such evil Spirits are now among us? How are we as it were inspired with
Mutiny, it being the universal dialect of the Nation; and of many in it, who
cannot be supposed to found it in any observation of their own, but are led by
the common genius, and bellow rather by consent with the rest of the herd, than
for any uneasiness, at least of injustice and oppression (for such only give
pretense for Mutiny) that themselves feel. And since it is become a Plebeian
vice, would God our Gentry would use it as they do their fashions, and leave it
off (if for no better reason) for its being vulgar: And indeed 'twere but
aequitable, that those who have taken up so many sins upon punctilio, should
for once lay down one upon the same score. The Athenian State put down their
Ostracisme (which otherwise they were fond enough of) because it was debased,
by happening to fall on Hyperbolus, a despicable and abject person: and there
seems not much difference in the cases, save only that we are more tenacious of
Sins, than they of Punishments; and I fear we shall so long retain this, till
we find it its own Lictor, not only in the present uneasiness, but in that more
fruitful harvest of Mischiefs, whereof it has now sown the seeds. We see here
what our thankfulness is, for those eminent miraculous mercies we have
received, and the account of that is an unhappy specimen, what we are like to
find, when we survey the uses we have made of them, which God knows have been
so unnatural and perverse, as does too fully parallel the former instance.

FOR first, if we reflect upon our spiritual blessings, what has the enjoyment
of those advantages produced, but the contempt of them; we have an easy free
access to God in his Sanctuary, our Churches are no longer Garrisons to keep
out the worship, to which they were devoted, but like hospitable doors, are
open to the regular piety of any that will enter. And now we have this liberty,
now the flaming sword is removed, we have lost all appetite to the Tree of
life, can willingly let those Everlasting gates (as the Psalmist styles them)
Psalm. 21. stand as everlastingly open ere we enter them: And though the
Fabrics are by Gods providence rescued from their dust and ruins, yet many of
us endeavor to reduce them to a yet worse desolation, strive to depopulate
those sacred Mansions, and execute against them that prophetic threat
concerning Nineveh, Nahum. 1. Leave them empty, void and waste. And indeed so
they are, if not in an absolute, yet in a Comparative sense; for could we at
any time of Divine Service make an estimate of all the persons that are absent,
'twould scarce be discerned that any are there; were all corners ransackt, what
a multitude of Recusants should we find upon a far differing account from that
of Conscience? Some we should see stretching themselves upon their beds,
keeping a Sabbath indeed, but to their floth, not their God; others perhaps we
may find roused from their Couches, upon the summons not of Religion but
Vanity; some new garment is to be fitted, some exotic dress essayed, and they
who grudge one hour to the Preachers glass, can spend many at their own; where
they are so taken up with their Idolatries to themselves, that they think of no
other worship; nay, as the world goes, 'twere well this were the worst
diversion, that some did not keep from Church, that they might in the interim,
defile those lesser Temples of God they carry about them, and cut themselves
off from the Communion of Christ's body, to make themselves members of an
Harlot: or that others were not Bacchus his Votaries when they should be Gods,
spend that time in their frantic revels, and sing a Dithyrambick instead of Te
Deum. As for the Mammonist, if he keep any holy day, it is like the Israelites
to his Gods of Gold, Exodus 32. 31. He is looking with veneration on his
Idolized treasure, numbering those bags he dares not use, or perhaps with a more
active Zeal pursuing the means of increasing them. Thus alas, may we go from
one to another, and as it was in Ezekiels vision, see still greater
abominations, Ezekiel. 8. And certainly that All-seeing Eye, which discerns what
multitudes do thus busy themselves, at the times even of his solemnest
worship, cannot but adjudge us most profane despisers of his mercy in restoring
it: Yet would to God 'twere only the absent upon whom that sentence would fall;
but alas, the behavior of many in the Church does too loudly testify how
little of devotion brings them thither, and at how mean a rate they value all
that is done there: Those Eyes which there should wait on God, as those of a
Servant on the hands of his Master, Psalm. 123. 2. are rolling about to fetch in
all the vanities and temptations which can occurr to them, and look every way,
but toward Heaven. Our Tongues which should be touched with a Coal from the
Altar, devoted wholly to Hymns and Prayers, are busied in private Colloquies
with those about us: Business, News, nay, all the impertinent chat of our most
vacant hours, is then taken up to entertain us; so that he who would know the
talk of the Town or neighborhood, need go neither to Exchange nor Market, the
Church will as certainly supply him: And this ill employment of our Tongues,
engages the like of our Ears, which when they should be hearkening what the
Lord God will say concerning us, are listening to those vain discourses we hold
with one another, from all which outward indecencies we may too surely collect
the inward irreverence of our heart. And is it possible that this should now be
the Temper of those, who not long since seemed to bewail their exclusion from
those sacred Assemblies: Did we long for them as David for the waters of
Bethlehem, when they appeared unattainable, and when they are brought to us,
refuse to taste them, pour them out not as he did in devotion, but in
contempt? It Is true indeed, in temporal Delights possession usually proves a
nauseating thing, and takes off our appetite; but it uses not to be so in
spiritual, whose peculiar property it is not to satiate, but excite by
fruition: But alas, though the Things we converse with are spiritual, our
Hearts are carnal, and that is the cause why instead of crying out with the
Psalmist, When shall I come to appear in the presence of God, Psalm. 42. We,
like those in Malachy, Chap. 1. 13. Snuff at his service, and say, What a
weariness is it? A weariness indeed it appears in the literal sense with many,
who sleep at it as men over-labour'd, and scarce take so sound repose in their
own houses as in Gods; indeed such is the variety of rude behavior that is
there used, that should an unbeliever come into their Assemblies, he must
surely (as St. Paul supposes in another case, 1 Cor. 14. 23.) say we are mad;
to see some gazing, some whispering, some laughing, others sleeping, and
perhaps the far fewer number praying; is such a medly, as the most brutish
Idolaters never admitted in their worships; and the way of worshipping Mercury,
by throwing stones, or Hercules by cursing, is a sober and decent kind of
service compared with this. And now alas, when will the Church recover its
ancient Title, and become the house of prayer; it is sure according to the
present appearance it may have many more proper names, that being the least
part of the business done in it: It Is true, there are some that make it a
Sanctuary, but it is only against the penalties of the Law, or reproach of
errant Atheism; they come to save their money or their credit; others perhaps
shun the solitariness of being at home, and come not as to a place of Devotion,
but Concourse; and it is to be doubted, some visit that place as they do many
others, because they have nothing else to do: They want their weekdays
diversion, and so are driven thither upon mere destitution of more grateful
entertainments; make it a kind of Sunday playhouse, sit there as Spectators or
Judges, to see the company, or censure the Preacher, but never remember that
themselves have any other part to act; or are beheld by Him, who will not
always be patient of such profanation; but will, as the Scripture speaks, Repay
them to their face, who thus contemn him to his. We know among men, every one
counts his House his fortress; and an Affront offered him there, doubles the
Injury, and is not only a contempt, but an invasion: and shall it not be a
proportionable enhansement with God also, thus to defy him within his own
doors, and approach his presence in an impious bravery, the more fully to show
him, how little we regard him. At this rate while we address our selves, we may
as ill manner'd Guests be forbid his house: Interrogated by God as the Jews
were, Is. 1. Why do thou tread my Courts? A total abandoning of Worship
being more fair and ingenuous than such Devotion: wherein like the barbarous
soldiers, we bring Christ a Scepter only to smite him on the head with it; and
make a preface of homage to give our selves the sport of the mockery: nay, it is
sadly to be feared, that God may thrust us out of his House, shut his Doors
against us, rescue his Service and himself from our profanation, and put us
again under the same, (or a worse interdict than that) which lately lay upon us.

HAVING now seen our scandalous Irreverence toward Gods worship in general,
it is too easy to make Application to the several parts of it; every one of
which must necessarily partake of the contempt which falls upon the whole; for
while we bring no thoughts but secular with us; those are equally disagreeing
to all the Divine offices: 'twill be needless therefore to trace our wanderings
in each of those, since our whole behavior in the Church is one great
deviation from the business we should come about: yet that supersedes not to
every guilty person himself the necessity of a more distinct and particular
reflection. It Is sure at the last dreadful Audit, we must account for every of
those spiritual advantages we have abused; and alas, what a dismal reckoning
will many of us have then to give up, when our prayers which we now turn into
Sin, shall be turned into perdition: and We who would not supplicate our God,
shall in vain invoke the mountains and hills to hide us from the face of the
lamb, when that Word which we now so fastidiously despise, that it must be
dressed up in the colors of humane Rhetoric, to make us at all patient of it,
and becomes then only tolerable to us when it is farthest removed from being
Gods: when that word, as our Savior speaks, shall judge us, and that gracious
invitation to life end in that fatal sentence, Go ye Cursed. Nay, when our very
Propitiation shall plead against us, and the crucified Body of our Savior,
which we have in Effigy so often recrucified, in our unworthy approaches, or
impious neglect of the holy Eucharist, shall witness against us as its
murderers, when we shall be found not sprinkled as with the blood of a
sacrifice, but imbrued as with that of slaughter: when all these means of our
salvation, shall thus miserably convert, and from the savor of life, become
that unto death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. then we shall to our amazement find, how
differing our estimates of them were from Gods; and in his vengeance read the
value he put upon them. What then have we now to do, but to anticipate our
doomsday, and judge our selves that we may not be judged of the Lord: To make
an impartial account of all these our profanations, and accuse our selves
before his mercy seat, that so we may prevent the arraignment at his bar of
Judgment. And as Offenders are usually enjoined to acknowledge their guilts in
the very places where they committed them; so let us make the Church the Scene
of our penitence, as we have of our faults: By our strong crying and tears,
deprecate our former indevotion, and by an exemplary Reverence, redress the
scandal of our Profaneness. This, and only this is the way to secure us against
the final Vengeance of these sins; nay, and against the intermedial also: for
we are not to expect that so unkind abuse of mercy shall be wholly respited to
another world, it being so exasperating a crime, as must in all probability
awake Gods fury, and pull down present Judgments, I wish the Event do not too
soon attest the reasonableness of this supposal.

IF from our spiritual Blessings, we now descend to our temporal, we shall not
appear much better managers of those; they being generally employed to purposes
the most distant from those, for which they were given. And first for our
peace, that great comprehensive enjoyment, upon which all others are dependent,
and which is to our civil Capacities, the same that health is to our natural;
the thing by which we relish and taste the rest of our comforts, we may from
the Song of Zachary, Luke 1. learn for what intent God bestows it: Deliverance
from enemies is to no other end, but that we may serve God in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life: But alas, he that observes how we
employ our quiet, must surely say it serves little to the advancement either of
Holiness or Righteousness: For the first of these we have already seen, how
little of holiness we show even in that place where nothing else should be
admitted; and we are not so preposterously religious, to show more in others.
That Piety which is so cold and benumn'd under the warm breath of the public
Ordinances; we may well presume stark frozen, in our more retired offices: and
if it thus faint and sink in consort, it is sure more liable to the Wise man's
Vae soli, and utterly dies when we are alone. It Is true indeed, these Closet
transactions are immediately visible to none but the searcher of hearts, yet in
true Devotion there is such a Symmetry and proportion, that the Inferences we
make by analogy may be very irrefragable; nay, it is to be feared many lie open
to a yet clearer conviction, and may be proved to have few or none of those
private intercourses with heaven; for though a negative be not simply
evincible, yet as in civil cases we prove a man not to have been at this time
in such a place, by his having actually been in another; so were the whole
Week, Month, perhaps Year: of some men exactly traced, we should find them so
engrossed with other diversions, that there will scarce be found any Minute for
devotion to interpose: Men's worldly or fleshly Concerns so divide their time,
that God from whom it is all derived can be afforded no tribute out of it. Yet
alas, 'twere well if this privative sort of impiety were all we had to answer
for: but it is too apparent we do not only neglect God, but reproach and violate
him: what else are those bold and insolent blasphemies wherewith we daily
assault him, making him the mark at which all our wild Passions are shot. Do we
want any thing either for our use or delight, presently God is accused, his
providence or his goodness questioned; and he declaimed against either as
impotent or illiberal. Does any body vex or disquiet us, God must have his
share of our displeasure, his sacred name must be profaned, and we count our
fiercest Revilings of men, faint and insignificant, if not inspired with the
most dreadful and horrid Oaths; Nay, he stands obnoxious to all the
displacencies we receive even from inanimate creatures, if a Die or a Card run
amiss, our resentments are presently vented upon him; he is profaned and
vilified, as if he were the Cheat that rookt us of our money, because he does
not secure us from those losses, to which we wantonly expose our selves; nor is
it only our eager and warmer passions that thus invade him: Our pleasanter
moods do the very same, and we blaspheme by way of divertisement; every
impertinent story or insipid Jest, must have the haut-goust of an Oath to
recommend it, as every incredible Narration has to attest it: to say nothing of
those more solemn and deliberate perjuries, wherein we impiously suborn Gods
venerable and dreadful name, to be the Engine of our fraud and malice: and as if
we thought he would forswear as well as we, bring him to countenance those
Crimes he has vowed to punish. Thus do we with a prodigious impiety contaminate
even divinity its self, make it the sink for all our puddles to run into; and
prostitute that name which as the Psalmist speaks, is great, wonderful and
holy, to all the unholy purposes, our Passions, our Interest, or our Phancies
can suggest to us.

THIS profaneness is so proper a foundation for Atheism, that we are not to
wonder to see so many advance from the one to the other, they pay so little of
the reverence due to God, that at last they turn their impiety into argument,
and infer him not to be God, whom they treat so unlike one. And truly this
seems to be the grand piece of Logic, which has disputed many, not only out of
Christian, but all native Religion. How unhappily successful it has proved
among us is too apparent in those impious discourses which are every where
heard, wherein men are arrived to such a licenciousness, that David's Atheist
was a modest Puny, who only said in his Heart there is no God, and perhaps upon
that account shall by some be adjudged to deserve the Epithet the Psalmist
gives him, and be indeed thought a fool that would not own what would now
a-daies so certainly denominate him a Wit, or in the solemn style a Master of
Reason. And indeed they will attest the propriety of the style, they rather
governing Reason, than being governed by it; otherwise 'twould be hard to
discern, how from different premises the same conclusion should be induced: and
those who in the late adverse times denied God in revenge of their sufferings,
should now pay their gratitude also in the same manner, and renounce him as (or
more) loudly since his signal attestation of that righteous cause; his not
owning whereof was then their principal plea. The truth is, it is a little
strange how Atheism could admit such enhansing accessions as we find it has;
for it being the completion and highest step of Ill, and that to which all
others do but subordinately tend, one would think it should from its first
appearance in the world, have been so mature and full grown a sin, as could be
capable of no improvement; but so subtly wicked are these later days, that
we can never be brought to a non ultra, but still find something to add to the
compleatest sin: therefore though of those that are really Atheists, one cannot
be said to be more so than another, yet some may be more daringly, and
mischievously so; and sure in that respect our modern, surmount all former:
They were generally on the defensive part, took up the tenet as a buckler
against the unwelcome invasions and Checks of conscience, and designed nothing
but the more peaceable enjoyment of their lusts; but now men do not only use,
but love it; make themselves its avowed Champions, seek to win it Proselytes;
and in short, appear so zealous for it, as if they made it their religion to
have none. And God knows, too many such reversed kinds of Evangelists we now
have, who with as great design unteach Divinity, as the first Propugners taught
it, and their number and boldness have so increased since the return of our
peace, that sure the next Age will have little cause to think Religion had any
share in the Restoration. Thus have we done our parts to supersede that
obligation of serving God in holiness, by leaving no God to serve; and after
the most signal attestation of his Deity in our rescue, we do like those
ingrate persons, who seek to subvert those by whom themselves were established,
and deny him because he has owned us.

THIS is the holiness wherewith we have served him, since our being delivered
from the hands of our Enemies, and our righteousness has been very
proportionable, for if we look into the dealings of all ranks of men; we shall
find the same vein of deceit run through all transactions. A few years since
Sequestration and plunderings, those wholesale robberies had so over-topt the
rest, that like an Epidemick disease they had overwhelmed, if not the kind, yet
at least the notice of all other Injustices: but since those Leviathans are
withdrawn, the lesser Devourers supply their place; Fraud succeeds to Violence;
and in all places, all occasions of commerce, we still meet with Sequestrators.
The adulterated wares, and false measures in Shops; the dilatory proceedings,
and evasive tricks in Law; the various and unworthy Cheats of Creditors, and
the mean and dishonest advantages which are watched in all sorts of Contracts,
are too irrefragable proofs hereof. Nay, not only our Business, but our very
recreations expose us to these deceits, as some of our bankrupted Gamesters can
too sadly witness, what troops of Harpyes attend those sports is every man's
observation: It Is strange so many should yet be to learn the prudence to avoid
so known a danger, wherein a man is at once made active and passive in the same
Robbery, and does himself defraud his family of that, whereof he is defrauded
by another. But amongst these many injustices, there is none wherein Men seem
generally to find such a gust and sensuality, as those wherein God is
concerned; twenty Laybooties humor them not so much as one from the Clergy; and
if the Quakers should be mustered according to that one Tenet of not paying
Tithes, we should indeed find their numbers formidable. How subtle even the
rudest persons are in defaulking those dues, we see by every days experiment,
the overreaching their Minister being the grand Triumph of a Rusticks wit; so
that not only their covetousness but their vanity is concerned in it: I know
it is the usual apology for this kind of Sacrilege, that either the maintenance
of the Clergy is too much, or their merit too little; for the first, I think it
may be demonstrated, That there is no liberal Science, and but few Mechanic
trades, from which a man may not hope as plentiful a subsistence, as this
affords to the generality of its professors: However I shall leave those that
make this objection to dispute it with that authority, which has allotted them
this proportion; desiring them to consider, that whatever the support of the
Clergy is, it costs them nothing; no man having Purchased more, than what
remains of the Estate, after his Tyth is paid. As to the second, I confess it is
extremely to be wished, that the negligence and vice of Some did not give too
much pretense to the Allegation; and to such I cannot but apply the words of
our Savior, Mat. 18. 7. woe be to the man by whom the offense comes; yet
certainly it is very incompetent, to justify the detention of their legal
rights: for till the Law which has assigned them, delegate the Forfeiture to
me, the greatest enormities of my Pastor, cannot entitle me to any thing that
is his: And indeed what blame soever is really due to some, we must expect it
should extend to all, if the Accusers were to have the benefit of the Mulct;
and (as in the late confusions) all Ministers should be made scandalous, in
order to the making them poor.

'TWERE easy to draw up a far larger Catalogue of those injustices we daily
commit; for as a man has diverse other concerns besides his goods, so he may be
injured in all those: and truly the iniquity of these days, seems fully
commensurate to all the suffering capacities of mankind: we weigh our own and
others Concerns, in very differing balances, and offer those Injuries without
any regret, which we can with no patience suffer: How nicely Jealous is every
one of us of his own Repute, and yet how maliciously Prodigal of other men's? so
that Defamation is become one of our main Topics of discourse, furnishes
entertainment to all companies; the present owe their Divertisement to the
absent, and many would be drein'd quite dry, were it not for this reserve,
which like an unexhaustible spring, still supplies fresh matter of talk. In
like manner how carefully do we avert any hurt or mutilation of our own bodies,
and yet how barbarously inconsiderate are we of others, to whom we do the
greatest outrages rather than use any violence to our Passion, or restrain an
angry Humor: only I confess there is one Instance, wherein though we are
unjust, we are not so partial; but expose our selves also, and that is in the
case of Duells, a barbarous custom wherein it is hard to define, whether the
Wickedness or Folly be greater; yet it maintains its way in spite of all the
methods God has used to make us better or wiser: Of this there are too many,
and too noted instances since our restoration, as if we were so enamored of
destruction, that when we are prevented of it from our Enemies, we seek it from
one another, or thought public Peace so intolerable, that when it is cast upon
us (as sure ours, if ever any may be said to be) we are fain to take in private
quarrels, as our rescue from that dull quiet, and court the utmost mischiefs,
to avoid the oppression of the greatest happiness. Thus perversely do we
countermine Gods purposes of kindness, and when he has secured us, solicitously
seek to be delivered from our safety; project new dangers, and dare his power
with a yet harder Task, the delivering us from our selves: And whilst we thus
avert our quiet, it is no wonder that we produce no better effects of it; nor
fructify under that, which we will not permit our selves to enjoy.

AND as upon this general view, we appear very ill managers of our Peace, so
shall we much more, if we reflect on those many particular blessings which are
wrapped up in that, of which we make so perverse use, that we therein no less
violate Sobriety, than we have already appeared to do piety and righteousness;
so filling up the measure of our iniquity by transgressing all the fudamental
rules of Christianity, living neither soberly, righteously, nor Godly in this
present world, Tit. 2. 12. And of those advantages which are the appendages to
Peace, there are two most eminent; Plenty and Liberty, both of which are the
more remarkable in our present quiet, by how much the deprivation of each was
the greater. For the first, we know the late times of rapine, had torn from
many among us their whole subsistence, so entirely despoiled them that they
were reduced to Jobs condition, and connected the two extreme points of Birth
and Death, by a middle state of the like nakedness and destitution: and to
such, our late restoration was a kind of Civil resurrection; raised them like
Elisha's dry bones, from the most hopeless state, and by a successive posseson
of their own Inheritances, made them heirs to themselves. And though all were
not so wholly divested, yet like those Canaanites whom the Jews did not
extirpate, they were put under Tribute: and while persons who knew so well how
to exact were Lords Paramount, a bare being was all could be expected, they
seemed rather Stewards than Owners of their fortunes, and had rather the
trouble than advantage of their Managery: And who would not think that this so
long want of plenty, should have taught us sobriety in the using it; that
desuetude should have worn out the skill of luxury, and we should not have
known how to be riotous: but alas, our memories have been too faithful to us in
this particular, no one of our vanities is fallen into oblivion, but on the
contrary the art of Voluptuousness so improved, as if all the time that was
lost from the Practick, had been spent in the Theory, and we had for so many
years been contriving new kinds and degrees of excess. Indeed it is too sure we
retained the affection when we had lost the power of rioting; and it is not our
prosperity seduces us, but we it. For as the Sun though it lends its rays to
the begetting of the vilest Insects, yet makes no such production but upon apt
matter, slime and putrefaction: so neither would the most opulent fortune make
us sensual, did it not find us disposed and prepared for it. How forcible those
propensions are, appears by the multitude of objects on which they work; For
they had need be strong Inclinations that take in all Opportunities, nay
possibilities of actuating themselves, and such it is evident ours are, there
being nothing capable of ministering to luxury, which we use not to that
purpose. Our Meat is no longer apportioned to our Hunger, but our Tastes: so
that the Stomach is made merely passive in the matter of Eating; serves only to
receive those loads we charge it with, whilst its Elections and Choices are
forestalled by the palate or fancy; nay, it is not permitted so much as a
negative voice, not allowed to refuse what is either for kind or quantity
destructive to it: We do with studied mixtures force our relucting appetites,
and with all the Spells of Epicurism, conjure them up that we may have the
pleasure of laying them again. Thus unworthily treacherous are we to Nature,
which while we pretend to relieve, we oppress, by giving her not only beyond
her need, but sufferance: And to show we are no less dextrous in mixing sins
than meats; our very Pride (though in its self an intellectual vice) mingles
with our Gluttony, every thing is insipid that is not costly; and it is thought
an ignoble Peasant-like thing to eat a plain meal: Nor is he now to be looked on
as a Gentleman, whose single Ordinary costs not as much as would be (and
himself would perhaps some years since have thought) a fair exhibition for some
whole families. And that we may not be charged with partial intemperance, we go
not less in that of drink, wherein we are so nice and critical, that it is
become a special skill and faculty to judge of liquors: But how great soever
our curiosity be, it is sure our excess is greater, and does not only over-match
but supplant it; there being no drink so unpleasant which the love of a debauch
will not reconcile us to. So great a malice do we bear to our reason, that to
oppress it, we are content to expose our darling, and do violence to our very
sense. How unhappily predominant this brutish Vice is, need not here be told,
since it too evidently attests its self, to every man's observation, it no
longer seeking the shelter of night and darkness, but impatient of such delay,
appears in the broadest light; and he is now a slow-paced drunkard, that has
not finished his course, perhaps begun another, before the Sun has ended his:
nay, so is the Scene changed, that sobriety is become the reproachful thing,
such as even those who value it dare not own, and are either driven to preserve
it by shifts and artifices, or else choose to abandon it rather than hazard the
scandal. And certainly this is the great advantage this sin has for the
propagating its self, for it is impossible Bestiality should be so universally
agreeable to mankind, that all should pursue it out of appetite and liking:
it is this Fear that engages many in it; and though it have too many volunteers,
yet sure it is this press that helps to make up its numbers, which as it speaks
the great baseness of those who are thus ashamed both of Piety and Humanity,
and had rather cease to be men, than appear to be Christians; so is it a sad
indication of National impiety, a fatal Symptom that we have near filled up
the measure of our iniquities, and are ripened for the woes denounced against
those who call evil good, and good evil, Esa. 5. 20. which sure was never more
palpably done than in this instance, wherein temperance is branded for ill
nature, and dullness of humor; whilst the most swinish Excess must pass for
sociableness, friendship, and hospitality; names which have been so long
prostituted that they have lost their native use, and men have forgot those
very distant things to which they originally belonged, yet sure such once there
were: God made us sociable creatures, and we might still continue so upon the
strength of that first principle, and need not owe our intercourse to our
debaucheries; no, nor our friendships neither, which have been so far from
being preserved that way, that there is nothing more obviously, and frequently
violates them; nay, indeed the whole species of real Friendships seems to be
extinct, since this fictitious sort took place. Men think it enough (as indeed
it is too much) to damn themselves with their friends, and all other
communications are transmuted into that of Sin, for we daily see those, who
cleave the most inseparably in this kind to each other, will yet neither do nor
suffer any thing else: And sure if this be friendship, it is such a reverst kind
of it as must have as preposterous a Definition; for none that have yet been
given by Divines or Philosophers will fit it. The like may be said of
hospitality, which sure is in its proper nature of a very distant make from
this; designed to relieve Strangers, not burden them; to cure their wants
indeed, but not by the worse exchange of a Surfeit: So that the ancient and the
modern Hospitality, differ as much as that of Melchizedeck from that of Circe;
the one refreshes, the other transforms: And how great a show soever of
liberality this later may have, yet he is not to be thought to have drunk
gratis, that has paid his reason for his shot.

AND to both these parts of Intemperance, our Uncleanness bears full
proportion, the one makes provision for the flesh, and the other fulfils the
lusts thereof. To how brutish an impudence this sin is grown is too visible: we
need not trace men into their privacies and recesses, themselves willingly
proclaim their guilts; nay, dread nothing so much as the opinion of being
innocent: yea so out-dated a virtue is Modesty now become, that even that Sex
to which it was once accounted the greatest ornament, have put it off, look on
it as a piece of Rusticity, and country breeding: whether this pulling down
the fence be an Indication they are willing to lie common, I shall not
determine: but sure that very free, and confident behavior now in use, is too
apt to invite assaults, and takes off all that Extenuation of crime, which was
wont to be allowed that Sex upon the supposition of their being seduced? Thus
do we publish our sin as Sodom, and if we consider how much boldness it has
gained since the return of our prosperity; twill be probable that ours also has
been fomented by fullness of bread, and abundance of Idleness, Ez. 1. 6. That
our Plenty is very subservient to it, appears by the vast expense wherewith
many men manage this vice: And that our Idleness is so too, is no less evident
by the large portions of time that are spent in those pursuits, it being as the
great design, so the especial business of too many men's lives. As for the
remedy which God has assigned, it serves now only to exasperate the disease.
Marriage with too many only advances simple-fornication to adultery, and
superadds perjury to uncleanness; those sacred bands are like Samsons withs,
broken upon every assault of the Philistines, and the very thought of being
confined makes men more apt to range; For alas, it is not their needs but their
Phancies they are to provide for, and that is so endless, that the greatest
liberty of Polygamy would never satisfy it: the same quarrel would lie then to
multiplied wives, which does now to single; I mean, that they were their own:
And how numerous soever their flock were, 'twould not secure their poor
neighbors only Lamb, especially when it is considered, that in this they
gratify two sins at once, their vanity as well as their lust; their
complacence in undermining the Husband, being generally as great, as that in
enjoying the Wife. And if Pride abstractedly and in its own nature be, as
Solomon says, an abomination to the Lord, certainly when it is thus complicated,
it must be infinitely more so, and ascertain a concurrence of those Judgments,
which are singly threatened to each of those Sins; what those are, I wish guilty
persons would seriously ponder, and then they would surely think their
momentary pleasures much overbought. But alas, such a fascinating sin this is,
as allows men no liberty of consideration, they go on as the wiseman says,
Prove. 7. 22. with the same stupidity that an Ox goes to the slaughter: or, a
fool to the correction of the stocks; and while every body else observes the
Effects of their Vice in their wasted bodies, and ruined estates; themselves
are the last that discern it, pursue the course till the very last remains of
strength and wealth are exhausted, and nothing left them but disease and
beggary. Of the truth of this, there have been too many sad examples, though it
seems not yet enough, to give caution to others.

And to these lusts of the flesh, we spare not to add those of the Eye also,
for so surely we may properly call all those Luxuries which adapt themselves
peculiarly to that Faculty, such are the gaity of Apparel, richness of
Furniture, and all the splendour of Equipage, which has no propriety to any
other sense, but that of seeing, and is lost if it be not looked on: And though
these seem to differ much from that Covetousness which St. John is supposed to
comprehend in that Phrase, the one being the tenacity, the other the profusion
of Money; yet they are but several branches of the same Sin, and are
diversified only by a various application to the Object: for in strict
speaking, he that covets Gold and Silver to lay on his back, is as properly
covetous, as he that designs it only to fill his coffers. But besides the
propriety these excesses have to that title, they have no less claim to that
ensuing, The Pride of Life; it being evident that they are both Effects and
Fomenters of Pride: and sure this sets but an ill Character upon them, that
when the Apostle has divided all the lusts of the world into three sorts, these
bid so fair to two of them. I would not here be understood to condemn that
Decency and moderate Expense, which agree to the several ranks and qualities of
Persons, there being not only a lawfulness, but some kind of civil necessity
for such Distinctions: nor is the levelling principle fitter to be admitted in
Habit, than in Title or Estate: That which I accuse is quite another thing, it
being that inordinate profusion which does not only exceed the ability and
fortune of the Person, but the proportion of his rank and condition; and so
confounds that distinction it should preserve, and levels us the wrong way: it
being more tolerable that all should be Peasants, than all Lords. And this is
the irregularity that many seem to affect, there being not only an emulation of
pomp and bravery among equals, but those of the most distant qualities, there
seeming now no other measure than the utmost extent of their money or credit;
the later whereof is often so stretched, that it not only cracks its self, but
by an unhappy contagion, breaks those it deals with, and like a Granado tears
Towns in pieces: The many ruined Families of Tradesmen do too sadly attest
this; would God our Gallants would consider how unequal it is, that many should
want necessary clothing, only to maintain the superfluity of theirs; an
Injustice which not only upon a religious, but politic account deserves the
severest Reproof, and since Divine Laws will not restrain it, 'twere well if
Humane were provided: though I confess, 'twere not easy to find out penalties
to deter those whom the wants so usually attending these excesses will not
discourage. This sort of vanity was once thought peculiar to women, and though
I cannot say that the sexes have exchanged faults, (because each still keeps
its own, together with those of the other) yet it is evident they have
communicated them, and as the women of this Age have transcribed masculine
Vices, so the men have feminine; this particularly, wherein they seem fully to
answer the Copy, they being as Critically knowing in all the mysteries of
vanity, and as diligent in reducing their speculations to practice, as any the
most extravagant female. Indeed both the one and the other pursue this folly
with so great an expense of Care, Time, and Money, as if to be fine and happy
were the same thing, and their bodies had been designed for their Clothes,
rather than their clothes for their Bodies.

AND now when all these luxuries are to be served, it had need be an exorbitant
plenty that shall supply them; and that will unfold the riddle so frequent
among us, of so many being poorer since they recovered their estates, than when
they wanted them: Our revenue how large soever, is so clogged and encumbered
with our vices, that they moulder away, and only serve to carry other men's with
them, by giving credit to run in debt. There are indeed no such unmerciful
exactors as our own Lusts, the one gleans after the other, till they induce
such a scarcity as the Prophet Joel describes 1. 4. That which the Palmer-worm
has left, has the Locust eaten, and that which the Locust has left, has the
Canker-worm eaten, and that which the Canker-worm has left, has the
Caterpillar eaten: So that in effect we have only changed our oppressors, and
are as much or more exhausted by our sins, as we were before by other men's;
with this woeful circumstance that now we have the guilts as well as the
sufferings: Thus do we rob our selves, and create want in the midst of all that
abundance God has given us, using our plenty as the Benjamites did the Levites
Concubine, Judge. 19. force and prostitute it till we destroy it; and the
similitude holds in this also, that what we thus violate is not our own; for
let us fancy what we will, certainly our superfluities are more the poors
Right than ours, assigned to them by God the grand Proprietor. So that our
Excesses have besides their proper guilt, that of injustice superadded; and
when the cry of the poor shall be joined to those of our riots, they will
certainly be too clamorous to let vengeance any longer sleep.

THIS is the account we can give of our plenty, and that of our liberty is not
much better; it is not long since that arbitrary tyranny expired, which gave us
no other measures of our duties or punishments, than the will or avarice of the
Imposers: And then how did we gasp to be under the conduct and Protection of
known determinate Laws? Yet now we have them, who considers them, or is
regulated by them? Between the licenciousness of Inferiors, and the remisness
of Superiors, they are rendered things only of form, not use; for while the one
violates, and the other connives, what can they signify, and though there be
never so many new Laws made to assert the old, yet we see they serve for little
but to partake of the same contempt with the others, and are but like the
Chimeras of an Utopian State, sagely contrived, but to no purpose. It Is the
Execution of Laws that gives them a real and effective being, and without that,
amidst our great volumes we are yet destitute, and may too probably experiment
the truth of that Axiom, that it is better to live where nothing is lawful,
than where all things are. Indeed if we remember how the Statutes of Omri were
kept, with what a tameness the severest Impositions of the late Usurpers were
submitted to, we have reason to think coercion is the surest Principle of
vulgar obedience; though withal it sets but an ill mark upon us, who know so
much better how to be slaves than subjects. And as we are restored to our civil
Liberty, so as a branch or consequent of that, we are to our personal also: We
were lately in the condition Christ foretold to St. Peter, carried by others
whither we would not, Io. 21. 18. but now we gird our selves and go whither we
will; and alas, what use do many of us make of this freedom? Is it not
visible, that neither our public or private affairs are the better attended:
But on the contrary we are in a restless pursuit of impertinent or vicious
pastimes, go pilgrimages to our pleasures, wander about from this sport, that
meeting to another, till many of us forget we have any other concerns in the
world, and are as much strangers to our own homes, as when we were forcibly
detained thence: And for such I know not whether the former restraint be not
eligible, to be a prisoner being a kind of rescue to him, that would otherwise
be a vagrant.

THESE are the uses we make of those advantages whereof God has repossest us. I
know it is too envious a task to distribute these accusations to every Rank and
Order of men among us; I have here given them in the lump, and wish that not
only such degrees, but each person would adapt to himself his peculiar share,
wherein contrary to other dividends, I fear the only Immodesty and Injustice
too will generally be, for every one not to carve liberally for himself.
However, it is sure in the gross they make up the Character of a most
barbarously ungrateful Nation. God was pleased to return our peace, before we
had forsaken our sins, as if he meant to try our ingenuity; that we who had
been so much worse than beasts under the former method, that no stripes would
discipline us, might have this advantage to redeem our credit, and be drawn
with these cords of a man: but we have put off not only piety but humanity, and
are equally untractable to all methods. And now who can refrain from Moses's
passionate Apostrophe, Do ye thus requite the Lord O foolish people and unwise,
Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Unwise indeed, that from the most benign purposes of God, extract
nothing but our own mischief: are the poorer for his Liberalities, and the
worse for his Goodness; by a preposterous use so wear out our Blessings, that
they cease to be, at least to be Blessings: And if they once fall from that,
there is no middle form for them to assume, they convert into the direct
contrary, and become the fatallest Curses, more heavy than those which were
originally designed as such; that degeneration adding malignity, and no Fury
being so extreme, as that which bottoms upon repelled and irritated Love. Gods
mercies are like those pictures, which according to the different position of
the beholder, carry different Representations, if we will still stand on the
wrong side, and not take them in their more amiable appearance, we shall find
they can put on a dreadful: his Goodness will not be finally unoperative, if we
will not permit it to lead us to repentance, 'twill drive us to destruction. I
am sure we have all reason to expect he should exert his power as eminently
against us, as he has done for us, unless perhaps he sees that is not necessary
to our ruin, for indeed let him but stand by and not interpose his omnipotence
for us, he may trust us to be his Executioners, our Vices having a natural as
well as moral Efficacy to destroy us. And who knows whether that be not the
reason of his seeming connivance, that he forbears to strike us, to give us up
to those more fatal wounds we inflict on our selves; this alas we have too much
cause to fear, for it is sure it is not our innocence that gives us Impunity, but
it is more than probable it is our incorrigibleness; that God gives us over with
a why should ye be smitten any more? Will not prostitute his Judgments, but as
the basest of Malefactors leave us to the basest of Executioners, and let our
iniquities become our ruin. This as it is the severest purpose God can
entertain toward us, so it is our most important concern to avert. And O that
we, who have so perversely resisted all the designs of his love, would now try
to defeat that of his anger, rob him of those intestine avengers within our own
breasts, those fleshly lusts which fight against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 10. which
do not only provoke, but execute his Wrath, and make us more miserable than
Hell its self could do without them; and God knows it is more than time for us,
to seek an escape from so formidable mischiefs: O let us not contract one
minutes delay, let us cast our selves at the feet of our offended God, and as
those who are condemned to disgraceful Executions, use to petition for some
death of less Infamy, as a boon and favor, so let us beg, that he will please
to think us worth his own correction; that whatsoever we suffer from his hand,
yet that we may not (like to Herod) be delivered up to the loathsome fortune of
being devoured by our own putrefaction. In a word, let us form David's choice
into an importunate prayer, and earnestly beg that we may fall into the hands
of God, and not into the hands of men, at least not of our selves, who are more
to be dreaded than all our other Enemies.

INDEED till we do thus, our prosperities are far from real, and do in this
justify our most mutinous repinings, that we are never the better for them,
nay, much the worse, yet since it is only we that have enervated them, they will
stand upon our account in their proper weight and value: When our receipts are
summed up, God will charge us with them, not as those empty useless things we
have made them, but as those great and solid blessings he intended them. And
certainly this is most deplorable ill managery, to reserve nothing to our
selves but the burden and account of our good things; to enjoy nothing, and
yet be answerable for all. In secular things men usually pay with some regret,
for those things of which they have only anticipated the use: But with what
dismal reluctancies shall we come to pay for these, of which we have made no
advantage, and must therefore pay the dearer because we have not; it being not
so much the things, as our employing of them to our benefit, whereof God will
exact account. His anger is then only incensed, when we resist his love; and
his only quarrel to us is, for frustrating his design of making us happy. And
sure those well deserve his wrath, that will provoke it on such terms; yet so
perverse is the choice, as of all sinners in general, so especially of this
Nation at this time, who have all before us which might make us happy in both
worlds, if we did not Madly affect to be so in neither, God grant we may
recover the Sobriety to make wiser elections, before it be out of our power to
make any, and we be found to stand to the mischiefs of our own wild Option.

THE Reader will perhaps think, I have gone beyond the limits of a moderate
digression, but the too great copiousness of the Theme, must be my excuse: such
overgrown Vices cannot well be drawn in little, and where there is such a
multitude, the most superficial view of Each, is rather proportional to a
distinct Tract, than to the few Pages it has borrowed in this. My greater fear
is, that the event may prove it impertinent, there being not much hope that a
private whisper shall be heard by those, who are deaf to the loudest calls of
Heaven, and have made no other use of those various and signal Providence we
have been under, than to defeat the design of them.

CHAP. IX. A survey of the Mischiefs arising from Disputes in general.
THESE are some of those many artifices, whereby Satan like a cunning Picklock,
slyly robs us of our grand treasure, the power and efficacy of our
Christianity, and leaves us only the empty Casket, the name and formal
Profession, that which serves only to make us proud, not rich, confident, not
safe: And God knows, so many are daily thus befooled by him, so many fall as
preys to these his Stratagems, as might, one would think, glut the eagerest
malice, and supersede all farther designs: but so insatiate is this grand
Devourer, that retail-prizes, though never so frequent, do rather enrage than
satisfy his appetite: He is Enemy not only to this or that man, but to mankind
in gross, and therefore as if he feared that even his malice might not prove
indefatigable enough for so many distinct pursuits, he contrives more
compendious methods of destruction: Frames such Engines as take off whole
ranks, nay, troops; compounds such active Poison, as like a Pestilence, kills
multitudes at once. It is too trivial a Mischief to annoy the outward parts, it
is his Mastery to spread an unseen venom in the Bowels, thence to diffuse its
self through't, mix with the vital spirit, and convert that kindly heat which
should animate, into those wild irregular flames which ravine and consume. And
this is done, by that Pestilential spirit of division, that heat of
disputation, which has for so many ages possessed and wasted the Catholic
Church; and by an unhappy kind of Magic transformed the zeal of Christian
practice, into an itch of unchristian Dispute; made the questions about our
Creed more numerous than the letters of it; and by multitudes and contrariety
of Paraphrases so confounded and obscured the Text, that what was anciently the
badge and tessera of Christian Communion, serves us for no other purpose but as
an occasion of breaking it.

SO long as the Church retained the simplicity of Christian doctrine, looked on
her faith as the Foundation of her obedience, and endeavored to propagate to
her Children such an understanding of the one, as was most apt to promote the
other; She happily made good the title Christ gives her, Can. 6. of his love,
his dove, his undefiled one: but when the Serpent had once got into this
Paradise, infused his subtilties, and nice intricacies into men's Brains; and
least that should not be ruinous enough, his venom also into their Hearts:
Then began all those unhappy Metamorphoses, in comparison of which, those of
the Poets are as trivial as they are Fabulous: then that faith which was once
inseparably joined with the patience of the Saints, forsook that tame company,
and linkt its self with the most contrary qualities of wrath and bitterness;
and those whose Profession it was to resist unto blood, striving against sin,
pursued to blood those that resisted them in any of their speculations: Then
that passive Valor which had rendered them so venerable to their Heathen
Enemies, converted some, tired out others, and amazed all; sadly degenerated
into that active malice, which from persecuted Christians, entitled them to
that monstrous style of Christian persecutors. And that ardent love, which had
offered up so many Holocausts to God, was supplanted by that fiery hatred, that
made no less acceptable oblations to Satan.

THIS miserable and destructive change was so much the interest of the Enemy of
Souls, that we cannot wonder he should so studiously promote it; and indeed
never did he at once so approve his malice and subtilty, I would I could not
say success also, as in this design; in comparison whereof, all his other
Projects speak him but a Puny, this is his one Goliath Stratagem which has
served him not only to defy, but even defeat the Armies of the living God.

NOR is his Sagacity more observable in the choice, and main drift of the
Design, than in the ways of Effecting it; had he brought into the Primitive
Church those large scrolls of disputable points, wherewith he has filled the
Modern; that more charitable Age must needs have startled and discerned, that
that seeming Jealousy for Truth, was indeed nothing but a real design against
Peace, and would surely never have parted with that sacred depositum, that
precious legacy so lately bequeathed by Christ, for those vain janglings, those
School subtilties which now entertain the world. But as he that would divert a
man from the guard of some important Treasure, alarms him in some other of his
greatest interests; so he at first raises up Heresies of the greatest
magnitude, whose blasphemous consequencies so shook the whole Fabric of
Religion, that what was Uzzahs Rashness seemed then every man's advised Duty, to
put his hand to the upholding of the tottering Ark. How could those who had
been baptized into the faith of the Blessed Trinity, suffer the Arians to rob
them of the Second Person, the Macedonians of the Third, the Valentinians and
Manichees so to despise the First, as to set up against him a Rival principle
of being: How could those who had so solemnly renounced the World, the Flesh
and the Devil, see them all bowed to by the temporizing, unclean, idolatrous
Gnostics? these were such invasions as seemed to commissionate all that could
weild the sword of the Spirit to take it up, and engage in this Warfare. But
all this while 'twas a sad Dilemma to which the Church was driven; if she gave
countenance to these seducers, she betrayed her faith; if she entered the
contest she violated her unity; the one would undermine her foundation, the
other would make a breach in her walls.

AND the Devil was too old an Artist to lose the advantage, he knew well that
even a just and necessary defense, does by giving men acquaintance with War
take off somewhat from the abhorrence of it, and insensibly dispose them to
farther Hostilities, and therefore he failed not to provide sparks for that
matter, which was now grown so combustible; nor did he always send them from
the bottomless pit, but sometimes borrowed fire from the Altar to consume the
Votaries, and by the mutual collision of well meant zeal set even Orthodox
Christian in flame. A memorable instance of this was the dispute about Easter,
wherein while the veneration they had of the glorious Resurrection of Christ,
prompted them to commemorate it in the exactest manner they could, the Serpent
creeps into this Paradise, and though they had the same common end, yet on
occasion of some little dissenting in the way, the heat of devotion insensibly
degenerated into that of contention; and by being very tenacious of a
circumstance of that celebration, they lost the more essential requisite that
of Charity: kept the Feast indeed, but with the leven of malice, and absurdly
commemorate the redintegration of his Natural Body, by mutilating and dividing
his Mystical. So likewise in the business of Rebaptization, while one side in a
pious abhorrence of Heresy, thought the stain like that of Original Sin could
not be done away by any Purgation less solemn than that of Baptism, and the
other in a just reverence of ancient custom, and jealousy of innovation
opposed it: the Dispute lasted till the Scene was changed, and those who
deliberated of the manner of receiving Heretics into the Church, were
themselves as such turned out of it. No less well meant were the Originals of
the Novatian and Donatist Heresies, as equally unhappy were their issues: For
in them all, when bitter Zeal was once fermented, through its aptitude to
receive, and the Devils vigilance to administer occasions, the Orthodoxy or
Heresy of lives soon became terms out-dated, and men were measured only by
opinions: That sword of the spirit which was at first designed against vicious
practices had its edge turned against speculative notions, in so much, that at
last like that of Ioab, 2 Samuel 28. 8. it had got such an aptness to fall out,
that it was always a ready instrument of Execution, till even a Philosophical
point, as that of the Antipodes was resolved with an Anathema, and not to know
the Systeme of this present World, made forfeiture of that to come.

BUT alas these, though great defections from Primitive unity, were but modest
essays, and feeble assaults, compared with those which infested the succeeding
ages: This root of bitterness was then but a probationer in the soil, and
though it sent forth some offesets to preserve its kind; yet Satan was fain to
be at some pains to cherish and nurse them up, placed them under the shadow of
the Sanctuary, and got them like the treacherous Ivy, supported by that piety
they were designed to destroy; but it was not long ere they had got firmer
rooting and strength, not only to propagate, but multiply. Every Dispute in
Religion grew prolifical, and in ventilating one question, many new ones were
started: And as questions grew numerous, so did Sects too; every Opinion almost
constituted a new party, and those again subdivided into many others, so that
of all the first Violators of Primitive unity, we scarce find any, who did not
revenge their Schism upon themselves, by separating from one another, as they
had all done from the Church; till at last the progeny both of Sects and
Opinions grew so numerous, that he who would exact an account, must be sent
like Abraham, to the Sky or to the Shore: The Stars or Sands, being as apt a
subject of Arithmetic as they. Whence it is brought to pass, that Satan now
may leave his toilsome labor of compassing the Earth; men do his business for
him, giving him leisure to be only a Cheerful Spectator of their
Divinityprizes; the bloody combats of Ecclesiastic Gladiators.

AND that he may be secured never to want that pleasing divertisement, the
later Ages have been careful to train him up Combatants, it being now become a
distinct sort of Learning, a new Species of Divinity, to raise nice questions,
create new difficulties, branch out with fond distinctions our holy Faith,
which the pious Simplicity of the first Christians, received to practice; not
to read upon as an Anatomy, unbowel and dissect to try experiments, much less
to bring into the Theater, there made to fight and bleed, to show men sport,
and try the skill of the unhappy swordmen, and Masters of defense. The form of
sound words, which in its native frame and constitution, was most enlivening
and Salubrious, dissolved and melted by Chimical preparation, ceases to be
nutritive; and after all the labors of the Alembeck, and hopes of an Elixir,
insensibly evaporates, and vanishes to Air; or leaves in the recipient a foul
Empyreuma, or fretting corrosive. An endless dotage about names and words, and
then as endless quarrel for them; appearing the commensurate effect of the long
studies of those Distillers in Divinity, who boast its Sublimation.

IT is indeed a thing worthy of the greatest both wonder and lamentation to see
how the plainest, and most simple proposition, when it falls into the hands of
these Artists, is mangled and disjointed, is rarefied, exalted, and refined: He
whose leisure, or indeed whole life, would serve him to survey all the subtle
Divisions, and Distinctions of the Schoolmen, would sure resolve, they had the
power of working Miracles. Questions in their hands multiplying in the
breaking, like the loaves in our Saviors. But sure the event of the Miracles
are very desperate, no solid nourishment being derived by the one, but on the
contrary, Stones given us in stead of Bread, and those too for the worst
purposes, even to fling at one another, as if because stoning was the death of
the first Christian Martyr, we designed his Charity to the same fate with
himself; that divine Gospel grace having since fallen under as thick a shower, and
with this sharp aggravation too, that whereas he suffered from Jews, Christians
are become its executioners: whilst those who pretend to be Champions of the
Faith, Irrefragable, Angelical, and Seraphical Doctors, not only fill the
Church with quarrels whilst they live, but bequeath them in their writings to
posterity; as Zisca is said to have done his skin, to be made an Incentive to
war and confusion.

IT was the policy of Julian to shut up the Fountains of humane learning from
the Christian youth, lest they should there gain such acuteness, as might
render them the more formidable Adversaries to Paganism: but could he have
foreseen that they would have employed those Weapons not against the common
Enemy, but one another, he would surely have reversed the Stratagem, freely
opened those Magazeens whence they might furnish themselves for their mutual
ruin, and have as solicitously promoted their Learning, as ever he obstructed
it. I am very far from abetting their arrogant folly, who either decry humane
learning in general, or make it such a Moabite, or Ammonite, that however it be
admitted in civil Converse, must be interdicted the Sanctuary. Our Religion
prescribes us rational not brutish Sacrifices, and therefore despises not any
of those advantages which may improve our reason, exalt the man and depress the
beast in us: yet sure we shall derogate very impiously from Christ's prophetic
office, if we allow not divinity to be the Supreme and noblest Science; such as
is to be served and attended, not regulated and governed by those inferior: but
that just order seems now to be inverted; divine learning is brought down to
humane; the Simplicity of Christian doctrine so perplexed and confounded with
Philosophical nicities, that Plato and Aristotle are become the Umpires of our
Religion, and we must go ask Heathens how far we shall be Christians. Those
deep things of God as the Apostle calls them 1 Cor. 2. 10. and of which he
pronounces the natural man an incompetent Judge, are yet brought before that
Tribunal, subjected to be scanned by rules of Art: but alas, our line is too
short to sound those Depths. Men rashly undertake to understand
incomprehensible, to order infinite, define ineffable things: and then no
wonder if their conceptions differ; for where there is no visible truth,
wherein to Center, error is as wide as men's Phancies, and may wander to
Eternity: while multitudes run cariers in the dark, it is not strange to have
them justle, and overthrow each other.

AND doubtless were the Controversies which have so long harrased the Church
thoroughly examined, many of them would be found of this nature. An humble
belief has been judged too sluggish and dull an exercise for men of acute
parts, and therefore they would not take faith's word that so it is, unless
reason will be her surety, and show them how; but sure it had been much for the
peace of the Church and safety of Souls, if Mysteries had been permitted to be
Mysteries; that those sublimer parts of our faith had been entertained with
more veneration, and less of disquisition, and that while even the learned
do acknowledge them to be Abysses, they would not confute that confession, by
attempting to fathom them. But alas, so preposterous has been the procedure,
that those things which were indeed inexplicable, have been rackt and tortured
to discover themselves, while in the mean, the plainer, and more accessible
truths, as if despicable while easy, are clouded and obscured; so many subtle
queries raised about them, that the Theorick of Christianity is become harder
than the Practick; a grace is much more readily acquired than defined, and that
key of knowledge which should give us entrance into the closets and recesses of
religion, is by so much tampering and wrenching made useless; serves only to
busy us at the door, and so in effect proves rather a bar to keep us out, than
a key to let us in. Thus perverse are the contradictions of humane depraved
nature, which like our first parents take it unkindly, that God has reserved
any thing from us, and boldly attempt to break down his enclosures, to rob him
of his peculiar; and yet in the mean, as industriously contrive to rob our
selves of our own, to cancelling both parts of Gods distribution, neither
leaving secret things to the Lord our God, nor the revealed ones to us and our
children, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Certainly the first propagators of our Faith, proceeded
at another rate, they well knew that not the brain but the heart, was the
proper soil for that celestial Plant, and therefore did not amuse their
Proselytes with curious questions, but set them to the active part of their
religion. We see what brief and plain instructions S. Peter gives his
Catechumeni, Act. 2. 38. Repent and be baptized every one of you for the
remission of sins: and this it seems as a full preparation for the gift of the
Holy Ghost, which he there promises upon these only conditions. This was that
vigorous Seed which at once sprung up suddenly, and rooted deep too, and
produced the liberal harvest of that day: but sure had those three thousand
souls, been Catechized by our modern Casuists, we had seen a wide difference,
not only in the expedition but success. In like manner we see Act. 8. how short
a Creed qualified in S. Philips judgment for the Eunuchs baptism: and we find
S. Paul whose education enabled him for the subtilest definitions, yet delivers
his whole doctrine in this compendium, Act. 20. 21. Repentance toward God, and
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; and it is observable how he introduces this
with a profession that he had kept back nothing that was profitable for them,
Verse. 20. and seconds it V. 27. with another, that he had not shunned to
declare unto them the whole council of God; from whence it is obvious for the
shallowest discourser to infer, that the whole council of God as far as it is
incumbent for man to know, at least necessitate medii is comprised in that one
breviat of Evangelical truth: and certainly whilst all the devision of these
generals, was the distributing them into practice, they were found most fertile
seminaries of all Virtue; but when they came to be dichotomiz'd, and cantond
out into curious aerial notions, they lost their prolifick nature: that
fruitful land became a wilderness, a wild and intricate maze, where men sooner
lose themselves than find either truth or holiness.

WHEN Christianity first attested its self by miracles, it produced in the
hearts of its converts, a firm assent to the truth of the Doctrine, and an
awful reverence and adoration of that God, who had given such power unto men,
awaking them to an Enquiry after duty, so to propitiate that omnipotence whose
Fury it appeared impossible to bear: And this sure was a much more genuine
effect, than if they had busied themselves in those many unprofitable
curiosities, nice, yet bold enquiries into the divine attributes which now
a-daies serve only to supplant that pious veneration we owe to them.

IN like manner the comprehensive enunciation of Christ, Mar. 16. 16. He that
believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned, was
received by the first Christians, as the condition on which the two so distant
states of Salvation or damnation depended, and accordingly excited their
diligence, to attain the one, and avoid the other. And this certainly was a
much more concerning employment, than to have entertained themselves with the
modern dispute, whether some antecedent decree of God had not irreversibly
determined them, to the one or other; a disquisition that has served only to
keep us Idly busy, set our heads a working, but folds up our hands like
Solomon's sluggard in our bosoms. So also when S. Paul affirms it the design of
Christ's giving himself for us, to purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous
of good works; the Primitive Christians had no other design than to comport
with that his purpose; to be what he died to make them, and to attest their
Zeal to good works, by being actually rich in them. They took Christ's word,
that he that gave the meanest dole for his sake, should not lose his reward;
thought themselves sure enough upon his promise, and never disputed the
proportion either of Worth or Congruity between the work and wages; and had the
Modern done the like, our works had not so unhappily evaporated into words, we
had talked less and done more.

'TWERE easy to draw the Parallel through all the points which busied the
devotion of the first Ages, and the curiosity of the later: By all which it
would be evident, how much Christian doctrine has lost in its Efficacy, since
it gained in its Bulk: how we have embased our Coin by multiplying it; and have
divided our sum into so many, and so small Fractions, as our Arithmetic can
scarce number, never unite. We should think him very ridiculous, that should
hope to advance his crop, by grinding the corn he sowes: yet methinks, this has
bin the Method of our Spiritual husbandmen, who have scarce suffered one grain
of our faith to escape Entire. It Is said that the Ant, when she lays in her
winter stock, bites the ends of the Corn, as being Naturalist enough to know
that will certainly prevent its sprouting: And sure that little contemptible
creature whom Solomon appoints to preach industry to the sluggard, may in this
point read Philosophy too, to our greatest Doctors; convince them that that
seed which they mangle with so many Distinctions and Divisions, will never
spring up into Christian practice: It will rather be like the Dragons teeth,
Cadmus is said to have sown, whose immediate production was a hostile band
combating one another. A fable which God knows we have found too sadly
moraliz'd in our School contentions, only with this unhappy difference, that
ours are more immortal, our Serpentine breed fight but never die, oppose but
destroy not one another.

AND then 'twill not appear strange to see the first seeds of discord, so
prodigiously increased, that they now overspread the face of the Earth: for
whereas in all other things there is a succession, one generation goes and
another comes* and so though the species continue, the Individuals perish;
these seem to have the accursed Privilege of propagating and not expiring, and
to have reconciled the procreativeness of corporeal, with the duration of
incorporeal Substances: This is such an advantage toward their multiplication,
that we may grieve, but cannot wonder to find them Swarm; not like Bees to
bring profit, but like Locusts to devour every green thing in the land; nor is
it now in the power of all the Magicians of Egypt to cast them out: for were
it possible ever to become Satan's interest to suppress them, he would certainly
find himself in the case of one of his young Conjurers, to have raised more
spirits than he could lay. Men's now irritated Passions, and formed interests,
the great fomenters of disputes, would prove too sturdy Devils, even for
Beelzebub himself to Exorcise.

BUT it is too sure his Kingdom will never so divide against its self; it suits
not only with his Nature, but with his Ends to perpetuate our Strifes, and
therefore as if our doctrinal debates were not enough to secure his purpose, he
has an auxiliary troop of ritual differences to attach us. The Leprosy which
infests the sollider parts of our Religion, has past from the body to the very
Garments; the most exterior adherencies, Habits, Gestures, Days, every thing
that has but the remotest subserviency to Piety, are become the objects of
fierce Contests, and have so increased the number and heat of our quarrels,
that it is unnecessary, perhaps impossible to add more if he can but keep up
these, as God knows he is too like to do, his Kingdom will be competently
guarded, they being his greatest security against that power of Godliness, that
vital force of Christianity, he so much dreads: that they are so, is obvious
enough to him that takes but the grossest confused view of them. But that we
may better discern the degrees of his advantage and our own mischief, 'twill
not be amiss to consider them more attentively, make some distinct
observations, not of all, for that were endless, but of some of their most
eminent Effects, which we shall find so pernicious and destructive, as
sufficiently speak their relation, and subserviency to the great Abaddon.

AND in the first place if we consider them only privatively as they supplant
and justle out our greater concerns, we shall find them sadly mischievous,
indeed to such a degree that were they not chargeable with any positive Ill,
they were by this their mere negative Force, competent Instruments of our
ruin. Did they actually convey no venom, yet while they substract our
nourishment, their effects will be sure to be deadly; Grace as well as Nature
being liable to be starved as well as poisoned, Christianity is not a dull
unactive, but stirring busy State, and therefore we still find it in the
Gospel represented under the Metaphors which imply the greatest Industry and
Activity; it is a trade, a watch, a race, a combat, and it assigns us tasks
enough to justify the propriety of the Tropes: And therefore as on the one
hand the sleepy Professor will at last find he has but dreamt of those glorious
Rewards he expects; so on the other, he that frames himself another Scheme,
that labors but not in Gods vineyard, that busies himself in things extrinsick
to that one great Sphere of motion the Evangelical Precepts, will finally
discern that he has but rolled Sysiphus his stone, espoused a toil under which
he may indeed be weary and heavy laden, but will never find rest to his Soul.

AND then what can be more perfectly adapted to his aim, who desires to
propagate his own eternal restlesness unto us, than thus to commute our tasks,
exchange these pleasant and gainful ones, which God assigns us, for those
uneasy and fruitless, we impose on our selves. It Is true we find too many of
those unprofitable works of darkness to busy and employ us: but I think no
one, nay I am apt to say not all others together, have proved so effectual to
his purpose, as this of raising and maintaining parties in Religion. It Is too
usual a policy of States to secure themselves from the fear of a potent
Neighbor, by fomenting a civil discord in his Kingdom: Satan has in this
instance found it a lucky Stratagem, it having proved the most powerful
revulsive of his danger. I will not examine, whether he borrowed it from, or
lent it to our Machavilions, but sure he may from his own experience recommend
it with the attestation of a Probatum est.

INDEED this art of diversion gives him a full security against all he fears in
our Christianity, for it is not the title he envies to us, or dreads himself; we
know he long since had courage to contemn the name even of Christ, when invoked
by those whose practices joined with him in defying it; while we are but Jewish
Exorcists, make no other use of Christ, but to get us a reputation and a trade,
he can deal well enough with us. Seven sons of Sceva are not half so terrible
to him as one St. Paul, it is him only he fears, that to the form has joined the
power of Godliness: That Exorcisme he knows he cannot resist, and therefore has
very dexterously found a way to divert it, by engaging us in those contentions
which allow us not to think of the practical part of our profession. By the
confused noise of Battle, quite drowning that voice behind us, which says, This
is the way walk in it. Nay, by this subtilty he does not only divert, but
forestall also; like the Philistines, allows no Spear or Sword that may be used
against him, but takes up all those Instruments by which we should work the
work of God. We know to all affairs of Importance there are three necessary
concurrents without which they can never be dispatched; Time, Industry, and
Faculties; and the more weighty and difficult the Business is, the greater
Degree of each of these is requisite. Now certainly the interest of our Souls
is not the slightest concern we have: the avoiding eternal misery, the
acquiring endless bliss is not so trivial, or so easy a matter, as to be the
Work of a moment, the purchase of some few yawning wishes, or volatile
phancies: He who is to dispense the Rewards, has proposed us other Conditions,
assigned us Work which takes up no less time than that of our whole lives; no
less intention than of our whole powers: And then if we suffer any thing else
to interpose, and defaulk what is thus entirely requisite, if we cut new
Channels for that which should run in this one full current, it is easy to
divine what the Event will be: For man being finite both in his nature and
operations, the time and attention he bestows on one thing, must necessarily be
subtracted from another. And therefore if our Disputes about Religion
entertain and busy us, they must unavoidably interrupt our attendance on
practick Duties; and so whilst we quarrel with one another, give our great
Master too just ground of quarrel with us all, by neglecting the great, and
indeed only Business entrusted to us.

NOW indeed that our contentions do thus divert us, is too apparent to any that
shall consider it in any of the three forementioned particulars; for, first for
our time, they do not only insensibly steal away much of it (a modesty which
most other diversions do still retain) but Magisterially exact it, and
accordingly have large parcels of it solemnly and avowedly devoted to them; the
scanning old questions, and raising new ones, having been the professed Business
of many men's lives; their very Vocation and Trade wherein they have arrived to
such eminence, as shows they made liberal oblations of their Time to it: And of
this every age has left so many Records, as the mere reading them would allow
few vacant minutes to the succeeding: And had not time a little revenged his
own quarrel, and consumed many of those writings, by which himself was wasted,
the Hyperbole would not be very extravagant in this case, which we find
warrantably used in another, Io. 21. that even the world its self could not
contain the Books which have been written. As it is, there are more than enough
to employ, nay, devour time; for when men once launch into the vast Sea of
Controversy, they are tossed there endlesly, and seldom recover a harbor,
Difficulties like waves crouding one upon the neck of another; And accordingly
we see in Polemick Disputes, how every rejoinder swells bigger and bigger, till
like Gehazies cloud, from a hand breadth it overspread the Heavens; every
little Manual becomes the Parent of vast Volumes; and unless the evil cure its
self by majoration, unless the greatness of the task bring in despair to
supplant curiosity, and keep men from reading, the spectators will have as
little respite, as the Combatants, both Writers and Readers will be so ingrost,
that they will have little leisure for any thing else. And I dare in this
appeal to any that have engaged deep either way, whether they have not found it
experimentally true: I wish they would but snatch some broken parcel as a plank
from the common shipwreck of their time; rescue a few minutes for a sober
reflection, and audit what real Profit accrues to them, from the expense of so
many precious Hours; how much it advances that grand business for which their
Time here was allotted, and according to which their Eternity hereafter will be
awarded: always remembering, that if it promote it not, it hinders it, by
diverting that time which should have been so employed: And indeed there cannot
be a more comprehensive mischief than this of the loss of time, it being that
which virtually contains the frustrating of all other Advantages, whereby we
should work out our Salvation. The operations even of Christ himself were, he
tells us, limited to a certain season: I must work the work of my Father
whilst it is day, the night comes when no man can work; and if the Night
overtake us, it matters not how we are stored with instruments of Action, since
they all at once then become useless. Our Laws anciently set a greater penalty
upon the stealing Beasts of breed, than on other Cattle of the same species, as
calculating the damage by the possibilities of which the Owner was robbed.
Time is the universal womb of things and actions; and therefore when we lose
that, we suffer an accumulative prejudice, forfeit our Rights in reversion as
well as our Possessions, our capacities as well as enjoyments. As in an
Abortion the unhappy Mother, besides the frustration of her hopes, and
childbirth pains sustained, acquires an aptitude to miscarry for the future,
and never to be able to bring forth a vital birth: And thus God knows
multitudes of Embryon purposes perish, and the misery of it is, they are our
best that do so. We generally pursue our frivolous projects with an active
vigor, but keep our great and concerning affairs only in design till death
come and surprise us, which like the fatal Metamorphoses the Poets talk of,
fixes us in the posture it finds us, and so presents us to Judgment. Now I
would know of the most eager Contender, whether he would not choose then to be
found with his hands stretched out in prayer to God, or alms to the poor, rather
than dealing blows amongst his fellow servants; if he would, certainly it is his
concern to put himself into that form he would then appear in, to husband his
little span of time so, as may stand him in stead when time shall be no more.

BUT if men will needs be improvident, yet why will they be ridiculous too, if
they will barter away their time, methinks they should at least have some ease
in exchange: but to be industrious ill-husbands, to lose all their advantage,
and none of their toil, is such a solemn piece of folly, as is at once matter
of Scorn and Wonder; yet this is the very case here, our wranglings do not only
exhaust our time, but our strength too: We pursue them with so vehement an
intention, as if our Faith proposed not to us any other victory, but over this
sort of Opponents: We run our selves breathless in this race, where the prize
is only a few fading Leaves, or what is more transitory, a little popular
applause; and make not toward the incorruptible Crown, till we are grown too
feeble and decrepit for the other pursuit. Men macerate their Bodies, and waste
their Spirits in Polemick studies, prescribe themselves no time of discharge
from that War, till they are able no longer to weild their weapons, and then
when mere Impotence makes them peaceable, begin to cry out of contention,
snatch up Devotion when Controversy begins to be too heavy for them, and at
their Death pray for that peace of the Church, which they have made it the
business of their life to disturb. This as it sufficiently attests what men's
thoughts are in their cool blood, what apprehensions they have of the way when
they draw near their journeys End; so does it abundantly evince the unspeakable
prejudice, Piety receives from our Disputes; Those have the active and vigorous
Abettors, while That is turned off to languishing bedridden Votaries. So that the
division between these two, is like that of the Cattle between Jacob and Laban,
all the stronger to the one, and feebler to the other: Would God the Scene were
not in one respect changed, and that the Syrian had not here got the better
share. But in the mean time what greater advantage can Satan wish for, our
strength and industry is diverted upon these foreign expeditions, and Sion is
left to be guarded by the lame and the blind, such only as are not able to
follow the Camp, and then it is not strange to see what succesful assaults he
has made, that that true practick virtue which once made such victorious
salleys on the heathen World, is now baffled in its own Quarters, beaten from
its Works, and driven to seek shelter in obscure corners, immures its self in
some few private breasts, and so like an exiled Prince, makes only shift to
live when it should reign. But alas, shall we for ever suffer our selves to be
thus befooled, shall this his stale stratagem after so many hundred years use,
nay, and detection too, lose nothing of its Efficacy? Must we always waste our
strength in forging shackles for our selves? This is such an infatuation as
Hosea speaks of, Chap. 9. 7. The Prophet is a fool, the Spiritual man is mad:
Would God we would once put our selves under the discipline of serious
recollection, it might perhaps cure the Frenzy: Let him who has with
unwearied diligence watched all advantage against his Antagonist; racked and
tortured every period of his discourse, to make it confess an absurdity: Let
him, I say, consider, how much better that industry had been employed in
discovering the fallacies of our common Adversary, that old Sophister, who puts
the most abusive Elenchs on us, whilst we are most busy in putting them upon
one another. Good God, how might true vital Christianity at this day have
flourisht, if we would have bestowed our pains the right way? At how much a
cheaper rate might we have cherisht, than we destroy her. All parties pretend
to be very careful of this Vine, are very busy in setting traps for the little
Foxes, all whom they are pleased to call Heretics; and in the mean time take
no care of the wild Boar, let that not only spoil her branches, but stock up
her roots, suffer the most savage beastial vices to destroy both Power and Form
of Godliness together. Thus unhappily do we divert our intentions, from our
most important concerns. And as Archimedes is said to have been so vehemently
intent upon a Geometrical figure, that he heard not of the taking of the City,
till an Enemy gave him his information and death together: So do we so busy
our selves in drawing our several Schemes of Religion (every of which will
pretend to no less than Demonstration) that in the mean, that which alone is
true Religion, is exposed to the fury of the Enemy, sacked, ruinated, and like
the plough'd up Jewish Sanctuary, not one stone left upon another. Certainly
most of the questions which at this day disturb Christendom, have in respect of
their matter no Propriety toward the propagating good Life, but, in reference
to their way of managery, all aptness to hinder it; how much were it then for
our Ease as well as profit, to turn us into the plain road, where none of these
Thorny difficulties will encumber us. Alas, why should the Romanist so sweat to
maintain his Purgatory flame, as if he already felt its heat, and would in this
world antedate those pains, when the same Industry bestowed here to purify
himself from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, would substract the matter of
that Fire, and leave little for that furnace to refine; which were doubtless a
much securer way, even according to his own principles, than to trust to the
uncertain devotion of others, to fetch him out when once deeply ingulph't: It Is
surely much better to starve that Fire, by ones own innocence, than to leave it
to be extinguished by the Tears and Piety of surviving friends. Why should the
Socinian so eagerly contend for the possibility of keeping the Law, when one
example would convince more than a thousand arguments. Let him bend his study
to make himself an instance of his own doctrine; and then though he do finally
fail in proving his Hypothesis, yet, if he do his utmost, he will not fail of a
better triumph, than that which the Schools can give; and so will even from his
error extract advantage, his very straying will by a happy Antiperistasis, lead
him into the way. Why does the Predestinarian so adventerously climb into
Heaven, to ransack the celestial Archives, read Gods hidden Decrees, when with
less labor he may secure an Authentic transcript within himself; let him
according to Saint Peter's advice, add to his faith virtue, and to virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, etc. and that chain of virtues will
stand him in much more stead, than if he could as infallibly (as some have
confidently) demonstrate every link of Predestination: It Is the assiduous
practice of Duty will make his calling and election sure; and unless he can
confute that divine Axiom, that without holiness none shall see the Lord; he
cannot but confess he may more profitably busy his thoughts in laboring to
become holy, than in disputing whether he can choose to be so or not. Or lastly,
why do we Christians of several persuasions, so fiercely argue against the
salvability of each other, as if it were not only our Opinion, but our Interest
and our Wish, that all should be damned, but those of our particular Sect; when
God knows not only every society, but every single person has enough to do, to
work out his own salvation, which if we will take the Apostles word, is to be
done with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. A temper very widely distant from
that of censuring and judging. And sure we should not think that malefactor
more meriting, or more likely to be acquitted, who should leap from the Bar to
the Bench, and there condemn the whole Goal but himself. 'Twas a sober and
Christian reply of a late learned Gentleman, who being asked by one whether a
Papist might be saved, answered, you may be saved without knowing that. And
would we confine our cares and enquiries, to those things which concern that
one great Interest, we might take less pains, and yet do more work, be less
busybodies, but more fruitful Christians, and then sure it is time we ask our
selves the Wise man's question, Eccles. 5. 16. What profit has he that
labors for the wind; and at last give over this unthriving diligence, and
not so emulate the most stupid of Beasts, as to make our selves burdens, only
that we may couch under them.

AND were this only Issachars lot, 'twere the less to be regretted, but also
Zabulon herein invades his portion; it is they that handle the pen of the
Writer, that have engrost this error, and will not suffer it to be a Plebeian
one. None do so much this way mis-employ the two vulgar talents of Time and
Industry, as those who have a third superadded to them, that of Extraordinary
Faculties and endowments which they do as prodigally lavish as either of the
former. The Beginners or Abettors of contentions have generally been Persons of
the most acute refined wits and excellent learning, which has enabled them for
those quirks and subtilties, of which grosser understandings would have
remained more happily ignorant: A strange production that the greatest beauties
of Nature and Art, should engender the foulest deformity in Religion. Thus alas
have Satan's altars the pre-emption of Gods, the fattest Oblation brought to
feed the fire of contention, whilst that of devotion expires for want of
Nourishment. It was indeed no wonder, that the blind zeal of Pagans had made
him so wantonly nice, that none but the choicest victimes would serve his turn;
none but an Andromeda and an Iphigenia, Royal and Virgin sacrifices propitiate
his infernal Deities: but that among Christians he should still have the same
Election, have the richest treasures of those, who say they war against him,
laid at his feet, have his choicest weapons out of his Enemies magazeen, is a
riddle that can scarce be solved, but by concluding Idolatry has only changed
its form, and that he sits as securely enshrined in men's passions and
animosities, as ever he did in an Idol Temple; so that he seems rather to have
lost the pomp, than the power of Regiment. But admit, that he were not herein
so immediately Gods rival, that these speculative debates had none of those
adherencies, which do so directly gratify him, yet still he is secured of
gaining somewhat at rebound; for alas, when men's faculties are thus employed,
what Weapons are there left for the defense of true practick virtue, and God
knows, she needs them but too much: Men's lusts are grown subtle Disputants, so
that the most improved reason may find work enough to manage the Contest; And
surely would men of parts timely have bent their endeavors this way, vice
could not have got so strong a party. Men are ashamed to be Proselytes to a
weak Arguer, as thinking they must part with their reputation, as well as their
sin: and certainly nothing is a more general discouragement from Piety, than
the opinion of its votaries not being Persons of Parts, and exalted
Understandings; a Prejudice as old as the time of our Savior, as may appear
from Io. 7. Would God our greatest Rabbis would sadly consider how much they
have contributed to this scandal, while by laying out their parts on Polemick
niceties, they have neglected the more weighty part of their business, and
given too much Attestation to that scandalous Maxim, that Ignorance is the
mother of Devotion: Certainly this is quite to mistake their Commission, which
is not that of a Herald, to proclaim War amongst men, but that of an
Ambassador, to reconcile them first to holiness, and by it to God: And
doubtless one soul gained to Piety, would more promote their account, than many
thousands secured to a Sect or Party. We find how sad the doom was of that
Servant who wrapped up his Talent, but we have no cause to think it would have
been at all easier, if he had melted the Talent into bullets, to maintain the
skirmish with his fellows: Whether that be not the case of some who have
received not the one Talent but the five, I leave it to be discussed between
God and their own Consciences; but in the interim, it is sad to see how
unhappily men engage their endeavors, which seems to represent the reverse of
Esay's Prophecy, we having beat our ploughshares into swords, and our pruning
hooks into spears, all the Instruments of fertility and growth in Grace, into
Engines of War and discord; and then it must needs be a most deplorable
condition to which Christianity is reduced; which seems in this to be under the
same calamity, which her distressed professors suffer from the Turkish tyranny,
whilst her hopefullest and most pregnant Children, are like Ianizaries and
Timariots trained up to fight against her. And let none wonder that I call it
fighting against her, when yet perhaps none of them do formally renounce her;
for that Circumstance only determines the War to be intestine, not foreign; and
if our own sad Experiences had not too much qualified us to judge, I might
appeal to the universal vote of mankind, which of those were the most
destructive. Indeed were there no other Act of hostility discernable, but that
which we have hitherto insisted on, the intercepting her supplies, the cutting
off from her that time, industry and gifts, whereby she would be nourisht and
supported, that were irreparably injurious to her, and consequently most
grateful to that grand Enemy who as has been showed, makes advantage of our
Wranglings of Dissentions with one another, to reak his more inveterate Malice
on us all.

CHAP. X. A Survey of the Mischiefs arising from disputes, as they supplant
Charity.
BUT alas, the mischief of these debates, can never be described by bare
negatives, there are multitudes of positive ills, that inseparably adhere to
them, and those of so destructive a force, that if Christianity were beleagred
and famisht by the former, she is stormed and battered by these, and so is
ascertained to sink under all the methods of ruin. In the front of these we
may well rank those displacencies and animosities which are the product of our
speculative differences, and which do indeed so naturally result from them,
that it is not to be hoped so long as the one continues that the other will ever
cease. For though in practice we often see a bewitching Sin dethrone the
Reason, and make men act as if they had no such superior principle to guide
them, yet in matters of Speculation their affections are generally strongly
influenced by their understandings. We do not only approve, but love those
notions wherewith we are prepossest, which kindness as it propagates its self
to the abettors of the same Tenets, so also it insinuates dislikes to the
opposers. And as that opposition advances, so the disgust does too, till at
last the Scene shifts, and the Persons are at a greater war than the Opinions.
But we need not thus derive a proof from the causes, when the thing does too
demonstrably attest its self by the effects; for what issues are there of the
mortallest hatred, which do not plentifully flow from this fountain. Humane
nature we know has but three ways of actuating its Passions; by thought, by
word, and by deeds; and we may surely conclude the feud very bitter that
employes all these Engines, as it is too visible this does; for though the former
of these be in their own nature inscrutable, to all but omniscience, yet the
two later are, according to Christ's own Rule of the Tree by the fruits,
infallible Criterions of them; and those make such liberal discoveries, that I
think I may appeal to any who have espoused a party, whether they have not with
the first discriminating rudiments of their own Sect, imbibed a secret confused
prejudice to all others. Nay, I fear there are but few of so mortified
passions, as to have stopped there, and not advanced to a direct aversion, and
alienation of mind. Indeed were it not for this, 'twere scarce possible for so
many of the vulgar, to be such Bigots in their several factions; for alas,
their Intellects are generally too gross, to have any clear apprehension of the
Points they contend for; their Leaders only give them some general confused
notions, just enough to excite their displeasure against all Dissenters, and
then their anger must presently be called zeal, and instead of the more uneasy
task of suppressing their passion, this expedient serves at once to hallow and
gratify it: Nay, so ridiculous have some men's prepossessions of this kind
been, that they would scarce allow those to be entire men whom they thought not
sound believers, but have phancied I know not what bodily as well as mental
Monstrosities in those they were pleased to call Heretics; a piece of childish
credulity which the emissaries of some factions have not disdained to make
their advantage of. But these inward disgusts and rancours are but the first
bound of this ball of contention, when this leven is once in the heart, it will
quickly diffuse its self, and both tongue and hands will be tainted with it.
Hence comes it, that disputes in religion are managed with such virulency and
bitterness, that one would think the Disputants had put off much of Humanity,
before they come thus to treat of Divinity. The government of the Tongue is a
piece of morality which sober nature dictates, which yet in this instance many
even of our greatest Scholars seem totally to have unlearnt; For whether we
consider the unseemly reproaches, or rigid censures, wherewith almost all
parties pursue their Antagonists, we have reason to say with S. James, The
tongue is an unruly evil, full of deadly Poison: would God their guilt of this
kind, did not so loudly proclaim its self, as to supersede the need of proof.
It Is too obvious that the Satyr has usurpt the chair, and polemick Discourses
are degenerated into libels and invectives, our Controvertists fall from
arguments to reproaches, as if their Zeal lay more to blast their adversaries
fame, than confute his error; and were this only in personal extemporary
debates, it might have the excuse of an indeliberate passion. Indeed it were to
be wished that all words of this sort, might vanish in that breath that utters
them; that as they resemble the Wind in fury and impetuousness, so they might
do also in transientness, and sudden expiration: But alas, a course is taken to
immortalize them, they become records, and our most elaborate controvertial
writings, like the Earth after the curse, overrun with these briers and
thorns, Sarcasms, contumelies and invectives filling so many Pages, that were
those weeded out, many volumes would be reduced to a more moderate bulk as well
as temper. Nor are our censures any thing more modest than our reproaches,
every petty difference is mutually upbraided, to each party as a defection from
the faith, so that we scarce know a milder name than Heresy, nor doom than
Damnation. And as if the visible obliquities of errors would not afford us
inditements enough against one another, there is a closer inspection made,
every position is ripped up, and curiously dissected, to see what Embryo is in
its womb, what seeds there are of monstrous productions, which though perhaps
the native strength of the Principle would never have animated, yet the
preternatural heat of an Antagonist can quickly hatch them (like the Chickens
at grand-Cairo) into life, and vigorous being: and if by a long chain of
(perhaps fallacious) Inferences, some such Imputation is fastened upon a Thesis,
then all who embrace that, are charged also with all this spurious brood,
though they never so solemnly renounce and disclaim them. A practice sure very
uncharitable, for suppose such consequencies never so regularly deduced from my
opinion, yet so long as I seriously disavow and detest them, I may indeed be
thought unwise in not discerning the connection, but sure not impious. So that
unless want of Logic be a damning sin, no man can hence be authorized to
pronounce me reprobate: and I cannot think that God, whose rigor bends against
the faults of our wills, rather than our understandings, and who at the last
great assize will assume our own consciences into the judicature upon us, will
ever sentence me for those deductions how horrid soever which I never made
mine, or that I shall ever find my self in Hell for a misperswasion which I
never entertained. But there are some whose Censures are not so artificial, yet
no less severe, who beg their Postulata, and taking it for granted that such
and such are the only sanctified opinions, make them the Shiboleth by which to
discriminate not only their own Friends, but Gods too, lock up heaven gates
against any who bring not that Ticket for admittance; and though they make the
way wide enough to receive the most overgrown Sinner of their own Opinion, yet
they pronounce it impossible to the strictest piety of a Dissenter. And upon
such grounds as these do we mutually doom one another to perdition, never
considering that whilst we so briskly presage others Damnation, we really
prepare for our own. Alas, our eagerness to heat the Furnace seven times hotter
for all that bow not to our dictates, does but expose us to the fate of
Nebuchadnezzars officers, Dan. 3. to be our selves consumed in that flame,
wherein we cast them. It Is indeed to be wished we would cease to invade Gods
peculiar, by judging those that must stand or fall to him: but if we will needs
take his office, it is but equitable, we take his rules too; and in our Wrath
remember Mercy: But God be blessed it is the Judgment of our upright, yet
gracious Master that shall finally determine us; and not that of our passionate
fellowservants: If these were irreversible, and the Key of the bottomless pit
were in our custody, we might give Satan a writ of Ease, discharge him from his
perambulations, he would need no more to walk about as a Lion, but might still
lie in his Den, and we should bring in prey enough to glut the Devourer: For
could we execute all we condemn, we might ask the Disciples question, Mat. 19.
25. Who then can be saved? But as these severe censures, are a present
violation of Charity, so they tend to the perpetuating it by obstructing a
return to that unity of Judgment, which might make up the very original breach:
for while men reciprocally load each others opinions and persons with
detestable imputations, if they really speak what they think, they do still
more deeply impress upon themselves the prejudice to that which they accuse: (
hatred as well as love gathering strength by being actuated): but if they do
indeed not believe their own charge, yet having once made it, either upon
Interest or Passion, it is not probable they will want pride to maintain it; and
when we consider how ruling a piece of carnality that is, we can not wonder if
it indispose men to retractations. I wish we had not too many, and too late
instances of some whose weightiest objection against a cause, has been their
own former violence against it. When men have once fastened the brand of
Heresy, Profaneness or Blasphemy upon an opinion, they think they cannot
afterward become its Proselytes, without either seeming to assume those
Guilts, or at least that of having falsely charged them upon others: and the
Horns of such a Dilemma do so gore their reputation, that it often tempts to
salve that with the wounding of conscience, and persuades them rather to reject
their convictions, than expose their credits And certainly were this the only
ill consequent of our rigorous accusations, it would be enough to prejudice
them as unfit Instruments in a Gospel design; but though they suit not with
that work to which they solemnly pretend, they are most accommodate to that
they really produce: For if we examine in the third place, what influence these
our eager contests have upon our actions, we shall find them fully
proportionable to our words. And first negatively, it is apparent in too many,
that they are apt to confine even the common offices of humanity to their own
Sect: and others who do not so, yet show so great partiality in dispensing
them, as discovers the Name of Christian is not half so charming, as that of
their own particular Faction. Were Instances of this kind as needful as they
are numerous, 'twere easy to give multitudes: but I think none that has lived
in our late confusions can have wanted occasions of observing it in others, at
least, if not in himself. But alas, omissions are scarce worth our notice, when
there are so many positive Acts of unkindness so visible among us: They know
little of ancient and less of modern Times, that are unacquainted with the
mutual persecutions, which almost all parties have alternately raised, one
against another among Christians: Confiscations and banishments, Gibbets and
flames; Weapons God knows much too carnal for a spiritual warfare, yet much
more in use than those S. Paul recommends to Timothy, gentleness, and meek
instructing of Opposers, 2 Timothy 25, 26. And when it is considered that those
Opposers too were Heathens, 'twill be more than a little strange, that Severity
should be allowable to Brethren, which was interdicted against Aliens. Is it an
easier crime to reject the entire body of that Faith which was once delivered
to the Saints, than to differ in the explication of some one branch of it? nay,
perhaps only of some corollary and deduction from it, which as far as it is
humane may be fallible, and therefore can no more command my assent than it
satisfies my judgment; yet this is generally the most that can be affirmed of
our differences; For almost what Party is there which do not avowedly own all
that Faith which constituted the first Christians; would God we did as
uniformly embrace the Charity too; and then most of our disputes would be
superseded, at least so calmed, that there should be none of those destructive
effects which they now produce: For alas, how many funeral piles has this
preposterous zeal kindled? So that what some said of Draco's Laws maw too
justly be applied to our arguments, that they have been writ rather in blood
than Ink. But as Christ when he forewarned his disciples of the ensuing
persecution, tells them not only they shall be killed, but they shall be put out
of the Synagogue: So now as if Christians were aemulous of every branch of
Jewish cruelty, we transcribe that part of the copy too, and either by causless
excommunicating others, or separating our selves, we deny the benefit of
public communion to each other: And this is a greater severity than the
former, by how much more implacable our hate is against what we count error,
than what we know to be vice; and by how much the concerns of the Soul are more
estimable than those of the Body. The inveterateness of those Feuds which rise
from Opinion, may clearly be discovered in this instance; let a man have
committed all the outrages which may render him unworthy to live, yet when we
prosecute him to death, we willingly afford him all helps toward his future
state, and no man is so inhumane as to refuse to pray, either for or with a
Malefactor; yet some few speculative differences are such a gulf betwixt us,
that we cannot meet even in that we all acknowledge our common Duty, the
worship of our God. Certainly among all the accursed issues of our contention,
there is none more malignant and criminal, than this of Schism and Separation,
and would men judge dispassionately, more irrational neither: For doubtless
were our case stated to any sober Heathen, he would never be able to guess, why
they who equally acknowledge the advantage and necessity of prayer, confess the
same God, have the same common wants in this world, and hopes in the next, may
not ask in the same form, and in the same place. Alas, is it not enough to be
at distance where we differ, but must we be so also where we agree? Is unity so
dreadful to us, that we must act contradictions to escape it. Surely this is a
stranger fascination of the spirit of Division, than that in the Gospel
Demoniack, which enabled him to break all bonds in sunder, and like it, abhors
the approaches of a Savior, crying out, What have we to do with thee, thou
Jesus the Son of God, art thou come to torment us? Who knows what a powerful
Exorcism the united intercessions of the Christian world might have been; had
we jointly deprecated our quarrels, God might have found a way to have composed
them, though we could not; and our tears might have cemented those breaches
which our dissents made, but our separation widens. I know the venerable names
of the Sanctions of Holy Church, the hundred thirty seventh Canon of the Code
of the universal Church, which says in express terms, (...), that we ought not
to pray with Heretics or Schismatics, and very many warm expressions of the
Fathers, are producible in this case: But till we Excommunicate with the Tears
and Sorrows, and public concernment of the Primitive Christians, who refused
all acts of kindness only out of love, and the most ardent Charity, we may by
no means lay claim to their pattern, whose estrangements only flow from malice
and inveterate hate. Would we indeed comport with the Example of those happy
Times, we should have feared the guilt of Schism in our selves so much, as not
to have lightly charged it upon others; we should have prayed for the
conversion of Dissenters, not laid Anathemas upon them, and prayed for their
confusion. St. Paul we see, Heb. 10. 25. reckons the forsaking of Assemblies,
as a degree, at least preparative of Apostafie; and from his time throughout
all the purer ages of the Church the holy Fathers have generally branded it, as
the highest impiety; and no marvel, for it is one of those Gyant-like sins,
which not only oppresses men, but invades even God himself. It Is the mangling
and assassinating that body to which Christ owns an inseparable connection; the
putting him to head scattered limbs, instead of an entire compact body, as if
we meant to refute St. Paul, show him it is possible that Christ may be divided.
Good God, what shall we say when we see Heathen Soldiers estimate Christ's coat
higher than Christians do his body! they thought the one too good to be parted,
but we cease not to tear and mangle the other, and which is yet more monstrous,
make it a part of our Religion to do so. We name our Opinions our Faith, and
when under that Title we have enshrined them, we make more barbarous
Immolations than ever the most savage Heathens did. They sacrificed some few
objects of their Love, their Children, but we sacrifice the very affection, and
think our Zeal lukewarm till it have reduced our Charity to ashes. And now if
we compare these our Divisions, Wrath and Bitterness, with those fundamental,
Gospel precepts of Unity, Love and Meekness, we must surely say we have not
there so learned Christ. And then how ridiculous is it, to pretend a Zeal to
that Gospel, whose very foundations we undermine. Peace is at once the blessing
and duty of Christians, and those heats of speculative Contests which violate
it, will certainly never serve to make us either good or happy. And therefore
till Charity cease to be an Essential part of Christianity (which certainly we
must burn our Bibles ere we can suppose) we must conclude, that our Disputes,
and the ways whereby we manage them, how much soever they pretend to Preserve,
do indeed evacuate and destroy true, that is, Practick Christianity.

CHAP. XI. A survey of the Mischiefs arising from Disputes, as they engage upon
ill Arts and Scandalous Practices, to sustain the espoused Cause and Party.
AND yet so unhappily are many men mistaken, that these irregular heats which
thus waste the vital spirits of Religion, are thought the most Sovereign
Cordials to support them. The highest Paroxism of this Fever are deemed the
perfectest Health. Men esteem the overflowing of their Gall, the exuberance of
their Zeal, and then all the Promises to the faithful combatant in Christ's
camp, they confidently appropriate to that their so eminent Grace; though
indeed it can with no more propriety be called so, than Pharaohs lean Kine
might be said to be fat, because they had devoured those that were so. In plain
terms, men lay so great weight upon their being of right opinions, and their
eagerness of abetting them, that they account that the unum necessarium, and
think the propagating of those so important a service to God, as will justify
the use of the most interdicted instruments, legitimate the most enormous
Commissions, that they can fancy contributive to that pious End: And moreover
commute for the neglect of Practick duties in the general tract of their lives.
I shall not here urge the hazard of men's erring in the choice of opinions, nay,
the certainty that of many opposite, one only can be the right; and then to all
such as miss, that their very groundwork fails them. I shall only confine my
self to the malignant influence this Persuasion has on practice, and in that
respect I cannot but affirm it a most pernicious delusion, which as it tends
extremely to the enhansing the bitterness of our contests, so it may justly be
reckoned among the worst effects of them, and is a most irrefragable proof how
much they obstruct the vital efficacy of Religion in our hearts. Nor is it any
new thing for men thus to deceive themselves, for we find such Confidences as
these frequently upbraided to the Jews, both by the Prophets and Christ
himself, they thought their Zeal to the Temple and ritual observances, so
invincibly meritorious, as no Crime could defeat, and that their legal
purifications would render them acceptable in Gods Eyes, in spite of all their
Moral pollutions: But how fallacious a hope this was, the many severe
increpations of God do sufficiently attest. Yet certainly their guilt was far
below ours, the things they so depended on were parts, though not the whole of
their Duty; those Ordinances, though perhaps somewhat adulterated by Rabbinical
mixtures, yet for the main were instituted by God himself, and that with a
design of discriminating, and separating them from the rest of the world; and
such peculiarities and privileges as these, might have an aptness to excite
that presumption: But alas, the case is otherwise with most of us; they are not
the Revelations of Gods will, not the Testament of our dying Redeemer, but some
Codicils and Annexes of our own we so earnestly abet. It Is not the Text (for
then 'twere impossible for any that received the same Canon of Scripture to
differ) but our glosses to which we pay such Reverence; and when on that
account we sever our selves from those to whom the Commands of God, the Blood
of our Savior have most closely united and cemented us: We can yet make a
shift to think that there is so much of Sacred in this, as shall not only
render it highly rewardable, but also hallow all other profanations of our
lives; and in our Iehu march upon such an expedition, can turn all regrets of
conscience (like Iorams messengers) behind us. That this is so, none can doubt
who observe with what boldness men rush upon the most unchristian sins, in
pursuit of what they Fancy a Christian cause. Were it not for this amulet, how
were it possible for any to think they may venture upon Perjury, Sacrilege,
Murder, Regicide, any thing without impeachment to their Saintship; nay, to
think that the only danger lies on the other side, in being remisly wicked,
that to slack any thing of the utmost speed, is to do the work of the Lord
negligently. Yet that this has been a prevailing Persuasion, we have had too
many, and too sad instances; and God grant we may not find them so repeated,
that our sense may supersede the use of our memories concerning them; nor has
this been peculiar to one only Sect, but those who are otherwise at the widest
distance unite in this Principle. They are not only Phanaticks that can say
grace over the foulest crimes, and consecrate them to the use of a good cause;
if we examine the Dypticks either of Conclave or Consistory, we shall find some
Saints upon that account, who could never have been so upon any other. And when
we consider how often Heaven has been mortgaged to gain Auxiliaries from Hell,
how men have been encouraged to the most damning sins, by promises of being
certainly saved; we must either think that a Holy cause is omnipotent enough to
reverse Gods decrees, to save whom he would damn, or else that this pretense is
one of the most ruinous deceits, the most fatal Treachery to souls that ever
Satan contrived, who though he do in all instances play the Mountebank, yet
sure never more than when on confidence of this Antidote he persuades us thus
to swallow down his deadliest Poison.

I MUST not here attempt to enumerate all the unchristian practices, that have
on this score been made, not only lawful but meritorious; yet there is one of
so frequent use, that I must needs advert unto it, and that is, those calumnies
and falsehoods, which are now become a piece of Ecclesiastic as well as state
policy, and a great part of that offensive armor wherewith our controvertists
assault one another. Indeed if we consider how many forges are daily going for
these Engines, we shall have reason to think, all Parties have an high esteem
of their usefulness. Of these Calumnies there are too many sorts and degrees to
be here particularized: And indeed those, who permit themselves to use any, can
be supposed to have no other boundaries than the advantage of their cause: And
accordingly as that seems to exact, they lay their Scene; sometimes they
traduce the persons of their opposers, and by raising prejudices against them,
hope some of it will reflect upon their doctrine: did men generally know how to
distinguish between reports and certainties, this stratagem would be as
unskilful as it is uningenuous: But considering the vulgar temper, its not
unaptly suited to it. This it seems was anciently understood, it being the old
Greek advice, (...). To calumniate stoutly, for that how perfectly soever the
wound of reproach be healed, there will remain a scar; and though we wipe away
with never so much care the dirt thrown at us, there will be left some sulliage
behind: And accordingly this was the Expedient the Pagans used against the
Primitive Christians, to put them thus in the skins of beasts, and shapes of
monsters, and then worry them to death. And this is the method still, though
heightened and improved, and our Religion has suffered infinitely more since we
used it against each other, than when they managed it against the whole
community. But besides this defamation of Persons, another branch of this black
Art is the depraving of Writings, both in the sense and very letter, and direct
words; for the former of these, whosoever observes the strange perversions, and
affected mistakes of men's meanings visible in many of our Polemick discourses,
will sure resolve that a man's intentions, as well as his words and actions may
be calumniated: Nor does the letter escape better, every period which threatens
danger to the cause must be mutilated and dismembered, and as Sampson was by the
Philistines, lose its Hair and Eyes, and then be made sport for the whole
party. And I fear there are too few, who do not in this case take the Jewish
reparation, an Eye for an Eye, etc. retaliate to the adversary the foul play
they receive. But some advance yet higher, and think it not enough to make an
Argument or Testimony useless to the Enemy, unless they draw it over to
themselves, make it betray the side it was to maintain, and as a Conqueror uses
to restore Arms to such of the adverse party, as will turn to his, so after
they have by satisfactions secured themselves of its aid, it shall then be made
as potent as is possible, and with such kind of Renegado troops as these, some
causes have been much supported. Yet were this violation offered only to the
writings of living men, who might vindicate it, 'twere not so transcendently
ignoble, but it most frequently falls upon those, who have made their beds in
the dust; who have changed their own Form, and cannot secure their Writings
from the same fate: Nay, it is yet more frequently those, whom we have all
reason to suppose, and most of us profess to believe, glorified Saints; and
this superadds a daring presumption to all other circumstances of the guilt,
and heightens an injustice into Sacrilege. It has always been held the most
detestable sort of forgery to counterfeit Testaments, though the Testator were
of never so low a quality, or his bequests of never so mean a value: And shall
it now pass for a piece of commendable dexterity, an art of manage to falsify
those writings by which the Fathers of the Church designed to entail truth and
piety, not strife and faction upon her. We know Necromancy has justly been
reputed one of the most horrid forms of Sorcery, because it enforced dead men
to speak what the living were inquisitive to hear. I leave it to be considered
what this wants of that, besides the dreadful ceremonies of the Incantation;
certainly it is a guilt which nothing but our too familiar acquaintance with it
could make unformidable. And indeed this whole method of serving a cause by
such sinister means is so utterly repugnant to the Principles even of ingenuous
nature, that we can scarce cast a greater scandal upon an Opinion, than to show
it needs such Aids. It Is by Historians branded as an execrable fact in him, who
to secure himself from a neighbor Prince, called in the Turk into Christendom:
But sure those who to fortify their side have brought in this Artifice of
calumniating and falsifying, have done an Act no less impious; the constitution
of Christianity agreeing full as well with the Alcoran as with these
Piaefraudes; as some of them who perhaps mean the fraud more than the Piety are
pleased to call them. Nay indeed, they accord not much better with Philosophy
than Divinity, every man knows the nature of contraries is to combat and
expel, not to cherish and support one another. How absurd is it then for those,
who say they design to advance truth, to make falsehood their Instrument. I wish
they would experiment to accommodate their secular concerns at the same rate,
let them cool them in the Fire, warm them in the Frost, and feed themselves by
perpetual Fasting, and when they find cause to commend the efficacy of that
Method, they may with fairer pretense in this higher instance reconcile the
feuds of Reason and of Nature, and make a lie the Evidence of Truth. In the
interim, it may well pass for Sophistry as well as sin; and doubtless whatever
advantages are hoped for to private Sects and Parties by this art, Christian
Religion in general is hugely prejudiced by it: For when men shall compare the
veracity of Heathens with our falsehoods; learn from Historians, that among the
Persians, (...), to lie was deemed a fault of the greatest turpitude, and they
therefore laid an ill Character upon persons in debt, (...), because he that is
so must needs tell lies: And when they shall see in the Laws of Cingis a
barbarous Tartar, Lying made a capital crime, and yet among Christian Casuists
made a holy artifice, they will be tempted to think our end as fictitious as
our way; and that our Religion has little countenance from truth, which is thus
fain to make lies its Refuge. Thus unhappily do these Arrows revert, not only
on those who shoot them, but in the face of Christianity its self, which is
defamed, and traduced by those slanders, we aim at our private adversaries.

BUT besides this direct, there are other more oblique Ways of making vice
subservient to Religion, or to speak more properly, of making Religion
subservient to vice; for some Zealots of several parties, who more regard the
numerousness than purity of their Professors, discerning how much the sensual
part of mankind startle at the strictness of Gospel precepts, are industrious
to take off that discouragement; not by convincing them of the real divine
sweetness and pleasantness of them, but by debasing and accommodating them more
to the carnal appetite: Yet here men proceed not all alike, some use Christ's
yoke, as Hananiah did that of Jeremy, break it quite off; others only essay to
slacken and alleviate it, that it may not pinch the lusts of libertine
Proselytes: Of the first sort are such, as having made the adherence to their
Party, the infallible mark of Sanctification, and that Sanctification of
Election, do from thence proclaim to all who are so qualified a general Jubilee
and manumission from the bond even of Christ's as well as Moses's Law: or if
some of them allow it to remain an impotent director, yet while they affirm
that God sees no sin in his Elect, or if he do, beholds them as a Father does
the harmless falls of his Child, rather with smiles than anger, they make the
violations of it so safe, that they are too sure to be many, and between
abrogating and thus enervating a law, the difference is merely verbal.

OF the second sort are some, who by indulgent and partial glosses, seek to
mollify the severity of Christ's commands. That contrive for their Clients not
the means of Obeying, but the arts of Escaping them. Like the unjust Steward
teach their lords Debtors to write fifty in stead of a Hundred; and decide
Cases of conscience more according to the interests and passions of men, than
the will of Christ. There are a generation of men of whose Dexterity in this
faculty the world has taken so much notice that I need not name them, a sort of
easy Casuists who seem to have erected a Court of Equity to relieve men
against the rigor of divine Law; and there is little doubt but they shall find
enough ready to make such appeals: Men love to be Christians as Cheap as they
can, and therefore will close with that party, which offers the easiest terms:
And then while these spiritual Pioneers do thus enlarge the narrow way, make it
a road as well for the Beast as the Man, the brutish sensual, as well as
rational divine Part of us, no wonder though Shoals of Converts throng in to
them. But it is to be considered that all this while this is winning Proselytes
to themselves not to God: the gaining them to a Sect not a religion; at least
not to that pure religion, and undefiled which the grand Author of our Faith
has both exemplified, and proposed to us; for how much that suffers by this way
of propugning private opinions, is more than enough apparent. Yet so ambitious
are our prime leaders of such Trophies that in order to them some are said to
ascend yet a step higher, and besides this general encouragement they give to
men's lusts by taking off Restraints, do in some cases actually promote and
excite them. For when they see a licentious person whose acquest they judge
beneficial to their cause, they have artifices of fomenting his riots, do not
only take off the bridle, but use the spur also, hoping that at the rebound it
may conduce to their End. If any think it impossible it should do so, let them
consider that among our various Opinions some there are which sell heaven much
cheaper than others dare, that allow such easy attonements as the most
habituated sinner need not despair of: and then the most infallible means to
ascertain such to that side, is to make them too bad for any other. For when a
man is resolute to keep his sins while he lives, and yet unwilling to
relinquish all hopes when he dies, it is more than probable he will embrace that
profession which bids fairest to the reconciling those so distant interests;
and therefore the greater malefactor he is, the more sure he will be to fly to
the horns of this Altar; the nearer sinking, the apter to catch at these reeds;
so that the Project is not impolitick, though God knows so impious that it is
much fitter for the School of Machiavil than of Christ; and seems to verify
that imputation as to a part of Christians, which Julian once as falsely as
maliciously affixt upon the whole: that their Church was an Asylum and
sanctuary for the most flagitious offenders, and protected those guilts to
which no other religion allowed any Expiation. It Is indeed so horrid that I
cannot think there are many consciences so cauteriz'd by this fiery zeal as to
admit it, yet that some have done it, there is too much certainty, and
therefore it is no improper instance in our present argument, for if men's
eagerness to support their several sides, can transport them to such attempts
as these, it is abundant Evidence how much Christianity loses by these contests
of under factions, which while they pretend to guard, do indeed invade her
under her own Colors.

BUT besides the faults men commit with this immediate avowed aspect upon their
religion, there are others which slily shroud themselves under the skirt of its
mantle: I mean those Sins of common life, which though they pretend not to
advance the cause, yet when acted by a Zealot are thought to be overwhelmed by
his heroic Piety* Indeed men who make themselves so much work about others
faith, are seldom at leisure to regulate their own practice, and so have no way
of stating their accounts with God, but by balancing the excess of the one
against the defects of the other: How such reckonings will pass the grand
Audit, it is I think not hard to divine, but in the interim, it keeps them very
cheerful and secure, teaches them a Receipt to retain all their Sins, and yet
lose none of their confidence; so that when they have immerst themselves in all
filthiness both of flesh and Spirit, they can trust their zeal to refine them
from all that Dross. Nor does it only thus reconcile them to their own vices,
but to other men's also, whose most brutish sensualities they can look on with
perfect patience, nay even Atheism its self can have fair Quarter: They are not
much discomposed to see men have no religion, it is only the having one
different from their own that awakes their indignation; then like Saul when
seized on by the evil spirit, they cast about their Javelins, think no rigor
too great on such a provocation, yet even here they have intervals, and the
very same persons who are thus at odds upon a religious, can unite upon a
vicious account. Those who mutually denounce damnation to each other, can with
full accord combine in those practices which will ascertain it to them both, as
if they so much feared to have their predictions defeated, that they would be
each others convoy to the land of darkness. Those that will by no means meet at
the Church, know not when to part at the Tavern, and though they will not
jointly partake of the Cup of the Lord, are yet very sociable at the Cup of
Devils; I mean those excessive debauches, which are a most acceptable
drink offering to those infernal spirits. Have we not seen many whose distant
opinions have fastened upon one another the brand of Antichristianism, who have
yet like Gog and Magog joined against the holy city: and those who could never
agree on the way of setting up Christ's Throne, have yet been very unanimous in
pulling down the Kings. Thus alas do we justle one another out of the narrow
path that leads to life, but can hand in hand run our Carier in the broad way
of destruction. And doubtless this great unevenness, these spiritual feuds, and
carnal endearments between the same persons; this impetuous zeal, and as
impetuous lusts in the same breasts could never be, did not men depend so
confidently on the one, as to think it will commute, and satisfy for the
other. But alas, how groundless a Presumption this is, the whole tenor of the
Gospel does abundantly witness. In all that grand Charter where is there the
least Clause importing such an immunity. I am sure there are multitudes that
assert the contrary. Indeed the whole frame of the Evangelical covenant is
totally against it: That requiring an entire uniform Sanctity, and allowing no
other privilege to the sins of the most knowing Professors, but a pre-eminence
in punishment, the being beaten with many stripes. And when it is considered
that the end of all religion is but the drawing us to a conformity with God,
the impressing on us some Character of his eternal goodness and holiness,
'twill be as absurd as impious to believe that our zeal to any Religion can
absolve us from that purity which is the end and design of all. And while this
is the way men take to approve their piety, it is no marvail to find so many
Christians, and so little Christianity in the world: for that is not to be
estimated by the number of its professors, but by their obedience to its Rules,
and he that gives up his name to it and not his heart, will receive as little
advantage by it, as he brings honor to it, and how little that is in respect
of its internal Efficacy, is I presume competently evidenced.

BUT that we may more thoroughly discern how universally destructive our
wranglings are to it, in all its concerns, let us a little examine whether they
do not endammage it even in respect of outward profession also. This may seem a
strange Quaere to those who think their desputes about Religion are to
denominate them the great confessors of the Age: yet certainly there is but too
much ground not only for the enquiry, but to resolve it in the affirmative. And
if it prove so, 'twill infer but sadly to those who having laid the whole
stress of their Hopes upon their zeal to advance their Faith, will be found to
have pulled down more than they have built up. Now Christianity may in respect
of profession decay two ways, either in its hopes, or in its possession, the
one in relation to Aliens, the other to Disciples. The first by hindering the
access of new Converts, the second by staggering or alienating the old, and
both these ways she visibly appears to suffer by our divisions. And first if
we consult but our experience, if we trust but our own observations, we cannot
but confess that the Gospel has long been at a great stand. That that Sun which
at its first arising was like David's, Ps. 19. surrounded the world in a
vigorous efficacious motion, is since become like Joshua's, Josh. 10. 12.
arrested in its course: Nay like Hezekiah's, gone backward, Is. 38. 8.
Mahumetism (if not Paganism) having long taken up its seat in diverse of the
most flourishing Apostolic plantations. A sad change, that from the daily and
numerous accession of the first times, it should now become a kind of Prodigy,
a piece of news, scarce heard in an Age, that one single Proselyte is gained to
the Church, yet that thus it is, is too obvious to be denied. And truly it is
not much less apparent that our dissentions have in a great degree contributed
to it. For first, as to the extirpation of the Eastern Churches, he that shall
examine the records of those times, will have cause to say their Janglings and
Divisions were not only in a moral or divine, but even in a proper natural
sense, the Instruments of it. The Turk only coming in at those breaches which
themselves had made, nor had their Candlestick probably been removed, had they
not first abused its light, to the setting themselves in Combustion. That the
same cause has not yet had the same effect among us, is owing not to its
unaptness to produce it, but to the admirable patience and mercy of God, who
yet withholds that fatal Judgment, which we do our parts to pull upon our
selves; our mutual violences against one another herein unhappily combining and
making one united force against us all. But though the divine goodness have
hitherto so countermined our treachery to our selves, as not to suffer us to
enjoy that state of darkness we have so courted, yet certainly our contentions
are extremely accessory to the continuing it upon others, our many new and
wandering lights, however they fail of having that Property of the Pillar of
fire, Ex. 14. of illuminating and conducting the Israelites, yet too much
answer its other, in becoming cloud and darkness to the Egyptians; there being
scarce any thing more apt to intercept the beams of the Sun of righteousness
from the Heathen world, every of those little enclosures our Factions have made
in the Church, becoming a great partition wall to keep others out of it. This
may be made evident in several respects. As first, in relation to those many
moral obliquities in which our eager disputes do (as has already been showed)
betray us, which cannot but give so much scandal to any considering man, that
we can scarce hope any can turn to us as to a better Religion, but will rather
think it the way to relinquish all; to obliterate those native impressions of
Piety and Honesty they brought with them into the world, so that if we expect
any Proselytes it must be only such as would live worse than mere nature allows
them.

BUT this though as important a consideration as can well be, I shall not here
insist on, having in the second Section given some instances how apt our
Morality is to defame our Divinity, and confirm men in Opposition to it. But
though this be a great, yet it is not the only means by which our Dissentions
hinder the progress of the Gospel, for they do not only make infidels less
inclinable to receive it, but us to propagate it. Those do so busy and engross
us, that there is neither leisure nor heart left for this. Our activest spirits
are so engaged at home in asserting their private quarrels, that all such
foreign designs are forgot. For as in Civil, so in Ecclesiastical concerns,
every one is more industrious to advance his peculiar interest than that of the
community, accordingly we find innumerable promulgers of every new Opinion. No
Sect wants its Apostles to propagate and diffuse it; but where are there any
that have the like care for the main Root of Christian Religion, which they
have for these little Twigs and Offesets which they have planted in their own
Gardens; how many ages must we look back to find a man that has made it his
business to convert Infidels to the Faith. It Is true indeed there are some very
magnificent relations of modern attempts this way, of great industry some have
used to bring the most savage nations to the obedience of Christ: but if we
examine 'twill be obvious, the main design was to subject them to themselves.
'Twas not so much their Heathenism as their territories they invaded, and such
Apostles as these are ill qualified to make S. Paul's profession, 2 Cor. 12.
16. I seek not yours but you. And the success of such Essays have been
answerable to the motive; they have won riches but not Souls. The Gospel in one
hand and a sword in the other has made many slaves, but I fear few Christians.
Indeed, what encouragement had those poor creatures to receive a Religion from
their Oppressors? why should they think that those who tortured and killed
their bodies, were really concerned to save their Souls? or that those who
would not permit them to enjoy what was their own, meant to help them to any
thing better? And while the felicities of another world were recommended to
them only by such, as had deprived them of all in this, we cannot wonder at
their little appetite to embrace them; or to find the oppressed Indians protest
against that heaven where the Spaniards are to be their cohabitants. In short,
this is sure such a method of Evangelizing, as too widely differs from that
which first planted the Church, to be likely to advance its growth: so that
notwithstanding all pretenses of this kind, we may resume our assertion, and
conclude that our intestine discords (perhaps not those alone) have diverted
the Zeal of this more Christian undertaking, and left a great part of the world
under that invincible Ignorance S. Paul mentions, Romans 10. 14. How shall they
call on him, in whom they have not believed, and how shall they believe in him,
of whom they have not heard; and how shall they hear without a preacher: and
God knows whether we have not herein provided better for their Excuse than our
own.

THERE is yet another way by which our divisions impede their conversion, and
that is by giving them prejudice to that Doctrine about which our selves cannot
agree. It Is an universal Maxim that truth is always consonant to its self; and
therefore where they see so little unity they have too much temptation to doubt
of Truth. He that wandering should meet a Company that offer to conduct him to
his journeys end, might reasonably incline to deliver himself up to their
guidance; but if he find them unagreed upon the way, one Disputing for this,
and another for that, and every one protesting against all but his own; he
would sure retract his confidence, and think they offered him only more variety
of mistakes, resolve it as safe to trust himself to his own Errors as other
men's. And this alas seems to be too exact a parallel of the present case; we
Christians do so mutually damn one another, that a poor Turk or Heathen will
think, he rather multiplies than ends his Danger by associating himself with
us; for there being so many parties, which soever he joins himself to, there
will be abundant odds against him; so that if he could be secured the truth
were among us, yet the great difficulty of finding it out, would be a very
disheartning consideration. Besides men love in transactions of great
Importance to have as many, and as credible Vouchers as may be, and upon that
score 'twill sure be but a cold inducement, to any to turn Christian to
foresee, that when he has done so, he shall be disowned by far the greater part
of that number, and that at his entrance into the Church, he shall be met with
almost as many Anathemas, as when he was an Infidel. Nay, I scarce know whether
I may call it an entrance into the Church, or rather into a Conventicle, or
particular Congregation, our Schisms and Separations having hardly left a
possibility of external communion with the universal Church, since the
Communicating with one part of it, does infallibly Excommunicate from another.
Thus have we placed our flaming Sword (though God knows no Cherubim) at the
gate of our Paradise, and when God calls all men to the waters of life, our
Contentions have made them like those of Marah, so bitter and unpleasant, as
deters and averts men from them: Which as it is in the highest degree injurious
to them, so is it contumelious to him, whose invitations are by this means
frustrated; it is in some degree the evacuating one of the main purposes of
Christ's coming into the World, which was to call men out of darkness into his
mavelous light, and as He was thus sent by his Father, so also were the
Apostles solemnly commissionated by him to preach to the Gentile world, who
with indefatigable industry and resolute sufferings pursued the charge; and
sure this is competent evidence, that the design was of the greatest and most
weighty importance, and such as can never be out-dated, till there cease to be
objects of it, unbelievers to convert: And by that let us measure the guilt of
obstructing it, which if we would impartially do, I assure my self the most
passionate Bigot of any Party must confess, that it infinitely out-weighs all
the Piety his doctrine can pretend to, that his peculiar Church gains not so
much as the Catholic loses: And that how confidently soever he have Canonized
his quarrels, they are indeed but the worst sort of Heathens, and serve to keep
out the better. Yet besides the mischief they do in relation to those that are
without, they are extremely pernicious to those that are within, and that not
only to some one Sect, but like an universal poison, that is equally deadly to
the most contrary complections, they operate on the most distant ranks of
Professors, the tender and the obdurate, the scrupulous and the profane. And
first for the tender tremulous Christian, it is easy to discern how much he
must be distracted and amazed by them, for while he hears each Sect thunder out
Damnation against each other, he cannot but be startled at the danger of
adhering to the wrong, and though that may a while excite his diligence to
discover the right, yet when he comes to that inquisition, he will meet with so
many Polemick intricacies to entangle him, that after many turns, first to one
side, and then to another, he will be apt to think the only clue to extricate
him out of this labyrinth of many Religions, is to abandon all. Nor is this
mere Speculation and Conjecture, God knows we have had successively through the
whole round of Error too many practick experiments of it. Several persons there
have been, whose Zeal to find out truth by an unhappy rule of False, directed
them to allow of every Error: While like sick men, who desire to die good
cheap, they put themselves into the hands of any Empirick; follow each bold
pretender, that has the impudence to talk of Truth, till Superstition ends in
Profanation, Godliness proves Atheism, and by having been of many Sects, at
last have no Religion. And surely this is a most unhappy Effect of our
discords, thus to be stumbling blocks in our brothers way, and when we remember
the woes pronounced against those that shall Scandalize any of the little ones,
'twill be strange how men can think to approve their Christianity, by the ruin
of their Brothers, or secure themselves of Heaven by keeping Others thence: For
though Christ tells his Disciples there should be some that should think it a
service to God to kill their Bodies, yet to fancy the destroying of Souls so
too, is a Deception of which we have neither record nor prediction in Holy
Writ, and is a superfaetation of the spirits of delusion, peculiar to those who
have placed their own sanctity in these religious wranglings, which serve to
destroy it in other men. And as they thus serve on the one side to shipwreck
the faith of these weak unstable Souls; so do they on the other advance the
impiely of the daring sinner; for as they are Temptation to the one, so are
they Pretense and Excuse to the other to bid defiance to all Religion. He whose
dissolute affections have so long been courting his understanding to turn
Atheist, will sure not lose the advantage of so plausible an Argument as our
divisions afford him; and since his lusts engage him in an irreconcilable War
against the practick part of Piety, he will most gladly embrace this occasion
of quarrel against the Theory also: So making himself entire, and extinguishing
those uneasy regrets and misgivings arising from the repugnancy of his life to
his belief. It were not hard to give a compendium of these men's Logic, and
draw out those Schemes of Discourse, by which from our differences in Religion
they infer the discarding of all. But I fear these are already too well known,
and where they are not, I should be loath to be any man's Instructor. This is I
am sure too palpable, that how fallacious soever these Reasonings are, they
have been very operative, as appears by the number of those avowed Atheists
among us, who placing themselves in the seat of the scorner, give themselves
much pleasing Divertisement by deriding our eager scuffles about that which
they think nothing. If any man thinks that the Church is no loser by the
defection of such Libertines, I must be allowed to dissent from him: For first,
there are examples of the most vicious Persons, that have been reduced, and
while they retain their Christian belief, that lays such undeniable obligations
to good life, that whenever they resume their reason, they must take up virtue
also with it; so that there is an equal possibility of their being good, that
there is of their being rational: But when all hope and fear of a future estate
is disclaimed, when those cords are broken which should pull them up from the
Dungeon, then, and not before is their state visibly desperate. But besides
this possibility of recovering them, the danger of losing others is to be
considered. Bold Atheism is like a raging Pestilence, which taints the very
Air, so that those impious discoursings which are the effects of some men's
Vices, may be the cause of others; and we too often see that those who ascended
themselves by degrees, do in an instant advance their Proselytes to the height
of Irreligion, as appears by the strange proficiency of some, whose Years allow
them not to have arrived to it otherwise than per Saltum. And sure this
spreading Contagion has been so destructive to the Church, that it were to be
wished, the mere titular Christians had rather remained such, than thus to have
averted others from being so much.

AND now if all these scandals be worth our regret, if the emboldening and
exasperating the bad, the corrupting the innocent, and the decay of Christian
profession consequent to both be formidable Evils, we know where to charge the
guilt. Our contentions must be arraigned as accessaries, if not principals in
the case: And then sure it will befit our angry Zealots to consider, whether
this be the way of advancing Gods truth, or what account they will give to the
Lord of the Vineyard, who while they pretend to dress and prune the branches,
do thus debilitate and destroy the roots. Nay, indeed in this they are
treacherous even to their own pretensions, for all those several Religions
which they so tenderly cherish, have no proper root of their own, but like
Excrescencies, spring out of the main stock of Christianity, live by its juice
and moisture, and consequently, can never hope to survive it. And then
certainly there can be nothing more ridiculous, than to express their kindness
to the one, by ways that are so ruinous to the other. It Is as if a Passenger in
a Ship should to fortify his private Cabin, tear up the planks and expose the
whole Vessel to sinking: Yet thus preposterously do many of our chief Pilots
apply their care. In the mean time, it cannot but be a very delightful prospect
to the grand Enemy of Souls, to see us thus busily promote his interest, lay
snares for our selves, and by our own folly do that which all his subtilties
could never compass. Nor can we think but he will be as officious to us as is
possible, while we are thus employed, will help us to contrive our Turrets,
whilst he sees we pluck out stones from the foundation to build them with; nor
shall we ever want new models of Churches, so long as they thus help to destroy
the old; and how aptly they are fitted for that Purpose, needs (I suppose) no
farther Demonstration.

CHAP. XII. A survey of the Mischiefs arising from Disputes, in reference to
Civil Peace.
AND now sure we cannot but conclude our Contentions highly injurious to
Christianity, that thus assault it both in the Practick and Theory: And indeed
how fierce soever our quarrels are with one another, the heaviest blows are
sure to fall on that, which as in its constitution is of the most Pacifick
temper imaginable, so it has the common fate of reconcilers to suffer from all
parties. But Godliness having the promise as well of this life as of that which
is to come, it often happens that there is such a consent between our spiritual
and secular Concerns, that the Mischiefs that oppress the one do reflect on the
other: And indeed Religion when entire and united, is one of the best bonds of
Civil as well as Ecclesiastical Peace, (as even those attest, who defying all
other ends of it, do yet admit it a useful state Engine;) from whence it is
consequent, that the distractions and divisions in that must have
proportionably a contrary influence, and infect communities with Discord,
Tumult and Disorders. And this is an effect with which I think not unfit to
bring up the rear of the foregoing Mischiefs, it being not so purely Secular as
not to suit our present subject; for outward order and unity can never be so
innocently disturbed, but that Christianity must be wounded in it also: And
besides, it may perhaps obtain more consideration than the former, as being of
a nature wherein the generality of men will think themselves the most
concerned; for though there be many that can look on the ruin both of
Christian practice and profession, with Gallio's indifference, Acts 18. 17. and
care for none of those things, yet when the siege draws closer, when they find
themselves begirt in their worldly interests, and that the same Deluge that
overwhelms Churches, may bear down Palaces also, perhaps they may think the
matter not so contemptible. And first, as to the truth of the observation the
World has too long groaned under the Experiment to need farther proof. That
bitterness which first tainted the waters of the Sanctuary, has from thence
diffused its self into our common streams, and like the Egyptian Plague, left
none uncorrupted: For whether we look upon Families, Neighbourhoods, Kingdoms,
any the least, or any the greatest Societies, we find the miserable Trophies of
our holy Wars, in Factions and Confusions; I wish I could not say Rapine and
Blood also. For the first of these, the domestic Jarrs caused by different
Opinions, the Instances are numerous, or rather innumerable, which our own age
and nation affords us. How many Servants have on this score been at defiance
with their Masters? Children with their Parents? nay, Wives with their
Husbands? Such an unhappy force is there in mistaken Zeal, that it dissolves
the closest bonds, violates all obligations natural or civil, while under
pretense of service to God, like the Pharisees Corban, it evacuates all duty to
man; and this has made such ruptures and divisions in Families, that that
delightful prospect the Psalmist so much commends, that of Brethrens dwelling
together in unity, Psalm. 133. is scarce any where to be met with; but instead
of that, such rancor and bitterness, treachery and malice, as if men either
mistook Christ's prediction, Luke 12. 52. for a precept, or at least were
willing to advance his Prophetic Office upon the ruin of his Kingly, and to
verify his praesage by breaking his command. And as the Oeconomical order and
peace is thus disturbed, so if he that misses quiet at home should seek for it
abroad, he will soon find himself disappointed, and discern that as the
societies grow greater, so do the disorders also, and that private Strifes do
as much combine to make parties and factions, as Families do to make Cities and
Corporations. By this means that mutual communication by which the Members of
civil bodies should not only benefit one another, but secure the whole is
interrupted, and men live not as neighbors but spies, always upon designs of
Entrapping and Ensnaring, for while they look on one another as enemies to God,
they think that rescinds all obligations of friendship among themselves, and
when Religion bears the Standard, the War will be concluded necessary and
honorable. But though it be so in imagination only, it is sure there are some,
who make it really profitable; for as in most Camps, the greater Number are
attracted rather by hope of booty than concern for the cause; so here, many men
list themselves under one Party, that they may have pretense to prey upon the
rest. And to that End several very commodious Axioms have been taken up. As
that no faith is to be kept with Heretics; that Dominion is founded in Grace,
etc. by such measures as these the goods of the Egyptians become lawful prizes
to any, that please to call themselves Israelites; and indeed Jews they may be
called in that notion we vulgarly use it of unjust and cruel extortioner: But
sure not such Israelites as Christ defines Nathaniel, Io. 1. 47. without guile:
For having thus consecrated their frauds, and found an expedient of serving God
and Mammon together, there is no piece of deceit either too big, or too little
for them; no transaction so important, which can oblige their fidelity; none so
trivial as to discourage their rapine: Opportunity is the only measure and rule
of their attempts, by this means no Obligation of Contract, no Laws of Commerce
can escape unviolated, every thing is lawful that may weaken the wicked, and
that zeal which makes men Saints in the Church or Conventicle, can make them
Thieves in the Shop or Market. Thus is Piety made an Engine of rapine, and by
these religious riots, all boundaries wherewith Laws or Equity have fenced men's
distinct properties, are thrown down: And sure this is a most carnal consequent
of our spiritual debates, and bids fair toward the reducing us to that state
of common Hostility, which some have phancied to be the Original condition of
mankind: For it renders commerce so dangerous, that men may within a while
think it safer to trust their own strengths, than to the shelter of those Laws
and Civil compacts, which they see so avowedly evacuated. And upon this
account, though the Injury be immediately done to private persons, it becomes a
public mischief: Yet alas, these are but the more moderate effects of our
Dissentions; they afford more expedite and compendious ways of public ruin;
the defrauding or undermining of a few Neighbors, are petty prizes for those
that think they have the sole right to the Creature, and are those Meek who are
to inherit the Earth, and every such acquest only serves to flesh them for a
farther chase. The spoils of a broken Kingdom will afford something worth the
scrambling for: And nothing more fit to break it than a pretense of Religion,
which like the stone that smote Nebuchadnezzars Image, has shivered the most
goodly Monarchies. And accordingly, we see no Engine is more constantly used by
men of Seditious spirits, to disturb and subvert Governments: Indeed there can
be nothing so advantageously fitted for the purpose. For should such persons
unmask their design, and show it in its native ugliness, should they avow the
shaking of a Kingdom merely to establish themselves in a condition of wealth
and grandeur, the new moulding of a Government only that they might shape their
own shares in it, 'twere impossible they should find any abettors; for though
the multitude are always in preparation for change, yet it is not on Intuition
of benefit to some private persons, but of somewhat wherein themselves may
partake: Nor is even the madness of the people mad enough, to expose all their
own interest, and most important concerns only to promote those of others. It
has therefore always been both the rule and practice for such designers to
suborn the public interest to countenance and cover their private; to cry up
Diana to secure their own gain, and to make the seduced Populacy like the
Iackeal to the Lion, hunt that prey which themselves mean to devour. And of all
those artifices by which such Incendiaries have set Kingdoms in a flame, none
has been more universally succesful than the praetext of Religion, which is
thought so creditable a cause to engage in, as can convert the infamous titles
of Rebel and Traitor into those of Patriot and Saint, and consequently, take
off all discouragement arising from the disreputation of such an enterprise:
And no less potent is it in solving the scruples of its unlawfulness; for by a
dexterous anticipation, it makes Conscience a party, that it may exclude it
from being judge, and by that one fallacy of supposing Religion to be a just
ground of quarrel, make way for all the wild consequences deducible from that
false principle: And indeed where that is thoroughly fastened, the mischiefs are
not only great but incurable, and yet the more so by how much the person is
more zealous. For alas, what will it avail to tell such a man, it is a sin to
fight against his King: when he will tell you it is a greater not to fight for
his God: That he contracts a heinous guilt in violating the peace of the
Church, when he with as great confidence believes, he merits in propagating its
truth. That he is accountable for the blood of his Brethren; when he thinks he
has like the Levites, Ex. 32. consecrated himself in it, and offered it an
acceptable sacrifice to God. Thus unhappily are these men fortified in their
sin, by presuming it their Virtue, and while the furious zeal of such is made
subservient to the wicked craft of others, it is a most apt instrument of
public Mischief, there being no attempt so desperate, which such may not be
put upon, who are methinks used as Hanibal is said to have done those Oxen,
whose horns he first fired, and then sent them to disturb the Roman camp: These
men as those beasts are found very useful for the molesting of others; but
commonly all they acquire to themselves, is the smart of their own flames. Few
of those who thus in the simplicity of their heart follow an Absalom or a
Sheba, that do not either miscarry together with the design, or else live to
discern how much their credulity was abused; and that both religion (however
pretended) and those that fought for it, were only made properties to promote
the lusts of those who despised both. But it is unnecessary to insist farther on
the effects of such religious Fury, of which we of this Nation have had so many
and so costly evidences, as far transcend the most tragical descriptions. God
grant we may never have other than our past experiences to measure them by: But
certainly there is little reason to be secure, so long as the root of them, our
speculative differences daily increase; for unless we could suppose an Age of
such innocence, that there should be none who would take and undue Advantages,
it is sure there will be enough given: And indeed when we reflect upon our past
Distractions, and consider how trivial the matter of most of those Debates was,
whose manner has been so cruelly solemn; how our slightest problemes have been
writ in blood, that many Thousands have been made naked to keep the Surplice
off a few men's backs, and we have pulled down our Churches in displeasure at
the windows, when I say these and a Thousand the like are considered, we must
conclude that there can never want Occasion to them that (in the Apostles
Phrase) desire Occasion. The lightest distempers in the Chuch being contagious,
and most apt (when fomented by ambitious designers) to beget an universal
Plague in the Commonwealth. And now who can without horror consider these
miserably perverted effects of Christian Religion, that that which was designed
the most inviolable bond of unity, should like those curles of entangled snakes
with which Erinnys is said to have infuriated Athemas and Ino, become the fatal
incendiary of the mortallest hatred. That that Economy which was meant to
regulate, should be the Instrument of confounding and embroyling the World; and
a Gospel of Peace should thus be made the Incentive to war, and create fiercer
quarrels than those it was to have composed. To turn the Grace of God into
wantonness, is justly branded as a great Crime, but sure to turn it into malice
is yet a greater. And though every sin offers violence to our religion, yet
this is of all others the most barbarous, thus to make it Assassinate its self,
become a kind of Felo de se, and contribute to its own ruin. And that this is
the case, is I presume sufficiently evident in all the foregoing instances,
which as they are most obviously the effect of our eager Disputes, so are they
no less visibly destructive to Christianity in all its interests, leaves it
neither root nor branch, neither inward Vigor, nor outward Luster; so at once
rendering it both unfertile and unamiable. 'Twas a piece of hostile Severity
against Moab, to fill the land with stones, thereby to render it barren, 2
King. 3. 25. The slingers went about, and smote it: but what that suffered from
professed Enemies, the Church daily sustains rom those that call themselves her
best friends. Our Benjamites are so in love with their skill of slingling to a
hairs breadth, their nice Criticisms, Distinctions, and Subtilties, have cast
abroad so many stones of contention, that the Church is become perfect quarry,
utterly steril and unfruitful, as to all those good works for the production
whereof, she was so peculiarly fenced and cultivated by God; nay, 'twere well
if barrenness were the worst, and that she had not on the other side acquired
an unhappy degenerous fertility: But what a numerous and accursed Issue spring
from this unpeaceable temper, the foregoing considerations do too sadly
demonstrate; and I doubt not every attentive Observer will be able to add more
(though not truer) Instances; and besides to discern that this spurious brood
like that of Hagar is grown so wantonly insolent as to despise the right heir
of the Promise. The true Gospel Graces of Meekness, Peaceableness and universal
Charity are accounted Earthy phlegmatic qualities, we disclaim that Holy Ghost
which descends in the appearance of the Dove, nay or in fire either, unless it
be like that of Elijah, to consume all that disgust us. Nor do we measure our
Religion so much, by the opposition it makes to our lusts, as to those whom we
first make, and then call our enemies. Thus miserably have we changed the
Scene, and by calling evil good, and good evil, have accumulated injuries upon
our oppressed Christianity, not only robbed it of its rule, but of its
reputation also. And do we daily thus see Ishmael mocking Isaac, and shall we
not think it time to cast out the Bondwoman and her Son? shall we for ever
cherish this generation of Vipers to tear out the bowels of our common Mother?
I pray God the Question have not as much of praesage as expostulation. For if
we consider the present state of things, how our contentions plead not only
right but prescription, there seems not much hope of dispossessing them, and
yet less, when it is remembered, how they have entwisted themselves, not only
with the passions, but interests of men; two such potent Abettors as will buoy
up the most forlorn cause. The truth is, there are many subterraneous springs
which feed this Ocean, and though religion and piety be on all hands demurely
pretended, yet as we have seen the effects of our debates very disconsonant to
such a Profession; so if we examine the originals and causes, we shall find
them for the most part as widely distant. It may not be amiss to take a short
view of some of them; for though I cannot hope the discovery of the Causes will
contribute to the general cure, yet perhaps it may prove Antidote to some
particular persons, who will be the less apt to admire the verdure of the
leaves (the flourishing appearances of zeal and piety) when they find both
fruit and root of so poisonous a quality.

CHAP. XIII. A Survey of the Causes of Disputes; and first, Pride.
AND in this inquest we find Pride already arraigned to our hands, by the
wisest of Men, Prove. 13. 10. only by pride comes contention. It is indeed a
most prolifick vice, and there are few sins to which it is not either a parent
or nurse: but there is scarce any which does more betray its immediate descent
from it than this of strife and debate, which has so many of the lineaments and
features of the deformed Mother, as sufficiently attest its extraction. And as
this is true of all strifes in general, so particularly of those whereof we now
treat: for Pride being its self an internal sin, it has such a neighborhood
with all the notions and speculations of the mind, that it easily makes
impressions on them: Nor are we to wonder that the Sacredness of divine things
is not Amulet enough against its Charms, when we remember that the first act of
Pride that ever was committed, was levelled even at God himself; and as it took
up its first seat in a spiritual substance, so has it ever since, never acted
more naturally, and therefore more vigorously than about spiritual matters. Of
this the Church in all ages has had many costly Experiments, for if we trace
the Catalogues of Heresies from Simon Magus his days down to our own, we shall
find Pride a principal Actor in every Scene, though perhaps in various dresses.
For though Pride be always in the general an affectation of some
transcendency, yet it differs as to the particular object, according to the
several estimates men make of excellencies. So that the propugners of new
Opinions, though they have this common aim, that they seek their own
exaltation, yet do not always do it in the same instances. For example, some
have coveted the repute of profound inquisitors, and this Vanity has prompted
them to dive so deep into the bowels of every the plainest doctrine, till at
last they have twisted and entangled them into the most perplexing
difficulties. These Navigators think they have never sailed successfully till
they have found out a Terra incognita, though God knows they bring nothing from
thence for the benefit of the habitable world; nor make it their business to
resolve Doubts, but start them. Another sort of men there are of so fastidious
and petulant wits, that they disdain an opinion of which themselves are not the
Authors; they love not to have their understandings prescribed to, by the
preconceptions of others, how divinely soever inspired, and will rather have a
Religion of their own making, than of his whom they pretend to worship. And
this, it is to be doubted is the bottom of the great veneration some have paid
to Reason, which they have set up in the Throne, not only in defiance of blind
implicit assent, but even of divine revelation. But in the mean time it is to be
observed, that it is not reason in general, the common excellency of our nature
that is thus advanced, but every man's own private and individual; which upon a
just scanning will often be found the most distant thing from what it is
called: Passion and Fancy, by that omnipotent advantage of being a man's own,
often passing for deep discourse and ratiocination: and what a fruitful harvest
of Tares such seed is apt to produce, our reason would inform us if our
experience did not. To these we may add another rank of men, who vehemently
thirsting after a name in the world, hope to acquire that by being the
disseminators of novel doctrines; they think while they go on in the beaten
track, they shall be obscured in the Throng; the only way to make themselves
conspicuous is to be singular: Thus fondly choosing to be eminent, though by the
infamous Characters of Heretic or Schismatic, and (like him that fired
Diana's Temple to secure himself from oblivion) build themselves Monuments of
the Churches ruins: and sure this Theudas his ambition of being some body, has
helped to raise more opinions than he did men. Yet commonly it answers it even
in that circumstance also; for when by separating themselves from the unity of
the faith, they have rendered themselves remarkable, their next aim is to have
others join to them; and so they may have the honor of being leaders, care not
though it be into the ditch. To be called of men Rabbi Rabbi, is enchanting
Music to any Pharisee, and serves like the Timbrels in Tophet to drown the
cries not of their Children, but Mother scorching in the flames of their
contention. Indeed so impetuous and uncontrollable is this kind of vanity, that
like a mighty torrent, it bears down all before it, overwhelms not only the
opposite virtues, but even all vices that are not of its own confederacy. Men
can in this case lay severe restraints upon their most intimate sensualities,
when they suspect them treacherous to this grand Design. The Wolf shall be
muzled and made to behave himself with the meekness beseeming the Sheeps
clothing. The Swine shall be washed and by an unnatural violence withheld from
the mire: All their rapacious and bestial appetites controlled and made tame,
that they worry not their reputation. And all this for a little naked
popularity, for whose dear purchase, very many have thought fit to divest
themselves, both of lawful and unlawful enjoyments; and have thought the
tumultuous applause of a few factious spirits worth all that self-denial. But
all Pride is not so perfectly Camaelion as to subsist upon this mere air, there
is another kind of it that proposes to its self something beyond this: such is
the affectation of rule and dominion, which though in respect of any real good
to the ruler, is as very a Chimera as the former; yet commonly they that are
under such a Jurisdiction, find to their cost it is more than Imaginative. And
God knows this aspiring humor, has been no less fatally active in
Ecclesiastic than in Civil affairs; nor has the Church ever been in more
danger of Anarchy than by those who most impatiently coveted a share in its
government; for where this spirit of ambition is the Impellent, it does like
the Demoniack in the Gospel, burst asunder all fetters and chains, violates the
unity both of doctrine and discipline, nor is any attempt too bold for men thus
animated: They who long to be in authority think the door opens not quick
enough for their entry, and impatient of so tedious an expectation, choose
rather to make breaches in the walls (nay sometimes to undermine the
foundation) than to want an access to their Desires. Neither is there any thing
so sacred, which upon this occasion they cannot prostitute; when Diotrephes, 3
Ioh. 9. seeks pre-eminence, the Dictates even of an Apostle shall be rejected,
and even the divinity of Christ, God blessed for ever, be trampled on, when
Arius wants a footstool to climb up to his affected greatness. In a word, if we
Examine the occurrencies of all ages, we shall find that either the eagerness
of acquiring, or the Revenge of missing dignities, have been the great
instigators of Ecclesiastic Feuds; and sure our Modern stories, are not likely
to fall short of the Ancient, in examples of this kind. And as Pride makes some
thus passionately desirous of rule, so it makes others as impatient of being
ruled, and even those who cannot hope to arrive to give Laws, will not endure
to be under those already established. That this is indeed the Christian
liberty for which many in our days have so unchristianly contended, is too
apparent, the fundamental quarrel has been against subjection: Yet to
countenance and abett that, whole Armies of frivolous cavils have been raised,
and the Church attacqued in every its remotest concern, and though there be
nothing farther from that unity of mind, to which the simile was first affixt,
yet in a perverse sense it imitates the Ointment of Aaron in descending from
the head to the skirts of the clothing: not only the supreme and more eminent
parts, but the most slight extrinsick and inferior relatives to Religion being
asperst and depraved; and the most innocent Circumstances of Civil or Natural
actions made criminal, when applied to Divine things. A strange infective
power, which these men have conveyed into Gods service, that it must thus
pollute every thing that approaches it. That the place where his Honor dwells,
must become a Pesthouse, and diffuse contagion to all in it. (I wish by the way
their Sacrilege had not been too valiant in despising the Danger of those
infected utensils, which may perhaps sadly verify the reproach, and prove
treacherous prizes) and when men's zeal operates thus unkindly, when the
pretense of internal sanctity devours all outward decency, and God is to be
honored and exalted by those ways, whereby men would think themselves
affronted, and vilified; we have too great reason to think such a zeal as
little according to godliness as knowledge, and that it is not so much the
tenderness of their Consciences, no nor generally the weakness of their Brains,
but the Iron sinew in their Necks, which makes them at once so scrupulous, and
so clamorous; for though the former might be supposed owing to Error, the later
can surely proceed from nothing but Pride. Several other instances might be
given to show how that pernicious temper has contributed to the rise and first
being of our divisions; and having thus given them birth, it does not like the
Ostrich abandon its Brood, but has as great an influence in the cherishing and
maintaining, as it had in creating them. Of this there need no other proof than
the mere nature of Pride, which as it averts nothing more than
self-condemnation; so upon pain of that appearance, it is irreversibly engaged
in the pursuit of its first undertakings, any desisting being interpretatively
a confession either of an Error or a Defeat, both which are insupportable to an
assuming temper: So that besides the original incentives forementioned, it has
this of disdain superadded to actuate its motions. And accordingly we find they
are at this rebound the more violent, not only the success, but the credit of
the first enterprise depending upon a vigorous prosecution: So that Catilines
Maxim of Villainy seems to have been adopted into some men's divinity, and they
think past Crimes are only to be secured by more and greater. Nor is it only
hope to atchieve their design, or hide their shame which thus animates them,
despair will do it to a yet higher degree. Our Concupiscible and Irascible
appetites dwell not so remote, but they are ready reserves to one another, and
what was desire in the pursuit, becomes anger and revenge in the
disappointment; and sure we need not be told the wild effects of those
passions. How many men have in a furious despair over-acted even their own
projects, and have made it a malicious consolation in their ruin, to get it
attended with that of the public? As Herod, who to secure a lamentation at his
death, commanded a Massacre should accompany it, or (to give a more
Ecclesiastical instance) like Aerius, who sought the abolishing of that order
in the Church, whereof himself could not partake. I wish no man's Conscience in
our days were qualified to suggest a fresher example. But whilst it is so many
ways the interest of Pride to abet our contentions, we cannot think it so
sluggish or unindustrious an agent, as not to find out expedients for its
purpose. I shall not attempt to give a particular of its instruments, when I
have said that Schism is one of them, I need not add more, since that alone
serves both to complete and perpetuate the Mischief of all our speculative
dissentions. How close a Band of concord the communicating in holy duties is,
we may learn by Jeroboam, who seems so well to have understood its unitive
efficacy, that he durst not trust the newly divided Tribes in a joint resort to
the Temple; and therefore least the rupture he had made in the State should
close again, he thinks it necessary to make another in the Church, and secure
his defection from his Prince, by that from his God. But we need not borrow a
testimony from that his impious Policy, we have a more Authentic attestation
from the holy Psalmist, who when he would describe the greatest entireness,
Exemplifies it by the walking to the house of God as friends, Psalm. 55. 14. And
the Apostle goes yet higher, and from our common participation of the
Eucharist, infers not only our union, but our incorporation. We being many are
one bread, and one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10.
17. And then sure me may on the contrary conclude, that our separation must
have the quite distant effects; alienate our affections, and by that means
still more estrange our Judgments. For besides that it is natural to men to
think they can never run far enough from that they begin to loath, they are in
their own defense to amplify the differences, that they may acquit themselves
from the scandal of a causeless separation, and this God knows is the usual
Method among us, when we have broken communion, our only study is not how to
repair, but justify it. The adversaries Tenets are rigourously scanned, new
Charges exhibited, and the Schism defended upon those later discoveries, which
were no motives to the making it. And then sure no man can doubt but this is a
proper way, both to multiply and Eternize disputes; and it is abundantly
manifest, that vanity and elation of mind is the cause that Men thus prefer a
mistaken reputation, before their own innocence or the Churches peace. Indeed
if we thoroughly consider it, we shall find Pride is one of the fatallest
instruments of Excision, the twoedg'd sword by which adverse parties do
mutually cut themselves from one another. The very elements and constitutive
parts of a Schismatic, being the Esteem of himself, and the Contempt of
others. I am not as this Publican was, we know, the voice of the proud
Pharisee, whose very name signifies separation, and our modern Separatists do
but Echo the same note, when they pronounce all those Heretical or Carnal from
whom they have withdrawn. Or perhaps they derive from a yet more ancient
president, those of whom the Prophet Esaias speaks, Esaias 65. 5. which say, Stand
by thy self, come not near me, for I am holier than thou; an Insolent kind of
language which the Cathari in the primitive times did not more exactly
transcribe, than many Sects of differing denominations have done in ours. But
it is to be remembered, that while the Pharisee looked so fastidiously on the poor
Publican, he renounced communion in prayers much more acceptable than his own;
and those refined Zealots who feared contagion from the approach of their more
innocent Brethren, could boldly venture on the pollutions of the most
detestable Idolatries: And God knows the note has too ready an application in
both instances. In the mean time it is a sad contemplation, that so much of that
zeal which makes such a glistering in the World, shall when brought to the
Touch, be found adulterate, that the transcendent purity men boast of, should
prove but a more sublimated wickedness, and their pretense to spirituality be
verified only in spiritual pride. Alas, is not the whole circuit of Secular
things wide enough to contain this swelling humor? Are there not Pomps and
Vanities of the world enough to entertain this one Lust, but must this Moabite
be brought into the Sanctuary? Can we not be elevated enough unless we trample
upon all that is holy, and make Religion Factor for our Ambition? We find some
very confidently point out Antichrist upon the strength of this one praedicted
circumstance, that he was to sit in the Temple of God. But what need we travel
beyond the Alps to find out that, which every where presents its self? Our
Pride does too unhappily answer the description; and though there is no
instance wherein it can cease to be Antichristian, yet surely it is more
eminently so, when it thus usurps Gods seat, and rules in Sacred things. Would
God the pains and animosity which has been spent in discovering and reviling
other Antichrists, had been diverted to the pulling down of this, the labor
would have been more effectual even to the immediate end of the Designers, for
were this Pride Eradicated, the Foundation of all Spiritual usurpations were
undermined. But alas, those who exclaim the most loudly against all foreign
Tyranny on their Consciences, do obsequiously bow to this intestine Usurper,
make an entire dedition of themselves, and submit to the severest and ignoblest
vassallage. They have invested it with so absolute and sovereign a Power, that
(as Samuel warns the Israelites of their King, 1 Samuel 8.) they are not to call
any thing their own when it is useful to its service: All their powers, all
their interests are devoted to it, and that not only to adorn its pomp, but to
fight its battles. Men quarrel and contend till not only themselves, but even
Christianity its self expire in the contest. But if it be indeed certain that
every War is so far unjustifiable, as are the causes of it, 'twill surely be a
competent prejudice against our contentions, that our Pride is so much
concerned in them, which is so unchristian a motive, as all the holy water
wherewith men have sprinkled it, can never baptize into a cleanness; all the
borrowed dresses of Zeal and Sanctity, however they may disguise, can never
legitimate it. Those Arts of concealment may indeed add a new guilt, that of
Hypocrisy, but can never expiate, no nor extenuate the old: And how Saint-like
a form soever our Vainglory puts on, it does but the more own its derivation
from him, who can transform himself into an Angel of light, whose aspirings
have first subverted himself, and now go on to propagate both his Crime and
Ruin to us; nor has he ever managed that design with more Art or Success, than
by thus making our Pride a partition wall to divide us from one another, and
consequently from God too; who being, as our Church styles him, the author of
Peace and lover of Concord, can never join himself with the disturbers of both,
but must necessarily be disobliged by our Dissentions and Schisms.

CHAP. XIV. A survey of the Causes of Disputes; Secondly, Curiosity.
IF now we proceed farther in our enquiry we shall find, that another grand
incendiary of our Disputes is Curiosity: A vice which though in some respects
it may be reckoned a species of the former, that of Pride, yet in others it
admits a distinct consideration. This is that baneful weed which the Devil made
a shift to steal even into Paradise, and which has ever since affected the
richest soils, the most pregnant and polite Wits; nor did it only eject man
from thence, but it has improved the original curse, and multiplied those
briers and thorns among which he was cast, yea, transplanted them from the
Earth, where they could only raze the skin, into the Brain, where they pierce
and torture the intellectual and immortal Part of Man. Nay farther, even that
sweat of his brows, which was to extirpate them from the ground, serves but to
water and cherish them in his mind; his very industry being in this case the
extremest ill-husbandry, and the more pains he takes, the farther he removes
himself from all real advantages of his toil.

THERE are some parts of Knowledge which God has thought fit to seclude from
us, to fence them not only as he did the interdicted Tree, by Precept and
Commination, but with Difficulties and Impossibilities; made it not only our
sin and danger, but our Folly and madness to attempt them. Of this kind are the
Mysterious parts of our Religion, which he shows us as it were a-far off to
exercise our faith and reverence, but stoops them not to our sense and
disquisition. These he has placed like the Sun, where they may influence, not
annoy; warm, not scorch us. And would we still permit them to remain at that
safe and wholesome distance, we should find none but benign effects; but so
importunate are the instigations of Curiosity, that no bounds will keep us from
the Mount: We will needs break through into the thick darkness, how dreadful
soever the thunders and lightnings are in the way. Like bold Phaetons we
despise all benefits wherewith the Father of light and us can court us; unless
we may guide his Chariot; and we moralize the Fable as well in the tragicalness
of the event, as the insolence of the undertaking; this unhappy Curiosity
having not only ruined many of the inquisitors, but set the whole world also in
a conflagration. Nor is this temerity more fatal in its Success, than impious
in its Foundation: For besides that, it is a direct invasion of Gods peculiar,
and violation of his Command, it does evidently imply a distrust, either of his
Wisdom or his Goodness; supposes him either so ignorant of the strength of
those faculties himself has made, that he has assigned them unproportionable
objects, and so they must have new work cut out for them by our selves; or else
presumes his Eye evil toward his own Creatures; that as the Devil once
suggested to our first Parents, he fears the rivalry of poor mortals, and by an
envious detention of some parts of felicity, like one that had been Bountiful
only upon surprise and incogitancy, illiberally retracts and contradicts his
original design of making Man completely happy. Nay, indeed this represents him
unkind, not only to us his created Images, but even to that Eternal and express
image of his Person, the Son of his bosom, who may well be thought to have
been, as despised in his Eyes, as he was once in ours, Esaias 53. 3. if he have
so cheaply exposed him for their sakes, to whom he denies any of those
intellectual advantages, which difference them from Beasts. Thus wickedly
curious are we, that rather than converse with vulgar ordinary things, we
create prodigies, put new forms upon him that is unchangeable, rob divinity of
its most inseparable attribute, and not only disobey God, but reproach him. And
then it is no wonder if that which affords so little glory to God, has no more
good will for Men, and that which thus wars with Heaven, leave little peace on
Earth. Indeed if we will be building our Babels, and thus assault Omnipotence,
it is but just we should have our language confounded, and that that knowledge
for which we boldly attempt to rifle Gods cabinet, should like the Coal from
the Altar, serve only to embroil and consume the sacrilegious invaders. Yet
besides what is owing to divine vengeance in the case, the thing has in its
self a proper, natural efficiency toward it; for when so many men are engaged
in a blind search, it is not imaginable they should all stumble upon the same
Notions, and supposing them to fall upon variety, it is impossible but men's fond
overweening of their own conceits and petulant disdains of others, will improve
that variety into Opposition, and that opposition into set and Solemn Feuds.
And God knows, the Church is too effectively acquainted with this fatal
gradation, and can experimentally attest the unhappy propriety of this sort of
Curiosity toward the engendring of discord and confusion.

BUT besides this higher rank of things which God has set so much above us,
there are others of an inferior sort, as much below us, which are concealed
from us, not for their sublimity, but their uselesness; for as God on the one
hand remembers that we are but flesh, unable to bear the nearer approaches of
divinity, and so talks with us as once with Moses through a cloud: So on the
other he forgets not that he breathed into us the breath of life, a vital
active spirit, whose motions he expects should own the dignity of its original,
and as it was its self an emanation of the Essential Goodness, should aim at
only real and solid good, and not evaporate and exhaust its powers in mean and
impertinent pursuits. And upon this score also, he has found it necessary to
hide many things from us, not that they would dazzle, but misemploy our Eye;
not swallow up our Understanding, but divert our Attention, from what is more
important: Of this sort are those many thin aerial speculations, the certain
knowledge whereof would bring us no real advantage, make us at all the wiser to
Salvation; yet such a value does our inquisitive Nature set upon every thing
for its being hid, that as if our Life were bound up with these Secrets, and
all our Felicity dwelt in the Shade of these recesses, we pursue this search
with indefatigable industry, ransack all corners with as great diligence as the
Woman for her lost piece of Silver, Luke 15. 8. And as if this were indeed the
treasure hid in the field, sell all that we have, lay out our whole selves upon
the purchase. Indeed he that shall consider what solemn Disquisitions there are
upon the slightest, and inconsiderablest Subjects, with what Advertence and
concern Questions of this kind are bandied in the world, must wonder how men
can at once be so serious and so trifling; or that those who can say so much,
should not once ask themselves to what purpose they say any thing. Yet what
multitudes of men are there engaged in such chases as this? when alas, the
quarry is not worth half the toil, could it be gotten: but what Solomon says
of the sluggard, Prove. 12. 27. that he rosteth not that which he took in
hunting, is true of the contrary temper, these over-busie spirits whose labor
is their only reward, they hunt a shadow, and chase the wind; and when they
strein to their utmost speed, there is still the wonted Distance between them
and their aims; all their eager pursuits bring them no acquest; but after they
have traverst so much ground, traced all the mazes that learned Curiosity could
contrive to perplex men, and st^^ied to the weariness of the flesh, if not to
the quenching of the Spirit too, they are still in the same ignorance from
whence they set out, and 'twere well if they were also in the same
doubtfulness: But the unhappiness of it is, they acquire a confidence without
any true ground of it; and get such a Knowledge as may puff up, but not edify.
This was eminently exemplified in the Gnostics of old, whose vain Chimaeras,
and foolish questions, as the Apostle calls them, Tit. 3. 9. past with them for
such a superlative wisdom, as gave them Insolence to discriminate themselves
from others by that swelling Title, and monopolize the reputation of Science,
which yet if we will believe the great Doctor of the Gentiles, and he too
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, the greatest Rabbi of the Jews, was science
falsely so called. And God knows, they want not successors in this as well as in
other particulars, men are so possessed with their own Phancies that they take
them for Oracles, and think they see visions, and are arrived to some
Extraordinary revelations of Truth, when indeed they do but dream dreams, and
amuse themselves with the Fantastic Ideas of a busy imagination. Yet would
they only please themselves in the delusion, the Frenzy were more innocent;
but like the prouder sort of Lunaticks, they will needs be Kings and Rulers,
impose their wild conjectures for Laws upon others, and denounce War against
all that receive them not: And this is that which makes the great combustion,
and confusion among us; for while one man Opines one way, another another, and
each will obtrude his opinion on everybody else; it is impossible but the
contests should be sharp and endless; for each man labors under a double
Impatience, the one of having his own notions rejected, the other of having the
quite contrary imposed on him; and though it is true the reciprocalness of the
Injury ought to allay the displeasure at it, yet men so much more consider what
they suffer than what they do, that every one cries out aloud of that hard
measure, which himself offers without regret. And between winds so contrary and
so fierce, it is no wonder if storms arise; and in such Tempests has Religion so
long been tossed, that it now needs the interposition of a divine Miraculous
power, to keep it from sinking; for alas, these Skirmishes expire not with the
first Propugners of the Opinions; they perhaps began as single Duellers, but
then they soon get their troops about them, have their partisans and abettors,
who not only enhance, but entail the feud to posterity. And indeed this
propagation of Strife, both in these trifling, and the former more profound
speculations, is the most fatal circumstance of the whole Case: Were it not for
this, though we might have many Errors, we could have no Sects. And if the
Church might be sometimes wounded with the darts of single Adversaries, yet she
could not be surrounded and besieged with combinations and confederacies. Some
straggling Soldiers might prove renegados, but they would not revolt in troops
and legions. We should not have such numerous Parties, who with the greatest
violation of Christian unity, denominate themselves, not from the grand author
and finisher of our Faith; but from the first brocher of their Idolized
opinions. In the mean time, it is a sad contemplation, that a little vain
curiosity should weigh so much, or the Churches peace so little with us: that
we should sacrifice the one, to the satisfaction shall I say, or rather to the
whetting and inflaming of the other. But it is a yet sadder, that this should
chiefly be done by those whose learning enables, and whose profession should
devote to the most noble and most profitable Studies; nay have the highest
obligations to correct those exorbitances in others, which with such Art and
labor they propagate and teach. How wounding a spectacle is it to see our
greatest Heroes like Hercules at the Distaffe, thus degenerously employed, and
to find those who were by Christ designed for fishers of Men, thus entertain
themselves like Children, with picking up Shells and Pebbles on the shore; and
which is yet more unmanly wrangling about them too. Indeed at this rate, it is
no wonder if they make the disciples Complaint, we have travailed all night and
have taken nothing. This sure is so little the way to win Souls, that he whose
business it is to destroy them, can very contentedly refer them to this method;
can gladly leave us all our nice and subtle disquisitions, upon the very same
score that one of the Gothic Commanders, advised the sparing of the Italian
Schools and Libraries; Let us, says he, leave them their Books, that whilst
they amuse themselves with such follies, we may subdue them at our pleasure. It
is the saying of the Wiseman, there is a wisdom that multiplieth bitterness;
and sure if there be a wisdom acquired by these curious Enquiries, it is of this
sort, like the Knowledge of Good and Evil attained by our first Parents, which
taught them to know the Good only by its loss, and the Evil by its smart.
Indeed our too high, and transcending speculations on the one hand, and our too
trivial and unprofitable on the other; are like the torrid and frigid Zone, the
one consumes us with its heat, the other chils, and benumns us with its cold;
that turns us to Cinders, this to Ice. These little trifling Notions being too
slight an exercise to keep heat in our Christianity, which not only expresses
but maintains its life by strong and vigorous Motions. And therefore between
these two intemperate, God has provided us an habitable Clime, I mean that
middle rank of divine truths which tend to practice. Here he would have us
dwell and converse, fix our thoughts and studies: Nor need we fear that they
are too dry a subject for our contemplation. We see as deep Speculators, as any
now assume to be, found it far otherwise. David could entertain himself with
the Meditation of God's Law (not his hidden Decrees or counsels) all the Day,
Psalm. 119. 97, Nay it seems the Matter was so copious and redundant, that it
could not be confined within that narrow boundary of Time, but invaded the
night also; forced him to defaulk from his rest, to bestow on his meditations,
I have thought of thy Name O Lord in the night season, and have kept thy Law,
Verse. 55. Neither is it a vain expense of Time, which it thus tempts to, but
gives the happiest improvement; lands at that harbor to which all rational
studies tend, gives understanding, Verse. 130. makes wise the simple, Psalm. 19.
7. and this also in an eminent degree, such as set him above his teachers, and
his Elders also. Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser than mine
Enemies. I have more understanding than my teachers, for thy testimonies are my
study. I am wiser than the aged, because I keep thy commandments, Psalm. 119.
98, 99, 100. These are high and liberal Elogies of this divine study: and if
any shall seek to divert an unwelcome inference by saying that David spoke them
only in pious raptures, that they were the transport of his zeal, rather than
the estimate of his judgment; we must resolve the objector far removed from
such religious excesses, and under the contrary defect: yet the cause will so
well bear an appeal, that he may be trusted to consult farther, let him advise
with Solomon, whose large desires and possessions too of wisdom, must suppose
him no stranger to its nature, and he will tell him the very same, and that not
in his devouter ecstasies, but in his most composed sedate temper, when he
solemnly seats himself in his School, reads Ethics to his disciples, and
professes his design of giving subtilty to the Simple, and to the young man
knowledge and discretion, Prove. 1. 4. for if his whole book of Proverbs be
scanned, the sum of it will be found to be nothing else but an exhortation to
the study of this practick Wisdom. Nay when his own understanding was improved
and advanced by Experience also, when he had not only begged, but bought wisdom,
after he had given his Curiosity its full unbounded Range, compassed the whole
Universe, and examined not only in contemplation, but by sensitive experiment,
whatever therein could pretend to be that good for the sons of Men, Eccl. 2. 3.
we find after all this busy inquest, he gives up his verdict in this form,
Eccles. 12. 13. Let us hear the end of the whole matter, Fear God and keep his
Commandments, for this is the Whole Duty of Man: And now methinks so solemn a
decision of the wisest of Men, and he too inspired by the Omniscient God, may
be thought of weight enough to acquiesce in. Yet since there are some who love
not to weigh in the balance of the Sanctuary, and that had rather receive
Responses from Delphos than from between the Cherubims: Let such at least hear
even the Heathen Oracle attesting Socrates to be the wisest man, because he
directed his studies to the moral part of Learning, which he did to such a
degree, as to disparage all those more Airy speculations, which bettered not
men's Manners, but were only (...), a noise and clattering of Words. And
Pythagoras his School defines Philosophy, (...), the cleansing and perfecting
of humane life, which two things are said to be done, first by Virtue, whose
business it is to remove (...), the inordination of our Passions: Secondly, by
Truth, which restores (...), the Image and pourtraicture of God. And since this
is the joint suffrage both of Religion and Reason, why should those that
pretend to either defy both, and vainly consume themselves in unprofitable
searches? Why should men wander to seek beggary and emptiness, who may with far
less labor be rich at home? Alas, it is not bare knowledge, how great or
universal soever, that can possess us of felicity. Were it possible for us to
have a window into Heaven, to see all the Divine secrets, yet that might be but
like the Rich man's prospect into Abraham's bosom, while himself was in the
bottomless pit. They are not only the gross and illiterate Souls that must feed
those flames, the most Aerial and Sublimated, are rather the more proper fuel
for an immaterial Fire, and the knowledge we carry thither, render us the
fitter company for him, who knew every thing but how to keep himself happy. It
was at once the Observation and Wonder of Plutarch, that whereas God has
several incommunicable properties as Power and Immortality, etc. these all men
aspired to, in the mean time neglected that of Goodness, wherein he was willing
all men should share. And sure there is now cause of the same complaint, we
would have Omniscience and all parts of Divinity besides the holiness, yet
alas, those without these would prove but fatal acquests, and that approach
toward being Gods, would only make us the more Devils. The only advantageous
as well as possible way of Assimilation with God is by purity, and the means of
that an Attentive consideration of those Divine revelations, which are to
regulate our practice; these at once dispense light and warmth, direct and
revive the Soul: And if men would not exhale vapors to cloud and darken them,
Eclipse the clearest Truths by difficulties of their own creating, no man could
miss his way to Heaven for want of light, and yet so vain are they as to think
they oblige the world by involving it in darkness, as if their Mists should
like that which Watered the new-form'd Earth, Genesis 2. 6. supply the place of
the dew of Heaven. But certainly to all such in their profusest liberalities,
we need make no other Request than Diogenes did to Alexander, desire them only
that they will not stand between us and the Sun, intercept its rays, and rob us
of that which is infinitely better than any thing they can give us. Were this
but obtained, we should soon discern the inconsiderableness of those things
whose effects have been so sadly considerable to Christendom; those many
Chimaeras which we wrangle and fight about, would in this Sunshine appear but
Motes that dance in the Air, (though God knows as we manage them, they are the
most luxurious Revels to the Prince that rules there.) Were but a St. Paul's
doctrine thoroughly imbibed, our Curious Arts, (...), superfluous unconcerning
studies, would as it happened, Acts 19. be supplanted; and our devotion if
sufficiently accended, would as theirs, burn up innumerable books of this sort.
And sure as this would be the greatest, so it would be the most triumphant
Bonfire Christendom ever saw, as being not only an indication, but a means of
the mighty growth, and prevailing of the Word of God, which our vain
Curiosities serve only to impede and obstruct, while they do as mightily
advance dissentions and animosities amongst men.

CHAP. XV. A survey of the Causes of Disputes; Thirdly, Interest.
BUT besides these two, there is a third Fomenter of divisions, which either
for its activity or success must not subscribe to either of them, and that is
Interest. This is the great Idol to which the world bows: To this we pay our
devoutest homage, give it not only our knees, but our hearts; and as if the
making us rich were a second Creation, that could cancel all the obligations of
the first: We sacrilegiously entitle our profit to all the Prerogatives of a
Creator, give it an absolute unlimited dominion over us, allow it to prescribe
us all our measures of good and evil; to rule not only our Reason but our
Passions too, (a Sovereignty alas we would never yield to our God) and as if
the giving us laws were not Empire enough, we permit it to impose Religions
also; for sure they that observe how great an influence it has in Church
affairs, will conclude it governs more than the secular part of the world. And
indeed if we look back, we shall find it is no novel usurpation, but though void
of other Title, has the Prescription of many ages. Divinity has long since been
made the handmaid of Policy, and Religions modelled by conveniences of State.
The golden Calves became venerable deities, when they were found apt to secure
Ieroboams Jealousies: And Machiavils policy, that States should serve
themselves of Religion, was a common practice long before 'twas his Rule. And
this Example of Communities has been transcribed by single Persons. In the Old
Testament we find frequent mention of those mercenary Prophets, that turned the
office into a trade, divined for money, nay, sometimes for more contemptible
hire, handfuls of Barley and pieces of Bread: And in the New we see the same
motive of Secular advantage had force enough to turn an Ecclesiastic into a
Laick, make Demas degrade himself, and desert his Ministry, and as it thus
stopped his mouth from preaching the Truth, so it opened those of Others to
divulge Errors. Such were those deceivers of whom St. Paul speaks, Tit. 1. 11.
who spoke things they ought not for filthy lucres sake. So when the same
Apostle declaims the most earnestly against the love of money as the root of
all evil, we find he fetches his proof of that Charge, from its having made men
err from the faith, 1 Timothy 6. 10. And it is St. Peter's prediction, that the
most damnable Heresies, even the denying of the Lord that bought them, should
be introduced by those, who through Covetousness should make merchandise of
their Proselytes, 2 Pet. 2. 4. and sure the event attests the presage to have
concerned more than the Age immediately succeeding, there being none of the
subsequent which has not in some degree assisted its completion, nor have we
cause to wonder here-at, since it is obvious to discern the conjunction and
dependence between Covetousness and Heresy. For the Itching ears the Apostle
speaks of, being an Epidemick disease, give fair opportunity to every
Mountebank to try his Experiments. When men nauseate Old truths, because they
are acquainted with them, and embrace doctrines for the very same reason, they
should reject them, even because they are New: When they love no Teachers, but
such as thus entertain them, and are bountiful to none but such as they love;
there is little doubt, but there will be Mints enough set on work, when the
Coiners can thus at once stamp new opinions for their Disciples, and Money for
Themselves: And God knows they are not a few of our Divisions, that have thence
taken birth. It will be needless to ravel far into the Records of Elder times,
every man's memory will be able to suggest to him too many, and too pertinent
instances. Upon which reflection 'twill be too visible, that much of some men's
late pretense to Godliness was but a real pursuit of Gain; and the new light
served to guide them to their neighbors Coffers: And probably many of our
Disputes had been superseded, had not the Authors foreseen, that though they
lost the Question, they should gain what they more sought. A few essays had
discovered how much the Populacy were pleased with Novelties, especially such
as at once gratified their Levity and their Pride, by casting ill reflections
on the things or Persons to whom they owed a reverence; and the liberal
contributions such Teachers met with, served still to invite more laborers
into that work, where without the uneasiness of a long Expectation, their very
seedtime was their Harvest, and by sowing Tares, they immediately reaped Gold:
And it is no wonder if such quick returns made them diligent at the trade,
industrious to provide those wares they saw they could put off so well. And
would to God we were secure, that this way of Traffic were yet at an end, for
so long as these spiritual Merchants can thus impose on their credulous
Chapmen, make them buy one mischief with another, and exhaust their Estates to
endanger their Souls, we must not hope our dissentions will ever cease, our
flames ever be extinct, that have so much matter to feed them, and such
importunate blasts to blow them up.

BUT covetousness is of too unsatiable a nature to be contented with one way of
supply, it is like the Sea, that receives the Tribute of all Rivers (though far
unlike it in lending any back again) and therefore those who have resolved upon
the thriving sort of Piety, have seldom embarkt all their hopes in one bottom,
nor so depended on the bounty of their Proselytes, as to neglect other ways of
preying for themselves. They wanted not providence to foresee, how uncertain a
revenue popular benevolence is: That the same giddy and violent humor, which
had opened their hands so wide, might by working another way close them as
fast; or if their inclinations continued, their abilities might fail; (a thing
very possible to those, who have such suckers) or if both these remained, yet
that they were unlikely to grow in proportion to their own appetites, and
therefore found it necessary to have some other reserve; and besides this way
of flattering, their willing benefactors out of part, contrived another of
forcing their unwilling Neighbors out of all their possessions: So making the
spoils of some men's honesty a richer booty than that of others folly. Hence
Shiboleths found out of Covenants and engagements, to give opportunity of
destroying a dissenting brother; by this Art a fat benefice became crime and
witness too against its Incumbent, and he was sure to be unorthodox, that was
worth the plundering. Thus alas has the Altar of God been attended, or rather
invaded by those whose very approach was a guilt, that qualified them rather to
lay hold on its horns, than pretend to its service; for sure that God, who has
declared he hates robbery for burnt-offering, cannot much affect Robbers for
Priests. But this is a Theme, so unpleasant I delight not to enlarge on it, and
rather wish that the memory of it were so extinct, that it might remain no
where but in the penitential Litanies of the Offenders; my design in the
present reflection is only to make it an evidence how much covetousness
promotes our contentions, which sure is not more visible any where than in this
instance: For where there is a design of supplanting, that necessarily requires
another of accusing; (even Iezabel her self projects not to seize on Naboths
Vineyard without a precedent Charge) to comply with which necessity, not only
the lives and conversations, but the doctrines and opinions of our most eminent
Divines have been strangely misrepresented, and when that proved not fence
enough to the reputation of their Oppressors, they have thought fit to change
the Scene, and to combat those opinions in their true shape, upon which they
could not so well fasten their disguise. I shall not here need to say with how
much, or how little praetext of reason they managed those Disputes: It Is enough
to my purpose that such Disputes there were, and those founded in the desire of
acquiring secular advantages, which sufficiently attests Interest to be a
potent Abettor of our quarrels.

BUT God knows that is a truth of which the world affords so many proofs, that
we need not confine our selves to this little Angle of it, or owe our
convictions only to our domestic transactions; if we look abroad we shall find
it too often exemplified. The memorable disturbance given to the Church, as
well as State of Germany by the Anabaptists, is a pregnant instance; whose new
opinion was but an expedient of investing themselves in new possessions, and
their second Baptism but the Solemnity of espousing, not only the flesh, but
the world also, which they had renounced in the first.

AND would God they had been the only set of Men, whose doctrines were
subservient to their interests, for such tumultuous and Plebeian projects,
though like a land-floud they make great spoil at the present, yet soon sink
again. Such avowed and excessive greediness devours its self, and the
instruments by which it wrought: so that the defeat of the secular Design, is
commonly the routing those Opinions, which were formed for the promoting it.
But when the same desire has the advantage of a sober guidance; when Avarice
puts on the Canonical habit, and twists its self not only with the practice of
Men, but the doctrines of the Church; when articles of Religion shall be
estimated by their profitableness, and Ecclesiastics dispute, as Laymen fight
for Money; then alas the mischief seems fatal, the disease so fixed and
radicated, as at once discourages, and mocks the attempts of cure.

THAT this is the case not only in a particular and private Church, but that
which assumes to be the Universal and Catholic is too apparent. The one
Position of the Popes right to dispose Kingdoms, outstrips all other principles
of rapine: this is to drive a wholesale trade, when all other petty Merchants,
deal but for parcels: which as it is a much bolder, so is it a more prejudicial
attempt than the invading of private possessions, and this Duo gladii, the
double armature of S. Peter, a more destructive Engine, than the tumultuary
weapon snatched up by a Fanatic: but sure S. Peter's sword though once rashly
managed by himself, was never designed to arm his successors to invade
Kingdoms: This property of it seems rather to have been derived from the
Praetorian soldiers, who insolently assumed the disposing of the Empire,
wherein they at the last arrived to that impudence, that after the Death of
Pertinax they made open port sale of it, (...), in a base and sordid manner, as
if it had been of common marketable wares: I cannot say the Court of Rome
transcribes that indecent owning of the traffic; but it has in other instances
so well attested its good managery, that it is not very credible, that Crowns
and Scepters are conferred gratis. And to this so advantageous a Doctrine
others bear proportion: Those of Purgatory, Indulgences, and Supererogation,
are ready instances, wherein the Assertors themselves seem to be unanimous in
nothing but in a joint reference to profit, for when they come to minute
definitions they vary and disagree; satisfy one another, as little as their
common Antagonists: and therefore in the Council of Trent they prudently chose
in their decrees to propose the bare Articles backed by the Authority of the
Church, and Anathemas of the Council, as having by precedent discussions of the
points in their congregations discerned the small accord that was among
themselves, when they descended to particulars. And indeed the Opinions were so
various as to the grounds of the Doctrines, that one would wonder how from so
differing premises, they should all infer the same conclusion; were it not
that the conspiration of Interest was too potent for the diversity of Judgment.
And sure 'twas a strange deference was given to it, when in the matter of
Indulgences, there was (by the Testimony of their own Writers) four different
Opinions, and yet all Catholic: which moderation toward Speculative
dissenters, compared with the great severity against those that opposed its
Practice, speaks loud enough that the Orthodoxy of the point, lay wholly in the
Profitableness: and that Luther himself had been no Heretic, had he busied
himself only in such disquisitions, as impeded not the gain of that Doctrine.
Nor is this merely surmise and conjecture, for if we consult the memorials of
those transactions, we shall find this was the thing that most alarmed Rome,
put that Court in almost as great a commotion as the birth of Christ did
Herod's: and accordingly in their private consults, the closer cabals of the
College; the securing this part of their invaded treasure was the grand
deliberation, upon which account it was, that when Adrian showed some
Inclination to the reforming abuses both in this and other instances, one of
his Cardinals who better knew the entrigues of affairs, admonisht him against
that unskilful piece of Ingenuity, not only from the Example of his
Predecessors, who were resolute never to confess Faults by mending them, but by
representing to him, That no reformation could be made, which would not notably
diminish the rents of the Church, which having four foundations, the one
Temporal, the other three Spiritual, Indulgencies, Dispensations, and
Collations of Benefices; no one of them could be stopped but that one quarter
of the revenues would be cut off. What a resemblance this advice carries to the
oration of Demetrius to his fellow crafts-men, Act. 19. 25. I need not stand to
demonstrate, but while such considerations as this, bear sway in Church
matters, where Profit shall be the Touchstone both for faith and manners, we
are not to wonder if no gainful Tenet be deposited; or Peace bought with that
which in most men's esteem is of far more value.

AND this is it which ominates sadly as to our divisions with the Romanists,
were our differences merely the product of Heat and Passion, they would like
the smaller clefts in the ground, want nothing but a cooler season to cement
and close them: but when they are thus formed into an interest, become the
Design not of single persons or ages, but of corporations and successions; the
Breach seems like the scissures and ruptures of an Earthquake, and threatens to
swallow all that attempt to close it, and reserves its cure only for
omnipotence. Indeed till spiritual and secular Concerns be reduced into their
proper ranks, which are now mixed and confounded, the better to disguise the
preposterous subordination of the nobler to the inferior; till we have
forgotten the unhappy Chemistry of turning all even Religion its self into
Gold, we must never hope to get out of the Furnace; our flames will still grow
fiercer, and with this unnatural effect to consume not the Dross, but the purer
Metal. In a word, till men can sever themselves from their Avarice and mean
pursuits of gain, they will never cease to separate from their brethren. For as
the most sovereign Balsoms cannot cure a hurt while the arrow remains in the
flesh: so neither can the most pacifick Remedies at all avail, so long as the
same worldly Aims, which made the wound, still stick in it.

BUT in the mean time it is a Melancholic consideration that Christianity
should be by its Professors thus unworthily prostituted; that the many various
and opposite Religions for which we severally pretend so much zeal, should be
but diverse ways to the same irreligious End; wherein our Elders seem to
resemble those in the Story of Susanna, who when they meant to part with each
other, yet did unawares meet by the impulse of the same Lust. We find it moved
the patience even of the Lamb of God, to see his Fathers house made a house of
merchandise, though the Traffic was for the furnishing of Sacrifices: with
what abhorrence must we think does he now behold those, who drive so much a
worse trade in it: who sell not accommodations for worship, but the worship its
self to accommodate their interests, and do not only make Gain in the Temple,
but of it. A thing the sacrilegious Rapine of our days has made literally true,
where besides the revenues, the very fabric and materials of Churches, have
been marketable ware: Iudas's good husbandry has been taken up, and ad quid
Perditio haec? put as the common Motto upon every thing that could be sold for
more, nay sometimes for less than Three hundred pence. And as Dionysius took
away the golden beard from Aesculapius, to rectify the indecency of the Sons
having a beard when the Father had none: and Julian robbed the Christian altars
with this impious Sarcasm, (...); that ' it was unfit the Son of Mary should be
served in Plate. So do men now adays make themselves regulators of holy
things, correct the indecorums of the sanctuary, that they may rifle its
treasures. Thus do we see the Apostles affirmation sadly verified that those
who will be rich fall into Temptation, and a snare, 1 Timothy 6. 9. Such is the
greediness of a covetous appetite, that it swallows indiscriminately whatever
looks like prize, and rather than it want its prey, God Himself shall be
robbed. Nay, 'twere to be wished in this instance, that That were all; but alas
he is mocked too, used not only unjustly, but contumeliously; we thus make him a
property to our sordid designs, and when he has professed that he will not be
served together with Mammon, we attempt that which is yet far more blasphemous,
and make him pay service to him with whom he disdains to share it when paid by
others.

NEITHER is Covetousness the only Vice that serves its interest upon Religion:
but as it is made a factor for that, so is it a cloak and disguise for many
other. Of this the Catalogues of primitive Heretics give sufficient witness;
diverse whereof as the Nicolaitans, Cerinthians, Carpocratians and Gnostics
seem to have constituted distinct sects in Christianity, only that they might
introduce the most bestial parts of Heathenism, and pretended an association in
Religion, when indeed it was in lust. How far some of our modern Sects resemble
them in this Particular, I will not undertake to pronounce: though there want
not those who make severe, and not improbable Conjectures concerning it. But
whether that be the main design or no; it is certain both that wickedness, and
many other find great shelter among them. He that brings resolution to uphold a
Faction shall not miss of Entertainment, how many or how great vices soever he
brings with it; and he that is of a godly party, shall in spite of the loudest
Guilts be a godly man. So meritorious a thing is it in some men's account to be
factious, that it covers the multitude of sins: hence it is that Criminals so
frequently fly to new Churches for Sanctuary: and 'twill still be the concern
of such to have so creditable a Refuge; and therefore we are not to wonder if
this Interest combine with the former in promoting our Dissentions.

BUT alas, as it advances those, so does it our guilt too, that have more than
on vile End to which we accommodate our Piety: and still implies the greater
affront to our God, by how many the more and baser interests we shroud under
his Patronage. Alas, is it not enough as Job speaks to hide our iniquities in
our own bosoms, but must we wrap them in the Veil of the Sanctuary. We read
that Goats once lent a covering for the Tabernacle; but here by an impious
Inversion, the Tabernacle must lend a covering to the Goats* The most bestial
appetites be both concealed and preserved under the Shadow of Religion.
Plutarch tells us that when Marcellus would have consecrated a Temple jointly
to Honor and Virtue, the Priests resisted it, saying, Two Gods dwelt not in
one Church: and if their vain deities exacted such a solemnity of Respect, and
would not be Inmates to one another, can we think the true God will be content
to be made so to all our vilest lusts. This is sure the highest Contumely to
the divine Majesty; and never could the abomination of desolation more properly
be said to stand in the holy place than in this sense: for as the natures of
these Guilts are fitly expressed by abomination, so is the effect of them by
desolation; they having brought the most fatal mischiefs on the Church.

AND now would God all that are concerned in this guilt, would soberly ponder
the weight of it, There are two things of which God has expressed himself
peculiarly Tender, his honor and his Church; this is the invading him in both;
the exposing the one to Reproach and Contempt, and the other to Ruin and
Destruction; and doubtless were there nothing of the former, this later alone
must be sadly accounted for. It remains yet a Character of infamy upon Achan,
that he troubled Israel to enrich himself: and on Balam that he not only loved
the wages of iniquity, but ensnared the people in uncleanness: and sure the
same with many aggravations belongs to those, who by the like unworthy
practice, have not only rendered the Church a prey to foreigners, but made it so
to its self; engaged one part of it against another, till the whole is so
wasted, that our Religion seems now nearer extinction, than our quarrels about
it.

CHAP. XVI. A Survey of the Causes of Disputes; Fourthly, Passion.
A FOURTH grand contributer to our dissentions is Passion, which being by God
and nature placed in a subserviency to reason, when it quits its proper station
and assumes empire, it must needs disorder and subvert not only the State of
the Mind, but of Every thing upon which it has an Influence. I shall not here
attempt any Philosophical discourse either of their nature or number; all that
concerns the present enquiry falls under one of these two, our love, or our
hate; and is either Kindness and Prepossession, or Spite and Prejudice: For
the first of these it is a thing which common experience attests to be a most
forcible corrupter of the understanding, which being by native right designed a
Judge, is by this interrupted in its office, not permitted to make those
impartial Enquiries, on which a right sentence should be founded. But (as it
fares sometimes with Magistrates in Popular insurrections) forced to give
countenance to its own violation, to own not its proper native dictates, but
such as are presented to it, by the prejudicate Fancy. And as it thus lays
restraint upon the superior part of the Mind, keeps the understanding in
fetters, so (to complete the inversion) it takes off all ties from the
inferior: Gives not only license, but incitation to the other Passions to take
their freest range, to act with the utmost impetuosity. And sure there can
nothing more be required, to render it a most apt instrument of Tumult and
Confusion. For when every opinion that is taken up, shall instead of reason and
argument, arm its self with heat and violence, there can be no end of
contending. And the truth of this is, God knows, too sadly discernible in our
Church-controversies, which derive a great deal of their warmth and bitterness
from this Fountain.

OF this prepossession there are two Sorts, the one relating to Doctrine, the
other to Persons; by the first I mean not a sober constancy to those principles
which being first imbibed by education, are afterward retained upon Judgment,
but an eager tenacity of Opinions, not so much upon Truth or Evidence, as upon
a confused irrational kindness; a Platonic love of some Doctrine merely for
themselves, and then making them the standards, by which all others are to be
measured: And this kind of Prepossession is no Stranger in the world, there
being multitudes of men, who assert opinions with all imaginable vehemence, who
can give no better ground of it, but because they like them: And as the wiser
sort choose a Tenet, because it is right, so these conclude it is right, because
they have chosen it. And having thus enamored themselves of their Helena, they
expect all should adore, nor can he escape the note of Profaneness that refuses.
By this absurd partiality it is that some doctrines, which would themselves ill
abide the Test, are become the Touchstone both of Doctrines and Men, and no
Opinion or Person sanctified which bears not this impress. I need not stand to
give instances, either of the Doctrines or the unhappy influence this espousing
of them has had on our dissentions; but indeed this kind of Prepossession is
oftentimes the consequent of another; and this great veneration of some
Opinions is founded in the reverence of their Authors. Men take up a confidence
of the learning or sanctity of a Person, and then all his notions are received
implicitly, strictly embraced, but not so much as slightly examined; and this
admiration of men's Persons, has in all ages been of huge mischief to the
Church, has nursed up private Phancies into solemn public Errors, and given an
unhappy perpetuity to many Heterodox opinions, which would else have expired
with their first Propugners. This seems to have been foreseen by St. Paul, when
he so earnestly exhorts the Corinthians against the ascribing their Faith, to
their several respective Teachers: But sure I am, 'twas sadly experimented by
the succeeding Christians, who owed many of their divisions to it. A pregnant
instance hereof was the Millennium, which in spite of its improbability
prevailed long, and almost universally against the Truth upon the strength of
Authority. Papias a holy man and Scholar of St. John, having delivered it, the
esteem of his Person canonized his mistake, and men chose rather to admit a
doctrine, whose unagreeableness to the Gospel Economy rendered it suspicious,
than think an Apostolic man could seduce them. And the force of this is yet
more considerable, when it is remembered that it found Proselytes, not only among
the Vulgar, who are commonly flexible to any new Impression, but among those of
a higher rank, men that were lights in their generation: Justin Martyr and
Irenaeus having owned the Opinion, and intimated it to have been received by
many others no less Orthodox; and if such a seduction could prevail, so early
in those purer times, before men's interests or spleen were adopted into their
Religion, and begot voluntary errors, if I say the mere reputation of a
Teacher, was then singly so operative; we cannot wonder at its efficacy in
conjunction with those auxiliaries, which worse* times have brought in. What
concurrence of those there was in the several Heresies, which after infested
the Church, I shall not now examine, but it is visible that many of them grew
considerable, chiefly from the fame of their Authors, thus Tatianus upon the
credit of being Justin Martyr's disciple, had an advantage to disseminate his
errors, and not only his, but those of Origin Apollinaris and Novatus, gained
abettors from the reputed Orthodoxy of the Persons, that proposed them, who
having asserted the Faith in some points, were qualified the more prosperously
to appose it in others.

NOR has it been only the mishap of elder times to have felt the mischiefs of
such praepossession; the disease has still advanced, and every day improved in
worse effect, by how much men have more degenerated from primitive integrity,
so that the easy Proselyte is now in danger, not only from the blindness, but
the treachery of his guide, and is often led out of the common road, as thieves
draw passengers into by-ways for the better opportunity of robbing them: But
it is not my present business to send Hue and cry after them, to examine what
the intentions of those leaders are, who misguide their tractable admiring
followers, it is enough for my purpose to observe, that those who so deliver up
themselves in a blind assent to the dictates of any man, are in his power to be
abused by him if he pleases: I shall leave it to others, to estimate the
probability that they shall not be actually so: But certainly this may be said,
that these later ages have beyond all the former given Opportunities of
seducing to any that will use them. The one established Doctrine of
infallibility among the Romanists is eminent for its propriety that way, while
under pretense of submission to something they call Infallible, it is evident
that the faith of the ignorant Vulgar resolves its self into that which they
acknowledge most fallible; the Doctrine of their immediate Teachers. But indeed
take it at the best, such a persuasion is not only an error in its self, and an
apt foundation for innumerable others, but it necessarily renders them
incorrigible; the least retractation of a mistake being so inconsistent with
the claim of infallibility, that while they retain the one, they must never
attempt the other, nor can they cease to Err, till they confess it possible
they may do so. How much more than possible that has been, the many Innovations
of that Church sufficiently witness; and consequently the danger of presuming
upon the unerrableness of a guide. But would all that upbraid it there, were
themselves secure from it, and that many did not in their practice transcribe
that decried doctrine, and that too with the improvement of worse
circumstances. I must call them worse, by how much the probabilities of Erring
are greater under the extemporary conduct of a Private person, than the fixed
rules of a community, and by how much again the voluntary enslaving my self is
more excuseless, than that which the principles of my Profession, and
consequently a seeming obligation of Conscience exposes me to. And as to the
matter of Fact, I think it is evident enough, that the admiration of men's
Persons is a spreading disease that has overrun Christendom, and though a great
part of it inveigh against implicit faith, yet if it be thoroughly scanned,
'twill appear it is rather the object than the act we differ about. He that
vehemently opposes that homage to the Conclave, will yet tamely pay it to a
Classis: and he that refuses it there, yields it to the Votes of a
Congregational Church; or if he hold out against that too, yet chooses to
himself some private Teacher on which to cast it: Like Micah, Judge. 16. Makes
him a Teraphim and a Priest too, for his private use; and then confidently
consults his Oracle, and has nothing to do but believe its responses. Nay, that
which makes the matter yet more sadly ridiculous, is that the very Opposition
to one Usurpation makes them deliver themselves up to another. How many when
they have heard a Preacher rail fiercely at the Pope, have presently made him
theirs, and supposing that Zeal an indication of a safe guide, have given him
as absolute a rule of their Consciences, as that he exclaimed against (perhaps
Envied) elsewhere: And the like instances might be given among our other
dissenting parties. And this has taught some Seducers a lucky artifice, made
them observe to what opinions their Proselytes had the greatest aversion, and
by complying with their anger so steal away their love, that they might after
lead them to what they pleased, yea, perhaps to that which they so much
detested: For there want not examples of some, who have by back ways been
brought to those Opinions, which at first they most defied. What have been the
attempts or success of the Emissaries of Rome this way, I shall not pronounce,
though some (not improbably) speak them great.

FROM this blind and passionate esteem of several Teachers have flowed many
pernicious consequents, particularly those distinct Appellations, which form
differences into Sects, many of which expressly own this original, by bearing
the names of their first Authors. I might here put them in mind, that they are
illegitimate persons, whom our Law directs to write with an alias, and ask
them, whether the Church from their superinduced name, has not cause so to
repute them. But I am sure I may with the utmost seriousness say, that this
practice is to the great violation of Christian unity, and reproach of
Christian profession, which seems to be abandoned and disowned by us, who
instead of denominating our selves from the Author and finisher of our Faith,
find out new Patrons, as if we were ashamed of our first Relation. Alas, how is
the title of Christian, which was so glorious to the Primitive owners, that
they gladly bought the occasion of boasting it with Torments and Death, become
so despicable to us, that every the obscurest name is courted to supplant it.
Have any of our Idolized readers bought their Interest in us so dear as Christ
has done, why then are we rather ambitious to be accounted their dependants
than his? It Is the Apostles own argument, 1 Cor. 1. 13. when he refutes their
factious entitling themselves to Paul and Apollo, etc. by asking them if Paul
were crucified for them: And indeed he there says so much upon this point, that
I need only refer the Reader thither to learn, either the unreasonableness of
this Schismatical zeal for our several Teachers, or the inevitable contentions
and animosities which spring from it; only let me observe, that every of his
Arguments are more pressing upon us, than on the Corinthians; those taken from
the unreasonableness sure are, by how much the names we so adore are less
venerable than those of Paul and Cephas or Apollo, and those from the
consequencies are so also. For those Teachers were industrious to prevent,
whereas ours commonly are no less busy to promote contentions on their behalf,
and so we are more ascertained never to want them.

BUT besides this kinder prepossession toward some men's persons, there is
another of a different nature, a sinister one. I mean prejudice and disgust,
and this has done no less harm in Ecclesiastical affairs than the former. Men
take up piques and displeasures at others, and then every opinion of the
disliked person must partake of his fate, and be engaged in the quarrel: Nor
will those that are enemies ever allow one another the honor of being in the
right: Nay, some have been so perversely malicious, that they have given up
their understandings to their spleen, forsaken an Opinion themselves approved,
only that they might find matter of contest with one they maligned. A memorable
instance of this Socrates gives in his Eccl. Hist. in Theophilus Bishop of
Alexandria, who having formerly attested the Orthodox belief, that God was
incorporeal; yet upon a sudden indignation against Dioscorus and his brethren,
who maintained the Tenet, he embraced the contrary Heresy of the
Anthropomorphites, that so under the Color of a difference in faith, he might
the more advantageously pursue his malice; and the Effects of it were very
Tragical, not only to private persons in Tumult and Bloodshed, but to the
Church by reviving that Error, which was before near expiring, and might as
Socrates affirms, have lain in the dust, had it not been thus awakened. And
indeed in Church story scarce any thing occurs more frequently than examples of
those, who upon private grudges have either begun or fomented Heresies and
Schisms. Thus Marcion being denied the Communion of the Roman Church, having
before by a scandalous crime been cut off from his own, he revenged himself by
publishing his detestable doctrine: In like manner Miletius upon a displeasure
at Peter Bishop of Alexandria, first separated from the Church, and after took
part with the Arians: So also Lucifer incensed at Eusebius for not approving of
his Electing Paulus to the Sea of Antioch, broke Communion, and gave both rise
and denomination to a new Sect. The like is said of Apollinaris, that he was
excited to the broaching his Heresy by his impatience of the Excommunication
inflicted on him and his Father, by Theodotus Bishop of Laodicea; and several
others might be given to the same purpose, out of the Records of those first
Ages.

AND certainly the World seems not to have so much improved in meekness since,
as that we should think the same principle is not still as active, and if the
Task were not more envious than hard, many recent instances might be given to
Parallel the former, especially of such as having justly smarted under the
stroke of Ecclesiastical discipline, have sought to revenge themselves both on
it and the inflicters, by Factions and Tumults; so making the public at once
cloak the Infamy, and bear the charge of their particular rancors. But this is
a Subject neither grateful nor necessary to be more distinctly spoken to. One
may however in the general say, that where these private Animosities are any
thing violent, they usually beat down all Consideration of public good.
Historians observe of Themistocles, that he always thwarted the Councils of
Aristides, not that he thought it the Interest of the Commonwealth, but his
own, to keep down the growing reputation of his Competitor: And I fear that
envious artifice has been too often transcribed, as well in Ecclesiastic, as
in Civil Transactions: No detriment is thought so formidable to a malicious
mind, as the prosperity of his Adversary; and public Ruptures shall still be
allowed to widen, till they swallow up the whole, rather than he will close
with his Antagonist. The History of the Scottish Church gives an apposite
Example of this, in a ruling Presbyter, who being by King James advised with
about the readmitting Marquess Huntley, and pressed with the present exigencies
of Church and State, which required it, gave his final answer in these terms.
Well Sir, I see you resolve to take Huntley in favor, if you do, I will oppose
it, choose whether you will lose him or me, for both you cannot have. Some may
think the greatest propriety of this instance lies to show the insolence of
that Tribe toward Majesty; but however it is not impertinent to the matter in
hand also; and shows how light the greatest public concerns are, when malice
is the counterpoize: And indeed the Naturalists experiment, that flame will not
mingle with flame, never justifies its self better than when applied to minds
thus accended, which however they may meet in mutual flashes, can never unite
and incorporate: The sadness of it is, that they should only conspire to common
vastation, and make the Church its self a burnt-offering.

THUS fatal have our several sorts of prepossions been to our Religion, for as
if that were the common Enemy, our most distant contrary Affections, our love
and our hate equally annoy it; those brutish parts of us our Passions, which
like the beasts under the Law, were never to be brought into the Temple, but
for sacrifice, are now found there upon a far differing account, not to be
slain, but adored; like the Egyptian Isis and Osyris, enshrined to receive our
Devotions, for that the Zeal we pretend elsewhere is really paid to them, is
alas too manifest.

CHAP. XVII. A survey of the Causes of Disputes; Fifthly, Zeal.
TO these several causes of our distractions we my add another, which though in
its original it may seem more innocent, yet is in its consequents no less
pernicious, and that is a mistaken Zeal, which as it is fire to all about it,
so is it wind to its self, fans and irritates its own flames, and by a
confidence that it does well, gathers still fresh vigor to do more. How great
the force of such an Erroneous persuasion is, we may collect from our Saviors
premonition to his Disciples, when he tells them, that those who killed them
should think they did God service; and if Murder, and that of Apostles too,
could by the Magic of blind Zeal be so transformed, we must not wonder to find
other Crimes so too. And what Christ thus foretold was after eminently
exemplified in St. Paul, whom the Holy Writ represents under all the Phrases
that may denote a virulent persecutor, as breathing out threatenings and
slaughter, making havoc of the Church, and in his own words, Persecuting that
way unto the Death, and being exceedingly mad against them; and all this he did
being Zealous toward God, and out of a persuasion that he ought to do many
things contrary to the name of Jesus, as we find in his Apology to his
contrymen and King Agrippa, Act. 22. 2. and 26. 9.

AND of the abettors of those Novel doctrines which after times produced, we
have reason to think many were of this Sort, especially in those Heresies which
though they carried secret venom in them had yet a plausible appearance of
Sanctity and Devotion; such was that of the Encratites, which seemed to be
founded in the veneration of two great Virtues Continence and Temperance,
though by extending them beyond the due limits, they lost that Sobriety they
too strictly embraced, and became inordinate in their Continence, and excessive
in their Abstinence: Such again were the Euchitae or Massalians, who made the
whole business not only of religion but even of life to consist in praying; and
though by it they evacuated all other ends of both, yet having the letter of a
Precept, and the pretense of Devotion on their side, 'twas a proper bait for
those who had much Zeal and little Knowledge. In like manner the Novatians
Heresy had so glorious an inscription of Purity as was very apt to attract
well meaning Souls; who seeing it bid such express defiance to Apostasy, could
not suspect that it was its self any defection from the faith; and accordingly
some of that Sect approved their constancy in times both of Heathen and Arian
persecutions. Nor must we be so uncharitable to the modern times, as not to
believe many, have acted upon the like Principles, and meant truth and piety,
even while they actually promoted the contrary. But how sincere soever the
purposes of such seduced Persons were, yet it is evident the Church has suffered
no less by them, than by the more crafty designers: their misguided piety has
made as great and incurable Ruptures, as the most flagitious blasphemies of
others. And when a rent is once made, it matters little whether it were done by
error or malice; nay perhaps as to the hopes of repairing, the former may be
the more desperate: for whereas he that knowingly commits an Ill, has the
Upbraidings of his own Conscience toward his reducing; these on the other side
have its Cherishings and Encouragements, to confirm and animate them. And
doubtless they are great advantages which Satan has in all ages made of Such
Persons, whom he seems to have deluded in the same manner, that Medea is said
to have done the daughters of Peleas, whom she persuaded to hack their aged
Father in pieces, in hope that by her Magic, he should not only recover life
but youth: so these rend and tear their Mother the Church out of a hope, no
less delusive, of restoring her pristine beauty and vigor; how far the Event
parallels it also, the dying state of Christianity does too sadly testify.

NOR has it only been the Heat of Erring persons that has been thus
mischievous, but sometimes men of right judgments have too much contributed to
the breach of Unity, and the intemperate and imprudent Zeal of these has
served to exasperate the mistaking earnestness of the other: this happens
sometimes for want of distinguishing between the Essentials and Circumstantials
of Religion, and so looking upon a mistake in the later with the detestation
proper only to the perverting of the former; by this means those who have
entirely embraced the same faith, have yet violated charity and broken
communion: such slight minute differences when managed by eager Spirits being
easily blown up into solemn and lasting contentions; so that the Disputes
raised about some pin or nail of the Temple, have sometimes shaken and
endangered the whole Fabric, robbed the Church of that fraternal unity which
was its fastest cement, and surest support. Of this we need no more apt
instance from antiquity than that which has been already mentioned upon another
occasion, I mean Victors unbrother-like Heat toward the Eastern Churches in
the controversy about Easter, which had fomented that Difference into a
Schism, which the meeker Piety of his Predecessors thought no ground of
unkindness, much less of Separation, as Irenaeus more at large tells him; And
probably had men in all the succeeding Ages deliberately poised the Errors they
opposed, and proportioned their Displeasure but to the just weight of them,
many of our disputes would have been so calmed, that they should never have
become quarrels. But many in this particular have only used the Touchstone, not
the Scales: and of Opinions that are erroneous, consider not which are more or
less pernicious, but with an equal violence fly at all, as if the Stoical
opinion concerning Sins had prevailed in Errors also, and that all were
resolved to be of the same size.

BUT even in those of the highest kind it may perhaps be doubted, whether too
eager an opposition have not sometimes done hurt, especially in those Doctrines
which relate to the mysterious parts of Religion, wherein a novelty is at first
looked upon with some horror, and many are willing rather to condemn in gross
than nicely to examine: Who yet when they find this done for them by Orthodox
persons, they think they may with such a guide venture to wade into the
question, where many times the insinuations of Error are so subtle, that all
their Antidotes secure them not from infection, but they are themselves
captivated where they expected only to triumph. Neither want there those of the
Vulgar that are of a more insolent temper; and out of a vanity of making
themselves Umpires between learned men, greedily read the writings of both
Parties, who yet are able to make no solid judgment of either; and when it is
remembered how many popular artifices there are to byasse such persons, we must
confess that Truth has many to one, Odds against her: Besides, public arguing
often serves not only to exasperate the minds, but to whet the Wits of Heretics,
and by showing them the weak parts of their Doctrines, prompts them to rally
all their Sophistry to fortify them, that what they want of truth and reason,
may be supplied with fallacy and little colors; and Experience shows how fitly
that kind of Logic is accommodated to the greatest part of the World. In short
it seems not improbable, that many Heresies owe much of their growth to the
improper means of eradicating them: and have acquired a reputation from the
stir that was made about them. Thus Socrates tells us that Alexanders letters
about the Arian Heresy served to scatter that pestilent infection the more
abroad, and combined men into parties, so that the whole world became the Scene
of that long Tragoedy, which possibly might have had a shorter and better
issue, had not the notice of the Controversy been so early dispersed.

BUT if the Attempts of the Pen have often proved so unfit, it may be
considered whether those of the sword are not more so, and fighting be not a
worse expedient than disputing: and certainly we have great reason to conclude
in the affirmative, if we weigh either the Injustice, or Unreasonableness of
it. I know there want not those who have thought the propagating Religion by
Arms not only lawful but meritorious, and that in order to the planting it in a
Nation, the soil may be mellowed with the blood of the Inhabitants; nay the old
extirpated, and new Colonies planted. But we are to remember that as God is the
universal Monarch of the World, so We have all the relation of fellow subjects
to him, and can pretend no farther jurisdiction over each other, than what he
has delegated to us: and sure 'twould be hard to produce any commission from
him for the invading a Nation only because it is not of our Faith. It Is sure,
those to whom he first entrusted the promulgating of the Gospel had far
different instructions, and 'twere fit our new Evangelists should show their
later authority for this sanguinary Method, in order to which though some have
made use of the Opinion of some Schoolmen that dominion is founded in Grace,
yet as that is but an Opinion, so were it admitted as the most certain Truth,
it could never warrant any enterprise of this kind, for supposing that a people
by wanting spiritual Blessings did lose all their right to temporal, yet that
Forfeiture must devolve only to the Supreme Lord, and when as God in another
case asks, where is the bill of divorce? Esaias 50. 1. so we may demand of these
zealous Invaders, where is the bill of assignment, by which that right was
transferred to them? In short, peace is the most valuable blessing of humane
life, and we cannot without injustice deprive man of it, though we could as we
pretend, give them truth in lieu of it; for maugre the Proverb, that Exchange
will still be robbery, where the parties are compelled to make it. But alas,
it is a vain imagination to think that Religion can be thus imposed: or that we
can bind the understandings and wills of men, with the same fetters we do their
bodies; it is true indeed the Apostle tells us there is a way of bringing every
thought into Captivity to the obedience of Christ, but he tells us withal that
the weapons, by which that Victory is achieved, are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10. 4.
Indeed did Religion consist only in some external conformities, external force
might bear some proportion to it (which perhaps is the cause that the one is
most used by those whose religion is most eminent for the other) but it is
seated in those faculties to which outward violence can have no access. Alas,
it is not whole Armies can besiege my reason, nor Canons batter my will, it is
conviction not force, that must induce Assent; and sure the Logic of a
conquering Sword has no great propriety that way; Silence indeed it may, but
convince it cannot: Its efficacy rather lies on the other side, breeds aversion
and abhorrence of that Religion, whose first address is in blood and rapine:
nor do such attempts gain any thing to the Cause but the infamy of those rigors
which are used to promote it. And sure since this piece of Mahumetan Zeal has
been transplanted into Christendom, it has been much more mischievous than in
its native soil. Christianity having been infinitely more oppressed by those
that thus fought for it, than those that were in Arms against it. Whether upon
this score the Pope have not done her more harm than the Turk, I leave to
consideration.

BUT what is here said of the military Sword, I intend not should be applied to
the Civil; for I treat not here of those legal punishments, which Magistrates
inflict upon their disobedient Subjects; who indeed may justly, nay indeed must
necessarily require Conformity to Ecclesiastical laws, as well as the Civil:
the Eruptions in the one commonly overflowing the other also, and Schism
usually ending in Rebellion; so that it is apparently their interest to guard
themselves from those riotous effects of pretended zeal, nor is it less their
duty, they being as the Ancients express it, Custodes utriusque tabulae in S.
Paul's language, the ministers of God, Romans 13. and in Constantines dialect
(...), Bishops in the whole outward administration of the Church, and if
Heresy or Schism be a sin, are by their places obliged to approve themselves
avengers; to execute wrath no less there, than in other circumstances: And that
they are sins and of no small bulk; none can doubt that observes Heresy
ranked, Gal. 5. with Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, murders, and other sins of
the flesh; or Schism, marked out by the Apostle to the Hebrews, as a kind of
petrifying crime, which induces that induration, to which the fearful
expectation of wrath is consequent, for so we find, Heb. 10. 26. that forsaking
the assemblies is looked on as previous to Apostasy and final defection: And
therefore sure the Magistrate can do nothing kinder even to the Offenders than
by taking their sin early, prevent that fatal growth of it. But that his just
power thus rescued I may assume my former assertion, and conclude, that all
other Violences are so far from advancing Christianity, that they extremely
weaken and disadvantage it.

BUT of no sort is this more eminently true than of those popular heats, where
the People undertakes to chastise error: for besides that the outrages then
committed are very apt to avert men even from truths which they see so
barbarously defended, it often happens that the multitude take causless alarms,
and think their Faith is invaded when it is not. A memorable instance of this
kind Euagrius gives in his Eccl. History, where he tells us that the Emperor
Anastatius having added to the Trisagium this Clause, Who was crucified for our
Salvation, the whole City of Constantinople was in an uproar, upon an ignorant
jealousy that those words had some Heretical meaning; in which fury they
happening to light upon a poor silly Monk, they immediately kill him as the
Inventor of that clause, and a conspirer against the Trinity: So unhappily
absurd are the Transports of wild zeal, which where it rules, does besides the
direct mischiefs of Tumult and Sedition create others at the rebound, which are
more permanent, and discompose and embitter men's spirits, and render them so
ambitiously greedy of quarrels for their Religion, that they are not only
prepared to receive but to seek Encounters: and it is too sure they can never be
wanting to persons of such tempers, since the adversaries of Truth cannot have
more advantage or Encouragement against it, than this unpeaceful humor of those
that profess it.

BY these several ways has it come to pass, that even that zeal which should
be the life of Christianity, is become its disease; and Religion like a Hectic
body is consumed by its own heats, if at least I may call those its own, which
derive not from its proper and native constitution; but are the accidents of
its declining state: for how confidently soever men pronounce of themselves,
and believe that they are then most pious, when they are most eager and
unquiet; yet it is sure this is far removed from the true genius and temper of
religion, which like the God it worships, makes its approaches not in winds and
Earthquakes, but in the still small voice, 1 Kings 19. 12. and when it is
considered, that the greatest part of the Evangelical Law is made up of
precepts of Meekness, Long-suffering, and Condescension; we must conclude that
zeal very preposterous, that pretends to obey by violating them; or to
establish Religion by undermining the most essential parts of it: and to
Persons under that mistake, we may most properly apply the reproof given by
Christ to his Disciples upon the same occasion, you know not, what manner of
Spirit you are of.

IT will therefore become men to look with Jealousy on themselves in this
particular; not too confidently to pursue every Incitation which carries a show
of Piety; but soberly to weigh how it agrees with the Rules and Economy of
that Gospel for which it pretends so much concern; for though the true
Christian Zeal can never be too much cherished; yet alas it is not every warmth
we feel about Religion that can own that Title; and sure we do not more often,
or more fatally mistake any thing than in applying that venerable name to
things of a far inferior, nay sometimes of a contrary nature. How often upon
this Error, have men ascribed that to their piety which they owed to their
complexions, and thought 'twas their religion made them Earnest, when 'twas
merely their constitution: Nay, how often has Satan taken this advantage of
transforming himself into an Angel of light, and insinuating his illusions
under this disguise. And truly they must still be liable to both these deceits,
so long as they place the essence of Christian zeal in heat and eagerness. It Is
true indeed it has its heats, but actuated in a far different way; it has
flames of Love, not of Anger; to melt, not consume our Enemies; and makes us
apter to pour out our own blood a Sacrifice to Truth than that of gainsayers.
In short, if it be a Fire, it is that pure Elemental which the Peripateticks
talk of, which is but of a moderate heat; apt to cherish, not devour.

AND would God men would so far believe this, as to think there may be
moderation, without the danger of Laodicean luke-warmness, and upon that
supposition suffer themselves to cool into a treatable Temper, and then I
should humbly offer to them these few Considerations.

FIRST the great and universal fallibility of humane Nature, which renders it
not only possible that we may, but certain that every one of us shall err in
something or other; and this sure is very proper to persuade lenity to those
whom we find actually erring. It Is the Apostles argument in the case of Sin,
Gal. 6. 1. Brethren if a man be overtaken in a fault, you which are spiritual,
restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou
also be tempted. Where the common Peccability of mankind is urged to induce
Commiseration and Gentleness toward the Offenders; and if this be of force in
sin, where the concurrence of the will renders the person more inexcusable, it
will surely hold much more in bare Error, which being purely involuntary, (for
nothing is properly Error farther than it is so) it is to be looked on rather as
the disease than crime of the Person: and since we use not to exclaim against
men for being sick, but compassionately to endeavor their recovery, why should
we here use so much a contrary method. It Is true indeed, it is necessary
sometimes in order to the Cure, and sometimes for preventing the infection of
others, to do some things uneasy to the Patient; and what tends regularly to
either of these Ends, may in this case also be Charitably done, by those that
have Authority: but that differs as far from our usual severities, as the
lancings of a Physician do from the wounds of an Adversary; or public
Discipline from private Spleen. So that notwithstanding this, we may resume our
conclusion and infer from the Errableness of our Nature, the reasonableness of
compassion to the seduced. And as it thus prompts us to look gently upon
others, so also to reflect impartially upon our selves; and consider how
possible it is, that even whilst we condemn others, we may indeed be in the
wrong; and then all the Invectives we make at their supposed Errors; fall back
with a rebounded force upon our own real ones. If this possibility were but
adverted to, it would make us less positive and Dogmatical in our opinions, and
so consequently take away one main ground of contention; for though we often
quarrel about matters, which are indeed but conjectural, yet not till we esteem
them otherwise; and when we consider how many men have vehemently believed
apparent falsehoods, it may well allay our confidences in all those cases, where
we have not some firmer ground than our own (or indeed any humane) judgment to
build it on.

AS for those who have the surest grounds of Persuasion, and by their security
of being themselves in the Truth, have the more reason to be earnest in
propagating it to others: let them in the second place consider how necessary
it is to choose appropriate means to that good end, without which they do but
undermine themselves, and defeat their own aims. Indeed Prudence is not only a
Moral, but Christian Virtue; and such as is necessary to the constituting of
all others: without it Devotion degenerates into Superstition, Liberality into
Profuseness, and this of Zeal becomes only a Pious kind of Frenzy. And of
Persons so possessed, God may say as Achish did of David, 1 Samuel 21. 15. have I
need of mad men? no sure, the defense of Truth is too noble a cause to be so
managed; its Champions are not like men in a fray to make every thing a weapon
that they can first snatch up, and lay on as chance or fury guides, but are
deliberately to consult the properest expedients, use not only force but
Stratagem against the Enemy, and yet withal to take care that while they
oppose one, another gain not advantage: For alas, it is indifferent to our grand
Adversary, by which of his temptations we fall, and if by subverting the faith
of some, he shipwreck the charity of others, he has his End, and triumphs at
once both over the speculative and practick part of our Religion.

AND this may induce a farther consideration, and prompt us to examine what
degree of guilt lies on those who either out of a blind, or rash zeal have
given him this advantage. And here though I cannot doubt, but God makes great
allowances to the Miscarriages of sincere intentions, yet perhaps we have
carved more liberally to our selves than he designs us, and presume our
Security greater than in truth it is. For how innocent soever a good purpose
may make our Error, yet it is a privilege beyond all possibility of grant, that
our sins should be so also; therefore if our Misperswasions beget wicked
practice, we may be accountable for the one, though not for the other. We find
indeed S. Paul alleges his ignorance, as the Cause of his finding mercy, for
his persecuting the Church, but we are to remember what that mercy he there
refers to is; not that of absolution, but conversion; and had he resisted the
later, though with never so full a persuasion of his doing well in it, I much
doubt whether his good meaning would have secured him the former; so that all
the Encouragement, that Example can afford it, that God may probably do more
for the reducing an Erring than a malicious Persecutor: And when it is
considered that all the odds that Christ makes between him that does ill
knowingly and ignorantly, is in the number of Stripes: we must resolve our
mistakes are no such Amulets as totally to secure us. And then whether our
guilts shall not swell in proportion to the ills we do, is a question that sure
can never be resolved in the negative: for if a good intention cannot alter the
nature of Sin, sure it can as little change their degree, or make that of two
Persons equally mistaken, the Murder of the one, shall not be a greater Crime
than an intemperate speech of the other. And upon this measure the accounts of
erring zeal are like to rise very high with many; unless we can think Rebellion
and Bloodshed, Sacrilege and Sachism, with all that train of zealous
Enormities to be light and trivial.

NOR will it at all legitimate these, or any other, Crimes, though they should
happen to be committed in the defense of Truth: Of this St. Peter is a ready
instance, who when to guard Him, who was Truth its self, he had violated the
Authority of the Magistrate in wounding an Officer: Christ apprehends his
rashness, and instead of applauding his zeal, upbraids his absurdity, that
could think his mean aids considerable to him, who could command Legions of
Angels to his rescue. And sure he is not so much more impotent in his glory,
than he was in his exinanition, as now to need our Sins to secure any of his
concerns; and if St. Peter were thus checked for using that Sword which he was
a little before warned to buy, it must sure set an ill Character upon those
tumultuous reformations which have so much employed the zeal of later ages, to
which there can never want a concurrence of several great sins, the guilt
whereof will scarce be wiped off, by their designed subserviency to Truth; what
Degree of extenuation it may afford is hard to pronounce, since we have no rule
to measure it by. But whatsoever it is, we are to remember, that it can belong
only to such a Zeal as is purely religious, that mixes not with our Passions or
Interests; and therefore before men be too forward to appropriate any
Indulgence of that kind, 'twill be necessary to Examine, whether no sinister
Adherent have vitiated that integrity of their purpose to which alone it can
(even by their own award and sentence) appertain.

I HAVE insisted the more on this, because many are apt to ascribe too
unlimitedly to the Force of a good meaning, to think that is able to bear the
stress of whatsoever Commissions they shall lay on it; and by thus presuming on
their Antidote, venture boldly on the deadliest poisons. To such the foregoing
considerations may be useful; and by robbing them of that imaginary Security,
help them to a real one, by making their good purposes the Director of good
actions, not the Apology for bad. This would make Religion look consonant to
its self, which now groans under the reproach of all those Ills, that are acted
under its Patronage; and sure to rescue her from such a scandal, is but a very
moderate piece of compassion: Yet would God she might obtain it even from those
who profess themselves her greatest Votaries: But alas, it is one sad
circumstance of her ruin, that she owes it to such; that those Weapons which
should defend her, thus recoil into her Bowels, and zeal should do her more
mischief than profaneness; for while she is but scoffed at by that, she is
wounded by this: nor are those wounds ever like to close, till our Zeal grow
more balsamic, partake of those healing qualities of Love and Meekness, the
Want whereof has rendered it so unhappily instrumental to our Distractions.

CHAP. XVIII. A survey of the Causes of Disputes; Sixthly, Idleness.
BUT as this over-active humor has done abundant Mischief to the Church, so is
it observable, that the direct contrary has done as much, nay, which is yet
stranger, the one is frequently the product of the other, and our too busy
zeal, springs from our too great Idleness. How much soever this may sound like
Paradox, yet both reason and experience attest the Truth of it; for we are to
consider that God has put an active principle into man, which it is impossible
so to suppress, as that there shall be a total cessation from motion: And
therefore every intermitting of sober, regular actings, makes way for wild
Extravagant ones; for as nature is said so vehemently to abhor vacuity, that
the very inanimate bodies would forsake their specific motions to prevent it.
So when the mind is Empty, when it has no worthy and profitable speculation to
Entertain it, every the most improper and preternatural Object offers its self,
and importunately crowds in to fill the vacuum. This seems to have been well
understood, though ill applied by Pharaoh, when he thought the Israelites
proposal of Traveling into the Wilderness to their Devotions, was the Effect
of their to (...) sure at home; and therefore increases their tasks as the
properest way of diverting their design: And in like manner we find those that
treat of Politics, insist upon the necessity of keeping the People busy, in
order to which it is, that they mention the use of Mathematics and other
contemplative Sciences, to entertain the active spirits of a Nation, in
demonstrating of Problemes, solving Phaenomenas, and drawing Schemes and
Diagrams, who else would be practicing upon the Government, making new Ideas
and Platforms for the Commonwealth: And doubtless there is parity of reason in
the Ecclesiastic State, which would have been at more peace, had some men
found themselves other diversions.

AND this is confirmed to us by experiment and observation of Event, for if we
look into the Primitive times, we shall find that when there was a necessity of
defending the common faith against Heathenism, when Christians were employed in
writing apologies and vindications, there were much fewer of these intestine
debates (at least such as were Metaphysical and purely National) they had their
hands full of the foreign Enemy, and had the less temptation to jangle among
themselves. So also when they were under the greatest storms of persecution,
when the Church was most violently assaulted from without, it had the greatest
Calm within. They were then incessantly employed, and busied their Thoughts in
preparing for the fiery trial. Those cloudy days made them keep close at home
waiting for the Bridegrooms coming, and suffered them not to wander abroad for
those unprofitable Curiosities, which though like Oil they might nourish flame,
yet would never furnish their Lamps, or gain them admission to the wedding but
in the intervals, and especially after the total cessation of their calamity,
when their Peace had taken them off their Vigilance, than while they slept, the
Envious man had advantage to sow his Tares. Rest made them idle, Idleness made
them curious, and Curiosity contentious; and those who under the Tyranny of a
Nero or Domitian were in perfect harmony under the gentle pious regiment of a
Constantine, grew to the greatest discord, and perhaps (besides the Divine and
extraordinary supports the Church had in her greatest conflicts) this may be
one of the best natural accounts, how she came to flourish most under her
heaviest pressures.

BUT our observation ends not here, for besides this extraordinary importunity
of thoughts, which persecuting times occasioned, Christianity is in its frame
and constitution an active State, has its standing business, and besides all
accidental, a Series of determinate, constant employments, sufficient to
entertain men's minds: from which we may infer, that when this is thoroughly
adverted to, there will be few chasms of Time to be filled with foreign
impertinences. And this gives a clear account how our divisions have come to
grow upon us, namely, by the Neglect of practick duties, for as every age
degenerated more from Primitive piety, so they advanced farther in nice
enquiries and new opinions; and as the zeal of practice grew cool, so that of
dispute gathered heat and vigor. So that if we consider how far our good works
fall short of the first Christians, we need not wonder to see our controversies
so far exceed them; that Time which was gained from the one, being employed in
hammering and forging the other. I do not forget that I have before ranked this
diversion of Christian Practice among the effects of our Contentions, and
foresee it may be thought very inartificial here, to make it the cause also:
But alas, its concern in them is so extravagantly great, as to have at once the
relation of Child and Parent, to be both Root and Branch, Fountain and Stream,
and like a circle unites in its self Beginning and End: For as it first gave
birth to our quarrels, so it finally receives increase from them. In short, our
oscitant lazy piety gave vacancy for them, and they will now lend none back
again, for more active duty. And as this neglect of our general calling of
Christianity has been thus pernicious, so have the ill effects thereof been
improved by the like ill attendance on our particular ones. We find St. Paul
takes notice, that the younger widows, who deserted their own Ecclesiastical
Office, grew busybodies in the Secular affairs of others; and sure we may
with truth invert the note, and observe that those, who either desert or
neglect their Secular Callings, are the most perniciously meddling in
Ecclesiastic matters. Did men conscientiously employ themselves in their
honest occupations, their Minds would be sufficiently diverted, and it would
not become the work of Artificers to make new Schemes of Doctrines or
discipline; Divinity would not then pass the Yard and Loom, the Forge and
Anvil, nor Preaching be taken in as an easier supplementary Trade, by those
that disliked the pains of their own. But all this alas we have seen to the
equal shame and detriment of Piety. Mechanics of all sorts have presumed to
teach what themselves never learnt; and those that served long Apprentiships to
other Crafts, have become Divines in a moment, and with the same aemulous
industry wherewith they used to invent new fashions, have made new Religions.
And as Idleness has thus made some Preachers, so it has made more hearers,
those who either by the easiness of their Callings, or their slight managery of
them, have had the most vacant time, have been the aptest to run after new
teachers: Hence it is that Towns and Cities have been the great nurseries of
faction, the leisure of Shop-men making them more inquisitive after, and
receptive of Novelties. And were that overgrown zeal of Sermons, which has now
devoured all other parts of Religion, among that sort of men thoroughly scanned,
we should find Idleness goes very far in its composition, for besides that
Hearing is the most lazy of all religious Offices, as appears by the
undisturbed sleeps men can take at Sermons; it is manifest this insatiate
appetite of it, is originally founded either in the not having business, or not
attending to it. For should I ask such men, whether if necessity had enforced
St. Paul's rule upon them, that without their labor they should not eat, they
would have spent their whole week at Lectures, and trusted to be fed by the
Ear. I believe few could pretend to have begun with so exorbitant a zeal,
though the truth is in the issue it sometimes arrives to it; and men that have
itching Ears forget the rest of the body, whilst to gratify them, they
totally neglect all care of their Secular concerns, and bring Themselves and
Families to want and beggary.

NOR is it only this one rank of Persons whom Idleness has betrayed to faction,
Servants we have frequently seen under the same Seducement, while either having
but little work, or but little diligence in it, they have found time to listen
after novel doctrines, with which being once tainted, they impatiently thirst
after more, and neglecting the duties of their place, spend their time, which
by compact is their Masters (and can with no more justice be purloin'd from him
than his goods) in following factious Teachers, who instruct them so in their
Christian liberty, that they bring them to defy all subjection: And by telling
them they are to call no man Master upon Earth, that they are to own no King
nor Priest but Christ; teach them to contemn all Authority, Domestic, Civil or
Ecclesiastic.

IF we look farther into families, we shall find also that many of our
She-zealots become so upon the very same ground, when Women neglect that which
St. Paul assigns them as their proper Business, the guiding of the house, their
Zeal is at once the product and excuse of their Idleness; and in spite of the
ill Character the Wiseman has set on her, whose feet abide not in her house,
Prove. 7. 11. it becomes the mark of a Saint, when a Lecture or Conventicle is
taken in the way: And though these feminine Irregularities may seem to be of no
great concern to the public, yet experience convinces the contrary; it having
been the unhappy privilege of that Sex (as ancient as their Mother Eve) to be
able to do great and important mischiefs; and doubtless many men may give the
same account of their Schism and Sedition, that Adam did of his first sin, The
woman that thou gave me, etc. This has always been well understood by
Seducers, who have found it the most compendious way to their designs, to lead
captive silly women, and make them the Duck-coys to their whole Family: But
even those who have mist of this influence over the minds of their Husbands,
have yet had it over their Purses, and out of them supported the Rabbis of the
Faction; who in gratitude to those wise Abigails give their Husbands the title,
and perhaps wish them the fate of Nabal. And God knows, how many men have thus
been made contributers to the cause they have most detested, maintained that
fire which those incendiaries have kindled in the Holy place; Money being no
less the sinews of Ecclesiastical than Secular War.

THUS we see how the Idleness even of the most inconsiderable persons has at
the rebound been extremely pernicious to the Church, which like a Clock or
Watch may be disordered by the rust of the least Pin; how much more then, by
that of the main wheels and springs; if Negligence in lay-callings have though
but an oblique, yet so inauspicious an Influence, the like Neglect in
Ecclesiastic must needs have a worse, because more immediate and direct. And
would to God we could say this had been wanting to the completing the
mischief: But alas, many of those who are called to labor in the Lords
Vineyard, seem to have forgot their Errand, and stand there all the day Idle (a
much worse sight than to have seen them so only in the Marketplace;) so that I
fear there is too evident ground of saying, that the slight execution of the
Pastoral Office, has been one of the most eminent Contributors to our
distractions. And among all the parts of that Charge, none has been more
generally, or more perniciously neglected than that of Catechizing; the want
whereof has left People so unbottom'd, that like a house built on the sand,
every Wind of Doctrine blows down that Faith which they only professed, but
understood not. This is that which has made so many unstable Souls, as St.
Peter observes, 2 Pet. 2. 14. to be the proper prey of Deceivers. And God
knows, we may from sad experiment confirm the note. I wish the same negligence
do not again evidence its self by the same effects: But besides this, which is
part of the Public Ministry, (and deservedly is so, being useful to the whole
Church, the aged as well as children) there are private Intercourses between
Pastor and People which are of great use, would God they were of equal
practice: We know a careful Shepherd does not only turn his flock into a common
Pasture, and then think he has done his work, but does with a particular
advertence observe the thriving of every one of them, takes notice of their
single strayings and diseases, and accordingly applies himself to reduce or
cure them, and surely the like care is full as necessary in the spiritual
Shepherd, it is not the counsel which is promiscuously dispensed in a Sermon
(and whereof it is odds every man takes that which is least proper for him) that
will do the business: Converts come not in now as in St. Peter's days, in
throngs and shoals, a more distinct and particular application is now
necessary; men must be treated with apart, their particular wants discerned,
and applications accordingly made of instructions, reproof or comfort, and it is
these appropriate Medicines, that are like to make sound flocks. Had Ministers
generally bestowed more pains this way, they might probably have frustrated the
attempts of Seducers, who could not so easily have insinuated themselves into
the people, had they found them thus prepossest: but while these with all the
arts of a subtle industry infuse their poisons into every one they meet,
nothing but the like diligence in administering Antidotes, is like to
countermine them. How much of that has been used I shall leave to the
Consciences of concerned persons to determine. But besides the ill influence
the Pastors negligence has on the People, it has in respect of themselves an
immediate propriety to the advancing our debates, the leisure which is thus
acquired, being apt to betray speculative persons, to the study of those
curious questions, which are the great disturbers of our Peace; and of those
that study them so few keep themselves in neutrality, that parties are still
fomented by it: whereas were the practical business of their Charge thoroughly
attended, the remainder of time would not be more than the study of the more
solid, useful parts of Divinity would exact, and consequently there would no
surplus be left for those dangerous impertinencies, which as the Apostle says,
serve to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers, 2 Timothy 2. 14. But
when our Watchmen sleep, it is no marvail if they dream too, and entertain
themselves and others with those Fantastic notions, which the great day will
manifest to have had nothing of weight and reality, besides the Mischiefs they
wrought.

AND indeed if we scan the volumes of those vain Speculations, we shall have
cause to conclude that Idleness has created as well as fomented them; and they
had as well wanted Authors as abettors, had men found themselves more useful
business: and that not only the extemporary Chimoera's of Phanaticks, but the
more elaborate nicities of the Schools, have been thus derived: we know Air
possesses no place, where it first finds not a vacuity, nor could those lighter
notions, have filled men's brains, had they found them prepossest with what was
more solid: but when men wanted more substantial work for their Understandings,
they were fain to employ them thus in making Cob-webs, of which they have made
a worse sort of Jewish veil in the Sanctuary, and have now involved the Gospel
in greater Obscurities, than the Law, was before: whence our Bezaleels and
Aholiabs have been inspired for this work I shall not determine; but sure not
from him whose Character S. John gives us (in peculiar reference to gospel
revelation) that he is light, and in him is no darkness at all, 1 Jo. 1. 5.

THUS we see even Idleness wants not its operation; but is productive of great
and mischievous effects; it being the unhappy property of that Vice, that it
supplants its Self, and by a fatal Antiperistasis makes men perniciously
active: so that we may truly say sloth has made more Business than industry. I
am sure in this instance it has cut out work for many ages, though of such a
kind, that we have little reason to wish that our Lord at his coming should
find us so doing: yet for ought now appears, our activity is so wholly bent
that way, that it is like to be the only, at least the most intense business we
shall be found at.

I MIGHT here take a very apt occasion to declame against Idleness, as the
unhappy fountain of so great mischiefs, but that is a vice that has been so
often arraigned, that I need not repeat those charges which all Authors,
Natural, Moral and Divine have laid against it. Let but this of its being the
Original of faction be added, and there can be nothing wanting to render it a
most dangerous crime: yea, and a most monstrous one too, that operates thus
preternaturally, that freezes and yet inflames men at once, stupifies and
enrages: And yet alas, there is as much riddle in its fate as its nature; it is
hated, and yet embraced; generally decried, and yet as generally cherished: and
though it have no advocates, has many friends. Would God men would at last be
ashamed to be what they are ashamed to own, and by a diligent attendance on
their proper business, secure themselves first from doing nothing, and then
from doing ill; the one being so close an Attendant on the other, that it is
scarce possible to sever them. And God knows the Church finds too sad proof of
their connection. Idleness having served as Ashes to keep alive that fire which
has set her in combustion. Thus unhappily passive is she in our disorders, and
accessory to all our Guilts and Punishments: All our peccant humors concur to
her disease, and like a common mark she receives arrows from all Quarters, we
have seen how many Contributers there are to her ruin, every one whereof with
a wanton cruelty (like Caesar's murderers) are ambitious to inflict new wounds,
and to give her Supernumerary deaths; and whilst she is thus surrounded with
Assassines, what can we expect but that her present languishings should End in
death. That Christian Religion now crumbled into so many minute fractions,
should like dust be scattered, and irrecoverably dissipated, and thus
infallibly it must be, if either God do not miraculously countermine us, and do
more for us than we can do against our selves, or we recover so much sobriety,
as to forbear to Massacre what we pretend to Love, and endeavor to bind up
those wounds at which our own Souls are like to Expire.

CHAP. XIX. The Conclusion drawn from all the Premises.
WE have hitherto examined the effects and originals of our contentions, and
now the only remaining Enquiry is concerning the ways of redress. And that will
exact no long disquisition: for as in diseases it is said, the knowing the cause
is one half of the cure; so more especially is it here, where the remedies are
merely privative, and we are not to be healed by external applications, but
only by substracting those Humors which feed the Malady: There will therefore
need no other prescription than to advise the exterminating of all those
Passions and Interests which have appeared accessory to our quarrels, which
though they are become the public Epidemick disease, yet as the infection did,
so must the cure arise from single persons: for as we look not a common
Pestilence should cease without due care and manage both of the sick and sound:
so neither can this Church plague ever abate, but by the cure, or fortifying
its individual members.

LET every man therefore who has any way made himself a Party to these
contests, seriously interrogate his own heart; what it is that has engaged Him
in them: if any of the sinister motives before rehearst, let him for a while
shift the Scene, and instead of accusing others as Opposites to Truth, condemn
himself as Enemy to Peace: remembering that how just or important soever the
cause be, it is no so to him; whilst he serves his humors and designs under
its covert. The Philosophers in their darker notions of Truth could yet
discern, that she was not accessible to any who sought her not purely for her
self, with sincere and single Intentions, and if she entertain no Pupils that
are not so qualified, is it fit she should have Guardians and Champions of a
quite distant Temper? No, he that undertakes the defense of Speculative Verity,
must first possess himself of that practick Truth the Psalmist speaks of, Ps.
51. That in the inward parts, such a simplicity and integrity of Purpose, as
may supplant all those indirect Aims, purge out every prejudice and passion,
which may bias, and pervert him; and by that time he has done this, it is odds
but he will find a new face of affairs, and discern that many of those things
he so fiercely contended about, were either false or trivial; acquired their
considerableness only from those magnifying perspectives of his own Lusts,
through which he viewed them. However till he have thus denudated himself of
all these encumbrances, he is utterly unqualified for these Agones; and how
lawfully soever others may strive, it is sure he cannot, that does it upon so
unlawful grounds, and therefore upon pain of losing much more than a
corruptible crown must withdraw himself. As for those who can yet acquit
themselves from having fomented our Distractions, I shall not forbid them to
look with great complacency upon it, but rather by considering how valuable a
piece of Innocence it is, engage and encourage themselves to preserve it; and
to that purpose, jealously to examine the first overtures of a Temptation. When
they find any proneness to immerce in Faction, any unwonted heat toward a
Dissenter, to trace it to its fountain and original; nicely to observe whether
it issue not from some of those envenomed springs forementioned, and make as
much have to stop its current, as they would to impede the most overwhelming
inundation; for such 'twill infallibly prove to those who indulge to its
course. But as a Turf will at first close the breach, which neglected becomes
the inlet of a mighty Torrent: so had this early vigilance been used, it might
with ease have prevented those Distempers, in private Beasts, from whence the
general Confusion has sprung. As it is, might but these two things be obtained,
would but the Guilty purge, and the Innocent guard themselves, we might yet
hope to see an end of our Discords: not that I suppose it possible to
extinguish all diversity of Opinions among men, who from their differing
faculties, and other guiltless occurrents, may and will have their judgments
severally disposed. But first, were all, who have upon the former culpable
motives entered the lists, excluded, we should find They would amount to such a
Number, that there would be few left to maintain the Combat. Nay, secondly,
were it not for those concealed inducements, there would scarce be any Combat
to maintain, those are the things that convey the sting and malignity into our
Differences, without those we might dissent, but not fall out; and should no
more be angry to see another opine contrary to us, than we are to see him of a
differing stature, or complexion. In fine, let us pretend what we will, it is
the Carnality within, that raises all the Combustions without: This is the
great wheel to which the Clock owes its motion, while the pretext of Truth and
Piety is but like the hand, set indeed more conspicuously, but directed wholly
by the secret movings of the other. This, this alone is it which creates and
continues our broils, and by a monstrous conjunction of Properties, is its self
both flame and fuel: Nor can we doubt that from hence spring those railing
accusations, we bring one against another, if we remember what St. Jude tells
us that the Angel brought them not even against the Devil himself, he could
calmly manage a dispute with the most execrable and provoking adversary,
because his Angelick nature had none of that carnal leaven which ferments to
the souring of ours, an evident Indication what it is that has rendered our
arguings so invective, that divinity seems now an Artifice to elude law by
daily patronizing those Libels, which would else be Obnoxious to civil Justice.

BUT I presume there need no more be said to evince this, which has, I fear,
the attestation of too many consciences, to be generally doubted; the greater
difficulty will be, to persuade the depositing of those lusts, which though
they are confestly the Boutefieus among us, have yet by I know not what
Fascination so endeared Themselves, that we tenaciously retain them in spite
of all their appendent Mischiefs; nay, we cherish and foster them, and for that
very purpose bring them under the covert of Religion. He that has but a puny
vice, if he get it like Ioash concealed and sheltered in the Sanctuary, 'twill
not only live, but reign too. Put on a Port and Majesty, and appear venerable
upon the pretense of that Piety, whose Essence and Being it evacuates and
undermines.

INDEED sin never arrives at so luxuriant a growth, as when it roots in
hallowed ground, which Satan so well knows, that he has ever been industrious
to plant it in that soil. Thus we find he had introduced the most brutish
crimes into the religion of the Gentiles, interwoven them into their Sacred
Rites and Mysteries, till virtue and vice had changed names, and it became
piety to be Wicked, and profaneness to be Innocent. And when that gross deceit
became detected by Gospel light, when he could not in the same manner obtrude
upon Christians, he yet found the way to do it more obliquely, and by starting
these religious quarrels, gave at once employment and reputation to the most
irreligious vices. For alas, what part of wild fury was there in the Heathen
Bacchanals, which we have not seen Equaled if not Exceeded by some intoxicated
zealots? Or what cruelty in their most barbarous rites, which has not been
matched by the inhumanity of dissenting Christians? So that upon a just
scanning, all our splendid pretense of Sanctity is but an emulation of Gentile
Impurity under a better name; and while we damn Heathens for their Moral
virtues, We are yet so stupid as to hope our selves to be saved by their worst
vices.

AND now who that does enough consider can think he can enough bewail this sad
state of affairs: That Christianity should thus outrun its self* and bring us
round to Gentilism again, whilst her Professors ridiculously contend for the
title of the best Christians, by such acts as denominate them none at all. Thus
have we inverted the significancy of that Sacred Name, and made it serve only
to upbraid the contrariety of our practice; so that that which was once the
Index to point out all Moral and Divine virtues, does now on the contrary mark
out that part of the World, where least of them reside. This, this alone is the
prize we have acquired with so much sweat and blood, this the Triumph we have
brought to our Religion, which indeed could never have sunk to such a
despicableness by any Endeavors but our own; for so long as Christianity waged
war only with foreign enemies she never mist to be victorious, but since that
these intestine discords have turned her force against her self, Bella geri
placuit nullos habitura triumphos, there is no possibility of success, the mere
fight implies a defeat, and the swords of all Parties meet in her bowels. 'Twas
a passionate expostulation that Iulia is said to have used with her two sons
Antonine and Geta, whose animosities having prompted them to divide the Empire,
which they were jointly to have enjoyed, she asked them whether they would
divide their Mother also; implying how much their discords had rackt and torn
her. And sure our common Mother may make a yet sadder complaint of her Sons, by
whose unkind dissentions she is so miserably mangled, that she may cry out with
the Psalmist, My soul is among Lions, and I lie among the Children of men that
are set on fire.

AND now if amidst all our importunate pretenses to Piety, there be indeed any
such thing among us, methinks it should give us some relentings, make us sadly
consider to what a deplorable condition we have brought that very religion on
which we profess to hang all our hopes; and would God those who are the most
nearly concerned in this Contemplation would pursue it to the utmost; let them
on the one hand set the most glittering temptations to Discord, and on the
other let them view the dismal effects of it, and then consider at how dear a
rate they gratify a few impotent Passions. Can any man without Horror think
that his thirst of Glory has brought dishonor to his Religion, and
consequently to his God; that his curious enquiries into things secret, has
helped to Evacuate the more useful things Revealed; or in short, that his
pursuit of his various interests and appetites has destroyed what was so
incomparably more valuable, the honor of the Gospel, the unity of the Church,
and as many souls as have perished by that scandal. 'Twas as infamous a
Character of inhumanity as the very Poets could feign of Diomedes, that he fed
his horses with man's flesh; but alas, that barbarity is here infinitely
outdone, when Men nourish far worse bruits, their own unreasonable lusts, with
those things that are most sacred. Certainly were the vastness of this guilt
thoroughly weighed, 'twould make men sick of those petty wretched acquests they
have thus purchased, make them fling back this price of blood, I say not with
the same despair, but with as great remorse and detestation as Judas did the
silver pieces for which he sold his Master. It Is sure the crimes have too great
an affinity, as in all other circumstances, so especially in this, that as the
one was, so the other is most frequently the Guilt of an Apostle, I mean of
those to whom Christ has committed the dispensing of that Gospel which they
thus evacuate, and doubtless this is a consideration of great enhansement, as
that which superadds treachery to all the other pestilent ingredients of the
Crime; it is the falsifying the most important trust, for under words of that
signification we find the office of the Ministry every where represented in
Scripture, as Stewards, Ambassadors, Shepherds, and consequently the accounts
of the sin must swell so much the higher. For a Steward to embezle those Goods
he undertakes to manage; an Ambassador to betray his Prince for whom he should
negotiate; a Shepherd to worry that Flock which he is set to guard, these are
crimes that double their malignity from the quality of the Actors; and yet this
is undeniably the Guilt of all those whose profession having devoted them to
the Church, have impiously changed the Scene, and devoted the Church to them,
served all their mean degenerous ends upon her; and as Chyrurgeons are said
sometimes to deal with profitable Patients, kept open, nay, widened her wounds
for their own advantages.

IT has been the Priests Litany as ancient as Ioels time, Spare thy people O
Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach; but now alas, who shall prevail
with them to do that themselves which they beg of God, to spare his people and
his heritage; to prostitute them no more to their own sinister designs, nor by
their vain and endless contentions, expose them as well to ruin as contempt.
He were indeed a happy Orator that could in this effectually intercede with
them, though One would think the wonder should lie on the other side, and the
only strange thing be, that they should either need or resist such a
solicitation, it being so much the concern of all that ought, as well upon the
score of advantage as duty, to be dear to them; so that the Church may most
aptly address to these her Sons in the same form St. Paul does to the
Philippians when he conjures them to unity, Phil. 2. 1. If therefore there be
any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill you my Joy that you be like minded.
And can it be possible for any who have tasted all or any of these, to think
fit to wrangle them away; to exchange these divine irradiations, the Antepast
and Emblem of Heaven, for those bitter dissentions, whose Alpha and Omega,
their original and end are Hell, and do as lively represent as they certainly
lead to the horror and confusion of that land of Darkness.

BUT if some men's appetites be so depraved, that they find more Melody in
discord, than in the harmony of the Angelick Quires, yet even these can discern
Music in a consort of Plaudites, and seldom miss to be affected with those
Eulogies which are given themselves; and therefore though they disjoyn the
Apostles motives, Phil. 4. 8. and will do nothing for virtue, yet they may be
presumed more considerate of Praise: And God knows, in a wrong sense they are
too much so; and sure, as we have already observed by it, have made no small
contributions to our discords: yet did they measure Glory by its right and
proper standard, they would find they have all this while courted a shadow, and
that the substance will never be acquired by being fomenters of public
Mischief; but the unhappiness of it is, that our Ecclesiastic as our Secular
Duellists abuse themselves with false notions of Honor, novel Opinions and
subtle Questions they think attest the pregnancy and acuteness of their
Understandings, and give them reputation; but alas, how vain an imagination is
this? Who admires the Sagacity of the Viper, that Eats her way through her
mothers bowels? Or who reverences a man for the sharpness of that Sword
wherewith he commits his Paricide? Nay, what more infamous brands have Records
of all ages stuck upon any, than those who were Ingeniosissime nequam, and
facundi malo publico, who used the best Parts to the worst Ends, and with the
greatest cunning and artifice have contrived their mischiefs?

BUT could we abstract from these pernicious effects, and suppose that this
exercise of their Faculties were innocent, yet sure it would be too light and
impertinent to become matter of praise. He that should spend all his Time in
tying inextricable Knots, only to baffle the Industry of those that should
attempt to unloose them, would sure be thought not much to have served his
generation. It Is one of the certainest Estimates we can make of a man, to
measure him by the employments he chooses, if those be slight and trifling, they
suggest the Person to have low thoughts; what an abasement of Majesty was it
thought in Nero to become a Fiddler and Stage Player; and Herodian tells us,
that men hoped no longer for any thing princely from Commodus the Emperor, when
he had once lifted himself among the Fencers, and instead of the magnificent
styles of his Predecessors, derived from the conquests of great and populous
Nations, assumed This, The vanquisher of a Thousand Gladiators: And certainly
it is no less a descent and diminution for those who were designed by God for
the highest achievements, the subduing the Kingdom of Satan, and pulling down
his strong holds, to devote themselves to these so much ignobler contests, and
account their conquests, not from the number of Souls won to God, but of
Opposers worsted in Argument. Indeed, as we before observed, they have now
rendered the Church a kind of Theater, Disputes are managed with such Slight
and Sophistry, that at the best, the litigants do but set forth a show of
Fencers: 'Twere well if they did not sometimes play the Gladiators, by that
wounding deadly sharpness they use, and 'twould be considered what a change is
now made: In the Primitive times, none that owned any relation to the Church
were allowed to be spectators of those Games, now That is made the Stage, and
her ablest Persons the Actors. But certainly it is very little to the reputation
of those who have so unworthily debaucht both it and themselves; and therefore
to all other disswasives we may add this of the Uncreditableness: For let men
fancy what they please of the Glory acquired in these opportunities of showing
their parts, the best that can be said of them is, that they use Wit foolishly;
A character whereof the one part devours the other, and leaves not so much as a
mouthful of that popular air which these Camaelions gasp after. In a word,
though vainglory be a principle I shall commend to no man, yet in this case
'twere more tolerable if it would work the right way, put them upon what were
really praiseworthy, and then sure 'twould incline them rather to close than
widen the breaches of Sion. To inflict wounds on an unresisting Patient, is a
thing that requires neither courage nor skill: Every man can do that who has
but ill nature enough, but to cure them is an act at once of Art and Mercy, and
entitles to the Praise of both; and therefore if any man's eagerness of Glory,
have made him over-see the way to it, let him now at last recover his
wanderings, and seek it in this one only proper Method.

BUT this is, I confess, a Topic of Persuasion fitter for Philosophers than
Divines, and I wish I may have urged it impertinently; it being much less shame
for me to have done so, than for them to need such an Argument. There is
another more genuine and proper, derived from the nature of distributive
Justice, which requires a man to do his Utmost to repair the injuries he has
done to any, this is so stated a rule, that all our Casuists justly press it in
all cases of damage: But are there not many of them, who while they so eagerly
assert that obligation in other men's cases, do as David did in the matter of
the poor man's Lamb, severely sentence that injustice, whereof themselves are
more highly Guilty. To every such I would speak in the words of Nathan, and say
thou art the Man. Alas, shall every little trifle I purloin from my Neighbor
have weight enough to sink me to the abyss, and shall thefts of the greatest
magnitude, the robbing God of his honor, the Church not only of her Patrimony,
but her Peace, and the World of those inestimable benefits, which from a
uniform consonant Christianity were to have been transmitted to it? Shall these
I say be so slight and inconsiderable, as not to hinder his ascent to the hill
of the Lord? Shall the least violence I offer to the person of an Enemy oblige
me to satisfaction, and shall he rend and tear the body of his Savior (who
willingly exposed his natural body only in tenderness to that mystical one,
which is thus violated) and shall this criminous barbarity exact no offers
toward amends? Certainly no man can have partiality enough to think it, and if
he do not, he is to remember himself indispensably engaged to take the same
course he prescribes to others, and with his utmost industry endeavor to
repair the injury he has done.

AND O that we might see this so essential a piece of Justice assumed among us,
that our impertinent strifes might be superseded, and all molded into the one
noble Emulation, who shall fastest unravel his own mischiefs, and promote that
peace he has hitherto disturbed. This indeed were worthy to be the united
design of all learned men; and were it once so, who knows how prosperous it
might be: For though some single attempts have miscarried, yet probably one
great cause why they do so, was because they were single. When one Person comes
with pacifick arguments to part an enraged multitude, let his Reasons be never
so convincing, they are not like to be much adverted to; the only effect is,
that he who designed himself the common Friend, is taken as the common Enemy;
but where many associate in such a design, and make a party for peace, their
numbers give a considerableness to their proposal, and prepare for their
success. And were there such a combination in order to the Churches Quiet, it
were more than possible they might undermine the contrary attempts of Faction
and Discord.

AND why should not every man be ambitious to make one in this so pious a
confederacy, and resolve most studiously to endeavor the composing the
Distractions of the Church, in which they may borrow something of instruction
even from their past guilts, and copy out their own industry to this better
purpose. This is sure; our disputes had never so multiplied, had there not been
a great deal of unhappy diligence in nourishing the seeds of them: Every
controverted Tenet has been heightened and improved, till it have spawned a
numerous brood, so that those who at first differed, perhaps but in some few
things, wrangle on, till at last they agree in fewer: Now were the like
Industry applied the other way, it might sure do much to the changing the whole
Scene. If men would as nicely observe the Principles of agreement between
dissenting parties, and with as much Art and Care seek to dilate and spread
them; why might not they as much overwhelm our Differences, as they have been
overwhelmed by them? It Is sure that those Universal truths, to which all
Parties assent, are, as the clearest for their Evidence, so the most important
for their Consequence: And why should not these, if rightly managed, be a more
enforcing motive to Unity, than the more singular opinions (perhaps phancies)
of some men, can be to Discord? Certainly would but our Moses's try what this
rod of God in their hand could do, they would find it able to devour all those
of the Magicians. Would they like Benhadabs Ambassadors, catch hold of every
amicable expression, any thing that looks toward Peace, and close in with it,
they might probably see Effects, beyond what can at distance be expected. For
sure Peace is not such a dry Tree, such a Sapless unfertile thing, but that it
might fructify and increase as well as Discord, were there a just care taken
to Cherish and nourish it.

INDEED this Design is the only Amulet which can render it safe to look into
controversies, which are else apt to infuse a kind of acrimony, and venom into
men's spirits; For we see many, whose curiosity at first brought them as
unconcerned spectators, do within a while engage with all earnestness in the
contest: but those who study differences only with an aim of composing them,
these have their thoughts determined and fixed, and so not left loose to the
enticements of any Party. Aristotle says that on the Hill Olympus the Air is so
subtle and piercing, that those who ascend thither, are forced to carry with
them wet Spunges, by that moisture somewhat to allay that extreme tenuity which
otherwise would be deadly; and sure they that deal in controversies, live in no
less corrosive an Air, and therefore had need make the like provision, and
carry with them this Pacifick purpose, as a lenitive and Emollient against the
infectious sharpness they will there meet with.

AND now how blessed a thing were it, if we could once thus follow the things
that make for Peace, that the numberless mutual enmities which are now among
us, may all be reduced into one, that we may fight not against single
Adversaries, but against War its self, and contend against nothing but
contention. And sure our victory here were worth millions of those petty
conquests wherewith men please themselves, and which acquire them so little of
real advantage, that the same account which was given of Otho and Vitellius,
that the war would swallow up the one, and the victory the other, is too
applicable to our combatants, who are like to be equally unhappy in defeat or
success* The Spartans had an Order that when any of their Generals had
compassed his Design by policy or treaty, he should sacrifice an Ox, but when
by force and bloodshed, a Cock only: from the distant values of which
oblations, Plutarch observes how much they preferred the Achievements of calm
and sober counsels, before those of strength and power: but sure the disparity
is more eminent in the present instance, where if we fight we wound our
Brethren, but if we unite we destroy our Enemy: baffle and circumvent Satan's
Master-stratagem, and not only worst but outwit him. Indeed this and this only
is worth our Industry, whereas those little defeats we give Each other, are
like those in a civil War, wherein the public is still sure to be a Loser;
upon which consideration the Romans allowed not their Captains to triumph for
such Victories; and sure our Christianity is very ill bestowed on us, if it
have made us so much worse natured, as to choose those ruinous Conquests at
home, before the most glorious and profitable ones abroad.

'TWAS Abner's admonition to Ioab, when he was in a hot pursuit of the
Israelites, 2 Samuel 2. 26. Shall the sword devour for ever? know thou not
that it will be bitterness in the later end? and sure it is more than time for
our Leaders to make the same reflection, and as Ioab did there, call back the
People from following their Brethren: Nay indeed, would they but attend, they
might hear themselves called back; the great Captain of their Salvation
sounding a retreat from these fatal skirmishes. Xenophon in the institution of
Cyrus tells us of one Chrysanthus, who in the heat of battle had his hand lift
up to strike an Enemy, but hearing in the very instant the Trumpet sound a
retreat, stopped his blow. A great sobriety of courage so to show more Zeal to
the obeying his General, than the annoying his Enemy; and an Instance of much
reproach to our Spiritual Combatants, who have showed themselves so much worse
disciplined, as in spite of daily repeated calls to Peace, still to pursue
their Hostility: But sure such an insolence is so inconsistent with the
pretense they make of fighting Gods Battails, that they must either reform the
one, or disclaim the other.

AND now if after all that has or can be said of the obligation, necessity, or
advantages of Peace, we are put to the Psalmists Complaint, that there are
still those that will make them ready to battle: if men are of so untreatable
a Temper, that nothing can be obtained of them: what remains for those that are
Peaceable and Faithful in Israel, but to bewail those Mischiefs they cannot
redress? If the Church must perish, at least to give her Funeral rites, and if
they cannot quench her flames, yet to bedew her ashes with their tears. It Is
true, we cannot yet say she is quite dead; but though she breaths yet in a few
pious peaceful Souls, yet like a Palsied person, she scarce moves a Limb, she
wants vigor to actuate the generality of her professors, and remains rather a
trunk than a body: and sure if there be truth in that Physic Aphorism, which
says that diseases which cross the temper and constitution of the Patient are
most dangerous; we may well conclude her desperate, there being nothing more
repugning to the very Elements and Principles of her Being, than those
contentions under which she now groans.

YET there is an omnipotent Power to whom no Difficulties are insuperable, an
unerring Physician who makes the most hopeless Diseases, but the Triumph of his
Art. O let us resort to him, and invite his Aids in the same pathetick form,
wherewith he was solicited for Lazarus, Jo. 11. 3. Lord behold she whom thou
love is sick: She for whose sake thou enduredst such contradiction of sinners
against thy self, is now by the contradiction of her own Children, languishing
and expiring: she for whom thou pouredst out thy blood, lies weltring in her
own, Lord save or she perishes: Were such Petitions enforced and ingeminated
by the daily breathing of humble devout hearts, who knows how prevalent they
might be. In this sense also Heaven might suffer violence; nor is there any
better countermine to all the outrages acted upon Earth than by making them
thus reverberate in our cries and prayers.

AND perhaps this Consideration will draw us all, even the most peaceful of us
into the guilt of a negative Accessariness to the present Mischiefs. There are
diverse that dislike our contentions, and blame the abettors; but yet with such
Unconcern'dness and Indifferency, as that wherewith we commonly talk of the
combustions of foreign States, wherein we rather express our Judgment than our
resentments, and do make it more our discourse than our concern. And even of
those who have in some degree laid it to heart, who is there that has not been
some way wanting in the ardency, or frequency of his intercessions? let every
one seriously interrogate his own Heart, and I fear 'twill witness to him, that
his own private concerns are much apter to excite his devotions. Let us
remember with what passion and importunity we invoke God in our particular
Exigents, and consider whether we are equally affected with those of the
Church: Have thou been like Hezekiah, sick unto death? and have thou with him
wept sore, and vehemently solicited a recovery? has thy estate been invaded by
Oppression, thy fame by Slander and Detraction? and have thou with loud and
earnest cries, appealed to that God to whom vengeance belongs? or have thou
been in that condition which is proverbial for setting men to their prayers?
have thou like Jonas been in a storm, in minutely expectation of being
swallowed up by the waves, if not the Whale; and in this Ecstasy of fear, when
as thy soul was as the Psalmist speaks, even melted away because of the
Trouble, have cried unto the Lord, and even out-noys'd the billows in thy
clamorous importunities for aid? Have thou in all, or any of these estates been
thus affected for thy self? then remember whether thy resentments have been
proportionable for that which is much better than thy self: If the no less
imminent and pressing dangers of the Church, have not as much awakened thy
fervor, given as sharp and piercing an accent to thy Prayers, thou must needs
confess, thou have fallen short, of what thou should and might have done
toward her rescue.

AND if this Inquisition be impartially made, who among us can plead not
guilty? and therefore in reflections upon our past omissions, we are in justice
obliged to redouble our Zeal, to say over again our Tepid heartless prayers,
and inflame them with a Cole from the Altar; an earnest affectionate Concern
for all that is holy, such as may prompt us to cry, and that mightily to God:
We see the Ninevites could do it when there was no visible approach of danger,
but merely upon the presage of a stranger Prophet, backed with the consciousness
of their own Guilt: I fear we more than equal them in the later Motive, I am
sure we far exceed them as to the former. The miseries we are to deprecate
being not only under denunciation and threat, but actually upon us, though
withal so improvable, that after all the black Catalogue our Experience brings
in; our Fears meet us with the bottomless Prophetic menace, Esaias 5. 25. for
all this his Anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
It Is the usual Economy of divine Justice to make our Crimes our Punishment,
and to give us up to those ills, which were at first, our own depraved choice:
and God knows we have too much reason to fear this may be our case: That we who
have so perversely violated all the bands of Unity, wantonly wrangled our selves
out of all inclinations to Peace, should never be able to resume them; that all
those gentle breathings of Grace, by which exasperated Passions are to be
cooled and tempered, should be withdrawn, and we finally be given up to be
dissipated by those Whirl-winds our selves have raised: That Christianity which
we have made the stale and Property to our irregular appetites, used only as
figleaves to hide our shame, should wither and shrink into nothing; and that we
who could not agree in what manner to retain it, should at last too well agree
to renounce it.

THIS alas, as it is the fearfullest, so is it the probablest Issue of our wild
Contentions, such as nothing but the miraculous Effluxes of divine Clemency can
avert. O let us with all the groans and tears, so deplored a Condition exacts,
address thither, importune the father of Mercies to pity us, who know not how
to pity our selves, and that though we have cast off all bowels, yet that we
may find them all concentered in him: that he will heal our wounds; and which
of all others is the most desperate, our unwillingness to be healed: that the
Spirit of Peace may overshadow us, and impress on us the dove-like qualities of
Meekness and Gentleness: that he would rescue our Religion from our Profanation
not by taking it from Us, but by conforming us to It: Finally that he would do
for us, not only above what we can ask or think, but beyond what we would wish
or choose, and not suffer us to acquire the Miseries we so eagerly pursue.

THIS divine interposition alone is it that can possibly secure us, and indeed
the suit amounts to no less, than that he will force upon us the Blessing we
resist, and do us good against our wills, which is so bold a request, that they
had need be more than ordinary Favorites that shall prefer it. Those hands
must be very pure, that are lift up in such an intercession: and therefore all
that undertake it are obliged to qualify themselves for it, by purging out not
only the levain of Malice and Strife, but all other filthiness of the Flesh and
Spirit: without This, we can never approve our selves to intercede in earnest;
for what can be more ridiculous than to deprecate the ruin of Christianity by
the contentions of other men; when our selves contrive it by some other vice of
our own? This is not to desire it should live, but that none but we should kill
it. 'Twill therefore concern those who wish the Peace of the Church, to examine
whether they do as much project for her Purity; otherwise it is a mockery to
pretend such a jealous tenderness for her. We have seen there are more ways
than one, by which Christian practice may be evacuated, and it matters little
from whence that Wind blows that ship-wracks our Piety. Yet it is not to be
denied that of all those tempestuous blasts, this of our contentions is the
roughest and most fatal. It Is indeed not a single gust, but an encounter and
struggling of several contrary winds; and God knows no poetical description can
out-doe the horror of the storms they have raised; yet for ought I discern,
there is nothing that is less vulgarly accused, which I must account to the
Reader, as the cause why I have detained him so long upon this Head; and given
it a length so unproportionable to the preceding parts of this Discourse.

CHAP. XX. The Close.
WE have now seen the unhappy riddle of the Unchristianness of Christians
unfolded, have observed the Originals and Causes of That which is too notorious
to all the world in its Effects. And though in this cursory view the Reader is
not to think he has any such complete discovery, as should supersede his own
farther inquisition, yet as it may serve to awaken, so somewhat to assist his
Industry, give him some light and insight into the wiles of Satan: and by
branding some of the chief of those cheats which have robbed us of our Piety,
prepare for the detection of the whole Confederacy: in the interim this
Specimen may serve to stop his wonder at the ruinous estate of Christianity,
for though it is true that it was compacted of all the most incorruptible
materials, had all the harmony of parts which the most exact Frame and
Composure could give it, and so was qualified both for strength and beauty, to
have defied all the injuries of Time; yet while she has so many Underminers,
it is not strange to see her in the dust, there being no one of these,
especially that I last insisted on, which has not destructive efficacy enough;
first to deface, and then to ruin her.

BUT it is but an unprofitable acquest to know the Authors of our mischiefs if
we stop there, this enquiry being matter not of mere Curiosity, but of the
nearest and most pressing Interest: we search not after Malefactors for their
acquaintance, but for their punishment, and our own security; and all our
discoveries of this kind are vain, if we apply them not to that purpose. Let me
therefore conclude with this earnest Petition to the Reader, That he will not
to all the native Defects of this discourse, add this accidental one that it
shall be perfectly impertinent; a mere waste of his Time and my own; which it
will inevitably prove, if it engage him not in an earnest prosecution of those
Delinquents it has appeacht; and in as earnest an endeavor to repair the
Mischiefs they have wrought.

IN short, let every man deposit what he has here read, not with his memory
only but his conscience, let him there seriously ponder the Excellency of that
holy vocation, as S. Paul terms it, Ephesians. 4. 1. to which he is called: and then
as seriously consider, whether he have as the Apostle there exhorts, walked
worthy of it; if he find he have not (as alas who is there that has?) let him
search out as the particulars, so the causes of his Miscarriages: diligently
sift out those Fallacies of Satan, or his own heart; those sly Delusions which
have made him act thus preposterously against all the Convictions of common
reason, natural conscience, or Christian experience; and when he has
discovered, let him make no delay to rescue himself from their Treacheries, but
manfully break those withs and cords (which are too weak to hold any that will
but in earnest remember, he is a Nazarite, a Person consecrate to God)
resolutely resist the insidious caresses of those Dalilah's, which will deliver
not Himself only, but the Ark to the Philistines. Nor is he to content himself
with his own single escape, but to propagate the deliverance, to as many as he
can; let him blazon and stigmatize those Imposters (for it is a combining with
them to conceal them) warn and caution others against those juggling Artifices,
by which himself was entrapped, and make his own ship-wracks a Sea-mark for the
securing the course of other Passengers. This is the Effect of Christ's
admonition to S. Peter, when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren; and a
piece of that Fraternal charity we all owe to every particular Soul, to whom we
have opportunity to dispense it.

BUT besides that private Obligation, it becomes a duty upon a higher, and more
public Account, it being the only way to take off that Scandal we have brought
upon our Religion; which as it was not contracted by the irregularities of one
or two persons, but by associated and common crimes; so neither will it be
removed by a few single, and private Reformations; there must be combinations,
and public Confederacies in Virtue, to balance and counterpoise those of
Vice, or she will never recover that pristine honor which she acquired by the
general Piety of her Professors. In those primitive days there was such an
abhorrence of all that was Ill, that a vicious person was looked on as a kind of
Monster or Prodigy, and like a putrified Member cut off, as being not only
dangerous, but noisome to the Body: but alas, the Scene is so changed, that the
Church is now made up of such as she would then have cast out; and it is now as
remarkable an Occurrent to find a good Christian, as it was there to see a bad:
and since every thing is estimated not according to its rare and casual, but
frequent usual Operations, it is easy to conclude, that Christianity has lost
as much in its Repute, as it appears to have done in its Efficacy: nor will
there be any way of repairing it, till We be generally rendered so malleable to
its impressions, that our Lives may attest its Force and Energy.

NAY indeed it is not only its honor, but its being is concerned in it, active
Principles cease to be when they cease to act. You cannot hinder the fire to
burn but by putting it out: and to suppress the Operation of our Religion is
indeed to extinguish it; at least to deprive it of its proper and specific
act: so that if it can be said to be; it is only by that abuse of speech which
calls a dead or painted man, a Man: It may perhaps be a vizor for the
Hypocrite, a Stale for the Ambitious, a wash or tincture for the Covetous; but
where it is these, it ceases to be its self. The essence and being of
Christianity is practice; and according to that Test and proof thereof, where
almost can it be said to Exist in the world? we have indeed some images and
shadows of it: Some have taken its picture, but the substance and solid body is
vanished, resolved into Air, and seems sadly to have moraliz'd the poetic
Fable of Sybills being worn into a voice, we have turned it into a mere noise
and sound; nay, which is worse, into an Echo, that flattering complying voice,
which reverberates every man's own language to him: Men dictate to their
Religion, and then will needs persuade themselves and others, that their
Religion dictates to them, will have the rebounds of their own Fancy or Lust
pass for Divine Oracles; so suborning this Aerie fantastic Christianity to
legitimate those practices, which the real solid one forbids and Execrates.

To this dismal forlorn estate have we brought that which was designed to bring
us to bliss, herein far exceeding the barbarity of the brutish Sodomites, they
would have violated the Messengers of their ruin, but we those of our safety:
We having not only neglected, but vilified and reproacht the Embassy sent us
from Heaven, and instead of embracing that purity and peace it recommended to
us, have done our Parts to make it forgotten that ever it was sent upon any
such Errand; and indeed so it is like to be, if some Heroic piety do not
revive its Memory, and teach us to record it not so much in our books as lives:
There, and there only it will be universally legible, there it would indeed
appear, what it is in its own nature, the power of God unto Salvation.

AND now why should we not all Emulously contend, who shall first put off that
ugly vizor we have put upon our Religion, and restore it to its native form;
especially considering that with its Beauty we lose its Dowry too; forfeit all
those glorious Rewards which it promises to them that preserve it immaculate.
It Is only a pure and undefiled Religion that will invest us in those white
robes, wherein we are to follow the Lamb. And sure those who have here
endeavored to darken and extinguish all the rays of Spiritual Light, that have
lived as if they professed Christianity merely in spite to defame it, must never
hope it shall bring them to shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, or
procure them the reward of blameless Souls. No, it promises no other Crown than
that of Righteousness, and therefore they that want the Righteousness must want
the Crown also: Nay, besides that so inestimable a Reversion, they lose all
those present Joys and satisfactions which true Christian practice would afford
them, and which both in respect of the intenseness and duration, infinitely
exceed the most profuse sensualities the World ever tasted.

THESE are interests that are sure Important enough, and yet we must be woed to
consider them, nay, that does not prevail neither, but with a perverse Coyness
we hold off; all the solicitations and importunate Calls of God are looked upon
as Artifices and Designs, as if he had some Ends of his own to serve upon us,
and (as the Corinthians suspected St. Paul) meant to make a gain of us; we
treat with him as if he were the Person to be advantaged, and barter for Heaven
with such an Indifference, as if it would want Us more than We It; never
considering that it is impossible for him to have any other Concern, than that
which his Compassion to us creates, and the more earnest and passionate That
is, the more it should excite our own care, it being the Extremest degree of
perverse Folly, to abandon and despise our own Interest merely because a Friend
or Patron considers and prizes it. And this brand must lie upon every one of
us, who still refuse to discern the things that belong to our Peace, after God
has done so much to render them not only visible but attainable.

WHAT shall I say more, but conclude with Christ's passionate wish, that we
might in this our day, understand the things that belong to our Peace, and O
that the Spirit of Peace and Light would descend among us, illuminate us with
that true practical Wisdom, which may convince us, that our Duty and Interest
are the same thing under several forms, and that while we impiously cast off
the one, we do as foolishly betray the other. That so those inestimable
advantages our Christianity gives toward both, may not be thus madly lost,
serve only as a price in the hand of a Fool, who has no heart to it, Prove. 17.
And to this end let us humbly and earnestly invoke the Father of lights, to
illuminate all those whom the God of this world has blinded, that after he
has sent into the world the Image of his own eternal brightness; caused the
Sun of Righteousness so long to shine upon us, it may not serve only to involve
us in that most dreadful condemnation, which awaits those who love darkness
more than light; but that answering the purpose of our holy calling, walking as
Children of light, we may vindicate that Christian profession which we have so
defamed, secure to our selves the light of Gods countenance here, and that of
his glory hereafter.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 12. Line 19. for taught Read sought, p. 97. l. 9. for diverts r. divests,
p. 99. l. 7. for insiduous r. insidious, p. 105. l. 27. for them r. him, p.
114. l. 14. for one r. own, p. 118. l. 6. for owes r. owns, p. 164. l. 27. for
assimulation r. assimilation, p. 165. l. 17. for shouls r. shoals, p. 171. l.
16. for avow r. disavow.


