PRECIOUS PROMISES The Portion of OVERCOMERS.

BY JOHN LOVGHER, Minister of the Gospel.

Vincenti Dabitur.

LONDON: Printed by A. Maxwell, and R. Roberts, for Edw. Giles, Bookseller in
Norwich, 1681.

To my Honored and Worthy Friends and Brethren in, and about Southrepps and
Alby in Norfolk; Grace and Peace be multiplied, through the knowledge of God and
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Dear Friends and Brethren,
UNder Christ, (whose I desire chiefly to be, and whom I would firstly serve)
you are nearest to me in spiritual relation, and dearest in Christian
affection, having, upon your call and invitation thereunto, given my self to
the service of your Souls; and though through much infirmity, I have preached
the Gospel to you, (being the most unworthy of them who Minister in holy
things) yet my weakness you have not despised nor rejected, but received me as
an Angel of God, yea, even as Christ Jesus: And though I have spent nigh
Eighteen years amongst many of you, yet I have not reason to put that question
to you, which St. Paul did unto his Galatians, Where is then the blessedness
you speak of? For your respects to me and my weak endeavors, continue fresh
and vigorous at this day, even as at the first. To some of you I am obliged in
many bonds of gratitude, to all in love and duty; to others I owe much, to you
my self; and therefore I could make a dedication of these Discourses to none so
fitly as your selves. The many imperfections in them, may render them
contemptible to others, yet I know your love will cover my defects, and will
receive them with as much candor and kindness from the Press, as you did
attend them with diligence and affection in the Preaching of them; especially,
considering that some of you importuned me to it, judging them seasonable; I
cannot easily wish the subject treated of greater or better, but the manner of
explaining and applying these excellent Promises, I could desire were much
better for your sakes: But where there is a willing mind, it is accepted with
Christ, and I doubt not but you will be conformable to his example in this
particular.

As the following Sermons were at first Preached for your instruction, and now
published for your edification; so let them be well digested by meditation, and
practiced in your conversation. You are called a Church of Christ. O study to
be so indeed, viz. A Congregation of faithful ones; faithful to God, and with
the Saints. Be not like Ephesus, declining, in your love and first works; or if
you be abated therein, remember whence you are fallen, and labor to recover.
Be not like Pergamos and Thyatira, seduced by erroneous Principles, or
debauched by evil Practices: Above all, be not like Laodicea, self-conceited,
and proud of your seize and enjoyments, or lukewarm in the great things
of salvation, for such are loathsome to the heart and spirit of Jesus Christ:
But be you a sweet smelling Smyrna; let the savor of Christ's good Ointments be
manifested in all your words and ways; and show your selves Philadelphians, of
humble, meek, loving dispositions toward one another, unto all the Saints,
yea, even unto all men.

In a word, Labor to approve your selves good Soldiers of Jesus Christ; look
to him who is the Author and finisher of your faith: yield not to, compound not
with, fly not from your spiritual enemies, but resist steadfastly, for Christ
stands by you, fights for you, and will give victory to you in the end. It Is
reported of the ancient British Nation, that they never ran away in Battle,
till their General first forsook them: Let us all demean our selves valiantly
in our Christian warfare, till Christ the Captain of our salvation desert us;
which will never be, for we have his faithful Promise, saying, I will never
leave you nor forsake you: To his blessing and holy protection I commend you,
desiring the continuance of your Prayers for me, and your acceptance of this
small testimony of my respects to you, by which I may speak to you, when I
shall go from hence and be seen no more. I am

March 26. 1681. Your weak but willing Servant in the work of the Gospel John
Lougher.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE end of my prefixing these few Lines to the following Sermons, is not
because I think they need any commendation or attestation from me, or that any
thing I can say of them will render them at all the more acceptable to any one
into whose hands they may come (for I doubt not but they will approve
themselves to every judicious, intelligent, and spiritually minded Reader) but
only to answer the desires of my dear and worthy friend the Author of them. As
to this Book of the Revelation (the precious promises to the Seven Asian
Churches, in the second and third Chapters thereof, being the foundation of the
ensuing discourses) it has been observed by some, that it is Symbolical and
Prophetical, containing in it Predictions of many things to come both in the
Church and in the World, symbolically represented; so that the Apostle John, as
in his Gospel he appears to be an Evangelist, in his Epistles an Apostle, so
in this his Revelation a Prophet. It is indeed penned in somewhat obscure
phrases, borrowed some of them from the Prophets of old; whence the
understanding of it (at least of some part of it) have been found difficult
even to the godly learned: thence some have refused to read it privately,
others have declined the public reading of it; others have forborne to expound
it, and some have refrained from Preaching out of it: yet it being a part of
the holy Scripture, dictated by the Spirit of God for the instruction and
consolation of the Church in these last and worst days (and there being also
such a gracious promise of blessing made to the reading and hearing the words
of it, but especially to the keeping the things written therein, Chap. 1.3.) I
cannot but judge the labors of those much to be commended, who have, either by
their Sermons, or Interpretations endeavored the elucidation and illustration
of it: And that the Author of these following discourses has by the gracious
assistance and guidance of the Lords holy Spirit, been directed to the true and
genuine sense and meaning of the same Spirit, in those choice and precious
promises whereof he treats. As to the subject matters contained in these
promises here discoursed, I look upon them as some of the most necessary and
substantial truths of the Gospel; for what indeed can be more necessary,
profitable and useful to Christians, than the right understanding of the most
precious and glorious promises thereof? those exceeding great and precious
promises, as the Apostle Peter calls them, 2 Pet. 1.4. which are as so many
breasts full of sweetness and consolation to all the heirs of them. The new
Covenant to which all the Promises relate, and in which they are all contained
(called therefore the Covenant of Promise, Ephesians. 2.12.) and which differs not
really, but intellectually only from them; the Covenant being the whole of the
Promises, and the Promises the parts of the Covenant; I say, this new Covenant,
containing in it the most blessed and glorious discovery of that wonderful
mystery, of the ever-to-be adored grace of God to sinners in Jesus Christ the
Mediator thereof, about their redemption and salvation, the Promises thereof
must needs be most refreshing and consolatory to all the heirs of them; amongst
whom, Reader, if thou be one, I doubt not but thou will find a sweet savor
and spiritual relish in these discourses; for they breathe forth nothing but
love and sweetness, pleasure and delight to those that are Overcomers, as all
the heirs of Promise shall at last assuredly be.

It is observable in all these Promises, that though they are in the conclusion
of the Epistles to several Churches, yet they are all made to the same persons,
vid. to Overcomers; now victory, at least in the spiritual warfare, supposes a
fight, conquest a combat; they only shall obtain the conquest over all their
spiritual enemies, who have strenuously maintained the combat with them, and
that to the end: Here therefore thou art directed so to fight the good fight of
faith, as that at last thou may fully lay hold of, and be crowned with
eternal life.

As to the manner of handling these things, I shall only say, that I judge the
Author has throughout the whole Discourse, taken Paul's advice to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.15. vid. studied to show himself approved unto God, and as to men he
has shown himself a workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing
the word of Truth; in his Doctrine showing uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity,
as the same Apostle exhorts Titus, Tit. 2.7, 8. using sound speech that cannot
be condemned; and as the same Apostle also speaks of himself and the other
Apostles, 1 Cor. 2.13. speaking of these great things, not in the words which
man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual
things with spiritual.

This little vessel (I assure thee Reader) brings thee Gold and Silver, not
Apes and Peacocks, as some of the Vessels of Solomon's Tharshish Navy did of
old, 1 Kings 10.22. Here are no empty notions, airy speculations, jingling and
rhyming phrases, or such fantastical things; but sound and wholesome practical
Divinity: not a flood of words, and a drop of matter; not vox and praeterea
nihil, but multum in parvo, much in a little; the most excellent, necessary and
seasonable truth prospicuously opened, and as pertinently and profitably
applied. Whouldest thou then know who are thy worst enemies? how thou may so
fight against them as to overcome them? what it is to eat of the Tree of Life
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God? how thou may be secured from
the hurt of the second death? Would thou know what it is to eat of the
hidden Manna, and to have the white Stone, etc? What it is to have Power over
the Nations, and to have the Morning Star? How thou may be clothed with white
Raiment, etc? Be made a Pillar in the Temple of God to go no more out, etc? And
have it granted to thee to sit down with Christ in his Throne, as he having
overcome is set down with the Father in his Throne? Read, consider, and
diligently mind these following Sermons, and earnestly pray for a Blessing upon
what thou read, upon the Author, and upon thy true Friend it thou love the
truth.

March 16. 1680. John Green.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IT has seemed good to the alwise God, that our lot should be to live in these
last and worst of days; In which, our Gracious God is going on in the ways of
his alwise providence in order to the fulfilling of his good Word; wherein, our
Lord has frequently forewarned us of many tribulations that his followers (if
they will be faithful) must meet with, Joh. 16.33. in this World; also the
great Apostle Paul from his own abundant experience tells us, 2 Timothy 2.12.
That they who will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecutions. And
Peter in like manner tells us, Acts 14.22. That through much tribulation we
must enter the Kingdom of God. To the end, that we being forewarned, might be
forearmed; and that when these things shall come to pass, we might not be
anxiously troubled.

The sad experience of the Church of Christ, in all ages do abundantly seal to
this; and surely, even in our present time it may truly be said, that this day
these Scriptures are fulfilling in our eyes.

The Woman is now, Rev. 12.16. forced to fly into the Wilderness, as formerly
she did in those primitive days, being constrained for to wander up and down in
Deserts, and in Mountains, and hi Caves of the Earth: But the same God, who
then not only took care of the Manchild, but of the Mother also, providing and
preparing a place for her, where she was nurrished and fed; I say, the same
God, who has preserved her, he does still preserve, and will preserve her,
even to his Heavenly Kingdom.

And although that great red Draggon, the Devil and his Instruments, viz.
Papists and Atheists, are continually casting forth, Rev. 12.15. floods of
Reproaches, Slanders, and Callumninations after her, that (if possible) they
might carry her away; yet God will stir up some who shall help her, though but
earthly minded, and self-ended in what they do: And though he should proceed on
to make war with her, yet shall he not overcome; and although a Troop shall
follow her, yet she shall overcome at the last.

And though this Lion roareth and rages at her, having great wrath, because
his time is short; yet shall the Lion of the tribe of Judah tread him under his
feet.

How be it, Psalm. 74.9. As sometimes the Church of Christ, being under great
persecutions, groaned under this as agravating of her misery, that she saw not
her signs of deliverance out of captivity, neither was there amongst them a
Prophet, or any that knew how long; even so, such is our case at this day.
Nevertheless, seeing that the Vision is but for an appointed time, our duty is,
to wait upon God, and to keep his way; being confident concerning this, That
the time is not very far off, when God will graciously say to Jerusalem, that
her sins are pardoned, and her warfare is accomplished; his thoughts to her
ward, being thoughts of peace, to give her an expected end.

And in the mean time, we are to stand and admire at the great goodness of our
God; That in such a day as this is, when the most of the Sons of men are
bending of their tongues like bows, for lies and falsehood; there should be
found amongst us, some who are valiant for the truths of the Gospel. And when a
many among us (pretending to be leaders) are found to be but blind guides; we
should yet have some seers, who in all faithfulness can say as he, Acts 20.27.
That they have not shunned to declare unto us, all the Council of God.

And whilst others are daubing with untempered mortar, sowing of pillows under
their elbows, and healing the hurt of the Daughter of my people slightly,
crying peace when there is no peace: yet we have some, who are found faithful
Moniters, as to our approaching imminent dangers, by whom (instrumentally) the
silver Trumpet of the Gospel, gives forth a most certain sound; causing the
Saints and people of God, to see and understand, that now it is high time to
prepare to the Battle.

Amongst whom, this worthy and faithful servant of Jesus Christ, the Author of
these excellent ensuing discourses, diservedly ought to be reckoned, and
rancked, not in the meanest place; whose design herein, (next unto the glory of
God) I doubt not confidently to affirm, is the spiritual good and benefit of
all his people; whilst it evidently appears, that he endeavors the good
of all, but especially the household of faith: of some he has compassion,
making a difference; others he saves with fear, pulling them out of the fire;
that if possible he might present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

To this end our Reverend Author, in delivering the mind of God in this
Discourse, so speaks, as stooping down to the meanest capacity; so
manifesting much of a sweet Self-denying and Soul-saving Spirit, whose
Preaching is not with inticeing words of men's wisdom, but in the demonstration
of the Spirit, and with Power; who though he could speak with Tongues, (God
having given him the Tongue of the Learned, that he might know how to speak a
word in season to every weary soul) yet I am sure, that in the Church of
Christ, he had rather speak five words with his understanding, that all might
he edified and comforted, than five hundred in an unknown Tongue.

But I need not say any more in this matter; the Work that is before thee,
Christian Reader, does sufficiently speak for him; wherein he, as a good
Steward of the manifold Grace of God, does labor to give to every one a
portion: for here thou have both milk for Babes, and strong meat for strong Men
in Christ. Such as are yet strangers to Christ, he labors to bring them into a
measure of Spiritual Acquaintance with him; and such as do in measure savingly
know him, he labors to put them into a more full enjoyment of him.

In order hereunto, in the first place, he wisely and faithfully acquaints all
who desire to set their faces Zion-ward, what things they may meet withal in
traveling thither; letting them understand the worst first, that meeting with
such things in the way, they might not be discouraged, so as to be turned out
of the good way of the Lord.

Moreover, in those sweet Discourses, he (as a Son of Consolation) does speak
comfortably, laboring more and more to confirm and encourage all the godly to
keep on in their way; considering, that all who are now in Heaven (that Haven
of Rest and Happiness) have more or less trod in the same path, viz. of Active
and Passive Obedience.

Yea, our Lord himself, who is the Captain of our Salvation, in his bringing of
many Sons to Glory was made perfect through Sufferings, and is through
Sufferings entered into Glory. In which way, all that will be found good
Soldiers of Christ, must be willing to follow him.

Now as a strong enducement, or as a mighty encouraging and persuasive argument
hereunto, our reverend Author does hold out in these divine discourses, many
sweet promises, as being proper and peculiar to all, and only to such as shall
be found overcomers; Thereby intimating unto us, first, That here while we are
in the body, is the time and place, for managing of this spiritual combat and
conflict; and then secondly, here is laid before us, what these Enemies are
with which we are to encounter in this spiritual combat; namely, Sin and Satan,
the World and the Flesh. Thirdly, by what means every Christian, shall be
enabled so to manage the great engagement, as they may undoubtedly be
Conquerers in the end; I more then Conquerers, viz. Through the faith of
Christ; who loves all that are his; which love of his being shed abroad in a
soul; will be in it such constraining love, as will be stronger than death;
causing the soul so to exercise faith in Christ, that through the strengh of
Christ it shall certainly prevail, and wholly overcome; and so come in the end
to see and share in the comfort of those sweet promises; viz.

1. To eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.
2. Not to be hurt of the second death. 3. To eat of the hidden Manna, and to
have that white stone, etc. 4. To have power over the Nations, and to have the
Morning Star. 5. To be clothed in white raiment, etc. 6. To be a pillar in the
Temple of God, and to go no more out, etc. 7. To sit with Christ in his Throne;
yea, to inherit all things.
Now good Reader, That thou may be helped to do thy duty faithfully, so as
thou may obtain all these things promised effectually, and so be made happy
in the Lord everlastingly, is the earnest prayer of him, who is thy sincere
well-wisher in the Lord.

T.W.

SERMON I.
REV. II 7. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of life,
which is in the midst of the paradise of God.


THE order of giving this Book of the Revelation is very observable; For God
the Father gave it to his Son Jesus Christ; Christ to his Angel, the Angel to
John, and John to the Seven Churches in Asia. Rev. 1.1, 4. It Is observed, that
this John was honored to be an Evangelist in his Gospel; an Apostle in his
Epistles: and a Prophet in his Revelation. It is a Book of singular use to
Christians to the end of the world: And though many things in it are very
mysterious, which Christ will reveal to his Servants in their proper seasons,
yet many things are more clear and obvious. The Epistles to the Churches,
though directed to the Angel of each Church, yet concern the whole body, and
each member; and therefore it is said, He that has an ear, let him hear what
the spirit speaks unto the Churches: This is spoken to each particular Church,
which plainly shows they were all bound to attend the voice of the Holy Ghost
in all that is delivered; yea, all the Churches that have been since, now are,
or ever shall be, are concerned in it; for all that is written, is for our
learning, upon whom the ends of the world are come, Romans 15.4. The Text is the
conclusion of that Epistle directed to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus: By
the Angel, some understand the Ministers, so styled to show both their dignity
and duty. This Ephesus was that famous City, Acts 19. where the great goddess.
Diana was so much esteemed, in which a Church was planted, at first vigorous
and flourishing; but at this time declining, both in her inward affection and
outward conversation: called (...) from (...), which signifies remisness, she
abating of her first Love, and declining from her first: Works. Now the words
of the Text are a gracous and sweet promise given out to encourage her to
repentance and a recovery of her self: Having used threatening arguments, he
concludes with this excellent and full promise, if by any means she might be
brought to remember whence she was fallen, and might get Victory over her
present dangerous Distempers: To him that overcomes, I will give to eat of the
Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. Here is 1. The
matter of the promise, to eat of the Tree of Life, which is described by the
situation of it, in the midst of the Paradise of God. 2. The condition of it
overcoming, The Doctrine is this.


Doct. That Overcomers shall eat of the Tree of Life in Gods Paradise. Here is
something implied, and also something expressed, of these in order.

1 That which is implied is, that we have Enemies who fight against us, and
seek our destruction for ever, against whom we are to manage a Spiritual
Warfare; and though none under twenty years old in Israel, went forth to War,
yet here none are exempted: not only are Ministers called to act and quit
themselves as good Soldiers of Jesus the Christ, 1 Timothy 2.4. as Timothy was,
the Weapons of whose Warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual, as St. Paul speaks
2 Cor. 10.4. They are to fight by the preaching of the Word, weilding well that
sword of the Spirit, by Church censures, by enduring hardship, and the like;
yet is not the War limited to them, but every one must come out to the battle,
even young ones must strive to fight this good fight, wherein the glory of God,
and the cause of their Souls are eminently concerned. This world is the field
in which the Battles are to be fought, and the War managed: In Heaven there are
no Enemies, nor shall they there learn War any more; It Is true, we read there
was war in Heaven, Rev. 12.7. and the Dragon and his angels fought; but it is
meant of the Church here, often called Heaven in Scripture and in this Book of
the Revelation; This world is the Enemies Country, and while the Church is
here, it must be militant, in a conflicting and warring condition, and this
without intermission; the Enemies are restless and implacable, and will admit
no truce, no cessation of arms: In Heaven above they are Triumphant, having
Crowns on their Heads, and Palms in their hands in token of full Victory; but
here we must all hold swords, and labor to be expert in war, every one having
his sword upon his thigh, Cant. 3. 8. because of fear in the night; this war is
both defensive and offensive; we must not only be standing upon our guard in
our own defense, but God has provided armor by which we may overcome our
Enemies and worst them in the Combat: as they said of old, to your Tents O
Israel; so let me say, to your arms, to your arms, O all ye children of men,
especially, O all Believers; take to you the whole armor of God, whereby ye
may be able to withstand in every evil day, and having done all to stand: For
this is not an arbitrary business, but of that absolute necessity, that we must
either fight or dye, kill or be killed, conquer our Enemies, or be finally and
eternally overcome by them: The Trumpet of the Gospel gives no uncertain sound,
1 Timothy 6.12. but requires us to prepare our selves to the Battle. If any say,
who, or where are our Enemies? I answer, the Flesh, the Devil, and the World,
are the professed and avowed Enemies of our Souls.

1. The Flesh; our carnal and worldly lusts; these are our worst Enemies; the
greatest fight is within; quot vitia, tot inimici: as many Adversaries as there
are corruptions: 2 Kings 11. 13, 14. when Athaliah heard the noise of the Guard
and of the People in the Temple, She came into the Temple, and seeing them in
their Warlike posture, she rent her Clothes, and cried Treason, Treason: when
we look into our hearts, which should be the Temples of God, and find so many
lusts gathered together there, that are Enemies to Christ, and would not he
should reign in us, and seek to betray our Souls to the Enemies without us, we
may well cry out Treason, Treason. Proud lusts, covetous lusts, unclean lusts,
lying and hypocrisy, distrust and infidelity, with a great Regiment besides,
these war continually against our Souls, and fight against the Government of
Christ and the Dominion of his Spirit and Grace in us; against these therefore
we should bend our main Forces: more especially; 1. Against the sin of our
Nature: This is called the Law in our Members, and is said to war against the
Law of our mind: Romans 7.23. This enemy is ever present with us, as the Apostle
St. Paul complained; when we should do good, it is present, either to divert
us from it, or distract us in it. This is a very importunate evil, a wrestless
and unwearied Enemy: we may cease evil acts, when we cannot avoid inward
motions: this was it which made that excellent Apostle cry out, O wretched man
that I am, Romans 7.24. who shall deliver me? 2. The special, predominant, and
most beloved Delilah, the sin that does more easily beset us, we should bend
our utmost strength against this: every one has a peccatum in deliciis, a
darling sin, a right eye of pleasure, a right hand of profit; and though no
true Believer can have a beloved sin, for he hates every false way, yet some
sin there is by which he is most easily overcome; and against this the heat of
the Battle should be directed; As it was said of old fight neither with small
nor great, but with the King of Israel 1 Kin. 33.31.
So say I, fight above all with the Ruling lust and predominant corruption: the
sin that we cannot well hear reproved, can hardly tell how to part with, are
most delighted and pleased in the thoughts of it, is first in a morning and
last at night with us: Oh this is that Enemy which when it kisseth, is ready to
kill us; we may easily see the dagger it has, ready to strike us under the
firth rib, even when it fawns and flatters most, as Joab did to Abner: we can
never be too careful here, to stand upon our watch, to keep guard against it,
as David did; Psalm. 18.23. I was also upright before God, says he, and kept my
self from mine inquity: No better means of safety, no greater sign of
integrity, then to keep our selves from our iniquity: Let our chief war be
against these indwelling Enemies, especially, against the sin of our Nature,
and the evil we are most apt to indulge, and are most addicted to, and the
Victory over the rest will be rendered much more facile and easy.

2. Satan is another of those Enemies to be encountered by us; for the Dragon
and his Angels fight against us; they assault us with all sorts of dangerous
weapons: we read of the wiles of the Devil; Ephesians. 6. the devices or methods of
Satan: 2 Cor. 2.11. the fiery darts of that wicked one: Diabolus est
methodidicus ad fallendum: Hence the Apostle brings in Satan under the notion
of a Soldier, against whom we are to combat: and a subtle Enemy he is 2 Cor.
11.13, for he has bin experienced in warring against men's Souls for above 5000
years; He labors sometimes to beat their Armor out of their hand, especially
the shield of Faith, and the sword of the Spirit, because these prejudice him
most. He watches the fittest time to assault; the policy of Soldiers is seen
in observing the right season, so does Satan: he takes the time of
Solitariness, the time of Sleepiness, or the time of Weariness, and the like.
He takes the advantage of place: Soldiers that are to fight, have a special
regard to the ground they are to fight upon, that they may thereby get some
advantage against their Enemies, so Satan does; he observes the ground we stand
upon: if upon high places, he knows how to lay his snares there, and to entice
us by the inordinate love of earthly things, from God and his ways; if upon low
places, he has his wiles there, temptations suitable to a poor condition: Hence
is the request of that wise man, Give, me neither Poverty nor Riches; Prove.
30.8, 9. he was not ignorant of Satan's devices. In both, in a word, he holds,
correspondence with that in party in us, which he knows is true to him, our sin
and corruption: this is the treacherous party within, which he engages to
betray us into his hand without: which makes our condition dangerous, by giving
such advantage to Satan. 2 Cor. 7.5. Without are fightings, and within are
fears, because he has always a party in our bosoms true to his cause: It is
this that renders him so formidable an Enemy; if all were right within us, he
would lose his designs upon us, as he did upon Christ: The Prince of this World
comes, says he, and has nothing in me. Joh. 14.30. But in Believers he finds
an army of doubtings and carnal fears; troops of carnal reasonings and
disputings, these take part with him, and give him often to overcome them;
others he takes captive at his will; but even good men by giving place to him,
and by being betrayed by their corruptions, are worsted by him. How greatly
then does it concern them and all others to resist this adversary at the first,
and not give way to him? Turpius ejicitur, quam non admittitur hostis: He is
more easily kept out at first, than cast out afterward. Add to all this, He is
an active and diligent enemy; called (...) for (...) the wicked one; because he
is always endeavoring to circumvent, and laboring to destroy Souls. He is a
potent enemy; though he has lost all his holiness, yet not his strength; they
are principalities and power still. He is a present enemy, can be always at our
right hand wherever we are; no place can be a sanctuary to us from his
assaults: Some think by shutting themselves up in a cloister, they can shut out
Satan, and that he dares not come where they sprinkle holy water; but he can be
with us in any place, and let us be never so secret and close, we cannot
exclude two from being present with us, viz. God and Satan. He is a cruel
enemy, especially to those who yield to him; the natural Lion, they say, spares
him that submits to him; hence that, Satis est prostrasse Leoni: But this
merciless Lion, roars most terribly upon, and carries it most cruelly to those
who yield. In a word, he is a constant adversary; It Is said, Saul became David's
enemy continually, 1 Samuel 18.29. This is true here, Satan is an implacable,
perpetual enemy, and therefore we must fight, per apertum mortem, by open
defiance of him and all his attempts; and though we war, impari proelio, he
being upon the upper ground, the Prince of the Air, spiritual wickedness in
high places, so that we are like little David to great Goliath; yet if we act
our parts well, though we be too weak, yet we have a good second, Psalm. 89.19.
God has laid help upon one that is mighty; of which more afterward.

3. The World is another enemy we are to combat and grapple with; we read much
of overcoming the world in the Epistle of St. John, not by carnal weapons, for
Christ bid Peter put up his Sword when he would be fighting; but with spiritual
Armor. What is the evil, may some say, that is in the world to be overcome? I
would say thus, Take the creatures as they come out of Gods hand, so they are
good, and make no war against us, nor are we called to put forth any acts of
hostility against them; but as our other enemies, Sin and Satan, make them
instruments to ourhurt, and cause us to misimploy them. Every creature of God
it good, 1 Timothy 4.3, 4. if sanctified by the Word and Prayer; but by the sinful
abuse of them, turn to evil, and help on the ruin of men. Every thing is apt
to become a trap and a snare to defile and destroy us; upon which account alone
we are called forth to fight against them. To instance, In our attaining great
things in the world, it is our enemy: They that will be rich, per fas, and
nefas, right or wrong, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. slighty in the great matters of their
Souls and Eternity, but eager in coveting and pursuing earthly things; these
fall into a share, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in
destruction and perdition; For the love of money is the root of all evil, and
they who are violent in the pursuit of it, have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. Demas, Judas, and many Thousands
besides have found the truth of these things; Soenior armis incumbet luxuria,
Juv. So in our retaining the world, there is a dangerous snare, as well as in
attaining of them: The hold-fast; men have of these things, is like a man's
holding red-hot Iron, or a Firebrand, against which he has need of some
preservative. This was the young man's utter ruin, of whom the Gospel makes
mention. There is that scatters, and yet increases; and there is that
withholds more than is meet, but it tends to poverty, says Solomon, Prove.
11.24. Further, In the very enjoying of the world, there is an evil to be
fought against, which is, that it stick not too near our heart: Wisdom is good
with an inheritance, Eccles. 7.11. Godly wisdom: though wisdom without an
inheritance is apt to be despised: no man remembered that wise man who delivered
the City, because he was a poor man, Eccl. 9.15. yet an inheritance without
wisdom, is not good to the owner of it, but a temptation, fuel of lust, pride,
vanity, and so is harmful for want of this wisdom to order and keep it in its
right place, out of the heart. Moreover, there is hostility to be used against
the world, even in our passing through the world; lest it cause us to lose our
sight of God, by interposing between him and us. A man may hide the Sun from
his eye with his hand. A little of the world, if we be not careful, may be like
a cloud, which will keep us from the sight of God: But to be curnbred with a
multiplicity of cares about these things, is to set great mountains between him
and us, to cause an eclipse of his countenance, that we cannot behold him: The
Moon eclipseth the Sun from our sight; earthly things hide the gracious sace of
God from us, if we be not very watchful against them. Yet further, we are to
fight against this enemy, as it does oppose grace, and hinder us in our faith,
hope, and charity. In our Faith; he that sees a fair estate, had need pray and
say, Lord, draw the curtain, and let me by faith see thee and thy beauty and
glory: The God of glory, Acts 7. (or God in his glory) appeared unto Abraham,
and this so darkened the glory of this world, that by Faith he left all at the
call of God: So much as we fix our eye upon the creature, so much the less we
see of God; and so much the more our faith is hindered. When Jacob had least of
this world, he saw most of God; and so it is with many: So for hope, the world
often hurts that: the soul is ready to say, How shall I travel over the fords
and deeps of the world? how shall I be able to resign up my all? This is hard
and difficult, to sell all, to part with all; the hope of better things will
carry us through it, but if we fix here, hope is lost: so love and charity,
they are defiled; there is spiritual whoredom between the Soul and the
Creature, by the love of the world; Ye adulterers and adulteresses, says St.
James, Jam. 4.4. know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with
God? Some take it for that spiritual adultrey, wherein a man gives his love
away from God to the Creature: where love to the world prevails, the best
things are slighted and undervalued; we ought to hate Father and Mother,
Brother and Sister, Houses and Lands, yea, and our own Life also, for Christ's
sake, Luke 14.26. when they stand between us and God, then away with them; had
we not need watch and war against the world, to subdue it and get the upper
hand of it? 1 Cor. 6.12. All things are lawful, but I will not he brought under
the power of any, says St. Paul. He would stand upon the liberty and privilege
Christ gave him, he would have the upper hand of these things, nothing should
command his love, his fear, or his joy: and it is sweet walking with God, when
in this frame of Spirit. That man who stands in right terms with the things of
the world, is content in every condition, instructed in all things, and can be
in want or abound, as it pleases God to order for him; and this we should
account better then the greatest estate in the Country: these will come on
faster in all grace, that can cast off this weight, and will run the race set
before them, and none shall hinder them: this is the generation of Travelers:
when Jacob went from his Fathers House, he had but a staff, and a stone; a
staff to walk with in the day, and a stone to rest his head upon in the night;
yet he returned two bands, and glorious visions of God were given him, Genesis 31.
Genesis 32. though he met with hardship, yet these made him pluck up his feet, and
go on cheerfully. This will put resolution into the heart of a Christian, Acts
20.23, 24. None of these things move me, says St. Paul, neither do I count my
life dear, so I may finish my course with joy. This is that which is implied,
That we have Enemies to war and combat with, and we hear what they are.

2. That which is expressed is, that Overcomers; all that get Victory of these
Enemies, shall eat of the Tree of Life in God's Paradise. Some, Questions
follow for a brief explication of this proposition.

Quest. Who may be said to be Overcomers?

Answ. This Apostle does best of all resolve the Question: which he first
propounds, and then answers. 1 Jo. 5.5. Who is he that overcomes the world,
but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? Though the world is only
named, yet all the Enemies are included; for he that gets victory over one,
overcomes them all: some will say, who does not believe this, that Jesus is the
Son of God? There will soon be an end of the war, if this be all, the Victory
will be easy: let such know, that though there be no great difficulty in giving
our assent to this proposition, yet the Deity of Christ has been denied and
opposed by none of the meanest for learning; not only by the Pharisees whilst
he himself lived, but in the times when this Apostle wrote his Epistle; and
afterward by the Arrians, and Socinians of late. How few embrace it with a
Divine Faith, which is the only Faith that overcomes in the day of trial? Some
take this up upon reasons of antiquity, Authority and Consent of the Church in
which they live, but this Faith will not give us Victory; if great trials arise
upon this Fundamental Article in the Creed: when the Apostle wrote this, it was
the critical point, the Shibboleth, as I may say, by which one was
distinguished from another; the discriminating Doctrine; the word of Christ's
patience. Persecution rose so high upon the defenders of this great truth, as
their Liberties and Lives were in danger to be taken from them for maintaining
it; at such a day not to be afraid to confess Christ to be the Eternal Son of
God, gave a comfortable ground to conclude them true Believers; such Faith
might charitably be judged right, by which they thus overcame the world. It Is
an easy thing when a Protestant Prince reigns, to declare we believe that
Transubstantiation is an error, contrary to Scripture, reason, and our very
senses; but if Popery should come in like a flood, and be the prevailing
Interest, and condemn them to be burnt for Heretics who deny it, as was the
case of the Martyrs in the Marian days; then to be steadfast even to the death
in this persuasion, would be a very hopeful evidence of the truth of our
belief, and of our Victory over the World. So in the case this Text mentions; O
how few would find Faith and Patience, to help them to seal to this, That
Christ is the Son of God, Coessential and Coeternal with the Father, with their
blood! How few would dare to appear to own it, as it is said, Athinasius did,
when the World was in a manner, overrun with Arianism? When St. Peter had maid
that excellent confession, Matthew. 16.16, 17. Thou art Christ, the Son of the
living God, what says Christ to this? Blessed art thou Simon, etc. and though
he was afterward foiled, yet he overcame all in the end. Acts 4.19.

Quest. 2. What is that Paradise of God promised here to Overcomers?

Answ. Heaven, even the third Heaven, the true Celestial Paradise. For what in
one verse, 2 Cor. 12.2, 4. St. Paul styles the third Heaven, in another, he
calls it Paradise: And thus to be taken in the Text and Doctrine now before us.
Here seems to be an allusion to the Garden of Eden, where God disposed of Adam
after he had created him, Genesis 13.10. styled the Garden of God; which was a
large circuit of ground, richly furnished with all good things, as became so
excellent a Workman; and was every way answerable to the ends for which it was
prepared, Cant. 4.12. Some judge it was a type of the Church, which is called a
Garden enclosed, and a Figure of Heaven: It was doubtless the choicest spot of
ground in the World; there were all sort of pleasant Trees, and delightful
Fruits; and free liberty to eat of them all, one only excepted. Who can
declare the delights of the Celestial Paradise? Eden had a very famous River
that ran through it, and watered it, Psalm. 46.4. So there is a River in Heaven,
far excelling that, the Streams whereof make glad that City of God: It does
overflow to refresh the Church here, but runs with a full current there, and
ravish the Inhabitants of that Paradise with unexpressible pleasures for
evermore. In Eden of old, the Covenant between God and Adam was perfect, till
man brake it: In Heaven, the new Covenant and all the mysteries of Grace
therein are accomplished. Adam was without sin and sorrow, and might easily
have so kept himself, when he was in Eden: But there is no possibility of sin
or trouble in the heavenly Paradise. In the Garden of Eden, Adam had free
access to, and fellowship with his Creator; but in Heaven they have it with God
as a Father, and more fully and durably then Adam had; by which we may see the
Paradise, what it is.

Quest. 3. Who and what is the Tree of Life mentioned in the Text?

Answ. Christ himself, and he only, is the true Tree of Life. Pro. 3.18. So
styled by Solomon, under the name of Wisdom; thus he speaks of Christ; She is a
Tree of Life to them that lay hold upon her; an allusion to that Tree of Life
which was in the Garden of Eden; which is made by some a Sacrament, and Seal of
that Covenant, by which God assured Adam the continuance of his natural Life
during his abode on Earth; and Eternal Life when he should be removed from
hence, in case he kept this Covenant. They who lay hold on Christ by true
Faith, have the best Seal that can be of Spiritual and Eternal Life; 1 Jo.
5.12. He that has the Son, has Life; the Fountain of Life, the Bread of Life,
the Water of Life, the Well of Life, the Tree of Life. That Tree in Eden was,
as some judge, both alimentum and medicamentum; food and physic; so is Christ:
he is the Tree of Life that is said to bear twelve manner of Fruits every
month, and whose Leaves are for the healing of the nations, Rev. 22.2. That
Tree of Life in Eden, stood in the midst of the Garden, Genesis 2.9. that it might
be often in the view of our first Parents, which way soever they went, either
to their Food or to their Employment. Christ is in the midst of the Paradise of
God, and will be in the view of all Believers for ever. Those Trees of
Righteousness will be round about him to all Eternity. But you will say,

Quest. 4. What is it to eat of this Tree of Life?

Answ. To eat, is to press forth the virtue and sweetness that is in our Food,
that we may partake of the benefit thereof. Overcomers shall participate of the
fullness of Christ to their own joy. In eating there is a natural delight
arising from the taste of our meat: it is said, They did eat, Neh. 9.15. and
delighted themselves in thy great goodness: so of others, that they did eat and
were all filled: 1 Kings 19. Elijah did eat and was strengthened: of another
it is said, 1 Samuel 30. he did eat, and his Spirit came again, and he revived.
They that get Victory over their Spiritual Enemies, shall feed and feast
themselves upon Jesus Christ the true Tree of Life in Heaven, whereby all their
desires shall be satisfied, and their Appetites quenched, and they
everlastingly strengthened, to behold his glory, and to follow him
whethersoever he goes.

Quest. 5. Why does the promise run in these terms, That he will make them eat
of the tree of life in the midst of the paradise of God?

Answ. Partly to mind us of that first sin by which we were overcome in Adam,
as he was the public head and representative of all mankind, that we may be
humbled for it; and partly to show us that this happiness then lost, is
recoverable by Christ, the second Adam, and shall be the portion of them that
overcome: Not that they shall return again to the Garden of Eden, as some have
concluded from this Text; but a far more excellent estate and felicity than we
should have had, if Adam had never fallen: which caused some to cry out, O
felix peccatum! O happy sin of Adam, which has occasioned the bringing in of a
far better estate! The Uses follow:

Use 1. Are these things true! Behold here the misery of all such as are
totally and finally overcome by the grand enemies of their souls; they are
excluded for ever from the good of this promise; as Christ said of them who
slighted the invitation of the Gospel, Luke 14.24. They shall never taste of my
supper. So he speaks of these here, I will never give them to eat of my fruits,
those fruits which grow upon me the tree of Life. They have temporal delights
which are a paradise to them, and are so well satisfied with these things, That
a Noble man in France is reported to say, He would not change his part in Paris
for a part in Paradise. Such a one was the young man in the Gospel, who would
not quit his earthly treasures for heavenly, and these assured by Christ
himself. Worldly contents are their chief joy, though but a Fools paradise.
Thou fool, says Christ to him that bid his soul take its ease, for he had goods
for many years, Luke 12.20. Solomon among other vanities, planted Orchards and
Gardens with variety of Trees, Eccles. 2. but not a Tree of Life amongst them
all. Oh! that men could believe how sad their end will be, who have no better
things than these, who get no spiritual conquests over the enemies of their
Souls; their end will be eternal expulsion and exclusion from the Paradise of
God. As God sent forth, and drove out Adam from the Garden of Eden (whether by
his word of command, or by forcible strength, is not material) never to return
thither again, Genesis 3.23, 24. so will he drive away all the wicked like chaff,
and scatter them like smoke, that they never enter in the celestial Paradise:
And as God set an Angel with a flaming Sword, which turned every way to keep
the way of the Tree of Life, that Adam might not eat of it, having by his sin
lost his right unto it; so whosoever is finally overcome by Sin, Satan, and the
World, living and dying under the full power and dominion of these enemies, the
flaming Sword of Divine justice will for ever keep them out of the Paradise of
God, and from eating of the Tree of Life that grows there; Oh! that men would
believe this report, and in time labor to prevent it.

Use 2. This Doctrine is a ground of strong consolation to all overcomers: 1.
They shall enjoy the heavenly Paradise, where are far greater delights than in
the Garden of Eden; Eden was earthly, this is heavenly: The Serpent got into
Eden; Satan that old Serpent, can never wind himself into the heavenly
Paradise. In Eden our first Parents sinned and broke covenant with God; in
Heaven they have an impossibility of falling. Adam was driven out from the
Garden of Eden; but none are expelled from the Paradise above. 2. They shall
^^at of the Tree of Life, feed upon Christ there: this is the Paradise of
Paradise, the Heaven of Heaven it self. Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee? says that holy David.
This was the living Cordial Christ gave the penitent Thief in his dying hour,
Luke 23.43. To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. To have Christ be with us
here, though in affliction, in prison, is an inestimable good and precious
favor; but to be with Christ is best of all. This may sweeten your Christian
warfare, if you consider how much this Tree excels that in Eden; that was
material, this spiritual; that grew out of the Earth, this grew in God's Bosom,
and was from Heaven; that Tree had no life in it self more then any other of
the Trees of the Garden, but should have continued life to Adam if he had not
sinned, during the Divine pleasure, merely by God's institution; but Christ
has life in himself, and quickens whom he will. Adam never eat of that Tree of
life; all true ^lievers shall partake of this. The^^ was a flaming-sword to
keep all from coming to that Tree in Eden; but here will be no obstruction, nor
any cause of separation from Christ. That Tree of old is long since perished,
and that Garden destroyed; but these abide fresh and glorious for ever.
Methinks the serious consideration of these things might allay the bitterness
of present troubles; Exodus 15.25. when the waters were bitter, so that the
Children of Israel could not drink of them, Moses took a Tree which the Lord
had showed him, and cast it into the waters and they became sweet: The most
bitter waters of affliction, may be sweetened by Faith acted on Christ's love in
them; Whom the Lord loves he rebukes and chastens: They all come through
Christ; every rod of affliction is gathered off this Tree of Life by a Fathers
hand: A few leaves of this Tree put into the cup of affliction, takes away the
bitterness thereof, and turns it into a cup of consolation, yea, a cup of
salvation to all believers. Oh that you would comfort your selves, and one
another, with these things! If any object and say, I fear I shall never
overcome, but my sin and the world will conquer me, the Devil will at last
prevail, and I shall one day perish at their hands; Let such a Soul know and
believe, that what is spoken to Dan for his encouragement, Genesis 49.19. is for
its comfort in all its wars and combats with these enemies; A troop shall
overcome him; but he shall overcome at the last. A man that wrestles or fights
with his enemy, may be foiled and worded at first, and yet recover himself, and
get the victory in the end. Peter was worsted at first in the combat, yet gets
up again and conquers all opposition, Acts 4.19. He that is thrown down by his
enemy, and lies still in and under his fall, not striving to rise and recover
himself, this man is fully overcome; but thus it is not with any true believer:
Let none such be discouraged, though never so weak, but remember that of
Solomon, Eccles. 9.11. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong; only believe and ye shall see the Glory of God, the glorious wisdom and
power of God working out your Victory. When some brought an ill report upon the
promised Land, Number. 13.17, 28, 29, 30. and weakened the hands and hearts of the
people, by telling them of the walled Cities, and the Children of Anak, and
other things to discourage them from fighting, Caleb a man of excellent Faith
and Courage stilled the people before Moses, and said, Let us go up and possess
it, for we are well able to overcome it: This was he that afterward God
brought into the Land, Numb. 14.24. being a man of another Spirit, and followed
the Lord fully, when the other died in the Wilderness and never came thither:
Heb. 3. ult. and the Scripture says, they could not enter in because of
unbelief: O let all take heed of an evil heart of unbelief, and the day is
yours; believe you shall overcome, and you shall surely overcome. 1 John 5.4.
This is the Victory whereby every one that is born of God overcomes the World,
the Devil, and their Corruptions, even their Faith: 1 Timothy 6.12. Fight the good
fight of Faith, says the Apostle to Timothy: above all take the shield of Faith
Ephesians. 6.16. this overcomes all before it: Even Christ himself yields to this.
Thus he speaks to the Spouse, Cant. 6.5. Turn away thine eyes from me, for they
have overcome me: he yields himself conquered to the Faith of his people: and
much more will it overcome the Enemies. Genesis 32.28, when Jacob had prevailed
over the Angel, he soon saw a Victory over his Brother Esaus wrath, Genesis 33.10.
Oh! that you would stir up Faith, all things are possible to him that
believes: the Lord increase our Faith. To conclude,

Use. 3. Let us be exhorted to courage and* confidence to this holy war, for
you fight not as uncertain of Victory, not as those that beat the air; Let
nothing here below hinder us, 2 Timothy 2.4. no man that warreth, entangleth
himself in the affairs of this Life: but strives to please him that has chosen
him to be a Soldier. If a Soulder be in Garrison he may work on his Trade, yet
so as to be ready to march at the beat of the Drum, or sound of the Trumpet,
but when in the Field, he; must wholly attend the war: we may use the world,
but as if we used it not; in our employments and enjoyments of it and in it, we
must be abstracted from it, or we shall never come off well in the day of
Battle; if we be entangled and ensnared by it in our affections, and not in a
constant readiness at the call of God to engage the Enemy, we shall come of
with dishonor and damage, dishonor to him that calls us to fight, and damage
to our own Souls. There are many things to encourage Christians to look about
them, and quit themselves like men, and be strong: as, 1. The paucity of those
who conquer; To him that overcomes, says the Text: Not to them, but to him, to
note they are but few. Christ prophesied that many will be offended, Matthew.
24.9, 10. The love of many shall wax cold, and it is but a He that endures to
the end. Oh how great a mercy will it he to be found in that remnant. David had
many Soldiers, few Worthies; many make a scuffle and seem to fight, few are in
good earnest and fight valiantly: 2. There are some advantages Believers have,
which if well improved may give them the upper hand of their Enemies; 1. They
have the armor of God; that belongs to every Christian: when David was to
fight against Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.38, 39. he was presented with the best Armor,
even by the King himself, which was no small encouragement. Believers are
presented with a whole coat of excellent Armor, every piece of it is Armor of
proof, and this by the King of Kings: Readiness Armor was too heavy for David, he
attempted to go in it, but could not: God has made every piece of the
Spiritual Armor fit and suitable to every true Believer. 2. They have Christ
for their Standard Bearer, whose heart fainted not, nor melted away, as the
Prophet Esaias mentions, Esaias 10.18. The Standard Bearer faints; when he sees
the Army routed, he casts away his Colors and flecth; so did not Christ; hence
that of St. Paul, Gal. 6.14. God forbid I should glory in any thing save in the
Cross of Christ, viz. in the death and sufferings of Christ; I will not leave
my Colors, I find the world, and my worldly affections dead, and doubt not but
to have complete Victory in due time. 3. They have the ministry of Angels, and
the special conduct of God with them.

All things come alike to all in the Court of Nature, but things come in
special to some in the Court of Grace: they have more for them than against
them, 2 Kings 6.16.17. which if their eyes were open they might see: And if God
be for them, who can be against them? Romans 8.31. The success must needs be on
their side, because having such a conduct, they can march on, preventing and
avoiding the stratagems of the Enemy: The Apostle Paul took it for a singular
privilege, 1 Cor. 9.26, 27. that he could so run and so fight as to obtain,
and keep under his Enemy, and not be a castaway; yea, by this they do not only
spy out the drift of the Enemy, but can fetch in Recruit and fresh Auxiliaries
in time of need, Heb. 4.16. When their own strength fails, God gives in
assisting Grace, fresh anointings, surmounting the Grace they had before, as he
sees the matter requires: David could encourage himself in the Lord his God:
hence could say, Psalm. 18.1. I will love thee, O Lord my strength; and he had
good reason, 1 Samuel 30.6, 7. for when the Amalekites had carried away all, God
strengthened him to pursue after them, and to recover all again. Yea, more,
they have the advantage of undergoing things patiently and quietly; when the
Lord makes them poor, they make many rich; when corrected, yet not killed,
always bearing about them the dying of the Lord Jesus: Sick and yet quiet, poor
and yet quiet, prosecuted and buffetted, yet quiet: In a word, they have that
interest above, and Influence from above, that they can set themselves against
the world, and do more by Faith and Prayer, than others can do by Wit and
Policy; for they can lead captivity captive, and by their spiritual strength
tread down strength: I mean in a spiritual sense; for Christians should be
peaceable subjects to their King, and peaceable neighbors with their
neighbors; but to war against spiritual Enemies, here they can say, 1 Cor. 15.
Thanks be to God who gives us the Victory. I have fought with beasts at
Ephesus, says the Apostle Paul; a great Victory, whether you understand it as
some do, of savage beastly men, or literally, as others; they say he was
condemned by the sentence of the Heathen, to be committed to the wild Beasts to
be devoured by them, unless he were able to rescue himself, which he did; he
lived and acted by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved him; and gave himself
for him, so that he had Victory over the World, and could say, O my worldly
Enemies, where is your Venom, your Gall? where is now your Enmity, your
Victory? To conclude, Believers have many excellent promises to encourage them
to fight and overcome: Seven in this and the next Chapter, of which the Text is
the first: O let us fear lest we should so much as seem to fall short of them:
Heb. 4.1. meditate much upon this in the Text; It Is sweet in the very reading
of it: How pleasant will it then be in its accomplishment? I end with that
Parallel Scripture, Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that
they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates
into the City.

SERMON II.
REV. II. 11. He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second death.


THESE words are the conclusion of the Epistle to the Church in Smyrna; and so
the eighth verse of this Chapter shows, To the angel of the Church in Smyrna,
write, etc. Some say this Church was more faulty then the former; but Christ
covers and conceals them, lest the sight of her former sins, and the
apprehension of her future sufferings, both at once, should too much discourage
her: Others think that she was, though the poorest, yet the purest of all the
Churches, I know thy poverty, says Christ to her, but thou art rich, verse 9.
poor in temporals, but rich in spiritual; outward poverty joined with inward
purity discommends none to Christ. Her name was answerable to her nature, I
mean, her new nature. Smyrna signifies a sweet smell, and her Graces were like
beaten Spices, very fragrant and odoriferous, they cast a sweet savor even
throughout all the Churches. It seems a terrible storm of persecution was ready
to come down upon them, wherein some of them might be called to resist not unto
bonds only and imprisonment, but even unto blood and Martyrdom; for he tells
them, The Devil, (that is, wicked men who are the Devils Bailiffs and Agents)
shall cast some of them into Prison; and then bids them be faithful unto death,
verse. 10. which implies that it might reach even to life it self. To encourage
them to faithfulness in all, he gives this sweet promise in the Text, as if he
had said, get Victory here; and if it comes to the worst men can do, which is
to kill the body, I give you my faithful word, they shall do no more, they
shall go no further, I will secure you from that which is a thousand times more
to be feared, viz. the second death, which is the sting and emphasis of the
first; that shall not touch, or hurt you. So then the observation lies plain
before us, viz,

Doct. That Overcomers shall not be hurt of the second Death, Sin, Satan, and
the World are the Enemies; true Believers are the Overcomers, as was declared
in the former Sermon: To these is this promise made: hence it is said, They
shall never perish, John 10.27. And he that believes on the Son shall not see
Death, John 8.51. viz. the second Death: for as to bodily death, the Psalmist
says, What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? Psalm. 89.48. We
shall now enquire, 1. What is meant by the second death. 2. What is the great
hurt thereof. 3. Why Overcomers shall not be hurt by it.


Quest. 1. What is the second death?

Answ. Death sometimes signifies great afflictions and distresses: Entreat the
Lord your God, says Pharaoh to Moses and Aaron, that he may take away from me
this death only, Exodus 10.17. that is, the judgment of the Locusts then upon
him; for being such Locusts as never was before, nor should be after, they
might be a deadly annoyance to them, as well as devour the fruits of the Earth.
So St. Paul speaks of Gods delivering him from a great death, 2 Cor. 1.10.
meaning an imminent danger, which he calls a death, because it was past means,
help, and hope of delivery. Such deaths he was in often, 2 Cor. 11.23. which
were either such sicknesses and persecutions in which there appeared no hope of
escaping with life, or such pains as were equivalent to the pangs of death. But
more particularly:

1. Death is taken for the dissolution of nature, dissolutio compositi: so some
define it, the dissolving the earthly house of this Tabernacle, 2. Cor. 5.1. A
Tent or Tabernacle is destroyed, not by consuming of the parts, but by taking
them asunder: the death of the body is no annihilation, but a dissolution of
the parts of which man is compounded, a cutting a-sunder the soul and the body:
This is the first death, which the Apostle Paul desired, I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. The soul sleeps not when a man
dies, for then his wish had been vain; upon his dissolution he could not have
been with Christ; but the union between the body and soul is cut a-sunder, and
the soul which wilst in the body was absent from the Lord, is then absent from
the body, and present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. This is that death all must
pass under, or something equivalent to it; It is appointed for all men once to
dye, Heb. 9.27. Statutum est, It is enacted in the Court of Heaven by a
Statute Law, more sure than the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be
altered: A sentence gone forth out of the mouth of God concerning all men,
never to be reversed: Death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned, Romans
5.12.

2. Death is taken for Hell and destruction; even the wrath of God inflicted
upon them that are finally overcome by the enemies of their Souls. Death and
hell were cast into the lake of fire; this is the second death, says the
Apostle John, Rev. 20.14. Men dead and buried before, were now sent body and
soul to Hell, Rev. 21.8.

Qu. 2. Wherein lies the great evil and hurt of the second death?

Answ. It is altogether unexpressible and inconceivable: Who knows the power of
thine anger, says David? Psalm. 90.11. Let none be offended or affrighted at the
opening of it; A Sermon of Hell, if rightly emproved, may keep us from Hell.
The hurt and evil of the second death lies in Two things:

1. There is, paena damni, the punishment of loss; This is great and grievous,
for they who fall under it, lose all good at once; they lose Heaven that holy
habitation, that, seeds beatorum, the mansion and dewlling place of all that
are blessed. When Tully was banished from Italy, and Demosthenes from Athens,
they were so troubled, that as often as they looked toward those places they
wept. What is Italy and Athens, and a thousand such places more, if compared
with Heaven? Though here unsound Professors may have room in Gods sanctuary,
yet there will be no place for them in his Palace hereafter: To be excluded
hence, will trouble and perplex them. They lose the best dainties, there seems
to be eating and drinking in Heaven; Christ will gird himself, and make his
Servants sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them, Luke 12.37. They
shall have flagons of Wine to comfort them, and Christ will say to them, eat O
Friends, and drink abundantly, O beloved. I take it spiritually in a far better
way than can be here. O the misery of them that shall never taste of the Supper
of the Lamb, of these refreshments in Heaven! Poor men grieve when they are
sent away empty from a rich man's Table, much more sorrowful will they be who
shall never eat of Christ's dainties. In this also they lose the best
inheritance: Ahab was sick with grief when he could not enjoy Naboths
inheritance, as we read, 1 Kings 21. It will make them head-sick and heart-sick
also, who shall be deprived of that incorruptible, undefiled, and never-fading
inheritance reserved in Heaven for Overcomers; for the Promise is, He that
overcomes shall inherit all things, Rev. 21.7. Yea, they lose the best
company; the society of Angels and Saints: Here they despise their company,
then they would be glad of it, but shall not have it. How desirous was the rich
man that Lazarus might be sent to him? Luke 16. On Earth he despised him, and
in Hell desired his company, but it could not be granted him; a great gulf
being fixed between them, which would not permit it: And which is yet worse,
they lose the company of God and Christ. When Orpah was to part with Naomi her
Mother-in-Law, she lifted up her voice and wept, Ruth 1.14. O how will they who
shall be separated from God, drench and even drown themselves in tears! His
gracious presence is the chief good of his creatures; yet this is the first
word of that dreadful sentence Christ at last pronounces, Depart from me, Mat.
25.41. To go from him who has the words of Eternal Life, is the most bitter
part of the second Death. If Cain, when banished from the Society of Saints
where God was worshipped, cried out, My punishment is greater than I can bear,
for from thy face shall I be hid; surely then to lose the glorious presence of
God, of the only true God, is more than to lose a thousand worlds, if there
were so many. We read that Absalom could take no Comfort in all he enjoyed,
because he could not see the King's face, 2 Samuel 14. Laban made great search
after his foolish Idols, when they were stolen from him; Genesis 31.33. And Micah
lamented for the loss of his false gods; Ye have taken away my gods which I
made; and what have I more? And yet you ask me, what aileth thee? Judge. 18.24.
How sad and fearful will the loss of the King of Kings, of the only true and
living God be? Here men can live cheerfully, if they have outward good things,
though strangers to the Life of God; yet when they come to see what they have
lost, they will find it the most bitter ingredient in their cup of misery. 2
There is paena sensus, the punishment of sense; for having lost the chief good,
an inundation of all mischiefs and miseries will necessarily follow, and
inevitably fall upon them: particularly,
1. Shame and confusion of face will cover them: They will rise to shame and
contempt. Here men sin and have a whores forehead, they cannot blush; The
unjust knows no shame, Zephan. 3.5. but then the shame of their nakedness
will appear before all the World. The thief is ashamed when he is found, Jer.
2.26. Especially, if he be taken in his wickedness before judges and great
ones; Oh! how confounded and abashed will sinners be, when all the secret evils
of their Heart and Life shall be laid open and discovered before Christ, his
Angels and Saints: Whither will they cause their shame to go? Here they glory
in sin which is their shame, but then they will be ashamed of this their
glorying, and would be glad if the Hills would hide them, and the Mountains
cover them.

2. Sorrow and Mourning will fill them: There, says Christ, shall be weeping,
and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 8.12. Where? you will say, even in
Hell: We read of Rachel mourning for her children, and would not be comforted,
Jer. 31.15. Of Jacob's great sorrow for the supposed loss of his beloved Son
Joseph, Genesis 37. I will go down to the grave to my Son mourning; thus his
father wept for him. Of the great mourning of Hadramimmon, in the Valley of
Megiddon, where Josiah was slain, and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for him,
2 King. 23. But what are all these to the hideous cries and shrieks, yellings
and roarings of them that lie under the wrath of God? It Is said, God will cast
upon them the fury of his wrath, and not spare, Job 20.23. and 27.22.

No man values a blow, if a Child strike; but if a man, a giant strikes, it is
not easily born; if an Angel smites, it is yet more grievous: but if God cast
upon him his wrath immediately, it goes to the bottom, it pierces deep into the
very Soul; It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, and
to have the living God fall upon us: Can our heart endure, or our hands be made
strong in the day that he shall deal with us? His frowns are able to sink us;
What unspeakable Sorrow will his blows cast upon us, fill us with? we know not
how to bear his hand upon us here, if it be in extremity, though but upon one
part, What infinite sorrow then will it cause to have him cast his fury upon
the whole man, upon all the Members of the Body, and all the faculties of the
Soul at once, and not spare? A drop of his displeasure upon Heman, upon David,
made them cry out bitterly; what will a Sea, an Ocean of wrath then do? O the
floods and seas of Tears that miserable creatures will then pour forth!

3. The Curse of God shall rest upon them: So it follows in that direful
Sentence, Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye Cursed: If they might go from his
presence with Blessing, it would be some comfort; but to depart from him with a
Curse, how very dreadful are the thoughts of it? Yet thus it will be: Solomon
says, The curse causeless shall not come, Prove. 26.2. When Balaam would have
cursed Israel, it came not, but was by God turned into a blessing; because
Balaam attempted this without just cause, Numb. 23.22, 23. God requited David
good for Shimei's cursing him; but God never curses without a cause, and it is
therefore effectual, and sad are the effects thereof. When Adam sinned, says
God, Cursed is the ground for thy sake; Genesis 3. The whole Creation groans under
that curse unto this day, Romans 8.22. The Disciples marvelled at the sudden
withering of the Figtree Christ cursed, Mat. 21.19.20. When Elisha cursed the
mocking Children in the Name of the Lord, there came two Bears and tore two and
forty of them, 2 King. 2.24. Oh how insupportable will the Curse of the
infinite God be, that shall lie upon them in Hell!

4. Darkness will annoy and trouble them: Ordinarily in the greatest Darkness
God commands some Light; Unto the upright there arises Light in the
darkness, Psalm. 112.4. The Lord will light my candle, the Lord my God will
enlighten my darkness, says David, Psalm. 18.28. But Hell is called the
blackness of Darkness; yea, outer darkness, Mat. 25.30. meaning a state most
remote from Heaven, the Kingdom of Light and Blessedness: We read of the
Egyptians, that God caused a dreadful Darkness upon them, such as might be
felt, Exodus 10.21, 22, 23. Not only was the Light of the Celestial Bodies
withdrawn, but such gross foggy Vapors did arise, as some think, that might
put out their Candles or other Lights; so that they sat still in their places
for three days, being under the Arrest of that Darkness; so that they knew not
whether to go, nor what to do: But the Darkness of Hell will be much more
afflictive and affrighting. Some are afraid of the natural Darkness of the
Night, but how dismal will those chains of Darkness be, wherewith they who
loved the darkness of sin here, shall be bound in the Prison of Hell hereafter,
where they shall have Darkness enough?

5. The worm will gnaw upon them: Of this Christ speaks, Mark 9.44, 46, 48.
Their Worm, that are in Hellfire, of them he speaks, v. 47. every one there
has his own Worm; not Literally, but Metaphorically to be taken, of something
that holds resemblance to it. A Worm in Scripture is put to resemble two
things; 1. Something that is contemptible, Fear not thou worm Jacob: And 2.
something that is tormenting and vexatious, and so it is taken here:
It is dreadful to Nature to have a Worm breed out of a man, and feed upon him;
thus it is with the Body in the Grave, the Worms shall feed upon it, Job 24.20.
But to have them breed in a man, and feed upon him alive, is more terrible. I
have read of a Tyrant who devised that Torment, to keep a living man in his
Coffin, and feed him till by his own filth he bred Worms, and those Worms fed
upon him, till he died by them. A sad Judgment it was fell upon Herod, to be
eaten up of Worms, Acts 12.23. But what is it then to have a worm gnaw upon the
Soul? This is that Christ speaks of; This is nothing but the tormenting acts of
Conscience, termed a Worm; 1. Because as a Worm is bred out of the Putrefaction
of the subject in which it is, so is this; there is much filth of sin in the
Conscience, by which the Mind and Conscience is defiled, Titus, 1.15. inwardly
full of rottenness and all uncleanness, as the Pharisees were, Mat. 23. and
this may easily breed Worms. 2. Because as Worms gnaw upon a man, so will a
man's Conscience gnaw upon him, when he shall think what offers of Grade and
Salvation he had, and neglected them; what Motions of the Spirit in the Word
and under the Rod he had, and quenched and resisted all, and would suffer
nothing to prevail; how near he came to the Kingdom, and yet fell short and is
shut out: Thus will the Worm of Conscience gnaw upon men, to their
unexpressible Grief and Vexation.


6. The Fire will burn and torment them: I am tormented in this flame, says
one in Hell, Luke 16.23, 24. The horror of Hell is set out by Fire, a Lake of
Fire; Fire and Brimstone, and a burning Tempest, Psalm. 11.6. Whether material
Fire or not, is not material; but such as will torment Soul and Body beyond the
hottest fire that men can make; for the breath of the Lord, as a River of
Brimstone, will kindle it. The fire of Nebuchadnezzar's, furnace was terrible,
being seven times hotter than ordinary, Dan. 3. The Fire God rained from Heaven
upon Sodom and Gomorrah was very grievous, Genesis 19. The Fire that burnt down
the chief City of this Nation, in 1666, was fierce and furious; the Fire that
will burn down the World at the last Day, will be more dreadful yet: but the
Fire of Hell will be more terrible than all the rest.

7. Despair will greatly afflict them: they will be there without hope of
escaping from under all the former evils. To be in a Valley of Achor, and see
no door of Hope; to be in a stormy Sea, and have no Anchor of Hope to stay
upon, must needs make a man's case desperate: In Hell all Hope is cut off, which
makes the heart to break: Every man on this side Hell is a man of Hope; To him
that is joined to all the living there is Hope, Eccles. 9.4. But in Hell there
is no outlet of Hope; the Hypocrites Hope perishes, Job 8.14. This will wound
more cruelly than the Devil can do. Hope deferred makes the heart sick; but
Hope utterly destroyed will make the heart break. In Hell the Hypocrites Hope
shall perish, and the Cobweb Hopes of wicked men will be swept down, and be as
the giving up of the Ghost: Here if men be in great Afflictions, and under the
guilt of great Transgressions, there is upon their putting their mouths in the
dust, Hope in Israel concerning these matters; but there is no Hope that Sin
will be pardoned or Miseries be removed. Spes alit Agricolas. The Husbandman
plows in Hope, and sows in Hope: Here men pray in hope, and hear and weep in
Hope; but in Hell their Cries and Tears are hopeless, Seas of Tears will not
quench one spark of the fire, and this Despair links and torments them beyond
expression.

8. The place in which they suffer these things, will yet aggravate their
Misery; It Is called a Pit, a Pit without water, a bottomless Pit, Rev. 9.1.
Joseph's Pit, Jeremie's Dungeon, Paul's Prison, and Bonner's Cole-house were
pleasant and delightful places, compared with this: The worst place on Earth is
infinitely better than the best place in Hell. To live in Bridewel, or in
Bedlam, is very grievous; but these are places of Pleasure, when this is spoken
of.

9. The company yet increases the vexation: Good-company is a great comfort in
trouble and misery; It is such a relief as has made some even to forget their
sorrow: But here the Devil and his Angels, and all the wicked wretches that
ever were on earth, and lived and died such, shall be the company of hell. Not
one good person among them: It will raise the happiness of Heaven, that not one
wicked person shall be there, not an Hypocrite among them; and it will no less
aggravate the Misery of Hell, that none but such are there. It was a grief of
mind to Rebecca, to be among the Daughters of Heth, Genesis 27. ult. The filthy
company and ways of the Sodomites were a vexation to the Soul of just and
righteous Lot, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. David when forced to dwell in Mesech, cries, Woe
is me. How will they lament in Hell, where damned Devils will be their Society,
and these Companions their cruel Tormentors? So they are called, Mat. 18.24.
The Devils are great Tormentors of the Bodies and Souls of men. It was the
Saying of a good man, I had rather endure all the Torments men can devise, than
see the Devil with my bodily eyes: What a miserable case will theirs in Hell
be, who shall both see and feel them their cruel Tormentors, who will have no
Pity, show no Mercy, will not spare; but cruciate and afflict as much as they
are able?

10. The Eternity of all the former Evils, does and will aggravate the Misery
of them in Hell; they are punished with everlasting destruction from the
Presence of the Lord, and shall never see his face with comfort, 2 These. 1.
They rise to everlasting shame and contempt, Dan. 12.2. Their worm dies not,
and their fire is not quenched, Mark 9. called Everlasting Fire, everlasting
Burnings, the vengeance of eternal fire, Mat. 25. Esaias 33. Jude 7. The
blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 7. All this is without mitigation,
intermission, or cessation. O! who can bear it? If they in Hell might have ease
but one hour in a thousand years, it were some comfort; but there the smoke of
their Torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest night nor
day. If after Ten thousand years a man might be taken up out of Torments, the
hopes of that would support; but there they must lie in the scorching flames of
God's Wrath for ever: O, who can endure unquenchable Fire! Did we consider what
an Eternity of Torment is, to live ever dying, and yet never dye; to be in a
Circle of Sorrow that knows no End, in Variety and Extremity of Pains that have
no Period; but after a man has been under these Torments as many Ages, as many
Millions of Ages, as there have been Moments or Minutes since the Creation, he
is as far from coming out, as he was in the first moment he went in; O how
inconceivable dreadful will this be! Now People think Prayers long, and Sermons
long, and Sabbaths long; O what a Weariness are they to many! But how long will
an Eternal Hell be to such? There they will be held down ever, ever, ever, to
feel the stroke of infinite power and wrath; and though men will not believe
this report, yet their unbelief shall not make God a Liar; for he has said it,
and will surely perform it upon all them that live and dye overcome by the
power of Sin, Satan, Antichrist, and the World. O! how glad would wicked men
and women be, could they blot out the word Eternal out of the Holy Scriptures,
but it cannot be! Some think it cannot stand with the justice of God to punish
men eternally, for sins committed in time; yet if men did consider what God is,
they would never make this objection: If men did consider an infinite God is
offended, and justice requires that an infinite satisfaction be made; men are
finite and cannot receive an infinite punishment in time, therefore justly
suffer to all eternity. Even men account it but a just and righteous thing to
lay up those in Prison all their life, or to take away the lives of those for
ever from the earth, who steal, or break open Houses, or kill men, and wilfully
murder, though these acts were done in a very little time: And may not God who
is infinite, justly inflict infinite torments? The circumstance of the person
against whom any act is done, much aggravates or lessens the fault, and so the
punishment. It Is more to strike a Prince than an ordinary man, and deserves a
greater punishment: Sin is committed against an infinite Majesty, therefore
justly punished to all eternity. Besides, if men should live on earth for ever,
they would sin against God for ever, and therefore may justly suffer for ever.
Some say thus, Man sins in suo aeterno, and therefore is justly punished in
aeterno Dei. There is in every sinner, infinita voluntas peccandi, a will to
sin infinitely; and that he does not so, is because God cuts the thread of his
life, who seeing this disposition in man, is righteous in his eternal
destruction. Thus much may suffice to show wherein the hurt of the second death
lies, viz. in a privation of good, in an inundation of all evils, shame,
sorrow, the curse, the worm, the fire, darkness, despair, the place, the
company, and the eternity of all these; This, this is the hurt of the second
death.

Quest. 3. Why shall not those that overcome be hurt of the second death?

Answ. Because Christ died for them; not for an example only, but in their room
and stead; when they were enemies, sinners, Christ died for them, Romans 5.8, 10.
He died not for his own sins, he had no sin inherent in him, he did no sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth, 1 John 3.5. 1 Pet. 2.22. Messiah shall be
cut off, but not for himself, says the Prophet, Dan. 9.26. but he was delivered
for our offenses, Romans 5. ult. And he died not as a private person, but as a
second Adam; the first Adam sinned, not as a private person, but as the head of
all mankind, in him all have sinned, Romans 5.12. So Christ died as the public
representative of all in him, who therefore are said in the Scriptures to be
crucified with him, and dead with him, vertually; and this death which he
submitted to for them was no natural, no ordinary death, but the very second
Death the Text speaks of, so far as God thought to be sufficient, and as the
excellency of his person was capable of; so far as that Divine Justice is
satisfied, the Law fulfilled, and all Enemies vanquished in the main, and so
broken, as they shall never recover strength to conquer finally the weakest
true Believer. Though he did not despair, nor endure his Sufferings eternally;
for being God-man, his Deity made his Sufferings of infinite Value and Virtue,
though he was under them but for a time; And it is very probable he endured in
his Agony in the Garden, and upon the Cross, even the whole of what Believers
must else have been under for ever: Great was the shame cast upon him; He was a
Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, even from his Cradle to his Cross;
from his Birth to his Burial: He was made a Curse for them. God his Father hid
his face from him; yea, laid his severe hand of Justice and Wrath upon him: He
spared not his own Son, but was pleased to bruise him, and put him to grief. O
the pains he endured both in his Body and Soul! His Soul was made an Offering
for sin, and he bare our sins in his own Body on the Tree, Esaias 57. 1 Pet.
2.24. And this, that all true Believers might not be hurt by the second Death,
either in Body or Soul: He underwent the Curse, that they might inherit the
Blessing; He was wounded for their Transgressions, that they through his
Stripes might be healed; He died this Death for them, that they might live
through him an Eternal Life. I have read of a Bird, which if it comes near a
man, who is troubled with the Yellow Jaundice, it attracts the Disease to it
self* cures the sick person; but the Bird dies Christ took our Nature and S^n
upon him, dies for them, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting Life. Now Christ having by his Blood given full Satisfaction,
God the great Creditor will not exact the same Debt twice, of the Surety and of
the Debtor too; but they are reckoned to have discharged all in him, to dye in
him and rise in him, and so to overcome in him; and therefore cannot, shall not
be hurt of the second Death.

Use 1. This Doctrine, well considered and applied, gives strong Consolation to
all true Believers; it is a great relief against the fears of outward Troubles,
and of bodily Death, that King of Terrors, and Terror of Kings: Though they
may come under the smart of the first, (which yet the Lord can make easy to
them) yet they are free from the hurt of the second Death, which is indeed the
sting of the first; The sting of Death is Sin: this they overcome in Christ. A
Fly makes as great a noise as a Be, yet we fear it not so much, because it
has no Sting: So here, Death has lost its Sting as to true Believers, though
it may terrific Nature, yet it shall not prove deadly to them. Christ threatens
some, that he will kill their Children with Death, Rev. 2.23. Some are killed
with Death; all dye, even the good as well as the wicked; but all are not
killed with Death, Death proves not deadly to any true Believer.

A good man once said, That he did Aegrotare vitaliter; so all holy men and
women do Mori vitaliter: Death lays its hand upon all, but the time comes when
this hand shall be cut off, even at the Resurrection, but no Power farther than
to carry to the Grave; and Christ says, I will ransom them from the power of
the Grave, I will redeem them from Death, Hos. 13.14. It cannot deliver them
over to wrath, or carry a good man in Chains to the Prison of Hell: This is to
be killed with Death. A Believer may say, O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave,
where is thy Victory? Thanks be to God, who gives us the Victory through Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. Once past the first Death, you are for ever free from
all fear of Death: This Life is on this account miserable, that it is in fear
of Death hanging over it every moment: What is your Life, says St. James, it
is a Vapor that now is, and quickly vanishes away, Jam. 4.13, 14. But after
this, no more fear of Death to a true Christian. And to make the Joy of such
full, there is a Meiosis in this Text; when it is said they shall not be hurt
of the second Death, it implies, that they shall be called to a blessed and
immortal Life: Not only not ashamed, but have boldness and confidence before
Christ at his coming; not only sorrow and sighing will flee away, but
everlasting Joy shall be upon their heads; not only free from the Curse, but
shall hear a Come ye blessed; not only no Despair, but no doubting; yea, a
perpetual Plerophory and full Assurance of their happy state; not only no Worm
of an accusing Conscience, but the testimony of an absolving Conscience, which
will be a continual Feast; not only no Torments of Hell, but the Pleasures of
Heaven; not only no Canaanites in that Land, no Devil, no wicked men, but the
Society of holy Angels and Saints, and God's glorious Presence to all Eternity.
Why should not all sincere Believers comfort themselves, and one another, with
these things, and that in the worst of times? A Martyr, being offered Life if
he would renounce the Truth, answered, Can you give me Eternal Life? And being
threatened with Death for refusal, he said, You cannot bring me under the second
Death, you cannot put me to Eternal Death; You can kill my Body, but that is all
you can do. I must fear to offend him, that can destroy Body and Soul in Hell.
Better it is, says he, that I have a little Wormwood in my Mouth a while, than
to have my Bowels filled with it for ever. Oh! how would the Improvement of
this Text and Truth support and comfort a Christian, in the saddest conditions
he may be called to pass through in this world.

Use. 2. Is it thus, that Overcomers shall not be hurt of the second Death?
Then let us all make out for true Faith in Jesus Christ; for this is the
Victory whereby we overcome the World, and all that is in the World, even our
Faith, 1 John 5.4. This is the first Resurrection, which whosoever has a part
in is blessed; If you ask wherein are such blessed? The Text tells you, Rev.
20.6. On such the second death has no power. Some understand this of Romish
Idolatries and Superstitions, for it is said, If any man worship the Beast and
his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand, the same shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God which is poured out without mixture into
the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone
in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: And they
have no rest night nor day who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever
receives the mark of his name: which implies, say they, that those who live
and dye under the dominion of those Antichristian abominations in Doctrine,
Worship, and Practice, and rise not by true Faith in Christ, and Repentance
toward God, will fall under the power of the second death. It Is said, every
living soul died in the Sea; for it became as the Blood of a dead man, when the
Vial was poured out upon it, Revel. 16.3. Whence some have concluded, that
those under the Romish Jurisdiction, who live and dye under the full Dominion
and Practice of their Idolatrous wicked Doctrines and Worship, cannot be saved.
But others take this first Resurrection, to be meant of a Spiritual quickening
to a Divine Life, the Dead hear the Voice of the Son of God in the Gospel, and
live; this is when Faith is first wrought, which is the beginning of the Soul's
life and strength, the first born of graces, the bond of Union between Christ
and Believers, and so brings all the strength and Grace of Christ into their
hearts, for Christ and all his Fullness dwells there by Faith, and by that is
derived to the Soul, to enable it to overcome all its Enemies: Where this is
not wrought, Sin and Satan do conquer and utterly destroy the Soul. If ye
believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins, says Christ to the Jews,
Joh. 8.21, 24. Should any one come and tell us, You shall die in a Ditch, or in
a Goal, it would sound harshly in our ears; but for Christ to say, Ye shall dye
in your sins, is yet more dreadful: For a man may die in a Ditch, or in a
Prison, and yet go to Heaven; but if any one die under the full power of Sin
and Satan, a dead Dog is better than he; it had been good for that man he had
never been born, for he drops presently into Hell, and the Second Death has an
irrecoverable Power over him; he can never get from under it, because all his
Sins will be laid upon him. If a Debtor be Arrested and cast into Prison, no
sooner do his Creditors understand it, but they come and bring in their several
Actions, that a man must lie there all his days. Thus if the first Death Arrest
us, and we under the full Dominion of sin, Satan comes in, Conscience comes in,
the Law comes in; yea, God himself comes in, all come in and lay Action upon
Action against us, and there we must lie, till the last Mite be paid: which
because we can never do, we must lie there to all Eternity. We live in very
dying Times, and none can tell how soon the thread of his Life may be cut; If we
look not diligently to it, we shall dye in our sins, and so be undone for ever.
O let us look and get true Faith, for it is he that believes that overcomes,
and he that overcomes shall not be hurt of the Second Death.

SERMON III.
REV. II. 17. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna,
and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no
man knows, saving he that receives it.


WE have here another of those excellent Promises made to Overcomers: It is the
concluding words of that Epistle to the Church in Pergamos, as in the 12th
Verse is evident. Some say this was a great City, distant from Jerusalem Two
hundred and twenty eight miles, very populous, but very wicked: Hence we read,
Satan's seat was there. A King rules over all his Subjects, yet he has his
Throne in some chief City of the Land. Satan that King of the bottomless Pit,
as he is styled, Rev. 9.1. reigns over all wicked men; yet in those notoriously
wicked, he may be said to have his seat. This was, say some, the Seat or Court
of Attalus, in whose time it was written, Discedat ab Aula, qui velit esse
plus: Like that to the Prophet, Flee thee away, O thou Seer, for it is the
King's Court, Amos 7.13. Afterward it was the Seat of the Roman persecuting
Governors, (who were Satan's chief Instruments, in afflicting and destroying
the Saints) and so is called Satan's seat. Christ takes special notice of the
places of his peoples abode, I know where thou dwell, even where Satan's Seat
is: He observes how perilous a place this Pergamos was, and what dangers as to
Liberty and Life his Servants were in here. Antipas had already suffered
Martyrdom for the Truth, (the name of some good Minister, or of the Pastor of
that Church, as many judge) an Honor not granted to the Angels of Heaven, as
Latimer says; yet we find a Church planted and preserved here, who held fast
his Name, (...), as with tooth and nail, or by main strength. Christ will have
to do where Satan reigns; some good he will have in the worst places; a remnant
of upright ones in a crooked and perverse Generation. As Satan had a Judas
among the Apostles, a Demas among the Disciples, a Simon Magus among the
Believers; so the Lord had a Noah in the ungodly world, a Job in an Idolatrous
Vz, a Lot in filthy Sodom, a Joseph in Pharaoh's Court, Saints in Nero's house,
and some that held fast the Truth even in Pergamos itself; those he reserves to
be Witnesses for him, and to testify against those to their Condemnation, who
will not by their good Example be brought to Conversion. Let us all labor to
be good in evil Times, it is excellent in itself, and will be our commendation
before Christ at last, as appears by his Testimony of them here; Thee have I
found righteous before me, says the Lord to Noah, in this Generation, Genesis
7.1. What kind of Generation that was, is set down; It was a time when Iniquity
abounded, all flesh had corrupted their way, a deluge of wickedness had covered
the Earth; for Noah now to be righteous, was excellent indeed: And it will be
our glory, if we study to be Lights in a dark World, holy among the filthy,
Lilies among Thorns, and as the Fish, fresh in Salt-waters. This may comfort us
also in very evil Times, Christ will preserve some from the stroke of
Persecution; Antipas was slain, yet some did remain; some, yea many may suffer
hard things, yea it is possible some particular Churches may be extirpated, yet
a Church Christ will have on Earth, against which the Gates of Hell, Satan's
Seat shall not prevail. Many Faithful ones may be removed by a natural or
violent Death, yet because Christ lives, therefore his Truth shall live, his
Cause and Interest shall live, and survive all Enemies and Opposers. Let this
help our Faith and Joy, though we dwell where Satan's seat is. Rome
Antichristian is now esteemed that Seat of the Beast, mentioned, Rev. 16.10.
yet even there God has his People, Come out of her my People, says the Lord,
Rev. 18.4. A People Christ had, and still has, where Antichrist most prevails,
though it greatly concerns them to come out thence, dangerous to continue
there, both for Infection of Sin, and for Infliction of Punishment, as this
Scripture expresses, Come out, that ye partake not of her Sins, and receive
not of her Plagues.

Pliny says, That Mice will hasten out of a house that is ready to fall on
their heads; And Spiders with their Webs will drop, before the house falls.
Certainly, Antichrist's ruin hastens, and Babylons Fall approaches, Come out
of her therefore. O all the People of God, Come out from her Idolatries, be ye
separate from all her Abominations and Corruptions. And to encourage all to
strive to get Victory over the Evil of Evil Times, this further Promise in the
Text is given to them of Pergamos, and to us in them; the sum whereof take in
this Proposition.

Doct. That Overcomers shall have such special and peculiar Favors given them
by Christ, as none know but they that receive them. There are some things in
which the men of the world intercommon with the Saints; as, Natural Endowments,
Worldly Enjoyments, External Church Priviledges, the common Gifts of the
Spirit, and superficial Tastes of Heavenly things; Absalom had Beauty as well
as, yea, greater than David; Herod and Jonadab had Wit and Policy as well as
Joseph; the Fool in the Gospel, was rich as well as Abraham; the foolish
Virgins were in Church Fellowship, as well as the wise; Apostates, such as are
not renewed to Repentance, may taste the good Word of God, and the Powers of
the World to come, as well as those who had better things in them, even things
that accompany, (...), that have Salvation in them: Saul had the Gift of
Prophecy, Judas Gifts of Preaching, Prayer, and working Miracles, as well as
the other Apostles; yet notwithstanding all this, there are peculiar benefits
Believers share in, which others have no part, no lot in: The secret of the
Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant, Psalm.
25.14. Not here meant of his providence, blessing him in outward things; of
this Job speaks, saying, The Secret of God was upon his Tabernacle, Job 29.4.
But the understanding of the mysteries of his Word and Covenant (hid from the
wise and prudent of the World) and their own interest in them.

Believers are the friends of God; as Abraham was called the friend of God,
James 2. So Christ called his Disciples friends; now the secret Cabinet is
unlockt and set open to a friend, though shut to strangers. Amicus alter idem:
A friend is another self; and a man cannot conceal any thing from himself, and
therefore not from his friend. Whatsoever Christ heard of his Father he made
known to his friends, John 15.15. His secret is with the righteous, Prove. 3.32.
the very Arcana Imperii, the mysteries of the Kingdom are made plain to them,
Luke 8.10. It is a favor to be of the Kings Court, but more to be of his
Council; Courtiers know more than those that live far remote from the Kings
Court; but Counselors know his secrets, the Privy-Counsellor is acquainted
with the special mysteries of State. Carnal professors and hypocrites may know
many truths, which Heathens who live not under the sound of the Gospel may be
ignorant of, and in an ordinary way cannot know; yet are they but of the Court;
Believers only are of the Counsel, to whom the mysteries of grace and godliness
are disclosed. It is said, the Lord told Samuel in his ear, 1 Samuel 9.15. When a
man tells his friend a secret he would not have others know, he whispers in his
ear; so the Lord deals with his People, he reveals those secrets to them which
every one shall not know; which indeed eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor
has entered into the hearts of other men: These God reveals to Believers by his
spirit, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. On this account is the Church styled by Christ a Garden
enclosed, Cant. 4.12. Not only are Believers, as to their persons, so enclosed
that they cannot fall away and miss of salvation, nor are the graces of such
only so enclosed that they perish not; but they are also enclosed in their
mystical enjoyments, that none partake of them but themselves; To which agrees
that Prove. 14.10. The heart knows its own bitterness, and a stranger does not
intermeddle with his joy. Believers have bitter and sweet, listings up and
castings down, sorrows and joys peculiar to themselves alone.

Quest. You will say, What are those special favors Christ gives those that
overcome, which others cannot receive?

Answ. There are many of these peculiar tokens of special love he does bestow
upon them that by faith get Victory over their spiritual Enemies as true
Believers do: we read that Abraham gave the sons of the Concubines portions and
sent them away, but to Isaac he gave all that he had, Genesis 25, 5, 6. God gives
portions in this Life even to all, to the worst of men; but some things
Believers have, others share not in; They have the Lord for their God, in a
peculiar covenant relation: it is said, he is not ashamed to be called their
God, Heb. 11.16. others have none of the life of God given them, none of the
fullness of God, none of the peculiar knowledge of God, no special interest in
the attributes of God, none of the saving influential goodness of God; all
which the Saints receive. Yea, they partake of Christ, they have received
Christ Jesus the Lord, Colos. 2.16. others are without Christ, no right to the
Covenant, no interest in the Promises; no reconciliation, no righteousness, no
acceptance, no salvation, for these benefits are derived to men by Faith in
Christ; I might add, Believers only are partakers of the spirit of God; I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, says Christ, even
the Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive, John 14.16, 17. And he is
to them a Spirit of Light and Wisdom, a Spirit of Power and Love, and of a
sound mind, a spirit of Grace and Holiness, a spirit of Love and joy, none of
which things others partake of. But I wave those, and confine my discourse to
those in the Text.

1. Hidden Manna; To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden
Manna, that is, of Christ himself; whom, though none of the Princes of this
World knew, yet God reveals this hidden Manna to his hidden ones by his Spirit.
It is an allusion to the Manna God gave Israel the Wilderness, which was a
famous and excellent type of Christ; as he himself largely declares, John 6.
Moses gave you not that Bread from Heaven, but my Father gives you the true
Bread from Haven. For this, pointing to himself, is the Bread of God which
comes down from Heaven, and gives life unto the World. verse 32.33. and so,
verse 48. I am that Bread of Life. Again, verse. 56. This is the Bread which
comes down from Heaven, whereof if a man eats he shall not dye. This Manna,
God gave the Jews, was twice hidden; 1. It fell in the dew of the Morning and
so was hidden from their sight; for it is said, when the Dew was gone up, they
saw a little round thing, and when they saw it, they said, it is Manna, Ex.
16.14, 15, 33. And 2. It was hidden when some part of it was by Gods
appointment put into a golden pot, and preserved as a memorial of that
wonderful Work to future Generations; unto this latter many take the Text to
allude. The sense of this Promise take in two things. 1. That Christ will give
Overcomers to feed and feast upon himself, sweet tastes of himself here in
Dunes and Ordinances; Even in these they shall be able to say as Christ did, I
have meat to eat you know not of, Joh. 4.32, we have hidden Manna given us the
World cannot taste of. Of this they eat sometimes in Prayer; when Hannah had
prayed, she was so strengthened by this Manna, that it is said, her countenance
was no more sad, 1 Samuel 1.18. An ancient once speaking of what he met with of
Christ in this Ordinance, said, nunquam abs te absque te recedo: Lord, I never
go from thee without thee: very sweet are the Refreshments victorious souls
meet with in this Duty; so in hearing the word, they meet with more than a
voice of words, even Angels food, the hungry soul is filled, they eat the word
as Jeremiah says he did, and find their weak hands strengthened, their feeble
knees confirmed, their fainting hearts comforted, their doubts resolved, and
their minds settled. Whilst Peter was preaching the word, the Holy Ghost fell
upon all the hearers, Acts 10.44. Especially, in that great Ordinance of the
Lords Supper, Believers feed not only upon Sacramental Bread, but hidden Manna
also; Here they eat his Flesh, which is meat indeed, and drink his Blood, which
is drink indeed, and sup with Christ and he with them; Here they have a feast
of fat things, and wine on the lees well refined; they are satisfied, as with
marrow and fatness, and taste his love which is better than wine; fat things
both sweet and filling, yet not cloying as other fat things are. My soul is
satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy Temple, says David,
Psalm. 65.4. We read that the Israelites nauseated the Manna, We have nothing
besides this Manna, Numb. 11. who shall give us flesh to eat? The excellent
Bread God gave them, was now but light Bread, and they loathed it, and grew
weary of it, but the spiritual refreshments Believers sometimes are partakers
of, have a present delight in them, and create an earnest appetite in the soul
after them. Such hidden Manna does Christ give them to eat here. 2. This
Promise intimates, that they shall feed and feast themselves upon him in
Heaven: He is hid and laid up there, as the Manna in the golden pot was laid up
in the holiest of all, which was but a shadow of this mystery. This none but
themselves can be admitted to share in, for without are the fearful and the
unbelievers: Here they eat by Faith, there by sight; here now and then a little
as they are able to bear, there fully and without intermission: Here when the
King sits at the table, their spiknard sends forth its savor, their graces and
gracious affections slow forth; What will the Sweetmeats of Heaven, the full
and eternal fruition of this Banquet, the everlasting enjoyment of these
Dainties produce in them? Blessed is he that shall eat bread, this Bread of
Life in the Kingdom of God, both of Grace and Glory. This is not meat that
perishes, but meat that endures to everlasting Life, John 6.27. This is the
first thing Christ here promises to them that overcome.



2. The white Stone is another of those peculiar Favors; I will give him the
white stone. It Is judged to be an Allusion to that practice in use of old among
the Romans, who gave both white and black Stones; white ones were given in the
Election of Officers, and Absolution of Malefactors. 1. In the Election of any
to an high Office, they gave him a white Stone, as a certain Token thereof: The
sense then of the Promise is, that Conquerors shall have the assurance of their
Election to be Vessels of Mercy, that they are chosen to Salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, and the belief of the Truth, to the end and to
the means, to Glory and to Grace; and though the means be the last in
intention, yet they are first in execution; their Salvation is first intended,
but Faith and Holiness are first effected. Now to have the Assurance that we
are chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world, that we be holy before
him here, and happy with him hereafter, Who can declare the Refreshment it
carries with it? Comfortable it is, 1. In respect of Delusion; They shall
deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect, Mat. 24.24. In the superstructure
of Truth they may be deceived, but fundamentally and finally they never shall;
because both the deceived and the deceiver are the Lords, Job 12.13, 16.
Deceivers may distemper them, but it is not possible they should poison them.
The Elect are a people exempted from the fatal Infection of false Prophets, and
false Christ's who decive many; this is a great Comfort to such in these
erroneous days. 2. In respect of Accusation, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect? Romans 8.33. Who shall charge when God discharges? True it
is, many will be ready to lay things to their charge, Satan will accuse them,
he is the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12. the Law will accuse them, the World
will accuse them; but God will justify them, which makes all their Accusations
null and void; as Christ caused all the Woman's Accusers to go out, so will Gods
acquitting them, make those Accusers and all their Accusations to vanish. 3. In
respect of public Calamities, which are shortened upon their account. For the
Elects sake those days shall be shortened, Mat. 24.23. What days? Even the days
of Tribulation which were to come upon the Jews; except those days should be
shortened, no flesh should be saved, no Jew should be alive, all would fall
under destruction when those Calamities come. Many others fare the better for
the Elects sake; these are the Salt of the Earth, that being sprinkled here and
there, preserve it from perishing. God gave all that were in Zoar to Lot, and
all that were in the Ship to Paul; if it were not for his Elect in the world,
he would make a short work in the Earth. And 4. In respect of their own
personal oppressions; Shall not God hear and avenge his Elect, that cry unto
him night and day? I tell you, he will avenge them speedily, Luke 18.7, 8. When
their Enemies are above Fear, and they below Hope, when there is not Faith on
the Earth to believe, there are Bowels in Heaven to relieve them. 5. In respect
of his working for them at the Resurrection and Day of Judgment; whereas they
will lie scattered here and there, he will gather together his Elect from all
parts of the world by his Angels, Mat. 24.31. Who will know them by their
Fathers mark upon their Foreheads: And as Servants know their Masters Corn from
another, and the Wheat form the Tares; so will the Angels soon discern and
single out the Elect from the rest, by the Glory and Cheerfulness which he will
put upon them, and into them. 6. In respect of the cooperation of all things
here for their good, according to that Promise, All things shall work together
for good to them that are called according to his purpose, Romans 8.28. They say
the Philosophers-Stone turns all it touches into Gold; This white Stone, as a
Token of our Election according to God's Eternal purpose, turns all Conditions
and Dispensations to good. How unspeakably full of Comfort are these things to
all Overcomers from this Gift of the White Stone, as a Sign of their Election!


2. White Stones were given of old in the Absolution of Malefactors, as black
ones were given to persons Condemned, as a Token they must dye; so white ones
to them acquitted in their Courts of Judicature. It Is as if Christ had said, To
him that overcomes will I give an evidence of the Remission of his Sins. And
what a Fountain of Consolation is in this particular? Son, be of good cheer,
thy Sins are forgiven thee, Mat. 9.2. Well might he be cheerful; to have the
assurance of our sins being pardoned, is able to make any one everlastingly
merry; Yea, though under present afflictions: This Palsy-man was not cured of
his disease, when Christ bid him rejoice; yet ground enough of joy he had, to
be assured from Christ's own mouth that his sins were forgiven him. Blessed is
the man whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered, Psalm. 32.1. for
this is an infallible evidence of Gods favor: outward mercies we may receive
from an angry God, silver and gold, and precious stones in abundance, and yet
from the wrath of God; but this white stone of Absolution is a certain token of
Love and Reconciliation. It Is not a giving-God for our Bodies that can give
grounds of Comfort so much, as a forgiving-God for our Souls can do. This
evidenceth our Redemption by Christ, In him we have Redemption through his
Blood, the Forgiveness of Sin: This brings Salvation. John Baptist's going
before the face of the Lord was, To give knowledge of Salvation to his People,
by the remission of their Sins, Ephesians. 1.7. Luke 1.77. Reconciliation stands in
it; God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
sins, 2 Cor. 5.19. In a word, it is the inlet to, and ushers in all other Good
and Mercy; Take away all Iniquity, and take up good, or give us good, as it is,
Hos. 14.2. They must pray for good, O but your Sins keep good things from you,
Jer. 5.25. Therefore first their request is, Take away all Iniquity: No good to
be given, till sin be forgiven; but when that is removed that withholds good
from them, then the passage is cleared, and way is made for all good to come
unto them: It makes way for the Liberty and Deliverance of the Church from
Troubles, Speak comfortably to Jerusalem, tell her that her Iniquity is
pardoned, and her Warfare is accomplished: When Sin was pardoned, her
Afflictions and Troubles soon had an end: It brings health to a whole Land. The
Inhabitant of the Land shall not say, I am sick; the Land shall be free from
infectious, pestilential and Epidemical Diseases. How comes this about? The
People that dwell therein shall be forgiven their Iniquity, Esaias 33.24. Oh this
is that which sweetens all other Comforts and Contentments; as the want of it
imbitters all our sweet things: What are we the better for House, Land, Silver
and Gold, when our Sin is not pardoned, when the Curse and Wrath of God hangs
over our heads, and is ready in this condition to fall upon us, and arrest us
every moment, to draw us to Hell for ever? But then Mercies are Mercies indeed,
when they come to us in the stream of Christ's Blood, with a Pardon in their
hand. Hence Believers are taught to pray, Give us this day our daily Bread, and
forgive us our sins; to show, that our Bread is sweet, when it comes with
pardoning Mercy. God had given David the healing his Diseases, and crowned him
with loving Kindness and tender Mercies. What made it so, but forgiving Mercy?
First he sets down that, Who forgiveth all thine Iniquities; then follow the
other Mercies, Psalm. 103.2, 3, 4. Pardoning Mercy is Crowning Mercy. Yea, this
fits us for holy Duties; Prayer or Sacraments: as sin unpardoned makes God hide
his face, that he will not hear, or appear to the Soul. It turns Prayer into
Sin, and Sacraments into Sin: So if this be taken away, the person is accepted,
and then all Duties are accepted, and God will be seen in them to the Soul, and
give it communion with himself. In a word, this fits us for a Suffering state
and time. How will the sense of Pardon, that assures a man he shall never be
cast into Hellfire, make him even willingly embrace and submit to a Fiery
Trial for Christ's sake? It prepares for Death, whether natural or violent. All
must die, and as a man's Death is, such is his Doom: As Death leaves us,
Judgment finds us. Job prayed earnestly for the white Stone of Absolution, as
it is an excellent preparative for his Dissolution; And why do thou not
pardon my sin, for now shall I sleep in the dust? Job 7.21. As if he had said,
Lord, my great Afflictions seem to hasten on my great change, and therefore now
especially I beg the pardon of my sin, and the sense of it unto my Soul, and
then I am prepared to sleep in the dust. We should not lie down in our Beds,
much less in our Graves, with sin unpardoned: If that be taken away, no matter
how soon we dye; Feri Domine, feri, tantum ignosce mihi peccatum, said Luther;
Smite me, Lord, smite as thou will, though by sharp Afflictions or Death, all
is welcome, if sin be forgiven: This is that the Lord here promises to
victorious Christians, when he says, He will give them the white Stone.

3. Anew name written in the Stone, is the third and last of those special
Favors promised to Overcomers in the Text. There are some that take it to be
an Allusion to that Custom of giving Stones to men, with their Names written
on them, as Tickets, showing them such as should be admitted to those Solemn
Feasts, held in honor of those that were Victorious in their sacred Games:
Then the meaning is, that Christ will give conquering Christians a privy Mark,
whereby they may be known and admitted to the Heavenly Banquet of the hidden
Manna, as welcome Guests. And, O! how high a Favor is it to carry the
Privy Seal of Heaven about us? To have a Token that we shall be taken up to the
Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, when others shall not taste of those Dainties? But
most take the new Name here to be Filius Dei, an Adopted Son of God, and make
it an Allusion to that of Isaiah, 65.15. God shall call his Servants by another
Name. A name better than the name of Sons and Daughters: For by this they are
Called and Translated out of the old family of Sin and Satan, to be of the
Family of God, of the household of Faith; a Privilege far excelling the civil
Adoption in use among men; for he takes many Sons and brings them to Glory, a
man but one: And when he has done that, he cannot communicate his own Likeness
to him. But God with the new Name gives a new Nature; with the Spiritual
Adoption conveys a Principle of the Divine Nature, 2. Pet. 1.4. If a man
adopts, it is either because he has no Son of his own, or else because his Son
is prodigal and disobedient; but God had a Son from all Eternity, one who never
displeased or disobliged him in thought, word, or deed: So that this new Name
giving is an act of free and rich Grace. Behold what manner of Love the Father
has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God, 1 John 3.1. If
men Adopt, it is but to some earthly Inheritance; But God gives an Inheritance
in light, incorruptible, undefiled, that never fades away, reserved in Heaven
for them, 1 Pet. 1.4. So that all his Children are Heirs, Heirs of God, and
Joint-heirs with Christ, Roman. 8.17. Heirs of the Promises, Heb. 6.17. Heirs
of the Righteousness which is by Faith, Heb. 11.7. Heirs of Salvation, of the
Kingdom of Heaven, Heb. 1. ult. Jam. 2.5. They have a glorious Liberty, called
The Liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21. A Liberty from sins Dominion and
Pollution, from the Covenant and Curse of the Law, from the Power of Satan, the
World, and Death. They have a gracious Access to God their Father, I will arise
and go to my Father, says the Prodigal, Luke 15. And his pity in all their
Troubles: As a Father pities his Children, so the Lord pities them that fear
him, Psalm. 103.13. They have access with boldness to the Throne of Grace, and
have his eye, his ear, his heart and his hand. We read of a Child., who finding
himself not well, ran to his Father, and cried out, My head, my head, 2 King.
4.19. Thus may God's Children go to him, and say, My head, my heart. Oh! this
ignorant head, Father, enlighten it; Oh this carnal heart! Father, spiritualize
it; Oh this dead, hard, earthly, divided heart of mine! Father, quicken,
soften, make Heavenly, and compose it, unite my heart to fear thy Name: Yea, as
a Father spares his obedient Son, so the Lord will spare his, As a man spares
his own Son that serves him, Malac. 3.17. If he correct them, it is in love and
in measure, and he will provide for them here; Your Heavenly Father knows you
have need of all these things, Matt. 6. Jesus Christ is your Brother, he is not
ashamed to call you Brethren, the Angels are your Guard; the King's Son has
the Nobles and Peers of the Realm to wait upon him: The Angels are all
Ministering Spirits sent forth for their good: yea, you shall be ever with your
Father. The Son abides in the house for ever, John 8. as that Father said, Luke
15. Son, thou art ever with me. He that is a Servant to day, may be none to
morrow; but if God be a Father, and we his Children by Adoption, this relation
abides unchangeably, he is an everlasting Father, and we his Sons and Daughters
for ever. O what an excellent Privilege is this new Name here promised! To be
a Son of God, is an old Name, for Adam was called the son of God; but it was
only by Creation: The Angels in that sense are also called the Sons of God; but
to which of all the Angels did ever God say, Thou art my Adopted Son? This is
the new Name here spoken of, and is the peculiar Privilege of true Believers.
It Is storied, That Alexander the Conqueror was by the flattering Oracle
saluted as a Son of Jupiter; but the Believer, who overcomes the Devil, Sin,
and the World, in a more noble Spiritual way, is by the true Oracle styled, the
Son of God; To as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believe in his Name, Joh. 1.12. The Believer is
no longer a mere Son of Adam, but in the instant of his Believing is united to
Christ the natural Son of God, and so becomes an Adopted one. And this is not
an empty Title, For they are born of God, and are of the Seed-royal of Heaven;
yea, this Adoption is, Quaedam Similitudo Filiationis aeterni, as a Learned man
expresses it, a Shadow of the Eternal One.

The natural son is the Image of Gods nature, the brightness of his Fathers
glory, and the express Image of his person, Heb. 1.2. The adopted Son is the
Image of his will, of his own will begat he us by the word of truth, James
1.18. And this puts a luster upon Believers, beyond what is to be seen upon the
Princes and Potentates of the earth. All the great swelling names thrown upon
them by men, is but, fumus seculi, a little smoke which quickly is scattered;
but this divine Adoption is, radius coeli, a beam of heavenly glory, which
makes them shine in the eyes of the Angels, and continues an indelible
character upon them. You see by these things somewhat of the new name here
promised, and is this a little matter in any man's account? When Saul's servants
told David of the purposes the King had to give him one of his Daughters to
wife, David said, Seems it a light thing to any of you to be a Kings
Son-in-law, seeing I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed? 1 Samuel 18.23. What
may Believers then say as to this Divine Adoption? Shall it be a light matter
to be a Son or Daughter of the most high God, the King of Kings? That they who
may say to corruption, Thou art my Father, or as it is said, Thy Father was an
Amorite, and thy Mother a Hittite, Ezekiel. 16. should receive the spirit of
Adoption, crying, Abba, Father, even to God himself? This, This is that new
Name which is here promised to all that overcome.

I might here add Reasons of this point; The love of God to them, his
chusing-love is the cause of this. The Lord loves the righteous, Psalm. 146.8.
Therefore his secret is with the righteous, Prove. 3.32. Delilah could not
believe Samson's love was so great to her as he pretended; because he told her
not that great secret, where his strength lay. It springs also from the
purchase of Christ: He bought a peculiar people, and purchased for them
peculiar favors: Their common, much more their special Mercies are the price
of Blood; and what Christ has purchased, God will give out unto them: To all
which, add his engagement by Promise, as in the Text, And faithful is he that
has promised. The Use follows, and briefly.

Use. 1. See here the great mistake of the men of the world, who are ready to
think none outgo them in their Enjoyments; They exceed in outward things, and
knowing no better, conclude themselves the only Favorites of God; And others
miserable, who want them. This Error proceeds from Ignorance of; and
Inexperience as to higher things; Every one is satisfied with what he
apprehends most suitable, as the Prodigal with his Husks; but having a new
Nature, must have new Food, and began to think of the Bread in his Father's
house. How much are all in a state of Unbelief to be pitied, who judge good men
have no such Privileges, as to be acquainted with God's Secrets more than
themselves: They measure a good man by themselves, and therefore are ready to
say in this case, as Eliphaz did to Job in another, Have thou heard the Secret
of God? What know thou that we know not? What understandest thou that is not
in us? Is there any secret thing with thee? Job 15.8, 9, 11. Yet Believers do
know and understand what worldly men know not, For the Secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him. The Secrets of his Counsel are reserved in his own
breast; but the Secrets of his Providence are many times revealed to them;
Surely, the Lord will do nothing, but he reveals his Secrets to his Servants
the Prophets, Amos 3.7, And the Lord himself says of Abraham, Shall I hide
from Abraham the thing that I will do? Yea, the Secrets of his Truth are with
Believers; for he has promised his Spirit of Truth shall lead them into all
Truth; the Secrets of his Love and Grace are with them, of which the world
knows nothing, no more than of the Word of God, which the Spirit only can
savingly discover, which Spirit the world cannot reeeive, Joh. 14.16, 17. As
wicked men have Bread which they eat in secret, Prove. 9.17. of which good men
desire no knowledge; some secret Lust which is as a sweet Morsel under their
Tongue, as to which good men are ready to say with the Patriarch, O my Soul,
come not thou into their secret; or with David, Let me not eat of their
dainties. So they that are truly good, have Spiritual Comforts peculiar to
themselves, which the world knows not of, never tasted of. Oh pity such, and
pray, if perhaps any may be delivered from their present delusion.

Use 2. This Truth and Text is full of Comfort to all true Believers, who are
victorious in their holy Warfare. Set these Divine Refreshments here promised,
against all Discomforts and Discouragements of spirit. Are you weak and feeble
by the assaults of the enemy? here is hidden Manna to strengthen and revive
you: Are you cast down with the fears of Sins Guilt and Gods Wrath? Here is a
White-Stone in token of your Election and Absolution; which may also relieve
against the black coals of Scandal and Reproach, with which men are ready to
dirty and defile you: And if your Names be cast out among men, Christ has
given you a new Name that shall be had in everlasting Remembrance, when the
name of the wicked shall rot. And that your Joy may be yet more full from this
Text, consider how much the Mercies promised in it, exceed the things alluded
to; The Manna God rained down to Israel was Material, this is Spiritual; That
came from the Clouds, this from the highest Heaven, from the bosom of God the
Father; That was hidden in the Dew and in the Golden Pot, this in the Virgins
Womb, and now in the Heavens; that fed the Body, this the Soul; That was apt to
breed Worms, and stink, this can see no corruption; That preserved none from
Death, Your Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness, and are dead, Job. 6.49.
But he that eats of this hidden Manna, lives for ever. So of the White Stone;
They were material the Romans gave, this is Spiritual; They were inanimate,
this is a Living Stone; Those were Tokens of a Temporal Election and
Absolution, this of a Spiritual and Eternal; Those its probable were given
sometimes to vile and wicked persons, this to none but true Believers. So for
the new Name, it is a name of Dignity and Honor, excelling the names of the
great ones of the Earth. Let Believers labor to drink in the Comfort of these
things.

Use 3. If this Doctrine be true, Then let all the Saints from these Promises
wax valiant in fight, quit themselves like men; yea, like good Soldiers of
Jesus Christ endure the greatest fight of Afflictions, Heb. 10.32. Put on and
handle well your Armor of Righteousness, to repel and repulse Temptations on
the right hand and on the left; Set your Watch, and keep it strictly, as
Soldiers must do upon Pain of Death. A Soldier being asleep when he stood
Sentinel, his Officer ran him through, thinking it an act of Justice to leeve
him as he found him. It Is a time of War, and our continual dangers should move
us not to sleep as do others; but to watch and be sober: Let Christians keep
close to the Standard. It Is Death by Martial Law for Soldiers to run away from
their Colors; they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed. Follow Christ your
Captain in all ways, dirty and clean, in all weathers fair and foul, in all
Ordinances, in all Providence. If any man serve me, let him follow me, says
Christ, Joh. 12.26. And strive to make good your ground; yield not to your
Spiritual Adversaries. Divines observe there is no armor provided by Christ
for the back, to show, that we must give no ground to our Enemies. A Captain
delights not in Renegadoes. If any man draws back, my Soul shall have no
pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. They are the Prophets words, say some; but God's,
say others; It Is true both ways: Neither God nor his People can take
plea-pleasure in Apostates. Fight courageously against your Spiritual Enemies;
as for your Bodily Enemies, you have another Rule, Love your Enemies, pray for
them that persecute you, Mat. 5. And if your Enemy hunger, feed him; if he
thirst, give him drink: Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.
But as to your Soul Enemies, fight manfully and stoutly against them, give them
no Quarter: If you spare them, your Life, your Soul must go for it. It was the
Saying of a Captain to his Soldiers, having the Spanish Army before them, and
the Sea behind them, Either you must drink up this Sea, or eat up these
Spaniards. So it is here, either we must fight and overcome our Sins, or drink
up the Sea of God's Wrath. O cease not combating, till all your foes be made
your footstool. This Church of Pergamos was overcome by the Doctrines of
Balaam and the Nicolaitans, holding both Adultery and Idolatry lawful,
Doctrines pernicious to sound Truth and a holy Life; only some held fast
Christ's Name, and did not deny his Faith, Antipas resisted unto Blood; the
rest are called upon to strive to overcome these Doctrines, by these sweet
Promises in the Text: And has not the Dragon poured out a flood of Errors
amongst us of late? Are not many carried away with diverse and strange
Doctrines? Do not some go about to null the Eternal Decrees of God? to make
void the Satisfaction of Christ? to deny and deride the Imputation of his
Righteousness to Believers in the matter of Justification? to maintain the
Doctrine of Free Will, and final Apostasy from Grace? And does it not then
concern us to keep the word of Christ, as Soldiers must keep the Word their
General gives them? so let all Christ's Soldiers keep the word of Precept, the
word of Promise, and the word of his Patience, that he may make the same
honorable report of you, which he does of them, Joh. 17.6. And they have kept
thy Word. Who knows how soon the same Trials may be upon us, that were upon
Antipas^ ^ere in his Church? Oh! that we may be found faithful Martyrs as he
was. Know, our Call to the battle is clear, our Cause is good, and our Comforts
sweet, when we have been slaying our Lusts, conquering Errors and Temptation
from the Devil and the World, Christ will meet us, as Melchizedek met Abraham,
when he came from the slaughter of the Kings, bringing forth bread and wine,
supports and comforts to our souls. Melchizedek's Bread and wine were to
Abraham Pawns and Pledges of Canaan, the Land of Promise; and Christ's supports
and comforts shall be to us Earnests of Heaven and Glory. See what consolations
flow in these promises to the Overcomer; as the Manna of old fell about the
Camps of the Israelites, and was preserved in the Golden Pot: so hidden Manna
falls about the Overcomer, and is preserved in his heart. Pardon is the white
stone, and Adoption the new name; and all these, though secrets to others, are
well known to himself: Let all that are listed to fight under Christ's Banner,
encourage themselves, and one another, with these words, To him that
overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna; and will give him a white
stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows, saving he
that receives it.

SERMON IV.
REV. II. 26, 27, 28. He that overcomes, and keeps my works unto the end, to
him will I give power over the Nations. And he shall rule them with a rod of
Iron (as the Vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to shivers) even as I
received of my Father; And I will give him the Morning Star.


HERE is another of those gracious Promises Christ makes to the Overcomers,
though directed to the Officers and Members of the Church in Thyatira, yet is
written (as the other are) for the common benefit of these seven Churches, and
of all others to the end of the World. This Thyatira was a City of Lydia, not
far from Ephesus, called Thugateira, which does signify a Daughter, as Mr.
Brightman observes; for as a Daughter newborn is always growing in age and
stature, till she comes to full ripeness, so it was with this Church, which he
therefore styles, Growing Thyatira: The true Believers went on from faith to
faith, and so consequently conquering and to conquer, Not like languishing
Ephesus, losing their first lively affections, and abating of their former
active Conversation, but making progress in their Christian course, and their
last works more than the first: The Church of Ephesus was commended for her
first love and first works, and reproved for her declining from them; yea,
threatened if she did not return and recover them. David's first ways were most
free from scandal, thence it is that Jehosaphat is commended for walking in the
first ways of David his Father, 2 Chronicles. 17.3. The love of too many that have
been very hot is grown cold to God and his ways; But these are Sea-marks,
recorded for our caution, not Landmarks set down for our Direction or
Imitation. This of Thyatira is an excellent Copy for all the Churches of Christ
to write after; Our last works should be more than the first; our last Sabbath
better Sanctified than the former; our last love to one another more than the
first, our last prayer better than the former; our Faith, Humility, and all
other graces and good things, better in the end than in the beginning. How sad
will our account be, if God shall find us declining in these things, and we
doing worse after twenty or forty years profession, than in our first entrance
into his ways? That we are less careful in keeping holy the Lord's Day than at
first? Then we would call the Sabbath a Delight, the holy of the Lord and
honorable, and would not unnecessarily run into worldly talk; but now little
else is heard from us, and little difference by observers can be made between
that Day and an ordinary Market or Fair-day. Is this to imitate Thyatira and
not Ephesus rather? No wonder God threatens to pluck all up, and to remove his
Gospel from a declining and degenerating people. Oh that yet we might remember
whence we are fallen, and repent and do our first works! Yea, let the last be
more than the first: The example of God above all should prevail with us; As
the Governor of the Feast said to Christ, Every man at the beginning does set
forth good wine, and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse; but
thou have kept the good wine till now, John 2.10. Gods first thoughts of love
to us that are his people were very precious, his electing love; His following
works in our effectual Calling into the state of Grace, and preserving us
therein, notwithstanding all the attempts of our Enemies, deserves great
admiration. But Heaven will be Heaven when all is done; His manifestations and
communications there will be such, as will force us to say, O Lord, thou have
kept the best wine till the last? Thy first thoughts and works toward us and
in us were wonderful, but yet the last are more than the first; How reasonable
is it then that we should strive to a conformity to the Lord our God in this
particular, lest we loose the things we have wrought, and receive not a full
reward? And that we may labor to get victory over all the evils growing upon
us, let us consider this promise in the Text now before us; the sum of which
take in this Proposition:

Doctr. That Christ will give great power, and excellent glory unto Overcomers.

Here are 4. things to be spoken too. 1. Who are they that Overcome? 2. What is
that great Power Christ will give them? 3. What is the Glory here promised? 4.
The Reasons of the Doctrine. These will make way for the Use.


Quest. 1. Who are or may be said to be Overcomers?

Answ. The Text gives a significant answer to this Question; He that keeps
Christ's works unto the end. When it says, He that overcomes, some will ask,
who is he? How shall we know him? He adds; and keeps my Works unto the end,
as exegetical of the former. Now these works of Christ are either such as he
commanded, or such as he himself practiced, leaving us an example that we
should follow his steps, perhaps both the one and the other, and both stand in
direct oposition to Jezebels wicked works, mentioned verse. 20. This Jezebel is
judged to be some great Princess, like that Jezebel who was the wife of King
Ahab, mentioned, 1 King. 21. only with this difference, she spoken of in
Thyatira pretends to be a Prophetess, and covers all her Wickedness under that
cloak; the other more openly and boldly declared her Sin: Now he that keeps
Christ's works in opposition to these, is he that overcomes. He that keeps
those works of Purity and Holiness Christ has commanded, and practiced for our
imitation; (for some things he did qua Deus, as he was God, which are for our
Admiration, not for our Imitation; some things he did qua Mediator, in dying to
reconcile God and man, in which we are not capable to imitate him) viz. That
Meekness and Humility, which he requires us to learn of him, Mat. 11.29. The
word (...) signifies one that is near the ground, thus was Christ; in all his
Actions he expressed great Humility, and this not seemingly only, as the Bishop
that was asked, Visne Episcopari? Answered, Nolo. Modestly showing himself
unwilling, when yet he had used all means to obtain it; but really, he declined
earthly Promotions and Dignities, out of Humility of Spirit. Farther, Christ
was much in Prayer, which work he did for our Imitation: Upon which one
descants thus, Orat is qui non fecit peccatum? silet peccator? Orat Medicus?
Cessat Aegrotus? Orat Judex? Silet Reus? Oh! Shall he that is Innocent Pray,
and the Sinner be silent? Shall the Physician pray, and the Patient be silent?
Shall the Judge pray, and the Guilty, condemned Malefactor, hold his peace?
Again, Christ was compassionate to the Bodies and Souls of Men in Misery, Mat.
9.36, 37, 38. He set them a praying for Laborers to be sent into the Harvest,
and he himself went up and down Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and
healing Bodily Diseases: He was very zealous for the Worship of God, and
against Superstitious Innovations, The zeal of his Fathers house did eat him
up, Joh. 2.17, He went through great Sufferings with much Patience; Oppressed
and afflicted he was, yet opened not his mouth, Esaias 53.7. He was faithful to
him that appointed him, Heb. 3.2. He did heartily and freely forgive the worst
of his Enemies, praying, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.
He was much grieved for the sins of others, and wept over Jerusalem. These and
many more works Christ did, that we might tread in his steps: A Christian
should be, alter Christus, another Christ.

He then that keeps these works of Christ as the Apple of his Eye, which the
least dust will offend, Prove. 7.2. Or as a man keeps his Treasure, which he
locks up in safety; or as a man keeps his Life, which he values above the
world; or as an honest Traveller keeps his way, he would not go out of it
willingly; and if he mistakes, upon knowledge of it is troubled; thankful to him
that better informs him, speedily returns into his way, is more circumspect to
prevent wandering for the future, and mends his pace for the time he lost. He
that thus keeps the Works of Christ, and that to the end, to the end of the
present Trial, yea, to the end of his Lise, this is he that overcomes. That Is
the first.

Quest. 2. What is that Power Christ here promises to give to Overcomers?

Answ. Some think it extends only to the present Enemies of this Church of
Thyatira, viz. Jezebel and her adherents; which although it has much Comfort
in it to the Members of that Church; Yet this Interpretation is too narrow: For
the Text says, He that overcomes, to him will I give Power over the Nations:
a Term of a very large extent. Yea, to show the largeness of the Power, it is
said to be the like Power to what Christ received of his Father. Now God the
Father has given Christ. Power over all flesh, Joh. 17.2. And though Believers
are not capable of having a Power every way equal with what Christ has
received; yet some share in it or shadow of it, is here promised to be given
them. Now Christ has received (...), which does import Rule and Authority.
This is Threefold:

1. There is, Potestas Dispositiva, a Right to order and dispose all things and
persons in the Nations; which some call a Providential Power: on this account
he is styled King of Nations, Jer. 10.7. Because he rules by his Power for
ever, His eyes behold the Nations, Psalm. 66.7. He disposes of his Enemies, For
he has bought them, though they deny him, 2 Pet. 2.14. He gave the price of
his Blood sufficient for them, and has Right to dispose of them, and to expect
service from them: He has this Power over his Friends, he has received Gifts
for them, though at present rebellious; yet he will subdue them to himself,
that he may dwell in them, Psalm. 68.18. Power to turn them from Darkness to
Light, and from the power of Satan to God, Act. 26. He has the Key of David,
he opens and none can shut; and shuts, and none can open, Rev. 3.7. called
the Key of the house of David, Isa. 22.22. that is, of the Church, as some
interpret. A Similitude taken from those that keep the Keys of a City, Castle,
or Palace, the Gates whereof cannot be opened without their leave and Order.
Thus Christ had opened a Church-door in Philadelphia, verse. 8. which no man can
shut: There was an open door, though many adversaries, 1 Cor. 16.9. He opens
the heart-door also, so opened he Lydia's heart, Acts, 16.14. He opens the
door of faith, as he did to those Gentiles, Acts 14.31. He opens the door of
hope in the valley of Achor, Hos. 2.15. And makes the Soul that is filled with
trouble and despairs to evade, to hope against hope; He opens a door of
deliverance from the greatest dangers and extremities. A shadow of this power
is promised to Overcomers, for by Faith and Prayer they engage the Power and
Providence of Christ to work for them: Jacob had by prayers and tears, power
over the Angel, viz. Christ, the great Angel of the Covenant, and prevailed; so
that a strange change was wrought in his Brother, who though he breathed out
threatenings and slaughter against Jacob, yet meeting together, Esau embraced
him so lovingly, contrary to his expectation, that he accepted it as a plain
token of Gods presence. Hence he says, I have seen thy Face as though I had
seen the face of God, Genesis 33.10. In his Brother's reconciled countenance he
saw the gracious face of God smiling upon him: This Victory God granted to
Jacob, as the fruit of his Wrestling and Weeping in Prayer, suffering himself
to be overcome by him, and subduing his Brother's rage and malice against him.
David's Prayer prevailed with God to defeat Achitophel's evil Counsel, 2 Samuel
15.31. and 17.23. Stephen's Prayer prevailed for the Conversion of many of his
Persecutors: Faithful and fervent Prayers have made wonderful Turns in the
Nations of the World, as might at large be showed. While Moses lifted up his
praying and believing hand, Israel prevailed against Amalek, Exodus 17.11. when
he let them down, Amalek prevailed, and the Israelites hands were enfeebled:
where we see how dangerous it is to faint in Prayer, and how powerful Prayer is
against the Power of Warlike Enemies. When Esther and her people were solemnly
engaged in this work, what a strange Turn was made thereby? A great Turn there
was upon the King's heart, he recalls all his Orders granted out for the
destroying of the Jews, and the whole Plot was turned upon Haman's head, who
contrived it against God's people: This way they have great Power over the
Nations.

2. There is Potestas Legislativa, a Legislative, or Lawgiving Power, which
Christ has received of his Father: Thus he is styled the Judge, the King, the
Lawgiver to his people, Isa. 33.22. There is one Lawgiver, says St. James,
Jam. 2.12. viz. Christ. Lycurgus, Solon, and others had Potestatem vitae and
necis, Power of Life and Death; and many now there are who make and give Laws:
yet there is but one Supreme and Absolute Lawgiver, whose Will is the Rule of
Justice, and this is Christ: none can give Laws that directly bind the the
Conscience, but he; It Is true, We are to submit our selves to every Ordinance
of man; but it is for the Lord's sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. It Is God's command that
lays an Obligation upon our Consciences to observe man's; yet withal, if men's
Laws be contrary to God's, though we must submit unto, not resist the Higher
Powers, yet active Obedience must not be given. We are to obey God rather than
men, says the Apostle, Act. 4.19. For men to impose Laws upon the Conscience,
to be observed, ex intuitu voluntatis, upon the bare sight of their Will, is to
set themselves down in the Throne of God, and speaks the very Spirit of
Antichrist. Now a shadow of this Law-giving Power may be given by Christ to
those that overcome the Enemies, and live in the times of the Churches
Exaltation upon the head of them all. When Christ was invested with all Power
in Heaven and Earth, he said to his Disciples, Go ye and teach all Nations to
observe whatsoever I have commanded, Mat. 28.19, 20. And when Christ shall have
exalted the Mountain of his House above all the Hills and Mountains of worldly
Power and Glory, then shall the Law go forth from Sion, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem, and all Nations shall flow unto it. Behold here a shadow
of this Lawgiving Power given to his Church, even as he received of his Father.
All Nations shall either professionally or really stand in an awful respect of,
and to the Church, and bow to the Laws of Christ therein established: for they
primarily receive the Law from Christ's mouth, and secondarily from the Church.

There is, Potestas Distributiva; which is a Power to distribute Rewards and
Punishments: This some call a Judiciary Power, a Power of judging all Nations,
giving Eternal Live to Believers, and Eternal Death to all the world besides.
The Father judges no man, but has cammitted all Judgment to the Son, Joh.
5.22. Before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one
from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats, Mat. 24. As many
Divisions as now there are, all will then come under that one Division, either
Sheep or Goats, and will have their Judgment passed by Christ, to whom the
Father has given that Power. Such a Power over the Nations is here promised to
Overcomers; Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the world, says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.2. Not Authoritatively and principally, not by pronouncing
Sentence, this is peculiar to Christ; but they shall join with him in judging
them at the Last Day, giving their consent unto, and applauding his righteous
Sentence. This seems here chiefly intended; for it is such a Power, as whereby
the Nations are broken, as the vessels of a Potter are broken to shivers; so
the Text expresses: Now earthen Vessels are easily and irrecoverably broken,
especially by an Iron Rod. Other Scriptures speak the same, This honor have
all his Saints, says David, To execute the Judgment written, Psalm. 149.8. What
Judgment, and where written? Some refer it to Enoch's Prophecy, mentioned by
St. Jude v. 14, 15. Behold, the Lord comes with ten Thousands of his Saints,
to execute judgment upon all, etc. To adjudge the wicked of the Nations to
eternal Misery. This dominion over the Nations shall the upright have in the
Morning of the resurrection, Psalm. 49.14.

Quest. 3. What is that eminent Glory Christ here promises to him that
Overcomes?

Answ. I will give him the Morning Star, says Christ. A sweet and full
promise; the sum of it take in the following particulars:

1. Some understand it of Christ himself, who is styled The bright and
Morning Star, Rev. 22.16. Thus he calls himself: The sense then is, I will
communicate my self wholly to him, and make him conformable to me in glory;
Always the proportion of the head and members observed: The Morning Star is the
most bright and shining of all the stars of Heaven, and communicates its light
to the world; Christ excels all men and Angels, as far as the Morning Star all
the Stars of Heaven; and he communicates all Light of Grace and Glory to the
world of Believers. He is styled The Star of Jacob, Numb. 24.17. this notes his
two Natures. A Star in its Original is from Heaven, which points at his Divine
Nature, who is the Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15. yet a Star of Jacob, as a man
of the Posterity of Jacob; so we must conceive him, both God and Man: And thus
considered, He is full of Grace, and of his fullness do all Believers receive,
even Grace for Grace. The Morning Star dispels the Nights darkness: When this
Day Star arises fully in our hearts, all mists of Ignorance and Error are
dispelled, wherein we were wrapped in our night of sin and imperfect condition
here.

2. It may intimate, that Christ will give him that overcomes a glorious
Resurrection at the Last-Day. The Prophet Daniel hints at this, They that turn
many to Righteousness shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, even as
the Stars, for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. There will not be the same measure and
degree of this; For as one Star differs from another in Glory, so it shall be
in the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.41. yet all will be adorned with resplendent
Luster and Brightness, far exceeding the beauty of the Stars; For then shall
the Righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat.
13.43. Those that have here lien among the pots smutched and sullied, shall
then outshine the Sun in his strength. Shine they shall in their Bodies, which
shall be conformed to the most glorious body of Christ, Phil. 3.21. And in
their Souls, those Spirits of just men made perfect; and in their whole
persons, as the Spouse of Christ; Vxor fulget radiis Mariti; she shall shine
with the Beams of his Beauty. A glimpse of this Glory was seen in Moses's Face,
in Christ's Transfiguration, in Stephen's Countenance: But the full
manifestation thereof is reserved to the day of the Resurrection.

3. It may imply, That the Overcomer shall have the next degree of Glory to
Christ, as the Morning Star is next the Sun; and is called, as some think, The
Son of the Morning, Isa.. 14.12. Because it usually appears in the Morning, a
little before the Sunrising; as if it were by the Morning produced. Victorious
Souls shall be very near to Christ in Place and Glory. When one requested her
two Sons might sit, the one at Christ's right hand, the other at his left, in
his Kingdom. He answers, It shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of
his Father. Among others, those that have encountered great Troubles, and come
off Conquerors, shall share in this Honor; For upon this request of the woman,
Christ said, Are ye able to drink of the Cup I am to drink of, and to be
baptized with the Baptism I am to be Baptized with? Mat. 20.20. etc. Implying,
they must come under a Baptism of Blood and Suffering, that would come to this
Honor, to be so near to me as you desire: This honor has he reserved to give
to him that Overcomes. All the Saints shall be with him, but these so near to
him, as the Morning Star to the Sun.

4. This Phrase may also intimate, that Christ will give the First Fruits of
Glory, Foretastes of Heaven, even whiles in this world, to assure of the full
enjoyment in another. The Morning Star is, Anteambulo Solis, the Suns
Harbinger, and Forerunner of a perfect Day. Christ will give such as overcome
Prelibations and Pledges of future Happiness, assuring them, That their path
shall be as the Light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove.
4.18.

This Morning they will not exchange for the brightest Noonday of worldly
Glory, which ends in a Midnight of Trouble and Misery; but their Morning-Light
is in a full Sunshine of Happiness. Hence the Saints are said to have received
the first fruits of the Spirit, Romans 8.23. Though in regard of quantity, the
First Fruits under the Law, were but an handful in comparison of the whole; yet
in their signification, they were an evidence to them that they should receive
a good crop of the rest: So the Graces and Comforts of the Spirit of God
Believers have here, are not only sweet to their apprehension for the present,
but also in their reflection as to what is future; they are a pledge of the full
Harvest: Christ is said to be The first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor.
15.20. Because his Resurrection was a forerunner of the Resurrection of all his
Members; so are the first fruits of the Spirit here, an assurance of a joyful
Harvest of Heavenly Felicity hereafter. The first beginnings of Spiritual
Regeneration, are an earnest of the whole crop of Salvation. And as it was said
of old, The Gleanings of Ephraim are better than the Vintage of Abiezer; so may
I say in this matter, The first Fruits of Glory Believers receive here, are
better than the greatest harvest of earthly contentments; because a drop here
is a sure sign of a River hereafter: the Morning Star a certain forerunner of a
glorious constellation in Heaven. To all which may be added, that,

5. This Phrase implies, that Christ will clear the wronged innocence of
Believers: As the Morning Star brings light after a dark night, so after many
false accusations and uncharitable censures passed against them by the World,
and Professors also, God will bring forth their righteousness as the light, and
their judgment as the Noonday, as the Scripture shows, Psalm. 37.6. As the
hope of the Morning Star to usher in the day, causes us not to be offended
with the darkness of the night, so ought Believers to trust and wait upon God,
knowing that he will clear their cause, and restore to them their right. When
Zophar would encourage Job to listen to his counsel, his agument is, Thine age
shall be clearer than the Noon day, thou shall shine forth as the morning, Job
11.17. Thou shall overcome the darkness at present upon thee, thy innocence be
revived, and comforts renewed. Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes
in the Morning, Psalm. 30.5. The morning is, as it were, the reviving time after
the death of sleep, and brings the light, the emblem of joy, after darkness;
Thus will Christ cause the light of his peoples Innocence and Uprightness to
rise in obscurity, and their darkness to be as the Noon day, Isaiah, 58.10. As
God can cause the Sun of wicked men's honor and prosperity to go down at noon,
so he can and will cause the light of the Saints to rise at midnight: As Haman
is a notable example of the first, so Joseph of the latter: Hamans glory and
honor how quickly was it obscured and eclipsed with clouds of disgrace and
ignominy? so the false accusations which darkened Joseph's reputation vanished
as clouds before the Sun when he goes forth in his night; There shall be a
resurrrection of names, as well as of persons; A day when God will make up his
jewels, Mal. 3.17. Then shall he take them up out of the dirt of reproaches and
sufferings, and make them clean; such a vindication from all unjust imputations
and aspersions, as will give them light and gladness, joy and honor, Esth.
8.16. By these things it is evident how eminent the glory is Christ promises to
the Overcomer, when he says he will give him the morning star. The Use follows.

Use 1. Behold here then the misery of those, who yielding themselves servants
to corruption, slaves to Satan, and Captives to the world, lose their part in
these great promises, and the contrary evils are their lot and portion; such
are all those who instead of keeping Christ's works to the end, keep their
sinful and wicked works to the end; hold fast deceit and hypocrisy to the end,
retain their pride and worldliness to the end, keep their unclean, drunken, and
profane works to the end; being thus entangled and overcome, and some after
they seemed to have escaped and got victory over them, yet are again brought
into bondage, their latter end will be worse than their beginning, 2 Pet. 2.21.
Because they sin against knowledge, and love darkness rather than light,
because their deeds are evil. These may have power over Nations as civil
Governors, so had Ahasuerus, Belshazzar and others; Alexander called the
Conqueror, having subdued a great part of the world then inhabited, yet these
were overcome by their lusts: It was true of them all what was said of the
last, vicit mundum, a se vero victus; He conquered the world but was overcome
by himself: What could it profit to rule over men a while, and lusts ruled over
them, unto their destruction? These were also overcome by Divine Wrath and
Justice. All the power men have, and Victories they get over men, will not
secure them from being broken to shivers by Christ's Iron rod, as a Potters
Vessel, fatally and irrecoverably ruined: Better is he that by the power of
grace rules his Spirit, than he that takes a City or rules over Kingdoms.

Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit Maenia -- Such may have worldly
grandeur, external Pomp and Splendor, and shine like Stars of the first
magnitude, yet going on in a slate and course of sin, are but wandering Stars,
to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 13. The Angels are
styled Morning-stars; the Morning-stars sang together, that is, the Angels, as
Expositors have it; The Angels rejoiced to see the Foundations of the Earth
laid, yet some of them became Apostats, fallen Stars, being willingly overcome
by sin. Satan is called a fallen Star, Rev. 9.1. We read also of a great Star
that fell from Heaven, called Wormwood, Rev. 8.10, 11. The Roman Emperor, say
some, who shined brightly for a time, but was put down by the Goths; of whom
the Prophet Isaiah thus speaks, How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, son
of the Morning? How art thou cut down to the ground who did weaken the
Nations? Isaiah. 14.12. Sic transit gloria mundi; Though the wicked spring as
the Grass, and all the workers of Iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall
be destroyed for ever, Psalm. 92.7. O! who would rest or glory in outward
enjoyments or endowments, when if the work of Faith and Holiness be not wrought
in us with power, if the Kingdom of God comes not into our souls with power,
the sinners in Sion will be afraid, fearfulness will surprise the Hypocrites,
and the cry will be, who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Who
shall dwell with devouring fire? Isaiah 33.14. Thus will all who are here
finally overcome by their yielding themselves Servants unto Unrighteousness and
Iniquity; be everlastingly miserable, and God justified in his proceedings; and
his Justice and Wrath overcome them, when they are judged.

Use 2. This gives yet further matter of Comfort to Believers, to meditate upon
the Power and Glory here promised to him that Overcomes: Here you are many
times oppressed by the Powers of the Nations, therefore you shall have at
length full Power over all Nations; Here you endure long and dark Nights of
Temptation, Desertion, and Affliction, yet yielded not to Satan and Sin,
therefore the Morning Star shall be given to you; And when Christ who is your
life shall appear, you also shall appear with him in Glory, Col. 3.4. Faithful
is he that has promised, who also will do it. Men's Promises fail through want
of Fidelity or Ability to perform them; Satan's Promises are made to deceive:
but the words of Christ are true and faithful: He is Jehovah, who gives a being
to them in their appointed time.

Use 3. Let all be persuaded to wax more valiant in fight, and strive to be
Overcomers, that we may inherit the Power and Glory here set before us in this
Text: What desperate Designs will some venture upon in hopes of worldly Power
and Glory? Christ knowing how tempting and taking these are with the Sons of
Men, sets these suitable Promises before them, to animate and encourage them to
quit themselves like Men in this holy War, and be strong unto the Battle; and
that they who are engaged and have begun well, may not be turned back, and give
ground to the Enemy: To this end, could we overcome God, and get his Presence,
Influences, and Assistances, we should overcome all others with ease. If God be
for us, says St. Paul, who can be against us? Romans 8.31. It Is true, many are
actually against us, all the Powers of Hell and Earth; But, Quis efficaciter?
who can be against us to any purpose, so as to effect their Designs against us?
If God take our part, we shall see our desire upon them that hate us. Now there
are two ways men prevail with God; that is, to speak after the manner of men;
he yields himself conquered, by the Reflection of their Graces, and the
Importunity of their Prayers. 1. By the Reflection of their Graces; Turn away
thine eyes from me, says Christ to his Spouse, for they have overcome me,
Cant. 6.4. they have exceedingly wrought and won upon me, like that, Cant. 4.9.
Thou have ravished my heart, My Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished mine
heart with one of thine eyes; Excordiasti me, so some Gloss, thou have
unhearted me, thou have taken away my heart from me: An Allusion to Lovers, who
are overcome with the Beauty of those whom they affect. 2. By the Importunity
of their Prayers; One faith of prayer, Ligat Omnipotentem, Vincit Invincibilem:
It overcomes him that is indeed Invincible; as Moses, Jacob and others have had
Experience; This is the best Victory, and the foundation of all other
Victories: Make we him our Friend, by the exercise of Faith upon him, and
fervent Prayer to him, and no matter who be our Enemy: It was once said to
Israel, Ye need not fight, for the Lord fights for you, Exodus 14.
But we are to fight, and not be terrified by our Adversaries; For more are
they that are with us, than they that are against us, 2 Kin. 6.16. Let us then
prevail with the Almighty, and we are in some sense almighty, and shall
overcome all in his Strength, and have that Power over the Nations, and the
Morning Star here promised to him that Overcomes.

SERMON V.
REV. III. 5. He that Overcomes, the same shall be clothed in White raiment,
and I will not blot out his Name out of the Book of Life; But I will confess
his name before my Father, and before the Angels.


THese words contain another of those Promises made to Overcomers; it is the
Conclusion of that Epistle to the Church in Sardis; The Officers and Members
were mostly unsound, hence styled Hypocrical Sardis by some; She had a name to
live, but was dead; verse 1. A name she had in the World, and a name amongst
other Churches; but, nomen inane, crimen immane, as one said, an empty name is
a great crime. Alexander the Conqueror commanded him that was of his name, but
a coward, either to lay down his name or fight courageously; so in some
respects it is better not to have the name of Christians upon us, when nothing
of the life and power of Christianity is in us: What could a show of vivacity
and vigorousness profit them, when indeed they were little better than dead, in
a spiritual Lethargy, or dead Palsy? or like a Body some Members whereof are
dead, though not all? This was the case of this Church, she was dead whilst she
lived, seemed alive to others, but dead to God; I have not found thy works
perfect before God, says Christ to her, verse 2. (...), full, as the word
signifies; They might be full before men who can see only the outward
appearance, but otherwise before God, life-less, heartless services in his
sight who looks chiefly there; Omnis Sarmatarum virtus extra ipsos, as
Tacitus of old spoke of them. Thus it was here, their works were fair and
spacious in show, but shored up by popularity or other low respects, and so
could not with their dead works acceptably serve the living God: The taint and
infection of Hypocrisy, if predominant, is pernicious to all good works; This
being their condition, Christ gives directions for their cure and recovery; He
calls upon them to be watchful and strive to strengthen that which is ready to
dye; verse 2. as if he had said, some among you have yet some good in you,
though it be but in a languishing condition, in a swound and ready to expire:
now when persons are to dye, the watch-candle had not need go out, those about
them had need be waking and diligent; so when good is declining and dying, then
need there is to be watchful, least the little remaining spark be quite
extinct: To move them to this and other means of recovery, he threatens if they
did it not, he would come upon them as a thief, when they were secure,
unexpectedly, as thieves do upon men asleep; and Calamity the more sudden, the
more terrible: partly because it exanimates a man, makes his heart faint and
fail, as an unexpected storm does a Mariner; Partly, because it can as little
be prevented as a weak Family can prevent thieves breaking in upon them at
unawares: by this he moves them to rouse up themselves, and shake them out of
this sinful Lethargy, as Sampson went out and shook him, when the Philistines
were upon him; which if they did not, he would come in an hour when they looked
not for him, and take away all their desirable enjoyments from them, and leave
them spoiled and destitute: On the other hand, he subjoyns a comfortable
promise to all such as should overcome those predominant distempers now upon
them, which the Text holds forth to them, and to us in them: The sum of which
you have in the Doctrine, which is,

Doct. That Overcomers shall be eminently clothed, their names indelibly
recorded, and openly acknowledged, by Jesus Christ. Here are three things:

1. Overcomers shall be eminently clothed: The same shall be clothed in white
Raiment, says Christ here; They shall not be found naked, being covered with
the Covering which is of Gods Spirit, Isaiah 30.1. This clothing is no other
than Christ himself, who is the spiritual Garment every true Believer puts on,
according to that exhortation of the Apostle Paul to the Romans, Put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.14. A Text by reading and pondering whereof St.
Austin confesses he was converted. This (...) does imply (...). That Christ is
the Christians Vestment, his Spiritual clothing and apparel: The meaning then
is, Overcomers shall be covered all over with Christ: clothed with his Merit
and Righteousness, and so be justified: He is made of God, to such,
Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. So some understand that of the Prophet Isaiah,
chap. 61.10. he, speaking of God, has clothed me with the Robe of
Righteousness, he has put upon me the Garments of Salvation; meaning Christ,
salvatorem and justificatorem nostrum, who covers Believers with his own
Righteousness, as with a precious Robe of Salvation. He does not only redeem
them with his Blood, being a Lamb slain, sed etiam lams operuit, as one
excellently says; He covers them with his Fleece, with his Wool; meaning his
own Righteousness. More particularly, he covers the very Nature; for no created
Nature can behold God; the very Seraphims with their Wings cover their Faces
before his glorious Presence, Isa. 6.2. much less can the Nature of man stand
before his Majesty without a Christ. He covers the sins of all Believers; the
loathsome habitual Sore of our natural deformity: On which account Christ says
to his Church, Thou art all fair, my Love, there is no spot in thee: All their
Actual Sins also, the ugliness and filthiness of them is by this covered,
together with all the Spots and Imperfections of their Holy Duties.

It Is observable, That the Mercy-seat under the Law covered the two Tables of
the Decalogue, Exodus 25. This Mercy-Seat typified Christ, who is called (...),
Romans 3.25. as the Mercy-Seat is, Heb. 9.5. The Cherubims covered the
Mercy-Seat, and the Mercy-Seat covered the Ark, in which were the two Tables of
the Law: So Christ is that Covering-Mercy-Seat that covers all the sins of
Believers against the Law of God, so that he imputes it not to them: They are
likewise clothed with the Graces of Christ, those Habitual Graces and Virtues
in Christ are implanted into them; He was full of Grace, and of his Fullness
they all do receive, and Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.14.16. Their Impatience is
clothed with his Patience, their Pride is clothed with his Humility, their
Frowardness with his Meekness, their Ignorance with his Wisdom and Knowledge,
their Unbelief with his Faith, and the like. In a word, He so covers them as
they are secure from those hurts and mischiefs that otherwise they lie open to:
They are secured from Divine Wrath and Vengeance; which else they can no more
avoid, than a naked man can fence off Fire; Christ and his Graces are the
Skreen between them and everlasting Burnings. They are by this also secured
from Satan's assaults, to whose fiery darts they are liable to be exposed,
having no other way to evade the destroying dint and power of them, but to be
covered with the Armor of Light and Righteousness; this put on by Faith,
quenches the fiery darts of that wicked one, Ephesians. 6.16. Secured they are
also from the terrible stings and lashes of an accusing Conscience: By his
Blood their hearts are sprinkled from an evil Conscience, Heb. 10.22. As our
bodily Garments are, Munimenta corporis, a kind of a moveable Garrison, as one
styles them, in which the Body marches and is defended from many
Inconveniences; so is Christ to the Souls of all that Overcome. The sum of this
Promise then amounts to this in the General; That Christ and his Righteousness
shall be effectually applied to their particular persons. The clothing of the
Body is the application of Apparel to the Body; so Christ is and shall be
appropriated and applied to Believers, whereby they shall be as fully possessed
of him, as a man is of the Garments with which he is clothed; they shall have
him as their own, to all holy and good ends appointed. It Is a thing of high
moment, considering (as has been hinted) how he is fitted every way to our
condition. As there must be a fitness between the Clothes, and the person who
is to wear them; so there is in this case. An High Priest he is, and such as
became us, as is suited and fitted to our circumstances; we obnoxious to Wrath,
he is our Peace; we unjust, he Righteous; we dead, he is Life; we poor, he is
Rich; we deformed, he Lovely; we filthy, he Holy: With this clothing are
Overcomers invested, and continue ever thus clothed. As the putting off the old
man is so done, as they never put him on again; so the putting on Christ's
Righteousness and Graces is so done, as they never put it off more, but stand
before God in this clothing to all Eternity. And that we may yet a little
further see and be affected with the sweetness of this Promise, it is said,
They shall be clothed with white Raiment; which notes Purity, Dignity, Beauty
and Festivity.

1. It notes Purity; White Garments are clean, free from Pollution and
Defilement. We read of Joshua having filthy Garments upon him, Zech. 3.3. The
tattered Rags of the old Adam, the nasty Filthiness and superfluity of
Naughtiness that yet remained in him, (though in part regenerate) and
intermingled with his best works. Should God break open that filthy sink of Sin
that is in the best of us, we should not only be loathsome to God and to men,
but to our selves also. I have read of one Mr. Lever, who desired of God he
might see his utmost uncleanness, who gave him his request: He saw his Sins in
such ugly colors, as caused him to go down Mourning to his grave. Now Joshua
found Grace in the Lord's sight, and had his filthy garments taken away from
him, and was clothed with change of Raiment, verse. 4. His rags were changed
into Robes, his polluted garments into clean Clothing: He was arrayed with that
fine and clean Linen, which is the Righteousness of Saints, Rev. 19.8. Thus
the Lord takes upon him their sin, and puts on them his pure and spotless
Righteousness. A blessed exchange indeed! Christ puts upon Overcomers his own
Comeliness, decks them with his own Purity, to take away all their Defilements.

2. It notes Dignity and Honor: In old time when Men were dignified for any
Service done to their Prince, they were clothed with the White Raiment; Thus
when Ahasuerus the King would put Honor upon Mordecai, he caused him to be
clothed with a Garment of Royal Apparel, White and Blue, Esth. 8 15. such as
Kings and great Ones used to wear: What shall be done to the man, says the
forenamed King to: Haman, that the King delights to honor? Who answers thus,
Let the Royal Apparel be brought that the King uses to wear, that they may
array that man withal, Esth. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. As if he had said, Let the Keepers
of the Wardrobe bring forth the Kings most Sumptuous Apparel, that he uses to
wear when he sits in State, and put it upon him in the best manner they can.
Thus shall he that Overcomes be arraied with Honorable Clothing, like the
Favoutites, yea the Children of the King of Kings; The Everlasting
Righteousness of Christ, a Garment so Honorable as never yet came upon the
back of an Angel: Such honor have all his Saints, to stand before him in this
Noble Clothing, peculiar to them in the House and Family of this great King of
Heaven.

3. It intimates Beauty and Glory; This is also set out by the color of white;
so when Christ was transfigured on the Mount, his face did shine as the sun,
and his raiment was white as the light, that is, it shined with an
extraordinary splendor and brightness, Mat. 17.2. We find the countenance of
the Angel, Mat. 28.3. to be like lightning, and his raiment white as snow; and
two other (called men, appearing in humane shape) in white apparel, that is,
very glorious and beautiful, Acts 1.10. Thus Overcomers shall be clothed in
white Raiment, they shall walk with me in white; says Christ, Rev. 3.4. in
great Beauty and Glory: The Kings Daughter is all glorious within, her clothing
is of wrought gold, Psalm. 45.10. Yea, they are said to be clothed with the sun,
Rev. 12.1. Cloth of Gold is accounted very glorious, but if a man were clothed
with the natural Sun, he would be much more bright and beautiful. How renowned
for beauty are they then who are clothed with the Sun of Righteousness? Some
who have no natural beauty, yet appear amiable by their fine shining Garments;
They are for Ornament, and are to the Body as rich Hangings or costly Varnish
over a wall of Clay, which make it look better than else it would; as the Poet
says, Viro vestis magnum decus addit honesta; Such a garment is Christ, he
adorns the Soul, and gives it a rich and perfect beauty; He is set out by the
wedding garment, Mar. 22.12. The High Priests garments of old were but types of
this, which were made for beauty and glory, Exodus 28.2. All the comeliness of
the Saints, is by reason of this beautiful dress in which they are attired:
This is that Raiment of Needle Work which is a great Ornament to them, though
outwardly in rags or mean clothing. He is a Crown and Diadem upon the head;
Signified by that fair Miter which was set upon Joshua's head, Zach. 3.5. which
has its name from compassing about, because it environed the High Priests
head. It had a holy Crown with it, Exodus 29.6. signifying the Deity and Dignity
of Christ. It had also upon the forefront of it a plate of pure gold with this
engraving, Holiness to the Lord; who is said to be glorious in Holiness. All
shows what excellent beauty and glory is put upon the Overcomer clothed with
this white Raiment.

4. It signifies festivity and rejoicing; Black is the mourning color, white
is the color of delight and joy: They used white Garments at Feasts and joyful
Solemnities: Hence that of Solomon, Let thy garments be always white, Eccl.
9.8. Not absolutely, but in all proper seasons of rejoicing. The very beasts on
which they rode in triumph to praise the Lord for victory over their Enemies
were of this color; They rode on white Asses, Judge. 5.10. That great mercy of
Absolution is set out to us under the notion of a white stone, Rev. 2.17. To
signify what ground of spiritual joy they have whose sin is pardoned. The sense
then is, Overcomers shall be filled with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1
Pet. 1.8. Glorious, because this joy is a taste of future Glory, or else
because it made them glorious in the eyes of men: The Kingdom of God is joy in
the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. When they are worsted by their Enemies, they are
filled with heaviness; but if at any time they lead captivity captive, and can
get their feet upon the neck of those that hate them, then their sorrow is
turned into joy, and their joy shall no man take away from them. When Israel
(or rather God for Israel) overcame Pharaoh and his Hosts, Then sang Israel a
joyful song unto the Lord, Exodus 15. Thus shall all victorious Souls have their
mouths filled with laughter, and their tongues with singing, and say, The Lord
has done great things for us, whereof we are glad; Great is the shouting and
rejoicing of Soldiers when they get a Victory, and with much better joy shall
they be clothed and filled, who conquer in this holy war. This is the first
thing here promised.

2. Rea. Overcomers names are indelibly recorded by Jesus Christ; who here
assures them of it, saying, I will not blot out his Name out of the Book of
Life. A Metaphorical expression also; we read of the book of Scripture, the
book of Nature, the book of Conscience, and here and in other places of the
book of Life, and that the names of men are written there, and those once
engraven never shall be obliterated, Phil. 4.3. Rev. 13.8. There we find the
Lambs book of Life, wherein are names written from the foundation of the world;
The phrase is taken from the enrolling of Citizens and Soldiers, that they may
be known to be such. The promise implies, That Overcomers are dear and precious
in the eyes of Christ; It is in matters of some concernment that things are
committed to writing, which men will carefully keep, that nothing be expunged
or blotted out: This is seen in Jeremiah and others, who caused Writings to be
drawn and preserved upon weighty occasions. Christ has an high esteem of
Valiant and Conquering Christians, they are written before him; yea, they are
written within him, engraven in his Knowledge and Remembrance, and in his Love
and Affections, as very dear unto him. As the Names of the Tribes were written
upon Stones, which the High Priest bare on his Breast Plate, when he went into
the most holy Place: Even so the names of all Believers are written upon the
heart of Christ, to show how precious they are to him. Queen Mary said, If she
were opened after her Death, they should find Calice written in her heart. Were
Faith duly exercised, we might see Believers engraven upon Christ's heart; and
this Book shall never admit one of the Names in it to be crossed out. If a
Pilate could say, Quod scripsi, scripsi; What I have written, I have written:
Christ much more. There are no Errata, and therefore no Deleatur in the Book of
Life. And who should blot them out? Not Men or Angels, for it is a Sealed Book
to them; not their Sins, (which yet they fear more than the former) for they
themselves are blotted out by the hand of Free Grace; I, even I, am he, that
blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own sake, Isa. 43.25. As a Creditor
takes his Pen and blots out the Debt, or as men cancel Bills of Indictment, so
does God (to speak of him after the manner of men) dip his pen in the Blood of
his Son, and dashes out the Hand-writings against them, and cancels all those
large Bills: And this not as men blot things out that are written upon Paper,
where great blurs remain, and they may possibly be read again; but as a Cloud,
as a thick Cloud, Isa. 44.22. The Sun so scatters and blots out the Clouds,
that there is nothing of them to be seen; their sins are so done away, as not
to he remembered any more; are as if they had never been. As a Table Book, wash
it, and there is no appearance of any thing written there; so has the Lord
removed their Iniquities: and having blotted out their sins for his Name's
sake, will not blot out their Names for their sins sake. So then it remains,
that none but Christ can blot out their Names; for he is the Master of the
Rolls, and keeps this Book in his own possession, and he has prevented all
fears of it, by his own solemn Promise in the Text.

Object. Against this some object these two Scriptures, Exodus 32.32, 33. Moses
said, Blot me out of thy Book. Whosoever has sinned against me, says God, him
will I blot out of my Book: especially that, Rev. 22.19. It any man shall take
away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part
out of the Book of Life.

Answ. As for that place in Exodus, some carry it, as if Moses desired in the
former verse to lose his part in a better Life than is here to be enjoyed, even
Eternal Life, rather than God be thus dishonored and blasphemed; but think it
a sinful desire, or great zeal at the best with a mixture of corrupt passion in
it: But others understand it of the Book of Records, in which men's names were
Registered. Princes use to keep such Books, in which were set. down the Names of
those that had done them any special Service: Mordecai's name was recorded in
such a Book, and how he acted to preserve the King's Life, Esth. 6. And this
was much Self-denial in Moses, to be willing to have his Name razed out thence
for the Peoples good. Moses rather desired not to live, than that all the
people involved in that sin should dye; willing to have his Name blotted out of
the Church Records, than the people come under this great Judgment. Like that
wish of St. Paul, Romans 9.3. who wished himself accursed from Christ, for his
Brethren and Kinsmen according to the flesh. Some say, Such was his Love to his
Kindred, that if it had been consistent with the Will of God, he desired to
have redeemed the casting away of the Israelites, with the loss of his own Soul
for ever: But besides that, this desire was impossible to be accompli^hed, it
would have been sinful. By this (...), or being Accursed from Christ, he means
only to be Excommunicated from the Church, which is called Christ, 1 Cor.
12.12. Which argued a high Affection to his Relations. And as to the other
place, God's taking away their part out of the Book of Life, is no more than to
manifest they have no part therein; and hence we find the Scripture speaking of
some, Whose Names were not written in the Lambs Book of Life from the
Foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8. God will declare them to be such, as were
not Predestined from all Eternity to be saved by the Death of Christ. Some
there are not written in this Book; but none written there shall be blotted
out. That Is the Second Particular.

3. Rea. Christ will confess the names of Overcomers before his Father, and
before his Angels; as if he had said, I will own and acknowledge him, as he has
owned and acknowledged me: They have confessed him before men, and he has
promised to confess such before his Father, Mat. 10.32. The meaning is, that
Christ will publicly own them in the great Day of Judgment, and will openly
profess their well-tried Faith and other victorious Graces, and they shall be
found to Honor, Praise, and Glory at his appearing, 1 Pet. 1.7. Then he will
avouch them to be his Children, saying, Father, Behold, I and the Children
which thou have given me, Isa. 8.18. Esther, though advanced to Honor with the
King, owned her Relation to Mordecai, and told him what he was unto her, Esth.
8.1. Joseph, though advanced to great Dignity and a chief Favorite in
Pharaoh's Court, yet owned and confessed his poor Relations, even before the
King and his Courtiers, Genesis 47. Even so will Christ at that day own his
victorious Servants and Soldiers before the King of Kings, and all those
glorious Courtiers of Heaven, the holy Angels. A taste of this he gave, when he
was here on Earth; When some told him, his Relations stood without desiring to
speak with him, he pointed to his Disciples, and said, Behold my Mother, and my
Brethren: For whosoever does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same
is my Mother, and Sister, and Brother, Mat. 12.49, 50. Here he freely owns and
confesses his Spiritual Kindred, and prefers them before his bare natural
Relations.

So we find him making a report of their excellency who were his Disciples unto
God his Father, saying, I have manifested thy Name to the men whom thou gave
me out of the world, and they have kept thy word, Joh. 17.6. Here he makes an
honorable mention of their laying up his words in their hearts, and keeping to
it in their lives: And though as yet they were but weak, yet he does notably
commend their good beginnings to his Father. What will he do then at last, when
they shall have perfectly overcome? We find it recorded of John the Baptist,
that he confessed and denied not, but confessed, I am not the Christ; and after
owned him and pointed at him, saying, Behold the Lamb of God, verse. 29. John is
plain and bold, ingenuous and constant in his testimony of Christ, renonuncing
the honor due to his Master, and confessing and declaring Christ in the
dignity and excellency of his Office, showing them how he was to execute the
same for their good and benefit; which was by Suffering; and therefore points
him out as the substance of the Passover, and daily Sacrifices who by the Merit
and Virtue of his Death takes away the sin of his own, both Jews and Gentiles.
And did John lose by this his resolute Confession? No, not even here; for
Christ did as freely confess, and make an honorable mention of him, For, says
he, among them that are born of women, there has not risen a greater than John
the Baptist, Mat. 11.11. Because he was Christ's immediate Forerunner; now the
nearer to Christ, the more excellent. He prefers him not only before all the
Prophets, but all others that were born before him. This is but the beginning
of what Confession shall be more fully made of the Names of all that overcome
in the great day of the Lords coming to Judgment. The Uses follow:

Use 1. See hence the miserable estate of all who overcome not, but are fatally
and finally overcome in their warring against these enemies of our Salvation:
They have neither part nor lot in these precious Promises; yea, the quite
contrary things will be their Portion. Instead of being clothed in white
raiment, in token of Purity, Dignity, Beauty and Festivity, they will at last
appear in all their filthy Rags and menstruous Garments; clothed with Shame,
and covered with confusion of Face. His enemies, says God of David, will I
clothe with shame, Psalm. 132.18. Much more those that dye in their enmity to
himself. Their Names are written in the Earth, and will be blotted out from
under Heaven, Deuteronomy. 29.20. They shall not be written among the living in
Jerusalem, but registered among the dead, as those that are Eternally forgotten
of God. Instead of confessing him, he will profess, He never knew them, Mat.
7.23. He will be ashamed of them before his Father, and before all his Angels,
as they were of him, and of his words before men, Mark 8.38. A Figurative
Speech, and spoken of Christ, after the manner of men, for our capacity: Not
that Christ shall then be subject to any shame, or be affected with it; but
that he shall so carry himself toward such as have been ashamed of him,
ashamed to own his Truth, and engage to fight in his Cause, as men are wont to
do toward those of whose company and acquaintance they are ashamed; that is to
say, That he will not acknowledge them for his Saints, Servants, or Soldiers;
but utterly refuse, reject, and cast them off, as wicked and reprobate. They
who now deny to fight under his Banner, or professing so to do, shall yield to
the Enemy, be overcome and recover not, rise not by true Repentance, these will
Christ deny before his Father, and before all Men and Angels.

Use 2. Here is yet further Encouragement to all to strive to Overcome: Whose
heart can sink into discouragement? whose Faith can fail, that reads and duly
considers the sweet Cordials in this Text? You shall be clothed with white
Raiment, by Christ's own hand it shall be put upon you: White inwardly, as well
as outwardly. Not like the Pharisees, whited Sepulchers, outwardly beautiful,
but within full of rottenness and dead men's bones; but as the King's Daughter,
All glorious within, Psalm. 45. Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like a
Lily of the field, Mat. 6.29. The most splendid and gorgeous Robes of the
greatest Monarch, are not to be compared unto this clothing. This is the best
Robe, spoken of, Luke 15. which the Father commanded to be brought forth, and
put upon his returning Son; who by Repentance and converting Grace overcame all
his former vicious and evil Conversation: This is durable Raiment. God did
miraculously preserve the Garments of the Israelites from waxing old, Deuteronomy.
8.4. But they were otherwise the worse for the wearing, as we say of all other
Garments. But this clothing waxes not old, is as fresh upon the Overcomer,
after he has worn it Thousands of Years, as it was the first day it was put
put upon him. The rich man, we read of in the Gospel, was clothed with Purple,
Luke 16.19. But Overcomers with Cloth of Gold. Her clothing is of wrought Gold,
Psalm. 45.13. Yea, far more precious than Gold that perishes. He that yields to
his Lusts and other Enemies, rejects this raiment; and does like him we read
of, Luke 8.27. that wore no clothes, and would suffer none to be put upon him.
Is it not great encouragement then that is here promised, that none shall be so
well arraid as the Overcomer? When that man was cured of his Madness, he sat
at Jesus feet clothed and in his right mind, verse. 35. None come rightly to
themselves but will fight courageously, and strive to be victorious, since
their Rags and poor Apparel here they many times wear, shall be converted into
such rich clothing. And so, what a sweet Promise is it that follows? I will not
blot out his name out of the Book of Life. When some came to Christ, rejoicing
that they wrought Miracles, and particularly cast out Devils in his Name, he
corrects them as mistaking the true ground of Joy, and points them to the
right, Rejoice not in this that, the Spirits are subject to you; but rather
rejoice in this, that your Names are written in Heaven, Luke 10.20. out of the
reach of all your Enemies, they can never cast a blot upon them. Here they blot
them with Reproaches, and vile Aspersions, as Joseph's Mistress did him: Here
they blot out, excommonucate and cast out their Names as vile and odious; but
still they remain written in Heaven, and shall be had in everlasting
Remembrance. So to be confessed by Christ at last before God, Angels and Men,
when others shall be discarded with a Discedite a me, nescio vos; Depart from
me, I know you not. What Favor and Comfort will it give Overcomers? Having
therefore these Promises, let nothing daunt or dismay us; nothing is more
unbeseeming the Royal Spirit of a Christian. Say not, the Devil is so
malicious, the World so ensnaring, the Heart so deceitful, our Attempts against
them so fruitless, we shall one day perish by our Enemies hand. Is this the
language of Heaven? Are these the words of Faith? Is this the voice of the
Scripture, and not rather the whisperings of the Old Serpent? The fruit of
slavish Fear and Unbelief? Is not the voice of God quite contrary? Does not he
say, I will pour clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your
Iniquities and from all your Idols I will cleanse you? The God of Peace shall
tread down Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16.20. That whatsoever is born
of God, overcomes the world, 1 John 5.4. Has he said it, and shall it not come
to pass? Is not he faithful that has promised? Why then should we be
faint-hearted? Why should we suffer our Fears to disanimate and dispirit us?
Let us not be like those unbelieving timorous Spies, who said, Canaan was a
good Land, but there were Anakims, Giants; and by bringing an evil report,
disheartened the people, and were shut out by God, Josh. 6. But let us all beg a
Caleb-like Spirit, whereby we may follow God fully, as he did, Numb. 14.24. and
our Enemies shall not stand before us. Give a Soldier Courage, and you give him
all; But take away his Heart, and then he is almost dead before he strike a
stroke: It is a Seal to his Overthrow, and a great advantage to the Enemy: This
evil of Unbelief and slavishness of Spirit, does us more hurt than all our
Enemies can do. When Saul was afraid, he had not a heart to strike a stroke,
but went to the Witch, etc. 1 Samuel, 28.4, 5. Were we valiant to the Battle, God
would say as he did of old to Joshua and Israel, Your enemies shall not be able
to stand before you: Observe therefore the language of their enemies, I know
the Lord will give you the Land, for your terror is fallen upon us, say they,
and all the Inhabitants of the Land faint because of you. As Soon as we heard
these things, our hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more Courage in
any man, because of you, Josh. 2.9-11. We cannot please the Enemies better,
than to say, We shall never overcome them; for then they pluck up their
Spirits, and hope the day shall be theirs: and God is much displeased; and what
if he should say, It shall be as we speak, we shall never get Victory? Oh! Let
us not provoke him to leave us to the power of our Adversaries. Christ was wont
to say, According to your Faith, so be it unto you: And he is of the same mind
still. Oh provoke him not to say, According to your Fears, according to your
Unbelief, so be it unto you: Only believe, and we shall see the Glory of God,
as Christ said to Martha, Joh. 11.40. Lift up your hands that hang down, and
your feeble knees, and know that the Battle is not to the strong. Though the
Enemy be strong and you weak, yet exercise but Faith upon the Mighty God, and
the day is yours. The Difficulties and Dangers should rather animate, and raise
the Spirit and Faith of a Christian, than discourage. Alexander, in a great
difficulty, would say, Hoc est periculum par animo Alexandri; Here Is a danger,
or a difficulty, fit for the Spirit and Courage of Alexander to encounter with.
Have not Christians reason then to be courageous, and when great and hard
Service appears, and called to engage in the heat of the Battle, to say, Here
is a piece of Service fit for Believers to go through? These are Dangers and
Difficulties for true Christians, who go out against the Enemy, as David did
against Goliath, in the Name and Strength of the Lord: Be strong in the Lord,
and in the Power of his Might, and the Victory is yours. Methinks Believers
should do as of old Eleazar did, who fought till his hand clave unto his Sword,
and the Lord wrought a great Victory that day, 2 Samuel 23.9, 10. Let not Faith be
asleep in a dead Habit; a Giant may be overcome asleep: Sampson was conquered
by the Philistines, being asleep on Delilahs Lap. Sin and Satan get great
advantages upon secure Souls. Let none be discouraged, saying, The Enemy rise
afresh upon us; let us look to the Captain of our Salvation for a fresh Supply
of his Spirit, and we shall prevail. I conclude with Joab's encouraging words
to his Soldiers, Be of good Courage, and let us play the men for our People,
and for the Cities of our God, and let the Lord do that which seems him good,
2 Samuel 10.12. So I say, Let us be of good Courage in this Cause of God and our
Souls, and leave the issue unto God, who will bring us off Conquerors, and
cause us to inherit the good of these Promises in the Text.

SERMON VI.
REV. III. 12. Him that Overcomes, will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my
God, and he shall go no more out; and I will write upon him the Name of my God,
and the Name of the City of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which comes down
out of heaven from my God, and I will write upon him my new Name.


EVery Promise is a Breast of Consolation, from whence the Soldiers of Christ
may draw fresh Auxiliaries in all their faintings and decays; such supplies of
strength and life, as will revive their weak and weary spirits, as will recruit
and renew their souls unto the holy War, in which they are engaged. The holy
Scriptures are sincere milk, but the Promises are flos lactis, as one says,
the cream, the purest of all. There is a story of a fight between Hercules and
Terrae-filius, who sought to destroy each other: This Terrae-filius, when he
was faint and weary, would cast himself down upon the Earth, and having lain a
little while, recovered and was fresh for the combat, and so Overcame his
Enemy, A humble reliance upon, a believing improvement of the Promises, is a
singular way of renewing strength, a never-failing means of Victory over our
Spiritual Adversaries. As God gives us in his word Line upon Line, Precept upon
Precept, so here he sets down Promise upon Promise for our encouragement, to go
on fighting till he bring forth Judgment unto Victory. Five of those we have
already spoken something to: Behold here another presented to our Consideration
in this Text; It is firstly directed to the Church in Philadelphia, a City in
Lydia, or in Mysia or Eolia, seated in a dangerous place, therefore not
populous; yet a Church planted there, and very famous. It is observed, that
Smyrna and this Philadelphia, were the only Churches of all the seven, which
Christ records nothing against; as Laodicea was the only Church of the seven
which he mentions nothing commendable in. Concerning this of Philadelphia,
Christ gives testimony of the present good that was in her, verse. 8. I know thy
works; thou have kept my Word, and have not denied my Name. By the word and
name of Christ, we are to understand that whole Truth whereby God in Christ had
revealed himself and his Will to his Church; Soundness of Doctrine, Purity of
Worship, and Holiness of Conversation, were the things she held fast; After
this, he gives her assurance, Goodness and Mercy should follow her, verse. 9.10.
Behold, I will make them that are of the Synagogue of Satan to come and worship
before thee, etc. I will make them reverence thee as one beloved of me, I will
both subdue thy disguised Adversaries, and preserve thee under all those trials
which are coming upon the world. Then he proceeds to exhort unto duty, To Hold
fast that, which she had; the word (...) signifies to hold strongly; put to thy
utmost strength, and keep vigorously what thou have. Many motives he uses to
persuade to this; as, 1. His intended speedy coming, Behold, I come quickly;
whether he means in a way of trial, as he had intimated before, verse. 10. as
some think; or in a way of mercy, to moderate the trial; or in a way of
Judicature, to call to an account, and reward every man according to his works,
as others, it is not material; for on every of these accounts, it is an
excellent motive, and should prevail with Christians to hold fast the good they
have. 2. Lest they lose their Crown; whether her present Crown, the honor this
Church had got by keeping close to the Word and Worship of Christ hitherto; or
the future Crown of life and glory in Heaven: the Argument is powerful. 3.
Christ uses further sweet Promises of high and glorious things to all that
perseveringly overcome, in the Words of this Text: The sum of which take in
this Doctrine,


Doct. Overcomers shall be made Pillars in the Temple of God, that shall go no
more out, and excellent Names shall be written upon them, by Jesus Christ; For
thus he himself promises to do, here in these words. To open this in two
Branches.

Bran. 1. Christ will make Overcomers Pillars in his House that shall go no
more out: Three things seem chiefly intended in this Promise, viz. Stability,
Beauty, and Perpetuity.

1. Stability; This is promised in this Phrase, I will make him a Pillar in the
Temple of my God; It is by Expositors taken to be an Allusion to the Pillars
that were erected in Solomon's Temple; the one was called Jachin, which
signifies he shall establish; the other Boaz, that is in it is strength, 1
King. 7.21. Both amount to this, Firmness and Stability. Some think that the
infinite Power of Christ is aimed at in these Pillars: it still confirms this
matter; Overcomers shall be established in the House of God by the Power of
Christ himself; Him will I make a Pillar, says he in the Text. It is a great
Favor to have a Nail in his Temple, a Name, a Room in his House and Family;
though we be but weak Children, but bruised Reeds. To have Truth, though with
much Infirmity and Weakness, is to be esteemed an inestimable Mercy; but to be
Pillars there, is a special Privilege: To be settled and rooted, confirmed and
established there, is a very desirable Blessing and very great Honor. Such
Honor is here made the Portion of Overcomers.

We read of Jacob setting up a Pillar of Stone, Genesis 35. and of the Promise of
God to Jeremiah, (being to go on his Errand to a furious and opposing People,
and the Prophet timorous) I will make thee an Iron Pillar, Jer. 1.18. Stone and
Iron both are very strong. To be a Living Stone in God's House is a great
Mercy; but to be a Pillar of Stone, or of Iron, notes Spiritual and Divine
Strength given to such, that they stand firm and upright, and are Instrumental
to bear up the Name, Truth and Interest of God in the world. Hence is the
Church styled, The pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. Not as if the
Church were the Foundation of the Truth, as the Papists say; (for indeed the
Truth is the Foundation of the Church: That Is the true Church which is built
upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, (not upon their Persons, but
upon their Doctrines) Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner Stone, Ephesians.
2.20.) But as the Pillar Bears up the King's Proclamation, that it may be
visible and legible, so is the Church the Pillar of Truth; it holds forth the
Truth of God to the view of all that will behold it: And keeps up the Doctrine,
and Worship of the Gospel from falling; or else in an ordinary way Truth would
be born down by Error, and Purity of Administration in Divine Worship would be
cast down by Idolatrous and Superstitious Innovations. It is a great Mercy,
when there are Breaches and Divisions in a Land, to heal them by just
Government: And when Righteousness is falling, and Equity can scarce enter in a
Nation, but all through Injustice and Oppression ready to run to ruin and
confusion, To bear up the Pillars of the Earth, even when it and its
Inhabitants are dissolved, as David did, Psalm. 75.3. And it is no less Favor
to be settled Pillars in the Temple of God, to keep up and to maintain his
Interest in the world. We read that Absalom in his life time reared up for
himself a Pillar, having no Son, to keep his Name in remembrance, 2 Samuel 18.18.
God rears up to himself Spiritual Pillars to keep up the Memorial of his Name
in the world, which else would soon be forgotten among men. And how great the
Blessing is to be such a Pillar, who can declare? Instability darkens a man's
excellency; Unstable as water, thou shall not excel, was Jacob's saying to
Reuben, Genesis 49.4. Water is easily moved by the Wind every way; He being thus
unsettled, did not excel, either in the number of his Tribe, or Valor, or any
excellent Achievement. To be a Reed shaken with every wind of Doctrine, is
dishonorable. To seem to be Pillars, as Peter did, and yet not to walk* with a
right foot, as he is charged to do, Gal. 2.9, 14. is very unbecoming: But to be
so indeed, to be fixed and grounded in the Faith and Order of the Gospel, to be
rooted and confirmed in the Temple of God, is a Mercy promised only To him that
Overcomes; to show in what esteem such are with Christ.

2. Beauty is here also signified in this Expression: Pillars are not only the
Firmament, (as I may say) but the Ornament; not the Strength only, but the
Glory of a Building; especially in such large and long Structures, where there
are many, and rows of them, as in the Temple, 1 King. 7, 3. So then the sense
is, Overcomers shall be made by Christ the Glory of his Church, the Beauty of
his Temple. In the Chariot Solomon made for himself, the Pillars were of
Silver, Cant. 3.10. Some take it for the Graces of the Spirit of God; others
understand it of the Ministers of the Church, named Pillars in Galat. 2.
forementioned: Others to note those of eminency in the Church, who labor to
uphold and support the truth of Christ therein, to be the Silver Pillars, to be
the Beauty of the Church; yea, the Glory of Christ, as some are said to be, 2
Cor. 8.23. Silver when purified is very beautiful; Victorious Christians are
Silver Pillars, an excellent glory in the Temple of God. Wisdom has builded
her House, she has hewn her out seven Pillars, Prove. 9.1, 2. Christ is here
meant by Wisdom; And though some take the House he has built, to be the
World, and it is a truth, that Christ built this great House and Fabric of the
Universe, Heb. 3.4. Yet most carry it to be the Church, that Spiritual House
which he is here said to build. But what the seven Pillars are, is not agreed
on: Some take the Seven Liberal Arts to be they; Others, the seven Days of the
Week; Others, the seven Gifts of the Holy Ghost, mentioned Isa. 11.2. And some,
(which is to the matter now before us) for a competent number of Faithful
Persons, who by their steadfast adhering to Christ and his Truth, not only
support, but adorn and beautify his Church. As those who through Cowardice and
slavish Fear yield to the Enemy, are a Disgrace and Disparagement; so they that
are firm and stable, are an Ornament to the Temple of God.

3. Perpetuity and Constancy is here also promised to Overcomers; for Christ
engages to make such Pillars, that shall go no more out of his Temple. Some
take this to be spoken to anticipate the fears that might arise in their
hearts, and trouble them. The Prophet Jeremiah tells us, That the Pillars of
that famous Temple of old were broken down, and the Brass of them carried away
to Babylon by the Caldeans, Jer. 51.17. Hence fears might arise in some, that
notwithstanding their present Settlement, they might afterward be utterly cast
out of God's House. To prevent all such Jealousies of After-Apostacies, he
assures them, They shall go no more out. It Is true, those that only seem to be
Pillars and are not sincere in the main, may, and will break and be utterly
cast down; as Judas, Demas, Julian, and many others were: But these were rotten
Posts, not real Pillars, and therefore were easily broken when the burden of
Temptation was laid upon them: Hypocrisy will end in Apostasy. They went out
from us, because they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us; but they went out from us, that they might be
made manifest that they were not all of us, says the Apostle, 1 John 2.19.
Here we see, Many are in the Visible Church, who are not of the Church
Mystical; and these will manifest themselves, at one time or other, what they
are. Some were troubled to see so many forsake the Church, but he would not
have them marvel at it; for if they had been of us, they would have continued
with us: They were not right and sound; if they had, they would never have done
so. They now discover they were none of us, and so are the better avoided: We
lose nothing by their departure. The Corn loses nothing when the Chaff is
gone, but is the purer; nor the Body when bad Humors are worn away, but is the
more sound and healthful; but yet every one that is upright shall so far
overcome, as to continue his station in the Mystical Body of Christ. A true
Believer may be so far worsted in a particular Combat, as to be cast out of the
Church by a Sentence of Excommunication, and that deservedly; which was the
case of the Incestuous Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5. Yet was not he totally and finally
overcome by the Enemy, but was recovered by Repentance, and restored to the
Communion of the Church again, and went no more out. Judas went out, and Demas
forsook the Truth and Servants of Christ; but we find nothing of their
Recovery, and rising again by Godly Sorrow. Where there is no Root, there is no
lasting Fruit; some hasty Blossoms, but they are soon nipt and quickly fall
off. They are true sincere Christians, that are persevering to the end; Sampson
pulled down the Pillars of Dagon's Temple, and the house fell, and all therein
were slain, Judge. 16.29. But all the Powers of Earth and Hell combined shall
not be able to destroy the Temple of God, nor utterly break one Pillar thereof.
God gave his People charge to break down the Pillars that the Idolaters had set
up, Deuteronomy. 12.5. But Believers are Pillars of God's setting up, and none shall
destroy any one of them. It Is true, if left to themselves, they are like to
Sampson, when God was departed from him; but as others, easily conquered by the
assaults of their Enemies; as Peter resolved to be more firm and constant than
all men, Though all forsake thee, yet will not I, says he; Yet how easily and
quickly was he overcome to deny his Lord and Master? But being upheld by the
stronger Pillars of God's Almghty Power, and immutable Covenant, they are not
so totally routed and vanquished as never to recover; but are renewed in their
Life and Strength as Peter was: And as a Bone that has been broken and once
well set again is stronger than ever, so they gather strength by their Falls,
and are confirmed in the truth and ways of God unto the end. This is the first
thing here promised to Overcomers. The Second follows.

Bran. 2. Christ will give to such, not only to be Pillars in his Temple, but
excellent Names shall be by him written upon them. The Pillars in Solomon's
Temple had very significant Names engraven upon them, but these here promised
are much more excellent. The Text mentions three; I will write upon him, says
Christ, the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of my God, and my new
Name. Of these briefly:

1. Christ will write upon the Overcomer the Name of his God. Some carry the
sense thus; He shall be acknowledged to belong unto God: As things written upon
Pillars are made visible and legible to all; or as things openly marked,
declare their Title, and show whose they are; So Christ will set Marks and
Characters of God's Image upon them that are Victorious, such as shall extort
and force this acknowledgment even from their very Enemies, who will he
convinced in their Consciences, and clearly see that they are the Servants and
People of God. When Professors are overcome by their Corruptions, Pride,
Worldliness, Passion, Uncharitableness, Injustice and Unrighteousness in their
dealings, Unfaithfulness in their words and promises, then the world writes
other Names upon them; then they are called Hypocrites, Dissemblers,
Formalists, a people that make Religion but a cover for Vice, a cloak for
Covetousness and for Maliciousness; seem better, but are worse than mere civil
and moral men. O, say they, we had rather trust or deal with just honest men,
though they make not such shows of Religion, than with many great Professors,
who for a pretense make long Prayers as the Pharisees did, but none more unjust
and false than they; they will say or do almost any thing to wrong and defraud
another, to overreach and go beyond another: Oh! that these things were not
too justly and truly spoken of too many that are called Christians, and
Church Members, Pudet haec opprobria nobis: On the contrary, when any get
Victory over these Epidemical Evils, and manifest it by a constant acting in a
contradiction to such sinful ways, then men will say, Ay, these are the people
of God indeed; if there be any Saints upon Earth, these are such; If all
Professors were such as these, we would be among them our selves. Oh! how
desirable is it to see the day come, that is prophesied of, Isa. 60.14. when
all they that have afflicted and despised the people of God, shall bow
themselves down at the soles of their feet, and call them the City of the Lord,
the Zion of the Holy One of Israel; They are Overcomers that must hasten the
fulfilling of this: That which God promised, to put his Name in Solomon's
Temple, 1 Kings 8. is made good to them, Christ will write his Fathers Name on
their Foreheads.

He also promises to write upon him the Name of the City of his God, even the
new Jerusalem, which comes down from God out of Heaven. There is a threefold
Jerusalem; Terrestrial, Celestial, and Mystical. 1. The terrestrial, or earthly
Jerusalem, called the City of David; The City of the great King, etc. Isa.
22.4. Psalm. 48.2. This City was once one of the Wonders of the World; as the
Gold among the Metals, so was Jerusalem among the Cities. Here the famous
Temple was built; here was the Ark of the Testimony, and the Tables of the
Covenant; the sacred Vestments the Priests wore: and it was the Seat of the
great King, even God dwelt there. In Salem (that is, Jerusalem) was his
Tabernacle, and his Dewlling Place in Sion, Psalm. 76.1, 2. 2. There is the
Celestial, or Heavenly Jerusalem, called a City, God has prepared for
Believers a City, Heb. 11.16. Of this some understand that, Psalm. 87.3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God. 3. There is the
Mystical Jerusalem, which is the whole company of Believers here, this is the
City set upon a Hill, Mat. 5.14. and it is called The City of the Living God,
the Heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22. in regard of the Original of it, and by
Right of Inheritance, as a Learned man speaks.
This is said to come down from God out of Heaven, because the Power and Mercy
of God shall signally appear in building his Church, and making it glorious in
the World. The two latter may be taken in here, though some wholly carry it to
the last. The sum is, Overcomers shall be enrolled as free Denison and Citizens
of the New Jerusalem, No more to be Forreiners and Strangers, but Fellow
Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God, Ephesians. 2.19. Even here on
Earth their City is in Heaven, as is said, Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation, our
(...), our City-converse and Behavior is above. Some account it much to be
Free of such a City as London is, to have free Liberty to trade therein. O what
a Favor is it then to have liberty of Access to the great God of Heaven! To
drive a free and full Trade Heavenward! to be Spiritual Merchants, who deal
for goodly Pearls of great price! This is better than the Merchandise of
Silver, and the gain of those things than fine Gold; They are more precious
than Rubies, and all we can desire are not to be compared with them, as Solomon
speaks, Prove. 3.15, 16. And after all, you shall be taken up into the Celestial
Jerusalem; You that have been Fellow Soldiers here, and Overcome, shall be
Fellow-Citizens there and Triumph: And though it will be a very glorious state,
he will bring his conquering Church into here, yet Heaven will be Heaven when
all is done. Notwithstanding this, the state here promised, that they shall
trade freely Heavenward, and be helped to order their Lives here as Citizens
of Heaven, is an inestimable Privilege. To have their Hearts in Heaven, their
Discourses of Heaven, (as the Primitive Christians had the Kingdom so much in
their mouths, that their Enemies were jealous they had evil Designs against the
Civil Government; but it was the Heavenly Kingdom they talked of) their daily
recourses to Heaven, their being Heavenly in earthly things, their desires to
be in Heaven, and the like, show that Christ has written this Name upon them,
that these are the Citizens of the New Jerusalem, so that he that runs may read
it. This is the most sublime and noble state, the most pleasant and delightful,
the most profitable to perfect Divine Discoveries, to strengthen their Graces,
to increase their Comforts; this is the most safe estate for prevention of
Temptations: because hereby their Souls are taken up with high things, and not
so apt to be taken in Satan's snare; as the Bird that mounts aloft, is not in
danger to be caught in the Fowler's Net. And in a word, It is the most suitable
estate, for they look to go to Heaven when they dye, and expect a Savior from
Heaven at the last Day. Almost all they have of any worth is there already:
Their Names are written in Heaven, their Treasure is in Heaven, their chief
Relations are in Heaven, their Inheritance is in Heaven; and therefore to have
a way and course of Life here, that is becoming a Citizen of that City, must
needs be a choice and precious Mercy; and this is here promised to him that
Overcomes.

3. Christ further promises to such, That he will write upon them his new
Name. Some understand it of the Honor they shall share in with Christ; When he
had overcome, God gave him a Name above every name, the name of a King and
Conqueror: So Overcomers shall be made Kings and Priests unto God, and shall
reign on the Earth, Phil. 2.9. Rev. 1.6. Others take it to be meant of Adoption
and Regeneration: But of this I have spoken in a former Sermon, A new Name
written in the white Stone, Rev. 2.17. I come to the Use of this to our selves.

Use 1. See here the different estate of Believers and Unbelievers, of them
that Overcome, and of them that are Overcome by the Enemy: Unbelievers have no
part, no lot in these Promises. They may be in the Temple of God, and seeming
Pillars there, but they will not continue long, but either go out, or be cast
out for ever; none of the promised Names shall be written on them, but Names of
Contempt and Reproach. Believers shall have the Stability, Beauty and
Perpetuity, and all the excellent Names here set down. O the Misery of the one!
O the Felicity of the other! Who would be an Unbeliever still? What should
discourage Believers?

Use 2. Let us all then strive for the Victory. If a man strive for Mastery, he
is not crowned, except he strive lawfully, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 9. 2 Timothy
2.5. and therefore much less they that strive not at all. To move us unto
Courage in this War, many things might be urged; Consider, 1. the Justness of
the Cause: Though Soldiers be never so strong and well furnished, yet if their
Consciences tell them they fight in a bad Quarrel, it will abate their Valor,
and make them timorous. But our Cause is most just, and our War lawful; for God
who is Justice it self, has proclaimed it by his Heralds the Apostles;
saying, Fight the good fight of Faith; Endure hardship as good Soldiers of
Jesus Christ; Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand and
withstand in the evil day; Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you, 2 Timothy
6.12. 2 Timothy 2. Ephesians. 6.10, 11. Jam. 4.7. Besides, the Glory of God and the
Salvation of our Souls lie at the stake; our Enemies Design is to dishonor
God, and to destroy us: And can there be a Cause of greater Importance? If we
would not treacherously betray these by our Sloathfulness and Cowardice into
the hands of our Enemies, let us enter the field, and never cease our
courageous fight, till we have obtained a full Victory. 2. The Enemies at this
day are full of Rage and Wrath, and a time of great Trial seems to be at hand;
terrible shakings there are already upon us: Philadelphia is warned of an hour
of Trial, which was the Persecution under Trajan the Emperor, as Expositors
judge. Some write that Philadelphia was, Terrae motibus concussa, often shaken
with Earthquakes; whatever of these proper natural Earthquakes as a City she
was liable to, she was, as a Church, shaken by the violent Assaults of enemies.
And it is the judgment of many Learned and Godly Men, that an Hour of
Temptation is drawing on upon the present Reformed Churches of Christ in
Europe, wherein they are like to be extremely shaken. Satan's rage and wrath he
is come down in, is very great; and his great Agent, the Beast, spoken of, Rev.
13. is very powerful, and his Worshippers begin to boast and make Challenges,
saying, Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to make war with him? We have
heard of the Prophecy of the late Reverend Bishop Vher, and what probability
there is of its accomplishment, any one may see by the present dark Providence
going over us; which if God shall order to come to pass, O what terrible
shakings will there be! Not the Earth only, but the Heavens will be shaken. The
Pillars of the Earth are the Lords, says Hannah, and he has set the world
upon them, 1 Samuel 2.8. Yet we read, that the Pillars of Heaven and Earth
tremble, Job 9.6. and 26.11. By the Pillars of Heaven, some understand the
Angels; by the Pillars of the Earth, Political Pillars, Kings and Princes; and
Ecclesiastical Pillars, such as Peter and John were. Whether they be
State-Pillars or Church-Pillars, if Antichrist once again prevail over us, they
will be terribly shaken; Men and Angels will be filled with Amazement and
Astonishment at the Providence of God. I have read of one Simeon, who is said
to have been Prophetical, that he passing through a Temple, spoke to the
material Pillars, and Prophesying of an Earthquake, bid them Stand fast, for
they should shortly be shaken. Things work in our days so strangely, as without
a Spirit of Prophecy, I may say, to all the Churches of Christ, to all that
seem Pillars in the Temple of God, Stand fast, for you shall shortly be shaken;
God will arise suddenly to shake terribly the Earth: Stand sure therefore, that
ye be not worsted and overcome by the Adversary. 3. Consider the Honor and
Profit that will accompany this Victory, if ye get it: Great is the Reward laid
up in all these Promses; Everlasting Honor and Recompense will be the portion
of all such. Brevis est labor, as one says, praemium vero aeternum. Earthly
Soldiers will purchase Honor, and get their Pay with the hazard of Life; the
Commendation of their Captain, the Applause of People, or a little Money will
make them courageous: What hazard then! Should not we run in fighting this good
fight? who shall have the commendation of Christ, the Captain of our Salvation,
and the Praise of the blessed Angels, who observe and look upon us, how we quit
our selves in this holy War? If it were only the present Profit and Benefit
which will accrue to us, it should move us to fight, how terrible soever it
seems to flesh and blood: For that is truly here verified, Pax Belli filia,
Peace is the Daughter of War. We no sooner enter the field to fight against
these Enemies, but presently we have Peace with God, and Peace of Conscience;
if not the sense, yet the ground of it. What then should the receiving of a
Heavenly Kingdom move us to do? Satan's pay to his Soldiers is but the Pleasures
of Sin for a Season; the Honor and Profit of the world for a moment; and in
the end everlasting destruction both of Body and Soul. Whereas they who keep
close to Christ's Standard, and overcome the Enemy, besides what they have
here, shall be filled with such Rewards and Joys, as Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, nor Heart of man can conceive.
Lastly, We have sure grounds of Victory, for our Enemies are already overcome
to our hand; Christ has cooled their Courage, and abated their Strength: And
he that calls us to the Fight, will help us to Overcome; Deficientes sublevat,
and vincentes coronat; When we faint he sustains us, and crowns us when we
overcome.

Besides, God gives us to see the end from the beginning; He showed David the
Victory beforehand, This uncircumcised Philistine, says he, shall be as one
of them, meaning the Lion and Bear he had slain, 1 Samuel 17.36. We may say, as
the Church of old, Rejoice not against me, O mine Enemy, for though I fall, yet
I shall rise again. She that is mine Enemy shall see it: shame shall cover her
that said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God? Mine eyes shall behold her, now
shall she be trodden down as the Mire in the Streets, Mic. 7.8, 10. Behold
Earth's Triumph in the midst of the Enemies Insultations; to see this
beforehand is ground of hope of Victory. Further, every piece of Armor speaks
them Conquerors; It is the Armor of God, the Armor of Righteousness, and
secures on the right hand and on the left. Though Readiness Armor was too
cumbersome for David, yet this is fitted and suited exactly to all that rightly
take it to themselves. Their Girdle and Helmet of great Strength and Purity;
Their Breast Plate such as secures the Vitals of Godliness and Religion; Their
Shoes impenetrable, though the way be strewed with Thorns and sharp Stones;
Their Sword better than Goliah's, and it may be said of it most truly, There
is none like it; Their Shield better than the Shields of the Mighty, quenching
all the fiery Darts the Enemy can throw upon them. Moreover, Whatever fights
against us, fight for us? All these things are against me, says Jacob, Genesis
42.32. yet found all for him; whatever resists Believers in a Conflict, does
encourage them: Their former and present Trials beget future Trust; Their
former Assaults are their after Experiences. By these they learn how to ward
off such a Blow, how to evade such a Snare and Stratagem, how to withstand such
a Temptation; and to add no more, In their Inability lies their Ability; out of
weakness they are made strong, and wax valiant in fight, as they of old, Heb.
11.34. Many are valiant to fight at first, but to grow strongest at the last
piece of Service, to so say as St. Paul, When I am weak, then am I strong; this
is encouraging indeed. These and other grounds of Victory Believers have; let
all such stand and withstand in the evil day, for you shall certainly overcome
at last. Assurance of Victory will make a Coward fight stoutly and
courageously. O let not your hands be weakened, or your hearts faint and fail,
seeing you are sure to prevail. There is a notable Speech of Charles the Fifth,
who (venturing into apparent danger in War, was dissuaded from hazarding
himself, ^est if he were killed, the whole Army should be routed and broken)
said, An Emperor was never shot through with a Bullet. Let the hearts and
hands of Believers be strengthened by this. A true Believer was never totally
and finally overcome by the Enemies of his Soul; but though foiled, and his
Weapons beaten out of his hand, yet recovers and stands when they are fallen
and destroyed: Only be strong and of a good courage, put forth your utmost
endeavors to overcome. Qui creavit te sine te, non servabit te sine te, was
the Saying of an Ancient. It is not Armor in the Magazine, but put on and well
used, that defends us and offends our Enemies.

This Church of Philadelphia had but a little strength, yet improving it well
kept Christ's word, and denied not his Name; For to him that has, shall be
given. If a man has Faith in the Habit only, though it were as strong as
Abraham's, yet it will do little toward a Victory: but Faith, though but as a
grain of Mustard Seed, yet in lively exercise will do wonders. Hence it is, a
strong Believer that suffers sloth and security to grow upon him, will fall
before the Enemy; when the weak Christian, improving his little Strength, shall
be victorious and get the better of him. If any object, we find the Enemy too
strong for us, as the Sons of Zeruiah were too strong for David; so may some
say, The evil Heart within, Satan and the World without are too hard for me, I
shall never overcome, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, by the Policy
and Power of my Adversaries. Let such look to their Captain for fresh
Auxiliaries, and fear not; God gave St. Paul, and will thee, Victory; not for,
or by thine own Endeavors, though they must be used, but through Jesus Christ.
Particularly, 1. Through the Strength of Christ: I can do all things, and
suffer all things too, says the Apostle, through Christ that strengthens me,
Phil. 4.13. A Christian in Christ walks up and down the world like a
Conqueror; but without him they can do nothing, John 15.5. 2. Through the
Blood and Cross of Christ. It Is said that when Constantine was going to fight
against his Enemies, the Sign of the Cross appeared to him, with these words
written upon it, By this shall thou Overcome. I know no Virtue to be in the
Sign of the Cross; but I read the Saints overcame the Dragon by the Blood of
the Cross, that Blood of the Lamb shed upon the Cross; Christ's Blood is
Sin-conquering, Satan-subduing, and World-overcoming Blood. 3. Through the Word
of Christ. The Apostle says, That Young men having the Word of God abiding in
them, overcome the wicked One, 1 John 2.14. Young Saints by this applied and
improved, overcome old Adam; yea, that old Serpent the Devil. 4. By the Love of
Christ. Believers are said to be more than Conquerours, through him that loved
them, Romans 8.37. Many waters cannot quench the flame of this Love, nor the
floods drown the sense of it: Love is strong as Death, and Death overcomes all,
none can stand before it. 5. By the Victory of Christ; Hence he does cheer up
the hearts of his troubled Disciples, ready to faint at the consideration of
his Departure from them, and the Hatred of the world against them; Be of good
comfort, I have overcome the world. This he did as a public Person, for
himself, and for his Church, and every Member of it. When Satan conquered the
first Adam, he overcame all Mankind, all being in him their Head and
Representative So all in Christ, the second Adam, do and shall Overcome by his
victory. Therefore be of good cheer, I have overcome the world; As if he had
said, My Victory is yours, and for you: else if they had no Interest in it,
what support could this give to them? Well then, Let all that are of a fearful
heart, be persuaded to fight, as if they had no Captain, no Christ; yet to rely
on the Strength, Blood, Word, Love and Victory of Christ, as if they had not
struck a stroke; so shall they certainly Overcome their Enemies, and enjoy the
good of these Promises.


SERMON VII.
REV. III. 21. To him that Overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my
Throne, even as I also Overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne.


THis is the last, though not the least, of those Seven Promises made to
Overcomers in this and the former Chapter. It is directed to the Angel of the
Church of Laodicea, verse. 14. This Angel some think was Archippus, who had
declined from his first life and activity in the work of the Ministry; Hence
the Apostle Paul bad some say to Archippus, Take heed to thy self, and to thy
ministry that thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it, Col. 4.17.
Laodicea was a City nigh to the Collosians, and the Church planted there seems
more corrupt than any of the other: In some there is much commended, and
something reprehended; In others nothing reproved, but much commended: Here
much reproved, nothing of commendation. The sum of the Epistle is to discover
her Sins, and persuade to repentance: The sins were two, 1. A detestable
neutrality in their Christian profession, at the 15 verse, Thou art neither
cold nor hot; as if he had said, thou art indifferently affected, neither eager
for the truth, nor an open Enemy to it; Neither a zealous professor, nor a
professed Enemy to Religion; but a neuter, halting between two, as they, 1 Kings
18.21. 2. Pride and self-conceit, in the 17 verse, Thou say I am rich, and
increased with goods, and have need of nothing, etc. as if he had said, Thou
do boast as if thou were rich in all manner of spiritual Grace, that nothing
need be added to that perfection thou have attained, when thou vauntest thus,
being ignorant of thine own lamentable state, not knowing that thou art poor,
and beggarly; yet poor and proud like a beggar boasting of wealth; so true of
her was that of Solomon, There is that makes himself rich, and yet has
nothing, Prove. 13.7.
And some think that the reason why no fault was mentioned in some Churches,
was not because there was no imperfection in them, but to show how much the
Lord favors humble modesty; and nothing commended in Laodicea, not because
there was nothing good among them, but to show how much the Lord disliketh a
lukewarm temper, and a proud vainglorious disposition. These were her sins;
Now Christ persuades to repentance by many arguments. 1. From his own
Omniscience, verse 15. I know thy works, that thou art neither hot nor cold; as
if he had said, though thou be careless, yet I care; though thou take no
notice, yet I do; I observe what temper thou art of, and how doubly thou
dealest by me. 2. By an argument drawn from the loathsomness of this sin, verse
16. Because thou art neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth:
Though they might think it were nothing to deal thus deceitfully with God, they
might account it a piece of wisdom to be thus moderate, as some call it; But I
have other thoughts of it, it is a filthy abominable sin, I will spue thee out
of my mouth for it, if thou be not zealous and repent: a plain expression,
intimating the loathsomness of it; as we spit at that which is loathsome to our
Stomach, so does the Lord by this declare how much he abhors this sin in our
Religion. 3. From the present inconvenience it brought upon her; verse 17. It
brings them into a miserable condition; They had a seeming show to be rich, and
wife, and happy, and full, when they were poor, and blind, and wretched, and
naked. A show of Religion makes men think they are in a good estate, and want
nothing; but because it is but a show, they are indeed the more indigent and
necessitous. 4. From the riches of his own Grace, verse 18. I counsel thee to
buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich, etc. Would men come
off in good earnest to Jesus Christ, and cleave to him in faithfulness they
need not make such poor shifts as they do; they need not make such formal
counterfeit shows as they do: to bear up their heads in the world, he would
enrich them to purpose; they need not be ashamed to walk in the midst of their
Enemies who wait to see their shame, he would cloth them effectually: 5. From
an insinuating motion; if they will not, he must take another course with them:
if they will not come home willingly, he must fetch them home with a rod; As
many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore and repent, ver. 19.
as if he had said, if there be no other remedy, though he dearly loved them,
yet he must rebuke and chasten them; therefore as they would avoid this
chastisement, let them be more zealous. 6. From his own importunity, the
longing desire he had to do good to their Souls; Behold I stand at the door and
knock, etc. verse. 20. as if he had said, How fain would I bless your Souls with
real blessings? How fain would I make over my grace and love to you, but you
deprive your selves of it by your Hypocrisy, and Neutrality? Behold, I come
once more to your doors, and stand and knock, if any man will open to me, I
will come in, and sup with him, and he with me. 7. From the great honor and
dignity he would raise those up to that overcome these predominant evils: This
is laid down in the Text; the sum of which take in this proposition.


Doct. That as Christ overcame, and sat down with his Father on his Throne; so
all Overcomers shall fit down with Christ in his Throne. Here are three parts,
1. That Christ overcame. 2. Having so done, he sat down in his Fathers Throne.
3. All Overcomers shall sit down with him on his Throne.


Bra. 1. Christ overcame; It is he that speaks these words in the Text, I
overcame. All he encountered with, he got Victory over. He grapled with Satan
and overcame him; He overcame him, says the Scripture, that had the power of
death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2.14. This Seed of the Woman has broke that
Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. The head is the place of policy in man, of power in
other creatures. Christ has got all the power and policy of Satan, and crushed
it under his feet. The Apostle says, Colos. 2.14. He spoiled Principalities
and Powers; That is, the whole Host of Hell, with all their train of Attillery
were utterly divested of all their destroying power; He overcame sin; coming in
the likeness of sinful flesh, condemned sin in the flesh, Romans 8.3. so that it
cannot condemn any in Christ, Romans 8.1. He overcame them by bearing them away,
as the word signifies, 1 Pet. 2.24. An allusion to the ceremony of the
Scapegoat, over whose head were confessed the sins of the Children of Israel,
and the Goat let go into the Wilderness, Levit. 16.21, 22. This shadowed Christ
upon whom God laid the iniquities of all his people, who so bare them as to
bear them away. One sin sunk the Angels that kept not their first estate into
their present misery, and they can never overcome it; yet Christ has subdued
all the iniquities of his people, and cast them into the depth of the Sea,
Mich. 7.19. He overcame the world; I have overcome the world, says he, John 16
33. He overcame the good things of the world by being dead to them; when they
sought to make him a King, he withdrew himself. He overcame the evil things
thereof by the invincible courage and patience of his life, for he meekly
endured the contradictions of sinners against himself: and by the victorious
power of his death, when he seemed to be overcome, but did never conquer more
eminently than by it and the consequences of it. He has overcome the justice
and wrath of God, by giving satisfaction; out of Christ it has a dreadful
quarrel and implacable controversy; and Believers are often under fears of
these, but Christ's blood has made it their friend: In Christ God sits with a
Rainbow round about his Throne, Rev. 4.3. When God smelt a sweet savor of rest
from Noah's Sacrifice, he promised never to drown the world again; and as a
token he would be mindful of his Covenant, he put his Rainbow in the Clouds:
So in Christ there is a Rainbow about Gods Throne; his Bench of Judicature is
turned into a Throne of Grace. Christ overcame the. Law by fulfilling it; He
obeyed the precepts of it; Though he was the Lawmaker, yet he was made under
the Law, Gal. 4. He was circumcised and so became a debtor to do the whole Law,
which he perfectly fulfilled, and is in that sense the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10.4. He endured the penalties
of it also, by submitting to the curse of it, Gal. 3.13. Christ redeemed us
from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. To be under the Law is a
state full of danger and terror; Believers many times fear it will put in a
black bill of indictment against them; but Christ's blood has blotted out the
hand-writings against them: They are not under the Law as to its envenomed
curses, and intolerable penalties. The Law it self to every true Believer, is
nonsuited, as one faith well, by the death of the Lawmakers: He overcame also
death and the grave; Not so destroyed it that Believers shall not dye; but
unstinged it, that it shall not destroy eternally. Hence the Apostles
triumphant (...), O death where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?
Thanks be to God which gives us the victory through Jesus Christ, 1 Cor.
15.55, 57. When a Be has fastened her sting in a man's flesh and so lost it,
she ever after (they say) turns a Drone. Death once fastened its sting in Christ
who overcame the venom of it, and ever since it has been like a Drone; it may
hum and affright, but not really hurt a true Believer. Death is very strong, it
overcomes the mighty Monarchs and Potentates of the Earth, and and none can
stand before it; yet Christ overcame it even upon its own ground; It got him
into the prison of the grave, but could not keep him there, it was not possible
for him to be holden by it, Acts 2.24. And though it is the last Enemy that
shall be destroyed, yet Death shall he swallowed up of Victory, 1 Cor.
15.26.54. Thus we see, that Christ overcame the Enemies, either by reconciling
them, or disarming them; either by making them friends, or leaving them
impotent Enemies.

Bra. 2. After he had thus overcome, he sat down with his Father in his
Throne; The Text is express for it: This is variously expressed in the
Scripture; He is sometimes said to sit at the right hand of the Throne of the
Majesty in the Heavens, Heb. 8.1. Sometimes to sit on the right hand of God,
Mark 16. All amounts to the same purpose. Four things are implied in it:

1. It notes Dignity: Superiors sit, when Inferiors stand; The ancient of days,
is said, to sit, Dan. 7.9. And God is described sitting upon a Throne, Rev.
7.15. Thus Christ sat down in his Fathers Throne, that is, he was advanced to
great honor: The Angels never arrived to such honor; To which of all the
Angels did God ever say, sit thou on my right hand? Heb. 1.13.The very
interrogation implies a negation, he never spoke thus to any of them. It was
great honor Solomon did his Mother, to cause her to sit down at his right
hand, 1 Kings 2.19. But Christ is raised to greater Dignity; for the Lord said
unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, till thine Enemies be made thy
footstool, Ps. 110.1. To such a height of honor is he advanced, that God has
charged all the Angels to worship him, Heb. 1.6. At first made lower than the
Angels, now above them.

2. It imports Authority: Thou satest in the Throne judging right, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 9.4. Thus God has highly exalted Christ to be the judge of all
the world; A throne he shall have in the Clouds, and he that once came to be
judged, shall come the second time to judge: The Father judges no man, but
has committed all judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the Son, as
they honor the Father, John 5.22, 23. And to show his Authority, it is said, to
him every knee shall bow, Phil. 2. All things in Heaven, in Earth, and under
the Earth, that is, Angels, Men, and Devils are subject to the Name and
Authority of the Lord Jesus: And every tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ
is Lord to the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.8, 9, 10. The Devils and wicked
men shall at last be forced to acknowledge the Authority of Christ, and to say
as Julian the Apostate did, Vicisti Galilee, O Galilean, thou have overcome me;
and all Saints and holy Angels shall with one consent acknowledge and own him as
the Lord, and as their Lord; And all this to the glory of God the Father, which
(...), though it signifies the great end of Christ's exaltation, viz. the glory
of God, yet some understand by it, that Jesus Christ is exalted to the same
Authority and Glory with the Father in Heaven, being now set down with him in
his Throne, at his right hand.

3. It implies a settled continuance of Christ in this Honor and Authority;
It Is said that Joseph's Bow abode, or as some read, sat in strength, Genesis
49.24. As standing is a posture that shows a man ready to go this way or that
way, so a sedentary gesture notes continuance or abiding: Though man being in
honor continued not, Psalm. 49. ult. Adam being in honor lodged not; whence
some conjecture, Adam fell in the very day he was created; And though our days
on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none abiding, 1 Chronicles. 29.15. Yet
the second Adam abides and continues in the Fathers Throne for ever.

4. It signifies Christ's resting from all his Travels, Labors, Services, and
Sufferings: As after much Labor a man sits down and rests himself, even so
Christ having finished the work his Father gave him to do, a cessation from all
troublesome Labors followed, and he shall know them no more. After Gods works
of Creation were finished, he rested on the seventh day, Genesis 2.2. Thus also,
when Christ had accomplished the works put into his hand, He entered into rest,
and ceased from his own works, as God did from his, Heb. 4.10. Some carry these
words of Believers, they are ceased from sins, who are entered into heavenly
rest; others, that Believers are ceased from all sufferings and sorrows, being
once in glory; All this is true, yet some take it for Christ his Rest from all
his labors and troubles; Though here he was a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with grief, yet being exalted to sit with his Father in his Throne, is ceased
from these for ever.

Bran. 3. Overcomers shall sit down with Christ on his Throne; so says the
Text; An allusion, say some, to the practice of those Eastern Kings, whose
Thrones were made large and capacious after the manner of a Couch; so that
besides the Kings place, others whom the King would honor might sit down with
him in the same Throne: what this Throne of Christ is, there are various
conjectures; The Kingdom of Grace say some; we are made Kings and Priests, and
reign on the Earth, Rev. 5.10. That is, have Dominion over Sin, Satan, and the
World; But this is Christ sitting on the Throne of our Consciences, rather than
our sitting with Christ in his Throne, say others, who therefore will have it
meant of his Throne in Heaven: But there Christ has no Kingdom distinct from
the Father, for having once ended that great transaction of the last judgment,
he shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, and God shall be all in all,
Cor. 15.24.28. Not that then Christ shall lay aside his humane nature, as some
have thought; but that his present mediatory Kingdom shall give place to the
essential Kingdom of the Godhead; God shall he all in all; not personally
(...), but essentially, (...), the Divine being, the Father, Son, and Spirit,
shall be all in all, that is, communicate himself to the glorified Church,
without the intervention of Ordinances and Creatures, and also without the
proper and immediate exercise of the Office of the Mediator: For when the
difference between God and the Creature is completely made up, what formal need
will there be of a Mediator? For we cannot make a Mediator of one, nor of those
that are made one; It is an Apostolical maxim, A Mediator is not of one, Gal.
3.20. But if any say, how then is the Kingdom of Christ everlasting? I answer,
this does not at all hinder it, for he has victory over all the Kingdoms of
the world, all the four Monarchies being fully conquered by him, Dan. 7. and
the Gospel of his Kingdom is vertually everlasting, Rev. 14.6. And Believers by
virtue of it, shall possess everlasting glory: neither shall this resignation
of the Kingdom be any diminution to his glory; for the song in Heaven will be,
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing, etc. Rev 5.11, 12. Others
understand this Text, of a Temporal and Visible Throne and Kingdom to be
erected in this World before the last Judgment. If these words, says an
excellent Divine, Do not intimate a reigning time for Christ's Church on earth,
I do not at all understand them; Whether there shall be a personal continuance
of Christ on earth for a Thousand Years, as some hold, is very hard to be
proved from the Scripture: Yet that there will be a glorious time for the
Church on Earth, before the end of all things, is very clear. The 60 Chapter of
Esaias speaks it fully, those Promises wait for the full accomplishment: Great
shall he the day of Jezreel, Hos. 2. ult. This is the world to come, as some
judge, mentioned, Heb. 2.5. Then shall Knowledge abound and cover the Earth, as
the Waters do the Sea. Some observe, that the Girdle was about the Loins, Ezekiel.
23.15. But then about the Paps, Rev. 1.13. to signify how Knowledge shall rise
higher in the last, than former Ages of the World: Then will Holiness increase,
All the Pots in the Lords House shall be holy, and Holiness written on the
Bells of the Horses, Zech. last. Then there will be an end of differences
amongst God's people; Now Ephraim is against Manasseh, and Manasseh against
Ephraim, and both against Judah; but then the the Lord shall be one, and his
Name one: Then will come down the new Heavens and the new Earth, wherein shall
dwell Righteousness. Now men say, Quod libet, licet; Sic volo, sic jubeo; but
then Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning; Kings Nursing
Fathers, etc. Justice shall run down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty
Stream; then shall Antichrist's Throne be utterly broken; That implacable Enemy
shall fall and rise no more: And then will the Kingdom of Christ be enlarged,
The Kingdoms of this world shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his
Christ, Rev. 11.15. The Kingdom of Christ shall be more observable and visible
than ever. We are not to expect a Kingdom, de novo, but the increase and
enlargement of that already extant: And though the Glory of his Kingdom is
eclipsed, yet it will be rendered conspicuous to all, when he shall not Reign in
a corner, but over the whole World: God has set his King long since upon his
holy Hill of Sion, all Power in Heaven and Earth was given to him at his
Resurrection; so that Christ has been in his Throne many hundred years, yet it
shall grow and prevail, till all implacable Opposers be put down, and his
Kingdom appear in its Beauty in this world; though it will not be of the world,
neither will the Saints have worldly Troubles, nor worldly Joys, but shall have
Heavenly Thrones; I mean their Thrones shall be in Heaven upon Earth: Then
shall Overcomers know better than now they can apprehend, how great the Mercy
here promised is, to sit with Christ in his Throne. If any ask, why Christ will
thus privilege them, the Answer is, from his free Grant; so says the Text, To
him that Overcomes will I grant: Nothing more free than a Grant from a King.
All this Charter contained in these seven Promises, is from the Royal Grant of
the King of Saints. Not for the Battles they have fought, not for the Victories
they have gotten; but all flow from the Fountain of Free Grace: All that was
done well, was done by his assistance. So then it will not be their Merit, but
his Mercy; not of Debt, but of Grace; when they are sat down in his Throne
with him, they will and must cry, Grace, Grace. The Uses follow.

Use 1. If these things be thus, Then let us all examine whether we be in the
number of those that shall inherit the good of this, and all the Promises we
have heard of: If any say, How shall we come to an assured Interest in them?
The Answer is, All depends upon our being victorious, they are all entailed
upon Overcomers. Let us then to secure our Title to the one, clear the truth of
our being in the number of the other, by discerning the soundness of our
Regeneration; for the Apostle says, Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the
world, 1 John 5.4. and all that is in the world; the God of the world, the Men
of the world, and the Lusts of the world: without this work wrought in us, any
of our Enemies will ruin us. When the Sons of Sceva thought to prevail, by
adjuring the evil Spirit by the Name of Jesus, whom Paul Preached; the Spirit
answered them, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? And the men in
whom the evil Spirit was, leaped upon them and overcame them, so that they fled
naked and wounded, Acts 19.14, 15, 16. As if he had said, I know Jesus to be
the Son of God, and Paul to be the Servant of God; the one may command me, the
other may in his Name compel me, but who are ye? Have you the Power, Grace, and
Spirit of Jesus or Paul? He knowing they wanted this, overcame them; And so
will Satan conquer all unregenerate ones. Let us then be looking diligently to
our selves, lest we fail of this Grace of God; All depends upon it as to
Victory. O let us take heed lest our New Birth prove a false Conception, lest
Ephraim-like we be unwise Sons, that stay long in the place of breaking forth
of Children, Hof. 13.13. Many throws and pangs some have, Convictions tending
to Conversion; yet they go away, and the Soul not born of God. Many go on in a
way of Profession all their days, and yet are not Newborn; are not in the
Spiritual Genealogy. And what do an Hundred Ciphers signify without a Figure?
Just nothing. To the same reckoning will all our external Religion come,
without the New Birth: Above all things let us be careful lest we be deceived
herein. And truly he had need be as wise as Solomon, to find out the true
Mother. Three or four things there are that deceive People; 1. They have been
convinced of Sin in a Legal way, and much troubled, and therefore hope they are
born of God; But this is many a man's mistake to rest in them; They are troubled
for Sin under the Word or Rod, yet sin again. The Children of Israel, when God
slew them, then they sought him, and they returned and enquired early after
God: Nevertheless, they flattered him with their mouth, and lied to him with
their tongue: For their heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant, Psalm. 78.34, 36, 37. 2. Some mistake in the point of
good disposition; They are well-enclined men, good-natured and hopeful men; but
was not Christ's words to such an one, Joh. 3.3. Verily I say unto thee, except
a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God? Why did Christ put him
in mind of this? Why, because he was a well-enclined and disposed man, and did
rest too much upon it; therefore Christ tells him where his danger lay. 3. Some
plant the bottom of their Christianity upon Forms, in things that are but the
husk, the Varnish and Plaistering of Religion: They think it enough to go to an
Ordinance, to keep their Church, to be Baptized, to come to the Lord's Table,
to be able to give an account of the Lord's Prayer, Creed, and Ten
Commandments; to such I may say, as Christ did to the Pharisees, These things
you ought to have done, but not leave the other undone. God did appoint these
things, that men should have a Form of Godliness; but we must not take the Skin
for the Body, nor the Shadow for Substance; For in Christ Jesus neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, Galat.
6.15. Think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father: Do
not think, that because you are educated in the Protestant Religion, under the
means of Grace, that therefore you are born of God. If any shall ask, How shall
I discern my new Birth? I answer, 1. If your greatest work be to get the old
Adam dissolved in your hearts, to get a proud heart to stoop, and the old
Nature changed, this is to obtain the whole in some sense. 2. If this Heart
ascribe all to God, and nothing to our selves; we are God's Workmanship, what
is Paul, what is Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believed, 1 Cor. 3. It was
God in the Ordinance that did the work. They that cry up men and means, and
forget to magnify the Free Grace of God, show it is not right. 3. It makes us
of a compassionate Temper to them that are out of the way of God: Be gentle and
meek unto all men, for we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, Tit. 3.2, 3. 4. We shall find an
indelible Memory is imprinted upon this work: Not that all men can say what was
the Time, Place, Sermon, when, where, and by which this work was done; for many
are brought up under Godly Parents, and free from all scandalous Sins; this
work steals in upon some such, they know not when nor how: But they can say,
Such they were in the times of their Unregeneracy, so foolish and ignorant, so
opposite and averse to what is good, so careless and regardless of God and
their Souls; but now, through Grace, they see and are ashamed of their former
Blindness; they are reconciled in some measure, both in Judgment and Affections
to that, and to those that are good: They desire to mind chiefly the one thing
needful. God may sanctify some even from the Womb, but there is something
daily to be put away in all that are Regenerate; and though they cannot tell
the first time, yet they can say it is often done; they do not turn to God
once, but more and more, they have a great deal to do still.
4. There is always going with it a Spirit of Prayer, it begins and ends with
Abba, Father. Prayer is the first thing in a Christian, and the last thing;
Because ye are Sons, he has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts,
crying, Abba, Father, Galat. 4.6. None of God's Children are still-born, Behold
he prays, says Christ of Paul, Act. 9.11.
Let us by such things as those try our Regeneration; If we find we are indeed
born of God, we overcome; and Overcomers inherit these Promises: Thus much in
General. More particularly; If the War be rightly managed, we may be sure we
shall prevail and conquer all our Enemies: As for instance, 1. If all our
Faculties in their rank and file do fight against them: The Scripture tells us,
The Stars in their Courses fought against Sisera, Judge. 5.20. Do the several
Faculties of our Souls in their place and order wage war against Sin? In
unsound hearts one Faculty fights against a Lust, another contends for it;
Herod's Conscience fought against the motion Herodias made of cutting off John
Baptist's Head, his Affections ran counter to his Conscience; this was no true
Spiritual War: When both are against it, that Soul will be a Conqueror in the
end. 2. If the War continues; Fire and Water will fight when they meet, and can
never be reconciled; the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the Flesh, and these two are contrary each to other. Contraries will
ever be contending; If our Combat be thus managed, it is a good sign God will
in due time give us Victory.
Let such encourge themselves in expectation of it: Let none say, The Canaanite
is still in the Land, and who may call himself an Overcomer? So long as it
does, Gravitare, lie hard and heavy upon thee, as a thing out of its proper
place, and make thee cry out as Paul, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me, thou art an Overcomer in God's account. To this purpose, the
Original word in all these Texts before us is very observable, it is (...) and
(...): Not to him that Overcomes, as we read it; but to him that is
Overcoming, to him that is Praying, Striving, Wrestling, Fighting against these
Enemies, to him that is in an Overcoming Posture; though the Enemy be not quite
out of the field, to him shall these great Comforts in the Promises be given by
Jesus Christ. If there be a Nolle peccatum, a bent of heart against Corruption
and Temptation, thou persuest them to Death, and would be glad of an utter
extirpation of them, then God accepts the Will for the Deed, and reckons thee a
Conqueror. Though the Damsel under the Law was abused, yet if she made the
utmost resistance she was able, and cried out, and there was none to help her,
she was accounted Innocent and Guiltless; because she was forced, and not free
and voluntary in it. Whatsoever is born of God Overcomes; it is not said,
Whosoever, but Whatsoever: The person may be in particular Battles worsted by
the Enemy, yet the principle is a Conqueror in the end, and will prevail; for
it never yields, but makes implacable Opposition: cries out to Heaven for help,
and is on this account esteemed an Overcomer. And therefore though we are still
assaulted, yet it is that we may be exercised, that we may stand upon our
Guard, and watch and pray continually; we must keep our Armor upon us, and not
be secure, for then the Enemy gets advantage against us: Our Enemies are like
to that famous General Marcellus, of whom it is said, he was never quiet, Nec
Victor, nec victus; neither a Conqueror, nor Conquered: Let it be enough to
know, they are, and shall be subdued effectually in due time. Above all things
despair not of Victory, when we find them turbulent and rebellious. Many
Creatures struggle most when dying; The Devil rages most when he is about to
be cast out, Mark 9.15, 16. No Believer so overcomes here, as to say, He shall
meet with no further Assaults. Our contendings are not to empty a Pit, that is
more easily done; but to dry up a Spring and Fountain, which is very difficult,
if possible, in this case; but Corruption will be bubbling, and Temptations
springing. And though a man has overcome a Fit of Sickness, yet he cannot say
he shall never be sick again; for he may have further Distempers, and be sick
again even of the same Distemper; yea, and be brought low by it. So I may say
here, A Believer, after he has gotten a particular Victory over his Enemies,
yet cannot say, I shall never be assaulted again by this or that Lust or
Temptation; For that may be, and thou be brought low thereby: Be not secure,
but watchful. But here lies the great Comfort, though a man may be under the
same Affliction, that he has formerly been recovered from, yea, and dye of it
also; yet I may assure all true Believers, That their Sickness is not unto
Death, as Christ said of Lazarus; It may bring them low, but never to hurt them
by the Second Death. You cannot say as Alexander, Veni, vidi, vici; I came, I
saw, I overcame; but you may he exercised by these Enemies all your Life, and
some have had the sharpest Combat in their dying hours; yet always true
Believers go off Conquerors. We read of a great Victory obtained by Israel over
the Syrians, yet at the return of the year the Syrians made another Invasion,
though it was to their utter Overthrow, 1 King. 20. Your Spiritual Enemies are
like the Syrians, though they be often baffled, yet they will renew their
Assaults. But as Joshua made his Captains set their feet upon the necks of
those Kings, Josh. 10.24. So will Christ, your Captain and Champion, who has
already won the Field, cause you to tread down the wicked, wicked Lusts, wicked
Men, and Satan that wicked one, As ashes under the soles of your feet, Mal. 4.3.

Let us all labor to be Overcoming, that we may get Christ's Grant, to sit
with him in his Throne; Vincenti dabitur: Look to get a principle of true
Faith, this is the Victory whereby we Overcome, even our Faith; if we fail of
the truth of this Grace, our enemies will utterly ruin us Instead of sitting
with Christ in his Throne, we shall be thrown out by Christ upon the Dunghill,
and the Devil will everlastingly triumph over us. What will not men venture
upon for Thrones and Kingdoms? Shall not a place in Christ's own Throne animate
us to this holy War?

To Conclude, You that are true Believers, you have begun to be Victorious, Go
on Conquering and to Conquer. To this end, 1. Beware of Divisions; Divide and
Impera, Divide and Rule. An Army divided is easily routed. Our Divisions give
our Enemies great advantage, as we have seen by sad Experience. It was said of
old, Dum singuli pugnant, omnes vincuntur; whilst they fought single, they were
all Overcome. Union is our strength, O that at length Christians would study to
join Hearts and Hands against the Enemies. It was good Policy in Joab, when he
saw the Enemy had beset them before and behind, he said to his Brother, If the
Syrians he too strong for me, then thou shall help me; but if the Children of
Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will come and help thee, 2 Samuel 10.11. So
should Christians say to each other, If Corruptions be too strong for us, you
shall come and help us; and if Temptations be too strong for you, we will come
and help you: This would much weaken the hands of our Enemies, and make us more
and more Victorious. 2. Give Christ the glory of every Victory, and he will
give us to go on yet Conquering and to Conquer. I have read of a Victory called
Victoria Hallelujetica; it was on this occasion, The Saxons here in England
being to engage the Britains, the Leader of the Britains having his Army in
Dales and Valleys, ordered them to cry Hallelujah; which they did, and through
the Echo of the Voice in the Valleys, the Enemy apprehended the number to be
more than they were, and through fear fled. Let Heaven and Earth ring again
with the Echo of your Praises for the beginnings of Victory, and the Enemy
will flee before you. 3. Above all, Go out against them, as David did against
Goliath, in the Name of the Lord. Austin being troubled he long fought against a
Corruption and could not overcome it, thought he heard a Voice saying to him,
In te stas, and non stas; Thou stand in thy self, and therefore thou
stand not: Say with the Psalmist, I will go in the strength of the Lord, I
will make mention of thy Righteousness only, Psalm. 71.16. David with a Sling
and a Stone, acting Faith in the Name of God, prevailed against the Enemy; but
Adam though without sin, standing in himself, was Overcome. Believers, you have
a good Second, a strong Champion, Jesus Christ, God has laid Help upon this
Mighty One: Rely on him alone, that through him you may have Victory, and so
inherit these Promises. And if these be not enough, it is said, Rev. 21.7. He
that Overcomes, shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall
be my Son.


FINIS.

