SEVERAL DISCOURSES ON The Unsearchable Riches of Christ. The Knowledge of
Christ Crucified. The Authority and Efficacy of the word. Working out our
Salvation. The Observation of the Christian-Sabbath. Christ 's coming to Judge
the World.
Being Some REMAINS OF WILLIAM ALLEIN, M. A. Sometime Minister of the Gospel in
Blanford.

Carefully copied from his own Notes, and published at the Request of his
Hearers.

Remember them which had the rule over you, who have spoken to you the word of
God; whose Faith follow, considering the end of their Conversation Heb.
xiij.vij. BRISTOL, Printed by Will. Bonny, for I. Allein at his House in
Bristol. 1697.

TO THE READERS, Those especially, who once were Hearers of the late Mr. W. A.
and now desired this Service.
YOur justly Honoured-Teacher, though ceased from his Labors near Twenty Years
ago, now once more speaks to you some great things of the Gospel, to the same
ends as St. Peter wrote to his dispersed Countrymen, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13. To stir
you up by the way of Remembrance, and to establish you in present Truth. The
World is indeed full of Books and Preachers, yet seems to want more; or at
least that surviving Elisha might receive a double Portion of Elija's Spirit:
we are not allowed to wish that ascended Elijah's might be sent back to our
dark impure World; Divine Wisdom has chosen other ways to amend it, but the
Mantle they dropped, we may take up to divide the Jordan in our way. I cannot
tell (as perhaps you may) at what times these Sermons were delivered: it
appears in some of them, they were in in the time of the Authors public
Ministry. Many yet remember what Excellent Piety, Learning Modesty and
Meekness, enriched and adorned him and his Doctrine; and have noted that when
in his former Book (which himself designed for the P ess, and to have added
somewhat to it) he pleads more judiciously and strenuousl^ for a dubious notion
than most others did, yet makes no such confident boast as they. Somewhere that
notion occurs too in these Papers, which needs not offend any who are not of
his mind in that. Many great Men of different Names in our Age, espouse most
that he argues for, viz. that a day and state of the Christian Church on Earth
shall be, when the impure mouths of Blasphemy now opened so wide against our
blessed Lord Jesus, his perfect Wisdom sacred Truth, omnipotent Grace, and
vital Headship to his Body, shall be stopped, Satan the seducer being chained
up, and the whole Mystery of Godliness more clearly understood, more
unanimously ^elieved, and the purif^ing nature of divine Truth irresistably
demonstrated in the holy lives, and loving Commerces of very numerous Converts
to Christ. Now who can forbear to wish at least this may prove true? To promote
such a Kingdom of Christ among Men as that in Rom 14.17. was the scope of the
worthy Author's Life, Study, and Labors; as witness these broken Remains: he
never designed them for the Press, as appears by many abreviatures, and etc's.
in his notes, even in alleging Texts of Scripture which I think the
Transcriber should have filled up, but has not: a desire to serve true
Religion peaceably in his private Station, induced his consent to the motion of
thus reviving his Honored Father's Memory. It cost him not a little pains,
though best acquainted with the Author's very small Hand: What assistance I could
give in comparing his Copy with the Originals, was due upon his request; but
after all our diligence, the work requires the Readers Candor, for we would
not assume to correct the Atuhor's words, though here and there may be a Phrase
ungrateful to some Ears, till they read on, where our Author delivers his sense
as plain and sound as needs be desired. Once indeed I altered one Sentence, to
give the meaning of it in terms inoffensive; but when the same recurr'd, I
chose to late it p^ss. These Discourses were chose out of many, because the
notes of these were most legible: the transcript has often failed in one little
word, viz. in putting so for ergo or therefore, which the Author commonly
wrote in a character like So: otherlike defects in the work claim excuse by
Common Law.

Many have writ well on these same Subjects; which as they can never be
exhausted, so must be alway^ inculcated, that Men may grow in Grace, and in the
Knowledge of Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3. ult. It Is not to be doubted but from a Man
of God so well read in Holy Scripture, you will receive what is worthy of your
time and pains, and will never be disrelished by any that love the Lord Jesus
in sincerity, but pleasant as bread eaten in Secret. He was a true, patient
Labourer, and most succesful Comforter of many dejected and wounded Spirits, by
skilful, affectionate application of Gospel-Cordials: a Man modestly zealous
for Truth and Peace, and mightily was his Spirit and Conversation influenced by
the pure, Heavenly Doctrine he believed and taught: Like Remains of two other
excellent Allein's, Richard the geuvine Brother, and Joseph the Kinsman of our
Author, have been judged worthy of such Publication. And we have later Examples
of Printing the Notes of great Men, which in some parts are not more complete
than these. Impartial Readers will allow that this Author was Baptized into the
same excellent Spirit as they.

In the Sixty third year of his Age he was called into hi^ Lords rest and joy,
when he had newly cut out for himself foam painful work, wherein he hoped to do
greater Service to the Church in diverse places, as he had every where good
acceptance: when his Friends told him they thought his Siskness would be unto
death, he answered, well, I know no cause I have to be sorry for that, for I
know in whom I have believed, and am persuaded he is able to keep that which I
have committed to him against that day. As 2 Timothy 1.2. but it is some trouble to
me, that during my day I have not more improved my Time and Talent as I might.
Suitable Counsels he added to those about him, to redeem the time, and hasten
all the work of their Generation: and notwithstanding his penitent Reflections,
(as excellent Archbishop Usher on his death bed, regretted his Sins of
omission.) the Lord was pleased to cheer him in his last Conflicts, by
ravishing prospects of Glory set before him, even Eternal Life, as the Gift of
God through Jesus Christ.

To supply what was lacking in his designed Service, is one reason of
publishing these imperfect Papers. Some that saw his amiable walking in all
good Conscience toward God and Man, will more reverence and love that Truth
where^y he was sanctified: the Faith and Footsteps of such guides St. Paul bids
us follow: and such remains may put us in mind, that England's Churches once
had burning and shining Lights. Survivors sadly confess a greater scarcity of
such now, and may we not do well to enquire. 1. How and w^y t^is is come to
pass. 2. What are the present Consequences of God's smiting so many Shepherds;
such as, scattering the little Flocks, growth of Ignorance, Error, Impiety,
Ruins of Temple work, many disorders and distractions in the destitute
Churches, etc. 3. What must be the Cure. Its time to enquire. For do we not see
want of more able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the
Spirit? 2 Cor. 3.6. wise and faithful builders of God's House: How weak are
many shoulders on whom so great work is laid, forcing an outcry for a richer
anointing with the Spirit of Grace, i. e. of Love, Wisdom, Humility, Zeal,
Self-denial, Heavenliness, which they had seen on others. If this depart, so
much of our true Glory departs. It cannot go well in Churches without fi^ed
Pastors after God's own Heart, entirely caring and watching for Souls, feeding
t^em with knowledge and understanding in the great Mysteries of Godliness. Jer.
3.15. such was our Author known: not mint and anise filled his T^oughts, but
the weighty things of Natural and Revealed Religion: if he dwelt more than some
do, on sublimer Doctrines of Faith, the Texts here treated are his Warrant,
together with Col. 1.24. to 29. -- 2.1, 2, 3. Nor did he treat them in a way of
bold, or curious speculation, but as leading to Christian Practice: upon the
great things of the Gospel must Christians live, if ev^r they go further in
Religion than a fruitless Form: It Is in wrong to Christ and his Church, if any
Preachers do not jointly declare these with the moral Rules of good living: I
cannot see that Law and Gospel were set as variance in the Ministry of Christ
and his Apostles: Nor that the Honor of Christianity can be preserved or its
ends attained without tutoring his Disciples, great and small, both in
Principles of Christian Doctrine, touching the glorious Person, Offices,
Fullness and Benefits of Christ t eir only Head, Lord and Savior, and touching
subjection to his Sovereign Wisdom in his Laws. They must be under the Law to
Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21. and that in virtue of his own Grace, 1 Cor. 15.10. what
kind of Evangilists must they be, that think the great discoverys of the
Gospel, whereby the world was Christianiz'd, are of little use in Preaching
now? Our Author was better taught as the Truth is in Jesus, and finished his
Course, fighting the good fight, and keeping the Faith once delivered to the
Saints: holding fast the Doctrine according to Godliness, till of his beloved
Master he obtained the Crown of Righteousness: would to God that a like love to
Divine Truth might prompt many others professing to embrace it, to meditate and
consult speedily how they may best establish and propagate it. It Is not wit^out
a Providence that of late we hear of so many sudden deaths of able, useful
Ministers; and may it not prove a presage of other Calamitees to surprise us.
It Is t^y spiritual Profiting, Reader, that this work aims at: and now look to
thy self, that thou receive not this Grace of God in vain. T e Unsearchable
Ric^es of Christ are surely the better part, and being timely chosen and
pursued, may be thine: choose and inherit them, study to know him, whom to know
is Life Eternal. Improve that Ministry and word of Grace to day, which is still
the Power of God to Salvation to them that believe, and enjoying this with
other Helps, work out thy Salvation with Fear and Trembling, and God for
Christ's sake will work in thee both to will and to do: So shall thou be
counted worthy to stand before the Son of Man, when he shall appear in Glory to
doom this whole World to its Eternal State. This is the Intent and Call of this
Essay: may the Lord of the Harvest so bless it. Amen.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST DISCOURSE. Ephesians. 3.8. Of the Unsearchable Riches of
Christ. CHAP. 1. Some transient Notes on the Text. Page 1 Chap. 2. Why the
things of Christ called Riches? Page 4 Chap. 3. What are these Riches? Page 6
1. Riches of Love, which is Abounding, Abiding, Effectual, etc.
Chap. 4.2. Riches of Christ's Righteousness as Mediator, 1. In his works for
Men. 2. In his works toward Men. Page 13
Chap. 5.3. Riches of Wisdom. 1. Speculative. Page 22 2. Practical. As 1. in
Ancient Providence, and 2. About Man's Salvation. Page 32
Chap. 6.4. Riches of Christ's Power. Page 37 The Power of his Death,
Resurrect. Intecession, etc. Power over all Men's Hearts and over all Creatures.
How exercised for us. Page 40
Chap. 7.5. Riches of Glory. Page 45 What Glory Christ has, and will appear
in. What Glory he received from the Father, and shall receive from Creatures.
Page 50 Saints shall see and share in his Glory. Page 56
Chap. 8. General Application of the whole. Page 62 To those enriched by
Christ, and to all, to seek a Portion in Christ's Riches. Page 66

The Second Discourse. 1 Cor. 2.2. Of Knowing Christ Crucified. Page 72 The
Text and Context explained to Page 77 Diverse Notes thereupon. As 1. That a
Gospel Minister must resolve to go through with his work of Preaching Page 80 2.
That he aim not at self-applause therein. Page 81 3. That he must Preach
Christ, though he be counted a Fool for so doing Page 82 4. That he truly knows
Christ when he labors to make others know Christ Page 83 5. He counts it a
precious service to Preach Christ Page 85 6. Of all Divine Doctrines, none more
necessary to be Preached than Christ Crucified. Page 87
Doct. 1. Knowledge of Christ is the most excellent Knowledge Page 88 1. Proved
by considering 1. its object, Christ, in general, Page 92 And in particular: as
his Natures, Names, Relations, Offices to the Church. Page 93 to 99 2. The
Effects of this Kowledge: as Justification, Spiritual Transformation and
Eternal Life. Page 100 1. Use of Exhortation with motives. Page 103 2. Means to
get this Excellent Knowledge. Page 113 3. Of Comfort to such as have attained
it. Page 119 Signs to Satisfy such as doubt.

Doct. 2. Our Principal study should be to know not only the History, but
Mystery of Christ Crucified. Page 126 That Mystery is, 1. Of Wisdom. 2. Of
Love. And 3. of Virtue in his Blood. Page 132 How the Virtue of Christ's Death
is conveyed to us. Page 138
Use 1. 1. Of reproof to the enemies of Christ's Cross. 2. Of Exhortation to
Believe in, Confess and Suffer for Christ. Page 134
Q. How may we so Suffer as to have Fellowship in Christ's Sufferings? Page 145
Christ's Sufferings for us a ground of our worshipping him: and how that must
be? Page 150
The Third Discourse. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. The Divine Authority of Scripture. Page
157 D. The Word contained in Holy Scripture is in truth the Word of God. Shown
Page 159 1. The Spirit in Scripture gives Testimony to it. 2. Arg. from the
word conv. its Authority. As 1. Its Power upon Sinners. Page 160 2. Its
Holiness. 3. Its Accomplishment. Page 166
3. To make these Argum. convictive, there is required an inward work of the
Spirit on the Heart. Page 170
Use 1. Of reproof to them that honor not the word duly. Page 175 2. Of
direction how to receive it. Page 179


The Fourth Discourse. Phil. 2.12. Of working out our Salvation. Page 185 Sect.
1. Opening the Text. Page 186 Sect. 2. D. 1. The great busin. that requires
greatest diligence, is to make Salvation sure. Page 188 1. Salvation of
Believers in Christ is sure in it self, as the whole Trinity can make it. Page
193 2. It may be made as sure to them. 3. It ought to be made sure. Page 194 4.
Nothing else can be made sure. Page 195 5. Nothing else is worth making sure.
Page 196
Sect. 3. What is Salv. and what Assure. thereof. Page 197 Sect. 4. Use of
Exhortation with motives. Page 198 Sect. 5. Directions. 1. to estranged
Sinners. Page 203 Sect. 6. 2. To Saints. 1. how to get this Assure. Page 211
Sect. 7. 2. How to carry thems. in want of it. Page 213 Sect. 8. D. 2. The
working out of Salvation begun should be the great desire of all Believers.
Page 220 1. Their Salvation shall be perfected. 2. by degr. 3. They should
desire its perfection. Page 223
Sect. 9. Use 1. Of Information. 2. Of Excitation. 3. Of Direction in this
great work. Page 229 Sect. 10. D. 3. Salvation is to be wrought out with fear
and trembling. Page 238 With what fear? and what not. Page 240
Sect. 11. 1. Salvation of Sinners is the work of the Trinity. Page 242 2.
There is a most glorious manifest. of God in it. 3. That cannot but work fear
in the Soul to which this manifestation is made. Page 245
Sect. 12. Of the not. and opposi^ of that fear. Page 249 Sect. 13. Use 2 Of
Information for Sinners. Page 250 Sect. 14. Use 2. To consider well what is
this work. Page 252 Sect. 15. On the motive to this work, ver 13. Doct. 1. they
that are in the way of Life and Salvat. are willing and doing Christians Page
256
Sect. 16. How they are willing and doing. Page 257 Sect. 17. Use for
conviction of many. Page 261 Sect. 18. Doct. 2. A gracious will is of God's
working. Page 266 1. Explained. 2. Proved by these steps. 1. In Not. Man is no
free will to spirit. good. he is 1 dark. 2. dead. 3. full of enmity thereto.
Page 271 2. Renewed Man has spiritual freedom. Page 273 3. This holy free will
is of God's working. Page 274 Two main Objections answered. Page 276
Sect. 19. Diverse uses of this point. Page 271

The Fifth Discourse. Isa. 58.13, 14 Of Sanctifying the Gospel Sab. Page 283
Doct. In the pu^est Go^pel-times the^e will be a strict observe. of the Sabbath
day. How this Prophet. Text proves that? Page 285 etc.
Q. How God's Com. to Sanct. the seventh day can oblige us now to Sanct. the
Lord's day? Page 293 Q. How the change of the Sab. day appears? Page 294 Q. How
was the Sabbath made for Man? Page 296 Q. Wherein consists the strict observe.
of it? Page 299 Answered from the Text it self.
Object. Who then can keep a Sab. Answered. Page 302 Q. Shall a Sab. be kept in
New Jerus. or when the Church is glorious on Earth? Page 303 Use 1. Of Rep. to
many for not counting the Sab. holy and honor. neither in the Judgm. nor in
their Practice. Page 304 2. Of Exhortation to Sanctify it better. Page 306 3.
Motives to the Exhortation. 4. Direct. how to keep a Gospel- Sab. Page 312


The Sixth Discourse. Romans 14.10. Of Christ 's Universal Judgment. Page 317 D.
1. Christ has a Judgment seat prepared for him. What is meant by that, and by
his sitting on it? Page 319 How Christ shall then appear. What Enemies will
then be Conquered.
D. 2. All Men shall then appear before him to receive Sentence according to
their deeds now done in the Body. Page 323 After what form Christ's Judgm will
proceed Page 324
Q. Shall the Sins of the Godly be then mentio. Page 326 Use 1. Of terror to
all the Wicked. Page 331 Urged by considering, that 1. it is the day of Christ's
wrath. 2. All their sinful works will be remembered. 3. None of their seeming
good works mentioned in excuse of their evil ones. 4. Their Conscience shall
then be convinced. Page 337 5. Their cries and Prayers shall not be heard. Page
339 6. They Will be reward. accord. to their works. Page 340
Use. 2. Of Exhortat. make it the business of every day to prepare for that
last day. Page 341 Directions how to prepare.




ERRATA. Of many Slips in Spelling and Pointing, these most need to be
Corrected.
PReface. Page 3. Line 16. for late read let. p. 4. l. ult. r. 12 Book. p. 1.
l. 8. dele Saint. p. 7. l. 28. after is add to. p. 11 l. 9. does: This. l. 33.
r. here is. page 53. 30. they. p. 54. 30. dele be. p. 62. 28. aim. p. 65. 12. is
r. are. p. 67. f. trusting r. instructing as we are instructed. p. 68. 32. too
r. to. p. 69. 33. where. p. 78. 12. add as after Sense. l. 28. is r. if. p. 80.
20. night r. might, p. 81. 6. you. r. must. p. 82. 11. spent. p. 84. 7.
exercise. p. 86. 33. Son-like. p. 87. 2. change the Points. p. 89. 28. dele
more. p. 90. 12. none. p. 97. 19. Isai. 33. p. 103. 14. search. l. 22. plenty.
p. 104. 30. then read thou. p. 107. 27. appropriation. p. 108. 10. dele re. p.
110. 15. I can. p. 115. 21. dele on. p. 116. 19. dele let us. p. 122. 3. Christ
was. p. 149. ult. they. P. 151. 2. constrain. p. 152. ult. be no. p. 160. 15.
and p. 170. 9. dele Truth. p. 19. 69. ^n r. in. p. 174. 20. fore r. for. l. 24.
there are. p. 180. 19. 15. r. 5 p. 199. 22. that he. p. 204. 3. r. live. p.
221. 22. we were. p. 235. 1. groa^ing. p. 275. 12. dele that. l. 21. his own.
p. 313. ult. they. p. 323. 30. dele and. p. 333. 14. change the Points. r. and
the. p. 340. 26. capacity. p. 341. ult. believe. This. p. 344. 15. Jude. l. 88.
that they.

THE FIRST DISCOURSE. THE Unsearchable Riches of CHRIST.
EPHESIANS the iij. verse viij. Unto me, who am less than the least of all
Saints, is this Grace given, that I should Preach among the Gentiles the
Unsearchable Riches of Christ.


CHAP. I.
THE Apostle here commends the Grace of God to the Gentiles, in that they were
made Fellow Heirs and partakers of his Promise in Christ, by the Gospel; and
also the Grace of God to him in particular, in Calling him to Preach the
Unsearchable Riches of Christ among the Gentiles.

Who was a greater and more Eminent Saint Saint then Paul? He calls himself
(when a sinner) the chief of Sinners: So there was ground for others to call
him, when he was a Saint, the chief of Saints, yet he styles himself less than
the least of Saints.

For the clearing this Point, take these Considerations.

First. The Judgment Saints should have of themselves, should be a Judgment of
Humility. There should be a Judgment of Charity in relation to others, so a
Judgment of Humility toward themselves: By the Judgment of Charity we think
and speak the best of others; by the Judgment of Humility the meanest of our
selves, which there is ground to do from the knowledge we have of our own
hearts, of our weakness, corruptions, etc. and we may say truly of our selves,
what Eliab spoke to David reproachfully, I know the pride and naughtiness of
thy Heart. And this knowledge and experience should keep all humble.

2. The carriage of one Saint toward another, should be as of an Inferior
toward his Superior, so far should we be from slighting the least, as we are
from slighting Superiors. Thus we are to understand these places, Phi. 2.3. Let
each man esteem others better then himself: And Romans 12.10. In honor
preferring one another: we should honor others and not our selves, let another
praise and honor thee, and not thine own lips.

As there are Saints of different Ranks, in Respect of their measures of Gifts
and Graces received, so those, that have more, should prefer those that have
less, and carry themselves as Inferiors to Superiors. The Men in understanding
should become as little Children in Humility; And as there are Saints under
several Forms, and too much at a distance, their forms being as a
partition wall between them, so it were to be wished, that the Saints of each
form would esteem those of another better then themselves: And as there are
Saints of different degrees in their outward and worldly Estate, there are high
and low, rich and poor, so the high Saints should account themselves less than
the poor Saints; The rich Saints that have the Goodly Apparel should account
themselves less then the least of the poor Saints, which have but the vile
Garment and rags. Thus all should carry themselves with such respect to others,
as if they were Superiors, and with as much care they do not offend them, as
men have, that they do not offend their Superiors. The best should account
themselves less than the least Saint, in that the best ought to become servants
to the least. Saints should serve one another in Love, Gal. 5.13. and Luke
22.26.27: He that is greatest should be as the younger: And he that is chief as
he that does serve. Whether is greater, he that serves, or he that is served?
Christ himself gave a glorious pattern of Humility in this, I am among you as
he that serves, and therefore Saints should not exercise Lordship, but be
amongst other Saints as those that serve. Let all Saints then be convinced that
it is their Duty to prefer other Saints; they ought to be low and lowly in
thought, speech, and behavior. And consider,

1. This is not the least Evidence of true Grace, when we can thus account of
our selves less than the least of the Saints; Paul says, if we have not
charity, so may we also say, if we have not Humility, what are we more than the
sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal.

2. This is the Ornament of a Saint; God's Glory is his highness; Humility is
the Saints Glory; God's Glory is his loftiness, Saints Glory is their
lowliness: Be clothed with Humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. This will be like the High
Priest's Garment, for Glory and Beauty. And the more we receive from God, the
more humble we should be; and when we are brought nigh to God, when we come to
Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, to God the Judge of all, when made Sons
of God, and Kings and Priests unto God, say, as David when he was brought to
the Kingdom, What am I that I should be brought hitherto?

CHAP. II.
HEre we may consider,

1. That the things of Christ are Riches, or why so called.

2. That there are unsearchable Riches in Christ, and why unsearchable.

3. What are these unsearchable Riches of Christ.

1. Why the things of Christ are called Riches?

F^^st, because the things of Christ are things of great worth. Riches are
things of worth which men esteem. Now the things of Christ are of greatest
worth, which gives ground to call him the chiefest and altogether lovely. In
him are the best Treasures, which should draw the hearts of men to them, and
make him most worthy to be called that which he shall be, the desire of all
Nations.

2. Because he has things of greatest worth, in greatest abundance. For as he
has received the Spirit, so Riches, and not by measure. They are counted Rich
that have much of this World's goods; Christ is most Rich, having the fullness
of the best things.

Secondly. Why Unsearchable Riches? Not because they may not be found, for
Christ says, I counsel thee to buy of me Gold, white Raiment, etc. There is no
Angel with a drawn Sword to keep the way of these Riches, but every one that
thirsts, and covets, may come and partake of them; But they are unsearchable or
untraceable (as the word imports) in that they are above men's understanding,
and beyond what men can ask or think; they cannot be comprehended, prized,
loved, desired, delighted in as they deserve, but there is cause to say as the
Apostle of the love of Christ, they have length, etc. which passes knowledge,
and as the same Apostle, of the decrees of God, Romans 11.33. How unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! So how unsearchable are the
Treasures of Christ, and his Riches past finding out; They are not past
finding, but past finding out; They are not past knowledge, but past knowing
out, and as the Psalmist says, Those that go down into the deep, etc. So we may
say, Those that ascend up to this deep (for this is a deep like the Waters
above the Firmament) There shall they see the Wonders of God.

CHAP. III.
WHat these Unsearchable Riches of Christ are.

1. There are the Riches of Love and Grace in Christ, which may well be called
Riches, being of greatest worth, of more value then the whole World, and also
being in greatest abundance; The Sun is not so full of Light, the Sea not so
full of Water, as Christ is of Love and Grace to his Spouse, to his Redeemed
and Sanctified ones, over whom he Reigns; and by the displaying the Banner of
his Love, Saints may see what they have in Christ to rejoice in, and live upon,
and sinners and worldlings and strangers from Christ, may see what there is in
Christ to allure them to him.

Consider these particulars.

1. The Love of Christ is an abounding Love.

1. It abounds beyond Sin; where sin abounded Grace did superabound, Romans 5.20.
that is, the power of Grace to save a sinner, is beyond the power of sin to
destroy, and when Grace undertakes this work, sin shall not prevent it. Sin
has the Law for its strength, and that says a sinner must dye, but what says
Paul? He loved me and give himself for me, out of love he made his Soul an
offering for sin, and now who shall condemn? by which it appears that the power
of his love to work out Salvation is beyond the power of sin to Destroy.

2. The love of Christ toward the vessels of Mercy, did abound beyond
self-love. The Law is to love our Neighbor as our selves; Christ did more.
When Peter said Master pity thy self, he was so great an offense to him, that
he calls him Satan; He pitied Souls to be saved more than his Body, and loved
their lives even to his own Death. And if the Jews had ground to say, when he
wept over Lazarus, behold how he loved him! much greater cause is there to say,
when Christ dyed for sinners, behold how he loved them! If the sheding of tears
was so great a demonstration of his love, what was this that he yielded his
Blood should be shed?

3. It abounds beyond all the wants and weaknesses of Saints: It is not
exhausted by what he has done for them or bestowed on them; as he has the
Residue of the Spirit, so the Residue of Love and Grace, even the fullness of
it, so as he accounted no suffering too great to undergo for them, so no good
thing too great to give them, Heaven, a Kingdom, the fullness of Joy, Holiness,
Light and Grace is not too much for his love to bestow; we cannot have less to
make us happy, and it is not more then his love can make us partakers of.

2. The love of Christ is an abiding love, he loves with an everlasting love,
here is a love not to be quenched with many waters, which no floods of either
Human, or Diabolical, or Divine wrath could Drown; Having loved his own he
loved them to the end, John 13.1. that is the finishing of that work he had to
do for them in the World, and will to the end of his Mediatory work, till he
has brought up all the Saints to the measure of the stature of his own
fullness, and when his love shall have brought him to this glorious end of his
work, in perfecting all the Saints, and presenting them to the Father, who
shall be all in all, and he shall have thus loved them to the end, then he
shall love them without end. The Saints have then ground to comfort themselves
with the abiding love of Christ: If the World pass away, if Riches come to
naught, etc. yet the love of Christ does not pass away; and when there is so
constant a hatred from the World, and such abiding malice against the followers
of Christ, in evil men, and evil Angels, there is an abiding love of Christ to
comfort them.

3. The love of Christ was once a love fulfilling the Law, and now is a love
fufilling the Gospel, it was once a love fulfilling Precepts, and now is a love
fulfilling Promises, Romans 13.10. Love is the fulfilling of the Law, such was
the love of Christ, love brought him that was Lord of the Law under the Law,
and carried him through it, even to perfect obedience; ^is love made him say,
it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness; and by this there is Reconciliation
and Peace with God, and as it was once the fulfilling of the Law, so now of the
Gospel: All the Promises are yea and Amen in Christ's love. When Saints are
unworthy of the good of the Promises, the love of Christ will bestow it on
them. There are Promises of not remembering sin, of giving Grace and Glory, and
every good thing, of putting the Law in the mind, of turning all to good, of
saving out of all troubles, and love will fulfill them all; the Gospel is the
Testament and Will of Christ, and there must be the Death of the Testator, that
the Will may be of force. Now here we may take notice of this truth, Christ
dyed that his will may be of force, and lives again to the Executor of his own
will, and his love is the fulfilling of it; hence Christ promises to his
Disciples, I will not leave you Orphans, I will come to you, John 14.18. Christ
being dead they were Orphans, etc. but happy were it for many poor Orphans if
their Fathe^s could come again, and set all things right, and see that every
Child should have his portion; now although this cannot be, yet it was so with
Christ: He arose from Death, and will be the Executor of his own Will, and
hence he is called the everlasting Father, having a Fatherly love and regard to
all the Saints, which is everlasting, and which will perfect that which
concerns them; Saints are the travel of Christ's Soul, and he must see the
travel of his Soul, Isa. 53.11. Rachel said give me Children or else I dye,
Christ said let me dye that so I may have Children, Rachel dyed in travel, and
did not live to see of her travel, Christ dyed in his travel with the vessels
of Mercy, and lives again to see of the travel of his Soul: Every Saint at
first was a Benoni, a Son of Christ's sorrow, in that he dyed in bringing them
forth, but afterward a Benjamin, a Son of his right hand, he being alive for
ever more, and is ever seeing them to his satisfaction, and they shall see him
for ever to their satisfaction, and living again, he will see that they be
partakers of that Grace and Glory that he bequeathed to them.

4. The Love of Christ is such, that when it finds not its Object lovely it can
and does make it lovely. Christ found Mary Magdalen a sinful Woman, and so not
lovely, but made her lovely in converting her; Paul was an Enemy to Christ, but
he converted him, his love made him lovely, it made him a Believer, a Saint, a
faithful Servant unto him; This is set forth in Ezekiel. 16. Thou wast polluted in
thy Blood, I passed by thee, and thy time was the time of love, and love made
them lovely, I spread my skirts over thee, I washed and clothed thee, and
decked thee with ornaments, and thy beauty and renown was perfect through my
comeliness put upon thee; If we have cause to say as Isaiah, woe is me a man of
unclean lips; If we abhor our selves and repent, we may take comfort in this,
Christ does not abhor, but his love does make us lovely.

5. The love of Christ turns all evil things to good, life, death, things
present, things to come, all are yours, the love of Christ makes them so, and
gives an advantageous and profitable propriety in them, and makes even
Reproaches for Christ's sake Riches, and better then the Treasures of Egypt,
Heb. 11.26. Riches are things of worth, so are Reproaches for Christ. The
Apostles rejoiced that they were accounted worthy to suffer shame for the name
of Christ: And better then Riches.

1. In that God does not esteem any man's wealth, nor him for his wealth's
sake; will he esteem thy wealth? Job 36.19. He will esteem thy Reproaches, etc.
and thy parting with wealth for his sake.

2. Better Riches in regard of better gain by them, the gain of Grace,
Spiritual consolation, of a Kingdom, etc. If sufferings for Christ abound
consolations abound more.

6. The love of Christ is every thing we need; this is the Gold that will make
us rich, Money answers all things, but it is most true concerning the love of
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.28. That God may be all in all; so he is in himself, and by
love he is all things to the Saints; Christ's love is Grace and Glory, and
every good thing; Jacob might well say to Esau, I have all, Genesis 33.11. So it is
in the Original, because God said, Jacob have I loved.

7. The love of Christ is such, that it will make him when glorified serve the
Saints: As their Duty is to serve one another in love, so Christ does this: he
did in his state of humiliation, but how much more to be admired is this, Luke
12.37. Blessed are those Servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find
watching: verily I say unto you, he shall gird himself, and come forth and
serve them: Here we may say as the Disciples (when Christ said, a little while
and ye shall not see me, and then a little while and you shall see me) we know
not what he says; we are not to understand it after a carnal manner: Christ
did serve his Disciples at his last Supper, he feasted them with himself as
Crucified, and with the benefits of his Death; In his Kingdom he shall feast
them with his Glory, and with himself as glorified: in that he feasted them now
with signs of himself, in this with himself in sight, showing all his Riches
and Glory to them; John 16.14. Christ promising the Spirit, said, he shall
receive of mine and show it unto you; this he does in the conversion of a
sinner, showing the Righteousness, Merits, Power, and Wisdom and Love to his
Saints: but when Christ himself shall appear, then he himself shall show them
all that he is and has; here is my righteousness, the price and value of my
Blood, here is my Love and Grace, here is my Glory: He kept the Passover with his
Disciples, feasting them with the benefits of his Death, in a large upper-room,
furnished, etc. Heaven is indeed the large upper-room furnished; there Christ
is feasting the Spirits of just men made perfect with the Glory of his Life; he
shall show his Glory as having the fullness of the Godhead in him, as the only
begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, as a Prince and Savior, as a
Bridegroom. Joseph said to his Brethren, ye shall tell my Father of my Glory in
Egypt; Christ shall, when he appears, tell the Saints of all his Glory in
Heaven, and let them see and hear that which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard,
etc. as Hezekiah showed to the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon the House of
his precious things, and there was nothing of worth which he showed not unto
them: This is the Entertainment that Christ will give, etc. What encouragement
is this to be found in those duties to which this Promise is made? That is,
Seek the Kingdom of God, give Alms, lay up Treasures in Heaven, let your Loins
be girt, Lamps burning, be like men waiting for their Lord! This is farther set
forth, Math. 26.29. I will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine until I drink
it new with you, etc.

Quest. What is that Wine? Answ. Contraries illustrate one another: now in Rev.
14.10. there is mention of the Wine of Wrath without mixture, as the portion of
the wicked; on the other side, then the Wine of Love without mixture is the
portion of the Saints: Pure Wrath is the portion of the Ungodly, pure love the
portion of the Godly; Evil without mixture of good is the portion of the
Wicked; Good without mixture of Evil shall be given to the Saints, Wicked men
shall not have so much as a drop of Water to cool their Tongues: Saints not so
much as a spark of Fire to torment them. Thus we see what Riches of Love there
are in Christ, which we should be careful not to despise, nor abuse by
indulging our selves in any evil way, because we hear of such Riches of Love;
If any shall turn Grace into Lasciviousness, they may know that there is fury
that shall smoke against such, Behold the goodness and severity of God,
goodness to such as continue in his goodness, but severity to such as abuse his
goodness, as who knows the Power of his Love, so who knows the Power of his
Wrath? His Love is above our Faith, and his Wrath above our Fear. Learn then to
love Christ, because he loves; to live to him because he loves; please him,
serve him, deny our selves, take his Yoke, because he loves, and take heed we
do not that abominable thing which he hates, take heed of that abominable
thing, Covetousness, of that abominable thing, Pride, Lying, Deceit, Hypocrisy,
Lukewarmness, and remember that he that loves Saints so much, hates sin as
much, and he looks that those whom he loves should love him, and hate the thing
that is Evil.

CHAP. IV.
2. THere are in Christ Riches of Righteousness, Romans 5.17. They which receive
abundance of Grace and the Gift of Righteousness; Abundance relates to both,
there is abundance of Grace giving, and abundance of Righteousness given; there
is uncreated Righteousness in Christ as God, which is Infinite, Perfect,
Unchangeable; so there is Riches of it, and no Iniquity in him. Christ may
challenge all, as God did the Jews, what Iniquity have your Fathers found in
me? Jer. 2.5. There is also the Righteousness of Christ as Mediator, which is
twofold.

1. In his works for Men.

2. In his works toward Men.

First. In his works for Men, being a surety, and representative, undertaking
to fulfill that Righteousness for them, which they could not for themselves,
that hereby he might reconcile them to God, and make them stand as just in his
sight. Here consider.

1. Christ's Righteousness fulfilled for the Elect is a full and complete
Righteousness, Christ taking the form of a Servant, did fulfill the Law, both
for matter and manner, substance and circumstances: The Law requires not more
active and passive Obedience than Christ yielded: The Law is exceeding broad,
Christ's Righteousness as broad as that; The Law was Spiritual, so was Christ's
Obedience; Sin was infinite in Evil, because committed against an infinite
Person; Christ's Righteousness had infinite good in it, infinite Glory, because
fulfilled by an infinite Person, who obeying was Equal with the Person
commanding Obedience, and demanding satisfaction for man's disobedience; so
that here are Riches of Righteousness, Paul had good reason to be found in it,
What a glorious change is wrought by its imputation? it makes a sinner a
righteous Person. By the Obedience of one many shall be made Righteous.

2. It Is such a Righteousness, that true Believers thereby are made the
Righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5.21. which is an expression that lifts up the
Creature as much as any in Scripture, showing that it is 1. A most excellent
glorious and transcendent Righteousness that Believers have: the Hebre^ uses
to set forth exeellent things, by adding the name of God to them, as the
Mountains of God, the Cedars of God, etc. So they are made the righteousness of
God, that is, in having the highest and best Righteousness imputed to them.

2. There is highest likeness, and nearest conformity to God in this. Inherent
Righteousness being wrought in us, and that which is wrought by us is a part of
God's Image, for the new man is after God in Righteousness; but this
Righteousness which is adherent and imputed, is a more glorious part of God's
likeness, for this is perfect, the other here being but in part, and if we
could be perfect in our works of Righteousness, yet must they be far short of
Christ's works or his Righteousness imputed.

3. Believers are Righteous before God in the Righteousness of God, for Christ
is not only man but God: but when we have said all, we have reason to reckon
this among the unutterable things, which Paul saw when he was caught up into
the third Heavens.

3. The Riches of Christ's Righteousness appears in this, that hereby we have
Justification of Life, Rom: 5.18. The free gift came upon all men to the
Justification of Life. Christ's Righteousness is Righteousness unto Life; as
Hezekiah said, in these things is the life of my Spirit, so in Christ's
Righteousness is the life of our Spirits: when sinners that remain without
Christ shall dye in their sins, when those that trust in their own
Righteousness shall dye therein, those that desire to be found in Christ,
having his Righteousness, shall live by him and his Righteousness.

4. They that have Christ's Righteousness, do not only live thereby, but Reign
in Life, Romans 5.17. They which receive the gift of Righteousness Reign in Life,
etc. which notes thus much, That true Believers are not in subjection to any
persons or things, which may take their life from them; it is one thing to live,
another thing to Reign in Life, we live a bodily life, but do not reign in that
life, but are in subjection to a Divine decree, it being app^inted to all men
once to dye; we are in subjection to many infirmities and sicknesses, etc. and
to men that have Power to kill the body: Adam in Paradise did live more then a
bodily life, but did not reign in life, Sin entered, and Death by Sin; but what
a better Estate is here? A Believer being in Christ lives and reigns in life,
being lifted up far above any power that may take it away, above the power of
sin, the Law, and second death; above the Power of Satan, he hunts after the
precious life, but it is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. Prove. 30.31. one of
the things that is comely in going is a King against whom there is no rising
up: The like may we say of Believers, they reign in life, so as there is no
rising up against their life; who shall lay any thing to their charge or
condemn, seeing it is Christ that dyed? etc.

II. There is Christ's Righteousness in his works toward men, in the
dispensation of that power which he has in Heaven and Earth; as a King he
reigns in Righteousness; as Priest he makes Intercession in Righteousness, and
as Prophet he Teaches in Righteousness, Isa. 63.1. I the Lord that speak in
Righteousness. His love led him into these Offices, and not only love, but
Righteousness leads him through them, and engages him to full and a faithful
discharge of them; concerning this take these Considerations.

1. Saints may fly for refuge, not only to the love, but to the Righteousness
of Christ, Prove. 18.11. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous
run thereto and are safe. Not only as he is Gracious and Merciful, but as he is
Just; Righteous Servants may run to a Righteous Lord for refuge, and shall find
his Righteousness a covert and hiding place, Isa. 32.1. He is Just to forgive
sin, 1 John 1.9. Just to Justify, Just to Sanctify, to give Grace and Peace,
Just to hear Prayers, Just to deliver out of the Enemies hand, and to bring
many Sons to Glory, (but remember that not our works but God's free Grace it is
that makes all this to be Just.) Being a Surety, he is a Just Surety; being a
Savior a Just Savior, Just to give the Oil of Joy, etc. And having betrothed
any to himself, he will take them to nearest communion, Hos. 2.19, 20. I will
betroth thee unto me in Righteousness, Loving Kindness, Judgment and
Faithfulness; Christ ^akes a Spo^se among the Captives, and when any Israelite
would do so, Deuteronomy. 21.10. He was to bring her to his House, she was to shave
her Head, pare her nails, put off the Raiment of her captivity, and to bewail
her Father and Mother a full Month; so such as are taken from amongst the
Captives to Sin and Satan to be bethrothed to Christ, must put off the old man,
and lay aside all superfluity of naughtiness; that is, all sin; for every sin
is a superfluity, and ^ewail Father and Mother, i. e. that they are Conceived
and Bo^n in Sin: and be in Christ's House; so he betroths in Righteousness,
etc. and will not be like ^he hard hearted Jews that give a Bill of Divorce,
for the Lord h^tes putti^g away; and ^eeing he betroths in Righteousness,
Ju^g^ent and F^^thfulness, therefore a time of the Ma^riage of ^he Lamb must
come, and his Wif^ shall be ^ade ready. Thus Saints may fly for refuge to, and
take comfort in the Righteo^sne^s of Christ.

2. The R^ghteousness of Christ makes him r^ady to fulfill all Promises, ready
to act for the Saints and to put forth his Power on their be^alf, Isa. 11.5.
there being a Prophecy of the K ngdom of Christ, it is said Righteousness shall
be the gird^e of his Loins, which shall make him ^eady t^ reprove and argue for
the me k of the Earth. He shall argue out the Saints Innocence, and ^he
wick^dness of the World in persec^ti^g for Righteo^sness sake; he shall debate
the business with them, that all may see what Reas^n ^e has to smite the Earth
with the Rod of his Mouth, and to slay the Wicked with the Breath of his Lips,
and to save the meek of the Earth: Christ is well pleased for his Rightousness
sake, Isa. 41.21. And when there are in the Saints so many failings, when cause
to say who is blind but my Servant, and deaf as my M^ssenger, who is P^^ud,
Covetous, Earthly, etc. and there is so much among them that is displeasing,
when divisions, s^ri^e, and contention among Brethren, yet for his
Righteousness sake he is well pleased to do them good; If we believe not as we
ought, yet he remains Faithful; When the Israelites did so much provoke the
Lord in the Wilderness, yet he was well pleased for his Rightousness sake to
save them.

3. Christ shall prosper in a work of Righteousness, Ps. 45.4. Ride
prosperously because of Righteousness; It is a Righteous thing with God to
render Tribulation to them that trouble you; to Babylon, to Persecutors, to the
Man of sin: In the last day it will be the great Work of Christ; as in Egypt
God rendered tribulation to the Egyptians, to the Task Masters, etc. and to the
Israelites Rest; so Persecu^ors of Righteousness most look to have their
portion of wrath and vengeance from the Righteousness of Christ.

4. Christ shall be a Fountain of Righteousness to the Afflicted and Oppressed
World; he is the ^un of R^ghteousnes^, he is full of Righteousness as the Sun
is full of Light; the World is Empty of Righteousness, Christ is full of it;
and this Sun shall arise, Psalm. 85.11. And Righteousness shall look down from
Heaven; it is in a great measure gone out of the Earth, and almost confined to
Heaven, all kind of unrighteousness flows from under ^^e Throne, Iniquity flows
thence like Water, and unrighteousness as a mighty Stream; but Righteousness
shall have a time to look down from Heaven, and the Waters of Life shall issue
from the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, and from thence Judgment shall run
down as Water, etc.

And now what abundant comfort may flow into the Saints, from the Righteousness
of Christ, in his Works for and toward Believers? By the Righteousness he
fulfilled for them, they are reconciled to God, believing and being in him,
having this Righteousness, there is no condemnation to them; and by the other
Righteousness they shall be saved from the Wrath of the Devil and wicked men;
Therefore as Christ's Righteousness sustains him, Isa. 59.16. that is, it bears
him up, and carries him on in a work of Vengeance upon his Enemies, and
Salvation of his Servants; in the one his Righteous fury upholds him, Isa.
63.5. in the other his Righteous love; so should Christ's Righteousness sustain
Believers under their burdens and crosses which they meet withal in the works
and ways of God; This should support their sinking and drooping Spirits, and
say to those that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not, for God will
come with vengeance and recompense, he will come and save you: Jacob said, with
this Staff I passed over Jordan; the Saints having the Staff of Christ's
Righteousness may pass over Jordan, and be above the fears of Death, Satan,
etc. The World with this may go through Fire and Water, and be sure to be
brought into the wealthy place; Jacob with his Staff got into a wealthy State,
he had a Staff in his hand, but a better Staff in his Heart; that was his
dependence on the Lord his God; This is the true Jacob's Staff, which if we
have, it shall sustain and uphold us for doing and suffering; It will be our
stay and strength in both.

And if Christ has Riches of Righteousness, and be Faithful and Just to
Believers, how should this engage them to be Faithful and Just to him? He is
Just to the Vessels of Mercy, in giving Repentance and Remission of sin, which
should teach them to be Just to him, in giving him his due Subjection, Service,
Worship and Glory; when he had undertaken it, he was just in giving himself for
them, and should not they be Just in giving up themselves? and say, we are not
our own, but bought with a price etc. Be Just to confess him, be Just to serve
him, and suffer for him, be Just to render all their due, and especially to the
Household of Faith; Comforting as being Comforted, Inst^ucting as being
Instructed, Forgiving as he Forgave, and giving freely, as we have freely
received.

And if Christ have the Riches of Righteousness then all wicked men that are
Enemies to Christ have cause to tremble, such as break his bonds and bruise his
members, that will not have him to reign over them, and would not that any of
his faithful Servants and Members should live among them, hating them because
Christ has chosen them; such have cause to fear before him. As the Wrath of
God is revealed from Heaven against the unrighteousness of men, so Christ's
Righteousness does engage him to punish the unrighteousness of men; as he is
Gracious and Merciful, abundant in goodness, so he will not clear the guilty,
Exodus 34.7. As he looks to those of a humble and contrite heart that tremble at
his word, and rejoices over them to do them good, so he beholds them that are
proud and rebellious, and harden themselves against him, and will bruise them
with his Rod of Iron, etc. Psalm. 2.9.

CHAP. V.
THere are in Christ Riches of Wisdom; in him are hid all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2.3. He has Wisdom in greatest Abundance, the
Treasures of Wisdom: Solomon had Wisdom and largeness of Heart, as the Sand
upon the Sea shore, whe^ein he was a type of Christ; but behold a greater then
Solomon is here! Exceeding him more then he did the Children of the East; if
any ask, as Job 2^.12. Where is Wisdom and the place of Understandig? It Is not
to be found in the land of the living; The depth says, it is not in me, and men
must say, it is not in them, verse 23. God understands the way and knows the
path thereof, and the Scripture discovers where it is to be found; that is,
in Christ.

1. Christ has the Riches of Speculative Wisdom, in the knowledge of the
highest and best Objects, of all deep things; he understands all deep
Mysteries; they are no Mysteries to him; darkness is no darkness to him, but
Darkness and Light are both alike; he knows the Divine Nature; That Name, which
is secret to us, is manifest unto him, and he has the knowledge of the deepest
Mysteries of Nature; He enters into the Treasures of Snow and Hail, and Springs
of the Sea, and walks in the search of the deep; He knows the Ordinances of
Heaven, all which was hid from Job; He knows all the Mysteries of the Word, all
Scripture-truths, Promises, and Prophecies; He opened the Scripture, the things
concerning himself; He has the knowledge also of the Mysteries of Iniquity,
which has been working so long: all Antichristian Counsels and co^t^ivances;
He knows the Mysteries of men's Hearts. John 2.2^. He knows what was in man:
all the Churches shall know, those of the Synagogue o Sa^^n shall know, yea all
the World shall know that ^hri^ searches all Hearts, etc. Rev. 2.23. He knows
the depts of Satan, and is not ignorant of his de^ices.

2. Christ has the Rich^s of Practical Wisdom, and thus (as it is Prove. 8.12.)
I Wisdom dwell with Prud^nce, and find out knowledge of witty inventions;
Wisdom is the knowledge that Christ has of all things, the highest and best,
the lowest and meanest; Prudence orders the way and means for bringing about
that which Wisdom judges best to b^ d^ne: Prudence is the Guide of Action, and
s conversant in doing. Wisdom counsels and consider; Prudence puts upon working
that which counsel determines; He works all things after the counsel of his
own will, Ephesians. 1.11. Wisdom is conversant in counsel; Prudence in working after
that counsel. Many men have a great measure of Wisdom and knowledge, but they
rest in knowing, and content themselves in Speculation: there is mention of a
Servant who knew his Master's will and did it not; His Wisdom did not dwell
with Prudence; he that knows to do good and does it not, to him it is sin;
it is not so with Christ; his Wisdom dwells with Prudence, nay he is Wisdom,
etc. Prove. 8.14. As he knows how to do good, so he does it; He knows how to
convince gainsayers, he knows how to Justify, Sanctify and Save, and how to
subdue and destroy his Enemies; The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand: Thus Wisdom dwells with Prudence and finds out knowledge of witty
Inventions.

The Scripture discovers many of the witty Inventions of Wisdom dwelling with
Prudence, foretelling and promising more 1. What a wise Invention was the
World, the Heavens, the Earth, and all the Host of them? These Works of the
Lord are great, and to be sought out; when we consider the Heavens, the work of
God's hand, the Moon and the Stars which he has created, the Earth and variety
of Creatures therein; but especially man, in the frame of his Body, but chiefly
his Soul, There will be abundant cause of admiring the witty inventions of
Wisdom dwelling with Prudence, and we may say of all, they are fearfully and
wonderfully made.

2. When man was fallen by the subtle inventions of Satan, what a witty
Invention came forth of Wisdom dwelling with Prudence, to recover man fallen?
The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15.

3. When the World was to be destroyed by a Flood, what a witty invention was
there of Wisdom dwelling with Prudence, to save Noah and his Family, and a
stock of all living creatures in the Ark? 1 Pet. 3.20.

4. When Joseph's Brethren had their witty inventions to make void his Dreams,
then wisdom dwelling with Prudence had its witty inventions to accomplish them,
and herein to be admired, that their wicked inventions intended by them to
frustrate, were made the means to further the fulfilling of them, Genesis 50.2^.

5. When Pharaoh thought he saw an advantage against the Israelites, they are
entangled in the Land, the Wilderness has shut them in, and now he resolves to
pursue and overtake, etc. But what a witty invention was there of Wisdom
dwelling with Prudence, for the Salvation of Israel, and utter destruction of
Pharaoh and his Host at once by the same invention? Exodus 14.

6. When Haman had a mischievous invention to destroy the Jews, Wisdom dwelling
with Prudence had a witty invention to save them, and to cut off Haman, Esther
6.7.

7. There was a witty invention to cut off those three, Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego, by setting up an Image and commanding them to worship it, and because
they would not worship it, they were cast into the fiery Furnace, but then
Wisdom dwelling with Prudence, that is, the Son of God appeared in the Furnace,
and walked with them in the midst of the Fire, restraining it, that it had not
power upon their Bodies, or Garments; only as we may conceive it did burn up
their Bonds, for they were cast in in Bonds, but walked loose, which is worthy
of our Observation, in that it hints to us God's great design in the fiery
Trial at any time happening to the Saints, which is, to burn up their bonds;
Lusts within are Bonds; these will the Lord consume by the fiery Trial; and too
often outward things, as Riches, Glory, Prosperity, are like the hands of the
whorish Woman, that is bonds to the Soul; which sometimes are loosed by the
fiery Trial; and what is Death to Saints, but the loosing of the bonds of the
mortal body, that so the Soul may go to its rest? Hence Paul ^ays, Phil. 1.23.
I desire to be diss^lved, to be unbound, to be let loose; and to be with
Christ, which is much better. And the design of dest^oying Daniel in the D^n of
Lions, was frustrated, and ended in the destruction of the contrivers.

Here we may see,

1. That there are Inventions within Inventions, of Wisdom dwelling with
Prudence; within Satan's and wicked men's inventions.

2. The inventions within, that is, of Christ, are the standing inventions:
Many are the devices of men's hearts, says Solomon, but the counsel of the L
rd shall stand, Christ's inventions do ove^-rule and over come all Satan's and
wicked men's in^entions. As

1. Sometimes making them prove abortive; destroying the Wisdom of the Wife,
and bringing to nothing the understanding of the Prudent.

2 Setting them their bounds; thus far shall ^hey come and no farther, and here
shall their p^oud waves be stayed, etc.

3. Giving them their tendency, which is many times directly contrary to what
men aim at, making them serve to the Author's destruction, men have perished,
and will perish by their own inventions, and fall by their own counsel; the
Lord will be known by his Judgments herein, and his Wisdom must triumph over
all the Wisdom of Hell and the World. But,

1. Of all the witty inventions of Wisdom dwelling with Prudence, the most
Glorious is that of the Word being made Flesh, and so made sin that sinners may
be made the Righteousness of God in him; Satan had a Subtle invention to
destroy; the the Lord a more witty invention to save men; what an invention was
here, that one Person should be God-man, Creator and Creature; Offspring of
David, and Root of David; his Son and yet his Lord? The Salvation of Sinners
seemed utterly impossible; God had said, a sinner must dye: There was an
invention of fulfilling this Law upon a Surety which undertook for man; As an
Infinite Person was offended, so there must be an infinite satisfaction, and
price of an infinite value, without which man could not be reconciled to God:
what a glorious invention was here? The Surety undertaking this, was an
infinite Person, equal with the Father, he gave a life of an Infinite Value, he
had in the humane nature united to him. A Body have thou prepared me; It was
the Body of the Son of God, and so a Sacrifice of Infinite Value, the Priest
offering the Sacrifice was infinite, the Son of God: the Altar Sanctifying the
Gift was the Divine Nature; What an invention was it for the redeeming of lost
man? The Incarnation of Christ, the Hypostatical union was the chief of the
witty inventions of Wisdom dwelling with Prudence.

2. The next is the mystical union betwixt Christ and the Vessels of Mercy, who
are joined to the Lord, and become one Spirit with him; being joined as Husband
and Wife, so are one Spirit; no man hates but loves and cherishes his own
Flesh, even as the Lord the Church; his Name is called on the Saints; they are
made partakers of his Benefits, of his Riches, Relations, Inheritance, and
Glory: They are joined also as Head and Members, 1 Cor. 12.1^. As the body is
one and has many members so is Christ; The Head is for the Members, and the
Members for the Head; the Head Rules, the Members serve; the Head ascending and
entering into Glory, the Members must follow the Head into that state of Glory.
Being joined to Christ they have that Power and Privilege to become the Sons
of God, to be Heirs and Joynt-Heirs with Christ.

3. The next of the witty inventions of Wisdom dwelling with Prudence, which
we may take notice of, is that of Regeneration; making men of Flesh Spirit; of
sinners Saints; of dead alive to God: we are his workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10. A
Saint is a work beseeming God, commending his divine skill. All the Saints
shall come unto a a perfect man in Christ, as the expression is Ephesians. 4.13. and
be prepared, as a Bride adorned for her Husband, and presented without spot or
wrinkle, having minds filled with light, hearts with love, fear, and all other
Graces. In this work the witty inventions of wisdom shall appear, 2 These. 1.10.
He shall come to be glorified in all his Saints, and admired in those that
Believe; as by them, so in them; Angels shall admire the work of God in and
upon the Saints, for it is a work the Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12.
In that by the Churches the manifold Wisdom of God comes to be known unto them,
Ephesians. 3.10.

4. Then the witty inventions of Wisdom dwelling with Prudence have been seen
in doing of great things, by very inconsiderable means: It pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching (as it was judged by the wise ones of the World) to
save them that Believe; God has chosen the weak things of the World to
confound the mighty, and things that are not, to bring to naught things that
are. Weak means therefore are not to be despised, when a Wise Omnipotent God is
at work in and with them: What great things were done by a few contemptible
Persons (as the World Judged) for the Conversion of many Souls, and the setting
up the Kingdom of Christ? So for outward Deliverance and Salvation, God can
work it by weak means; as by the three hundred men which were with Gideon, who
took water in their hands and lapped, being contented with a little of the
creature for present refreshment, were ready to go forward in the work they
were called to; of Christ it is said, Psalm ^10.7. He shall drink of the Brook
in the way, therefore shall he lift up the lead: By these few did the lord
scatter the great Host of the Midianites; and here Wisdom dwelling with
Prudence did suggest a witty Invention and Stratagem of carrying Trumpets in
their right hands, and empty Pitchers and Lamps within them in their left,
which terrified the Ho^t, and brought all into confusion: and thus God can by a
few of his Servants, who know how to use creatures and not abuse them, who are
burning and shining lights, sounding forth the truths of the Gospel, and the
Praises of the Most High, break the Rod of that Oppressor, the man of sin, as
in the day of Midian Isa. 9.4. for yet a little while and the indignation shall
cease, and the anger of God in his destruction, and the Lord of Host shall stir
up a scourge for him, according to the slaughter of Midian at the Rock of Oreb,
and he will do to him and his followers, as unto the Medianites, as to Sisera,
as to Jabin at the Brook of Kison, which perished at Endor. They became dung
for the Earth; not only as dung upon the Earth, but for the Eearth; they had
fatted themselves with the Fruits of the Earth, but at last all their glory and
wealth, etc. shall be as dung to make fat the Earth. And as many of the witty
inventions of Wisdom dwelling with Prudence have been discovered, so more must
be. As there were witty inventions in the first Creation, so there must be in a
New Creation, which shall so far exceed, that when the new Heavens and the new
Earth shall be Created, the former shall no more be remembered, neither shall
come upon the heart; The Glory of the latter House shall exceed the Glory of
the former: what inventions shall be in and about the new Jerusalem? that City
which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God, described in Ezekiel by
legal Expressions, which are to be known as Christ, not after the Flesh but
after the Spirit; it is the body and substance of all legal Shadows, which is
set forth and shall appear in that City and Temple there described: John's
Vision of the new Jerusalem is the same with Ezekiel's, which shall have the
Glory of God, have light like a Stone most precious; the street thereof is pure
Gold, as transparent Glass; there shall not be such darkness of ignorance, sin,
corruption, and misery as now; it has no need of the Sun or Moon, for the
Glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

5. There have been and will be also the witty inventions of Wisdom dwelling
with Prudence in works of Providence and Preservation; the Bush did burn and
was not consumed; the world is set on fire of Hell, the hearts of wicked men
burn with malice and anger against the Godly, the Anti christian party have a
Fire continually a burning within them against the followers of Christ, and
hence have made use of so much outward fire against the Saints, yet cannot
destroy the Church of the Firstborn, who have the Name of God in their
foreheads, and are the first Fruits of God and the Lamb. When ^haraoh studied
to des^roy the Male children of the Hebr^ws, Wisdom dwelling with Prudence had
a way to preserve them, and Moses, who was to be the Deliverer, was secured and
bred up in Pharaoh's Court; Infinitely does the wisdom of God exceed man's
wisdom! and so when the time shall be for Redemption out of Egyptian and
Antichristian Bondage, as God is providing his Instruments, so he will call
forth and command his Sanctified and Mighty ones for his anger, even them that
rejoice in his Highness, to put down Babylon, and execute the vengeance of his
Temple upon it: when Goliath defied the Armies of Israel and terrified them, God
brought David to the Camp, and put it into his heart to fight with the
Philistine, who being Armed (as he thought) sufficiently, the Lord knew where
he was bare, and with David's Sling and Stone slew him, and David cut ^ff his
head with his own Sword: In like manner must that Goliath at Rome be destroyed,
by a Stone cut out of the mountain without hands, and by his own Sword; for the
Kings that gave up their Power to the Beast, shall hate the Whore, etc. Saints
under so long a trouble must needs have fainted, had they not believed to see
the goodness of God in the Land of the living, and had they not been assured
that by the witty inventions of Wisdom dwelling with Prudence, Babylon shall
be made to fall, and he, that sits in the Temple of God, shall come down and
sit in the dust, nay be cast into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone;
for the Beast and False Prophet shall be destroyed, and their Bodies given to
the burning flames.

6. Lastly, as when the old World was destroyed by water, God had a witty
invention to save Noah and his Family, so when the World that now is, shall be
destroyed with Fire, God will have a witty invention to save whom he pleases.

Now this glorious truth of the unsearchable Riches of Wisdom in Christ,
affords abundant matter of Joy and Encouragement to the Saints and Servants of
Christ.

1. As Christ has the Riches of Wisdom, so he is Wise for them to do them
good: The Wisdom bestowed on Solomon was for the good of the Israelites, that
he might know how to go in and out before them, to do Judgment; He had Wisdom
to Teach and Instruct, as we see in those Books of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and
Canticles, Eccles. 12.9. Because the Preacher was Wise, he still taught the
People knowledge, as the more wise he was, the more he taught the People
knowledge: And so the more wisdom Christ has, the more shall he teach the
Saints knowledge; Solomon had wisdom to Build a Temple; so had Christ to build
a Spiritual House; Solomon was wise to put a difference betwixt the Israelites
and Strangers, and these he made Servants for his work, but those were free and
Officers under him; and Christ shall make Believers Free, so as that they shall
be free indeed: Thus as Christ is Wise, he is Wise for the Faithful, Wise to
Teach, to Save, and to perfect that which does concern them.

2. His Wisdom is to be a Fountain of Wisdom to them, in his light must they
see light; by his wisdom they shall have wisdom, Christ's wisdom multiplies in
Regenerated ones, as he has a Spirit of wisdom, so he gives it; as the Sun is
the light of the World, gives light to the Moon, Stars, to the Earth, and
living Creatures therein, so is Christ the light of the Church; he does give
Wisdom dwelling with Prudence to his Members, he gives to men natural and
civil wisdom, for their ordering of their worldly affairs, for in such things
it is God instructs men to discretion, as he does the Husbandman in and about
his Husbandry, Isa. 2^ 26. and he gives Spiritual wisdom to the Saints to know
God, and order their conversa^i^n aright; his work is to give more wisdom where
it is begun, and this he will do, till all the Saints come up to the measure of
the stature of his own fullness; and this in the latter days will be a work that
Christ will more gloriously appear in; for many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall abound. Dan. 12.4. and the Earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the Lord as the Waters cover the Sea, and the light of the Moon
shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun sevenfold, as the
light of seven days: Then, as he that is feeble shall be as David, so he that
is simple and but a babe in understanding, shall be as Solomon. This is
incouragem^nt to go to Christ for wisdom; As the Queen of Sheba came with her
hard questions to Solomon, and he satisfied her in all, so should we come with
our hard questions to Christ; every true Christian has many hard questions
about Divine Truth, about the sense of Scriptures about the dispensations of
God, and concerning his own Estate, whether it be a state of Grace and Peace in
which they are with God: Now he should go to Christ for satisfaction: There are
hard questions among Believers in which they are divided, as about the form and
pattern of God's House: Now they should seek to the Lord and wait on him, and
in due time he shall reveal even this unto them, to the making of the Saints
all of one Mind and Heart: then the Lord shall be King over all the Earth, and
Antichrist no where King; then the Lord shall be one, and his name one; only be
humble; see the way of Wisdom, ask in Faith and he will give it.

Again, are there unsearchable Riches of wisdom in Christ, as Solomon was
Renowned for his wisdom? Then,

1. Have a high esteem of Christ because of his wisdom; all the Kings sought
the presence of Solomon to hear his wisdom, and she that was a Queen said,
Happy are those thy Servants; It is better to be Christ's Servants, seeing his
Glory, and hearing his wisdom, than to rule over men; David behaved himself
wisely, and was Respected of all the People, 1 Samuel 18.30. shall not Christ be
judged much more worthy of acceptance? David behaved himself more wisely then
all the Servants of Saul, and his name was much set by, or very precious; and
shall not Christ's Name be much set by?

2. Trust to his Wisdom, he knows what is good for us and how to do us good,
and to make all work for good; when we have wants, he knows how to supply them;
when infirmities, he knows how to help them; when dangers he knows how to
deliver out of them. When there was an Achitophel giving counsel against David,
he had an Hushai to defeat his counsel; when there are so many Achitophels in
counsel at Rome, here is one that sits in Heaven, whose Name is Wisdom dwelling
with Prudence, who knows how to defeat their counsel.

3. Justify Wisdom; Wisdom is Justified of her Children; as wisdom justifies
them, so should they justify wisdom; There is much finding fault. Flesh is apt
to find fault, as Jonah said, he did well to be angry: by murmuring, by
impatience we condemn the Lord; when the Flesh condemns, let the Spirit and
renewed part Justify the Lord; the world is apt to find fault, Antichrist
condemns the truth and ways of Christ, and sets up many Doctrines and
Ordinances to make void the Doctrines and Ordinances of God; Now here Saints
should Justify wisdom and confess Christ: stand up for his Truths, Commands,
etc. Justify wisdom by words and works. Although we cannot and ought not to
justify our selves against the charge of God's Holy Law by works, yet there is
a sense in which we ought to Justify Christ by our works.

4. Fear Christ because of his Wisdom: we reverence men much that have wisdom
beyond others, and rise up before the hoary head, that is, because with the
Ancient is wisdom. Here is the Ancient of days, with whom is perfect wisdom,
worthy to be had in reverence by them that are round about him; the Enemies of
Christ have cause to fear him, because of his wisdom; when Saul saw that David
behaved himself very wisely he was afraid of him, 1 Samuel 18.15.

5. Walk circumspectedly not as Fools but as wise, Ephesians. 5.15. walk as wise
before him that has such Riches of wisdom; when we are amongst wise men we
will speak and act as wisely as we can; much more being before the wise Lord of
Heaven and Earth, be wi^e to consider the day of visitation, the things of
Peace, be exact in our walkings and doings: have Eyes before, behind, and
within, as the beasts have, Rev. 4.6, 8. the Body has not so; but the Mind
should look before, to see the Lord before us, his will and Glory, look to the
Joy before us; look behind to see what we were in the Flesh; and to Satan
pursuing, the world persecuting; have Eyes within, to see our failings,
imperfections, wants and what is amiss within us.

6. Let there be Wisdom dwelling within you, so as it is with Christ: that is,
we should know and do, know and obey, know and love, if ye know these things
happy are ye if ye do them, John 13.17. Be doers and not hearers only;
otherwise knowledge will but aggravate sin, and increase Judgment: As we should
have Eyes within, before, and behind, so also Wings, Rev. 4.8. we should make
haste and not delay to keep the Righteous Judgments of God.

CHAP. VI.
THere are in Christ Riches of Power, Job 9.4. He is Wise in Heart, and mighty
in Strength, not only strong but mighty in strength, he excels therein, so that
the strongest Creatures have no strength in comparison of him, verse 19. If I
speak of strength lo he is strong, what do we speak of the strength of Men?
Sampson, Goliath and David's worthies, etc. he has strength worthy of praise,
lo he is strong. Solomon was a type of Christ in Wisdom; David in his glorious
Conquests; so Sampson in his strength,

1. There is his Power and Strength as he is God, the Lord God Omnipotent, all
thinngs are possible to his Power; by this he weighs the Mountains in Scales,
and the Hills in a Balance, and takes up the Isles as a very little thing; to
which the Power of the Nations is nothing, yea less than nothing and vanity,
Isa. 40.17.

2. There is the Power as Mediator, thus.

1. There is the Power of his Death, which may be called the weakness of
Christ, but yet stronger than Man, than Satan, than the World, than Sin; there
is a conquering Power of his Death, Heb. 2.14. By Death he destroyed him that
had the Power of Death, that is the Devil; in his works, Kingdom, etc. Satan
had his power by means of Sin, and that being satisfied for, there is
Redemption from his power; The Death of Christ was not so destroying to
Christ's own as to Satan's Kingdom, and to the old Man which was Crucified with
Christ; when a dead-Man touched the bones of Elisha, he was raised to live, 2
Kings 13.21. and much more when Christ dying is touched by Faith, those that
are dead shall live, Romans 5.10. We were reconciled to God by the Death of his
Son; and if there be so great a Power in his Death, what is the Power of his
Life? If so great a Power of Christ Crucified, what is the Power of Christ
Crowned? If so great a Power of Christ in the Grave, what is the Power of
Christ on the Throne of his Glory?

2. There is the Power of his Resurrection, Phi. 2.10. That I may know him and
the Power of his Resurrection, which has a justifying Power; He was raised for
our Justification, Romans 4.25. As the bonds of his Death were loosed, and Prison
Doors opened, so this declared he had paid the uttermost Farthing, and thereby
the bonds of Captivity were loosed to the Vessels of Mercy, who being under the
bonds of Guilt were loosed thereby and enlarged: There Is a raising Power of his
Resurrection, a saving Power of his Life. Christ quickened becomes a quickening
Spirit: Because he lives the Elect shall live also, John 14.19. He is a
quickening Spirit to the Soul that is Planted in the likeness of his
Resurrection, and shall be to the Body: the same Spirit, by which he was
quickened shall quicken your mortal Bodies, Romans 8.11. what a glorious Power is
this! And what reason had Paul to desire so much the Power of his Resurrection!
and how happy are they that have the experimental knowledge of it!

3. There is the Power that Christ has with the Father in his Mediation and
Intercession. If Jacob had Power with God, then how much more Christ who could
say, I know thou always hear me, let me alone, said the Lord to Moses, etc.
Exodus 32.10. What was this but to show what Power Christ as Mediator has to
hinder Divine Wrath from consuming Sinners: having taken it upon himself, he
saves from wrath such as believe in him, as on the other side he has Power to
draw forth wrath against Antichrist and all his Enemies, Rev. 8.3, 5. The
golden Censer is filled with Fire, and cast into the Earth; This is a sweet
consideration for true Believers, that it is Christ their Head, Savior,
Redeemer, etc. who has Power to dispense good and evil Grace, and wrath,
having a loosing and binding Power in some sort, in relation to the Fathers
Love and Wrath.

4. Christ has Power over himself and his own wrath Number. 14.17. When the
People murmured, because of the evil report brought upon Canaan, and the Lord
threatened to destroy them, Moses makes intercession, Let the Power of my Lord
be great, as thou have said, the Lord gracious, etc. and now pardon the
Iniquities of thy Servants. When the Lord pardons he has Power over his own
wrath: when men are offended and provoked, they have not always Power to keep
themselves from revenge: Simeon and Levi had not Power over their own wrath,
which Jacob cursed, because 'twas cruel, but the Lord has Power over his Wrath
to turn it from believing, convinced, humbled, repenting sinners; when the Lord
knows, and we know also our manifold transgressions and mighty sins, Amos 5.12.
It Is comfortable to know, that the Lord has a mighty Power to pardon even
mighty sins: as Christ lays hold on the Fathers strength, so we may on his and
make Peace, Isa. 27.9.

5. Christ has Power over Men's Heart.

1. Of the Elect, to change them and to turn them from sin unto God; to take
away the heart of Unbelief, the heart of stone; he can humble the proud heart,
and make the rebellious heart to yield. How soon can Christ make us other Men?
Saul why Persecutest thou me? I am Jesus, and what said Saul? Lord what
would thou have me to do, Acts 9.4.6.

2. Of wicked men; he can bind up and bound their Malice: he can melt and
incline their hearts toward his Servants; as he did once and again the heart
of Saul toward David; of Ahashuerus toward Mordecai, and the heart of Cyrus
to make Proclamation of Liberty for the Jews return to Jerusalem; and hence
this is an Expression to set forth the Power of God, Isa. 44.24. Thus says the
Lord that stretches out the Heavens, v. 27.28. that says to the Deep be dry,
that says to Cyrus, he is my Shepherd, he shall perform all my Pleasure. What
comfort is this, when Saints see what bad hearts they have, they know that
Christ has power to make them better; and what malicious hearts wicked men
have, Christ can either destroy, or incline them to show kindness, as he did
the heart of Esau to Jacob. Genesis 23.

6. Christ has power over all Creatures, to do with them as he pleases, and to
do what he will by them: they go and come, move or not move, live or dye, they
are, or are not at his will: He sends forth his Spirits, they are created; he
takes away their breath they die. He has power of nothing to make something, of
darkness to make light, of evil to turn it to good, of death to bring out life
from it; it is the Prerogative of God, he calls the things that are not, as
though they were. 1. Cor. 1.28. and commands them to be: and much more can he
confound that which is of Babylon: he can say of it, Babylon the great is
fallen, is fallen. This is matter of abundant consolation to the Sainis: thy
Redeemer is strong, the Lord of Host is his Name. 2. Tim. 2.12. I know whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep me, etc. Believers
know whom they have chosen, believed in, whom they love and serve, how full of
might he is, and when the power of Hell, and of the World lying in wickedness
is against them, they may comfort themselves in this, the power of the Lord is
for them: God made Nebuchadnezzar to know that the Heavens do Rule. Dan. 4.25,
26. that is, the three, that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Spirit: which Spirit is in the hearts of Saints: also of which the Apostle
says, Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the World. 1. John 4.4.
the holy Spirit is the Spirit of the Church, Satan is the Spirit of the World:
the Saints comfort is they have the greater Spirit, and if their Spirit be
greater than the Spirit of the World, much more is it greater than the Flesh of
the World.

Particularly 1. Christ's Riches of Power are to be excercised for the good of
the Heirs of Salvation. Psa. 89.19. I have laid help on one that is mighty: the
Father has laid it on Christ, with his power to help Unbelief, to help
Infirmities, to help the Spirit against the Flesh, the law of the Mind against
the law of the Members: None will stand by me in these things but Michael your
Prince. Dan. 10.21 --.12.1. Let the weak then say I am strong, Joel, 3.10. In
the Lord have I Righteousness and Strength, Isa. 45.24. In the Lord it is, and
in the Lord I have it.

2. Christ's Riches of Power is a Fountain of Power to the Saints.

1. In Regeneration he propagates his Power, he begets and maintains a Power of
Godliness in the new nature, 2 Timothy 1.7. A Power to serve God, a Power to
confess his Name, to take up a Cross and follow him. Joseph's bow abode in
strength when the Archers shot at him, being made strong by the mighty God of
Jacob, Genesis 49.24. So are Saints strenghtened by the mighty Power of Christ
resting on them; Sin is from weakness, how weak is thine heart, seeing thou
do these things? Ezekiel. 16.30. Virtue is a Power to do good, which is from
Christ.

2. In the Resurrection Christ will give great Power to the glorified Bodies of
the Saints 1 Cor. 15.43. It Is raised in Power, the Power of raised and
glorified Bodies shall be exceeding great; there is not such power in any thing
in the World as will be in them; if God should give commission, one glorified
Saint might be able to destroy a World of ungodly men.

3. In the World to come all weakness shall be swallowed up in Power; there
will not be cause to complain of the Power of Sin and weakness of Grace; Heb.
6.5. there is mention of the Powers of the World to come, there is no weakness
but power in that World; the power of Godliness, the power of Love, the power
of an Endless Life, Heb. 7.16. of Endless Holiness, of Endless Joy, Josh.
14.11. As my Strength was then so it is now, herein was Joshua a Type of the
perfect and abiding strength of the Saints in the World to come.

And there being such Power in Christ learn,

1. To Trust in him, Isa. 26.4. because in him is everlasting Strength, Isa.
3.15. O my Soul thou have trodden down Strength, Judge. 5.21. Deborah's Soul
having strong Faith, and being poured out in Prayer, did most in that Victory:
Deborah's Soul with Barah's Sword overcame the Host of Sisera: Saints do most
with the strength of their Souls, and in this have great advantage of their
Enemies, and with this they shall tread down Satan and the Man of sin; when a
Saint has no power in himself he may say, as John, there is one mightier than
I, and mightier than all my Enemies, Jer. 31.22. A Woman shall compass a Man;
that is, the weak shall overcome the strong, as Deborah and Jael did; one trod
down the strength of the Host with her confidence, and the other slew Sisera
the Captain of it; the Woman clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under her
feet, though driven into the Wilderness, yet at last must compass and conquer
the Man of sin, and then her Wilderness shall be as Eden, and her desert as the
Garden of the Lord, and Babylon's fruitful Field shall become a Forest.

2. Fear him who has Riches of Power; he can destroy both Body and Soul in
Hell: Who art thou that art afraid of a Man that shall dye, and forgettest thy
Maker? Fear him that has made Heavens, and the Earth, the Sea, and the
Fountains of Water.

3. Praise his Power, Psalm. 21.13. Be thou exalted Lord in thine own Strength,
so will we Sing and Praise thy Power. The Saints shall have abundant matter
ministered unto them in the last days, of praising the Power of Christ, and of
saying Salvation and Strength to our God, and to him that sits upon the Throne,
Psalm. 145.11, 12. They shall speak of the Glory of thy Kingdom and talk of thy
Power.

4. Be in subjection to Christ, and serve him; if we ought to be in subjection
to the higher Powers, then much more to him that has the highest Power, and
take heed that we be not found in opposition to him; Do we provoke the Lord to
jealousy? are we stronger than he? Job. 9.4, 5, 6. He is wise in Heart, and
mighty in Strength, which removes Mountains, and they know not. Who has
hardened himself against him and prospered? He shakes the Earth and does great
things past finding out, and Wonders without number. And as the consideration
of Christ's Power should make us ready to serve him, so to serve him with our
might, Eccles. 9.10. What thou do, do with thy might; be not heartless,
cold, lukewarm in the service of so powerful a Lord. The works which he does
for Saints, he does them with his might; The Eyes of the Lord run to and fro in
the Earth to show himself strong, etc. 2 Cbron. 16.9. As he is strong, so he
delights to show himself strong on behalf of those whose Hearts are perfect
with him.

CHAP. VII.
THere are in Christ the Riches of Glory, Job 40.9.10. Have thou an Arm lik^
God? Deck thy self now with Majesty and Excellency: this is the Glo y of
Christ; he has the Arm of God, and like God he is decked with Majesty, and
arrays himself with Glory and Beauty; he is clothed with Majesty and Honor,
and decked himself with light as with a Garment: If the King's Daughter be all
Glorious within, much more is the King himself, who is the Lord and King of
Glory, who is most Glorious in himself, and has the command of his Glory,
being able to maintain and communicate it as he pleases, Christ has the Glory
of being every way the chiefest: that is, in Dominion, Strength, Wisdom, etc.
being altogether Lovely, therefore altogether Glorious: There is an H^brew word
for Glory, which signifies Weight; true Glory arises out of that which is of
Weight and VVorth; the World's Glory is but a shadow, which flies away as a
Bird, Hos. 9.11. and is but as the Grass of the Field, Christ is the substance.
If Saints shall have an exceeding weight of Glory, how much more then has
Christ? If their's be Glory from an Hyperbole to an Hyperbole, as 2 Cor. 4.17.
then how many Hyperboles are there in Christ's Glory? Christ is the gathering
together of all Glory, as the Sea was the gathering of the Waters; as the
scattered light created the first day was on the fourth day gathered into the
Body of that great light the Sun, which rules the day, so the scattered Glory,
which was here a little and there a little amongst creatures, is gathered in
Christ into a fullness of Glory, which makes him the beginning or Head of the
Creation of God, Col. 1.17, 18. If Sion be the perfection of Beauty, how much
more is Christ?

And these Riches of Glory are Unsearchable: we may well say, here we cannot
order our speech by reason of darkness; i. e. the darkness in which his Glory
dwells in relation to us, and by reason of the darkness of our Minds: Job
26.14. How little a portion is heard of him? When we have thought or spoken out
our all, we may conclude, these are but part of his ways, and of his Glory.

Now to speak what we can of his Glory, let us consider how he himself describes
it, Luke 9.26. The Son of Man shall come in his own Glory, in his Fathers
Glory, and with the Angels, that is, the Glory he shall have given him of the
Creatures, for the Creation, which is in bondage to men's lusts, and those
abuses which it is weary of, shall serve to set forth the Glory of Christ, which
is its earnest expectati^n: Romans 8.

1. There is his own glory, his eternal, essential glory, which he had with the
Father before the world, and still has, being in the form of God: and it is no
Robbery to think so; when the man of Sin shows himself that he is God, that is
robbery, but not so when Christ is equallized with God. The best description of
his Glory is to say, he is above all. Ephesians. 4.6. the face of his Glory we cannot
see, only the back parts thereof, in his word, and works, etc. whence we may
conclude, as the Psalmist, He that made the Eye shall not he not see? etc. Psa.
94.9. He that made all, was not he before all? and is not he above all? so far
above all in power, that he is the Almighty: In Knowledge, that he is
Omniscient: in Duration, that he is Eternal, he is the brightness of his
Fathers glory, and Express Image of his Person. That is his own Glory which he
shall come in. Heb. 1 3.

2. There is his Fathers glory which he shall come in; that is Glory which he
had, and shall have from his Father, and Glory becoming so glorious a Father:
Labans Son spoke it enviously of Jacob, of that which was our Father's has he
gotten him all this glory; we may say it well of Christ, of that which was his
Fathers, has he gotten him all his Glory. There is,

1. The Glory he had from the Father in his humble Estate; for in that he had
much Glory, which was manifested forth in his Miracles, in which he had a
Witness from the Father: When John's Disciples asked Christ, art thou he that
should come? Math. 11.5. he answers, go tell John, the blind see, the Lame
walk, etc. and those works will tell what I am, Joh. 9.30. herein is a
mavelous thing; he has opened mine Eyes, and yet ye know not whence he is:
Cbrist in his humble Estate had Glory under a Vail, and there was a Cloud upon
the face of his Glory; Under the Law, God made a Cloud to be the Sign of his
Presence, which was then his Pavilion; this was a Type of that Cloud of Flesh
and humane Infirmities, wherein Christ in his Divine Glory was covered in his
humble State; although under his Feet then there was a paved work of Sapphire
stone, like the body of Heaven in clearness: Exodus 24.10. which was a figure of
those Beams of Divine Glory which did shine from Christ's works, and goings
when he was in the World, declaring him to be the Lord from Heaven; much of his
Glory came forth in his Speech, never Man spoke like this Man: he spoke like
one having Authority: in this State he had the Glory of Grace and Virtue, of
perfect Righteousness, Zeal, Power, Patience, Humility, Holiness, and Love,
etc. and these were his Glory; we are changed into the same Image from Glory to
Glory; that is as John 1.16. we receive of his Fullness Grace for Grace: Grace
is Glory.

2. There is the Glory of his Exalted State; and if so much of his Glory did
shine forth, from under his Sufferings in his low Estate, what then is the
glory of his Exalted State? there is the glory of his Soul and Spirit, which in
the kind of Spirits is most Excellent; being far above Angels. There is the
glory of his Body, which of all bodily things is most Excellent, having a
brightness above the brightness of the Sun, and above the strength of all
Creatures: If we consider him in his Person as God man, so he has the glory of
being the Father's King, whom he has set over all the works of his hands,
having given him all power in Heaven and Earth, and made him the King of Glory;
it is one thing to have the Glory of a King, another to be the King of Glory;
that is, a King made up all of Glory; for they did some things which were their
Shame and not their Glory. These were but as the Moon which rules the Night,
having their Spots; but Christ is the King of Glory, made up all of Glory, like
the Sun, that rules the Day. Particularly,

1. Christ has the glory of being Universal King; Antichrist mainly strives
for it. This is Christ's peculiar Glory, all things in Heaven and Earth, and
under the Earth are subject to him; he is in Heaven at the right hand of the
Majesty on High: his Eyes run to and fro on the Earth, beholding the Evil and
the Good: his left hand is under the Head of the Saints, and his right hand
does embrace them; be they never so much under, yet beneath them are
everlasting Arms to uphold them, and be their Enemies never so high, yet the
everlasting Arms are above them, and his Hand shall be in the Neck of his
Enemies, Genesis 49.8.

2. A Triumphant King; all his Enemies must be made his Footstool, and he must
see his desire and designs upon them; he shall bind Satan and the Hands and
Hearts of wicked Men, that they shall not hurt nor destroy in all his Holy
Mountain.

3. A King Reigning in Righteousness: Righteousne^s is the best Glory of Kings;
the King of Kings shall be most Glorious in his Righteousness; as he is a
Priest after the Order of Melchisedec, so a Prince also after his order; being
the King of Righteousness, he shall not Judge after the sight of the Eyes, but
Righteous Judgment, Isa. 11.3, 4. as David was a King, the goodness of whose
Government did extend to the Saints, being a King for them and not against
them, Psa. 16.3. So is Christ much more: he is a King to relieve the Oppressed,
and hearing also the cry of Oppression, so as that he shall break Oppressors in
pieces, but shall save the Poor and Needy, and such as have no H^lper: in his
days the Righteous shall flourish, and abundance of Peace, so long as the Moon
endures: He shall be a King, not like Saul, who was for having good things
extended to him from the Israelites: He shall take off your Olive yards, etc.
but like David, who was for the extending of his Goodness, etc.

4. Christ is a King having an Incorruptible Crown: Earthly Kings must dye, and
their Kingdoms must at last come to an end, but Christ's Kingdom shall never
have an end: Earthly Kings after they have lived a while in Glory lie in glory,
Isa. 14.18. that is, in some stately Monument, but Christ shall always live and
never lie in Glory; much less then shall he lie down in shame; this is the
meaning of the Rainbow about his Throne like an Emerald, Rev. 4.3.
Anti-christ's Throne, that Throne of Iniquity which establishes Mischief by a
Law, has not a Rainbow about it, but a handwriting against it; the Bow in the
Cloud secures the Earth from being overwhelmed again by a Flood, so the Rainbow
about Christ's Throne notes its security from Destruction; it shall destroy but
never be destroyed, it shall break in pieces, but never be broken.

3. There is the Glory which Christ shall have from Creatures.

1. From the Holy Angels, they are his Servants, ascending and descending upon
the Son of Man, Joh. 1.51. they have their standing in, and their stability by
Christ; and they do not stand idle in Christ, but ascend and descend; that is,
they are running and going at Christ's Command, and are always employed in the
business of the Son of Man, being his Ministers, by whom he does his work in
the World; they ascend to know, and descend to do; they ascend to receive
Command, and descend to Execute them; they descend about their work, but ascend
in their end, doing all to the Glory of God; and when Christ shall come, these
shall be his Attendants, and be round about his Throne, Dan. 7.10. Thousands,
thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before
him.

2. From the new created World: Christ will not come into this old corrupt
profane World, which is like a moth eaten Garment; the Heavens do contain him,
till the times of Restitution of all things, Acts 3.21. such a restitution
there must be, that there may be a better World to receive Christ, and be in
subjection to Christ; the Heavens must be dissolved, and the Elements melt with
fervent heat, to purge away their Dross, and that all may run into a more pure
and glorious Form; f^^ this fire shall be, as in some respects a consu^ing
fire, so also a R^^^^r's fire; Men do much by fire for refining (...), ^^d
calling them into what form they p^^^s^, and also f^r Extracting Spirits; great
Transmutations of things are made by fire: what great things will the Lord do
by this fire at the last? the new Heavens and the new Earth shall come forth of
th^s fire; for the Earth and the works therein shall be burnt up nevertheless
we, according to his promises, look for new Heavens and a new Earth, wherein
Righte^usness dwells. 2 Pet. 3.10, 13. and the Lord promises. Isa. 60.17. for
Brass I will bring Gold, for Iron Silver, etc. which shall have an
accomplishment several ways; as, if we consider the new world in general, it
shall be in comparison with the old, as if Gold were brought out of Brass,
Silver out of Iron, Iron out of Stones.

1. And if in particular we consider men, first as Men in the Constitution of
their Bodies, in a natural and moral Capacity, in respect of Wisdom,
Understanding, and Knowledge of Natural things, and in their behavior, so
shall there be such difference from what Men are now, as if Gold were brought
out of Brass, and Silver out of Iron.

2. In a politic Capacity, so there will be the like difference: which seems
to be expressly hinted in that Promise, seeing it immediately follows, I will
make thine Officers Peace, and thine Exactors Righteousness, in which respect
there will be for Brass Gold, for Iron Silver. In the times of Degeneration, as
we may observe in that Image Nabuchadnezzar saw, Gold degenerates into Silver,
Silver into Brass, Brass into Iron; but in the time of Regeneration, Math.
19.28. it will be contrary; then the Iron, and the Brass, and the Silver will
regenerate into Gold, and better Gold than the Head of that Image; In that the
Lord Promises I will restore Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the
beginning. Isa. 1.26.

3. In a Spiritual capacity as Saints, and in respect of Church State; so for
Brass will the Lord bring Gold; for common Stones there shall be precious
Stones; I will make the Windows of Agates, and the Gates of Carbuncles, and all
the Borders of pleasant Stones, Isa. 54.12. Then shall be that Church, into
which nothing shall enter, which works abomination, or makes a lie, neither
Hypocrites, nor profane Persons; there the dark Saint shall be full of light,
the weak shall be strong, the too much Earthly and Carnal Saints shall be
Spiritual and Heavenly, and the divided Saints shall be all one; and this shall
in an especial manner be accomplished among the Jews: When the Jews were cast
off what was their condition? We see it set forth, Ezekiel. 22.18. Son of Man, the
House of Israel is become Drossie; all they are Brass, and Tin, and Iron, and
Lead; they are even the dross of Silver, but when they shall be called, then
they shall not be the dross of Silver, but pure Gold; nay compare them in their
most glorious and pure Estate, which formerly they were in; as when they had
the Law given them on Sinai, when the Tribes were brought into such excellent
order, and they had Moses their Leader, and Aaron the High Priest, when they
were fed with Angels food, and had the Cloud and Pillar of Fire, and the
Tabernacle, in which was the Ark; I say, compare them in this Estate, with what
they shall be at last, and we may well conclude that they are but as Brass to
Gold; for then they had but the shadow, but when they shall be called they
shall have the Body and Substance: Then they had the Law given by Moses, and
written in Tables of Stone, but at last given by Christ, and written in Tables
of their Hearts; and Christ will be their High Priest, and Prince upon a
Throne, and the shall have the Cloud and Pillar of Fire too; Upon all the Glory
there shall be a Defense; and as their Estate shall be more excellent then ever
heretofore, so they shall be an eternal excellency, and then all Nations shall
bow before Christ, and be made to serve him; and some of the chiefest in the
Nations, the Kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles shall bring Presents; The
Kings of Sheba and Saba shall offer Gifts: In the beginning of Christ's Kingdom
not many Mighty and Noble were called; it being in great contempt, and under
great Persecution; but when this shall become a great Mountain, and fill the
whole Earth, and God shall beautify the place of his Sanctuary, and make the
place of his Feet glorious, then many Mighty and Noble shall be called, and
brought into it, Jer. 33.21. Their Nobles shall be of themselves. Rev. 21.24.
there is mention of Kings bringing their Glory and Honor into the new
Jerusalem, where they shall find better Glory then they bring, Isa. 49.7. Kings
shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship, because of the Lord which is
Faithful. Isa. 60. There are four Promises made concerning Kings, with
reference to these times, verse 3. The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and
Kings to the brightness of thy rising, verse 10. Kings shall minister unto
thee; There is a time of their ministering unto the great Whore, but at last
some of them will hate the Whore, and love the Saints, and minister unto them:
verse 11. Thy Gates shall be open continually, that men may bring unto thee the
forces of the Gentiles, that their Kings may be brought, verse 16. Thou shall
suck the Breasts of Kings; Now when this shall be, then shall the Church be
prepared, as a Bride be adorned for her Husband, and have Glory suitable to
Christ's Glory: When he shall come, all the Saints shall come with him, Zach.
14.5. The Saints in Heaven and all the Saints on Earth shall be all gathered
unto him; they shall come from the East and West and sit down in the Kingdom of
God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.1. I beseech you by the coming of Christ, and our gathering
unto him: As the Lord was present in the midst of the Camp of Israel, in the
Ark, which was the sign of his presence, and all the Tribes were gathered in
order about him, and the Levites next to him; so when Christ shall come, all
the Saints shall be round about his Throne, and be all Priests near unto him;
then Christ shall come in the Glory of the Bridegroom, and the Church shall be
in the Glory of his Bride; the Angels shall be the Friends of the Bridegroom,
and Saints the Bride, the Lambs Wife. Then Christ shall have his mystical as
well as his personal Glory; for as Head and Husband he accounts not himself
pefect, but in the perfection of his Spouse and Members, the Church being the
fullness of him that fills all in all: this shall be the New Jerusalem, and
that City and Temple mentioned in Ezekiel. 40. etc. set forth under legal
expressions: The Law had the Shadow of good things to come, but the Body is of
Christ; that City and Temple is the Body of legal shadows; when we read of a
Temple, Court, Chambers, Priests, and their Garments, of Burnt-offerings, and
Peace Offerings, by all we must understand that which is the Body of these
legal shadow; Christ shall be the Priest by whom Believers are reconciled to
God; and the Saints shall be made Priests to God; Christ the Prince, and all
the Saints shall reign with him, every one shall have a Chamber, a Mansion
there; now they long for the Courts of God, then shall they be in those Courts,
and be Pillars there, Ez^k. 43.27. The Priest shall make your Burnt-offerings,
and Peace Offerings; the meaning is, I will accept you.

Now what has been spoken to set forth the Riches of Glory that are in Christ,
shows what reason there is to have the highest esteem of Christ, as better then
all other beloveds; well might David say, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and
there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee: Here we may consider
further.

1. The sight of Christ's Glory shall be the Saints blessedness; Blessed are
your Eyes for they see; if there was so much blessedness in seeing him in his
humble State, then what blessedness shall it be to see him in Glory? the
Wicked, that dye in their sins shall see Death, John 8.51. He that believes on
me shall never see Death; unbelievers shall see it: The Greek word imports a
seeing by contemplation, and speculation; the death of the wicked is a
contemplative death; as we read of some, they live a contemplative life, being
for speculation, and not for practice, so we may say of the wicked in Hell,
they dye a contemplative death; as we read of the hurt of the second death, so
very much of the hurt thereof comes by contemplation: the same words are used
Rev. 11.12. when the Witnesses ascend in a Cloud, it is said that their Enemies
behold them: they see and have the speculation of their Glory and Joy, but do
not intermeddle with it; they have a terrifying and tormenting vision, but not
a beatifical vision of their Glory: and the wicked see death, and their
contemplative death is a proportionable punishment of contemplative wickedness,
which abounds, as we may suppose, beyond practical; thoughts being more then
actions: they are contemplating on that which continues and heightens their
torment; they think upon the vain course they led, upon the seasons of Grace
they slighted, the great Salvation neglected by them, they contemplate on the
eternity of their Misery, and they think on the happiness of those that they
persecuted and hated; Dives is said to see Lazarus afar off, the wicked think
on the blessed estate of the Godly, but on the other side the Saints never see
Death, but Light and Life; they shall see Christ and be ever with him,
beholding his Glory, Joh. 17.24. Father I will that they be with me, to behold
my Glory, to be in everlasting contemplation of it; and the Light of him shall
satisfy, and they shall be ever seeing him: there shall not be any Cloud upon
his Glory: true he shall come in Clouds, but when he comes, Clouds shall go
away: when he ascended, a Cloud received him out of the sight of the Disciples;
when he descends, a Cloud shall usher him into their sight, and then Clouds
shall for ever pass away, that Saints may for ever see him; and then they shall
see Christ, and all other things by Christ; The Lamb is said to be the light of
the new Jerusalem, by this light they shall see Christ himself, as by the light
of the Sun we see the Sun, and by Christ's light all other things, as the
Scripture, and all those things contained therein: The Jews before Christ came,
knew him by Types and Signs, but after Christ came, they knew these Types and
Figures by Christ; now we know Christ by the Scriptures, but when he shall
appear we shall know the Scripture by Christ; now we know the Creator by the
Creatures, then shall we know the Creatures by the Creator; now the invisible
things of God are known by the things that are made, then that which is
invisible to us of the things that are made, shall be known by the Light and
Glory of him that made them. And their seeing shall be a beatifical Vision;
Christ shall then see the Saints and be satisfied, and they shall see him and
be satisfied, Exodus 24.11. The Elders of Israel saw God, and did eat and drink;
not as when they made the Calf, but either, they did eat of the Sacrifices, or
did eat and drink Spiritually: they delighted in the Glory of the Lord, and fed
their Eyes, and feasted upon the brightness of his Glory, which was better to
them than the most pleasant meat: In answer to this, Christ promises that we
shall eat and drink at his Table, in his Kingdom: this is the Portion of the
Saints in Heaven, they shall see Christ, as God manifest in the Flesh, and the
Godhead in Christ. After the general Judgment, they shall see God immediately
as All in All and not only through the Manhood of Christ.

2. Christ shall be a fountain of Glory to the Saints, they shall receive of
his fullness, Glory for Glory, as the Sun communicates the Glory of his Light,
so shall Christ the Sun of Righteousness, which he beginning to do here, shall
do it perfectly, to the filling of Souls and Bodies with Glory; they shall have
the Glory of being one in the Father and the Son, Joh. 17.21.

3. Christ's Glory is a Pattern of the Saints Glory, who are predestined to be
conformed to the Image of the Son. Romans 8.29. they shall see, and be like him,
and be satisfied with his likeness: If Saints now suffer, so did Christ, and as
Christ is glorified, so shall they; if we suffer, it is no worse with us than
'twas with Christ, and when Christ shall appear, it shall be as well with us as
to a like Glory, though not an equal Glory with his; they shall appear with him
in Glory; there shall be a Manifestation of the Sons of God, which the Creature
has an earnest expectation off, that they may be delivered from their bondage
unto the power of the Man of Sin, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.
Romans 8.18, 19, 20.

1. A Gracious Liberty, which they have being under Grace, and in a State of
Grace; being free from the Curse of the Law, from the reigning power of Sin,
and from being led Captive by Satan at his will; this is a Liberty where with
Christ has made free.

2. A Glorious Liberty, where with Christ shall make them free, not only from
Sin as a King, but from Sin as a Tyrant, and from any temptations and
buffetings of Satan; not only from pleasing Men, and walking as Men, but from
all persecutions from Men for Righteousness sake: they shall not hurt, nor
destroy, etc. such a glorious Liberty shall be to the Sons of God, a triumphant
Liberty, as under Solomon's Reign, when there was neither Adversary nor evil
Occurrent: And as the Creature, so the Saints also, having the first fruits of
the Spirit, do groan for the Adoption, even the Redemption of the Body:

There is a twofold Adoption, Romans 8.23.

First, by receiving power to be Sons, through believing in Christ, Joh. 1.12.

2. In receiving the Portions of Sons, and that Inheritance which belongs to
them, as Joynt-Heirs with Christ.

There is also a twofold Redemption.

1. Of the Soul, from under the power of Sin, Satan, and the World.

2. Of the Body, from Persecution, and Trouble, which is the State Saints shall
be in after the fall of Babylon, when there shall be none to make them afraid;
as also there shall be Redemption from Death and the Grave, so that their vile
Bodies shall be fashioned like Christ's Glorious Body: Only,

1. Consider, if you would see Christ and be like him in Glory, see that you be
found in him, having his Righteousness, Psa. 17.15. I shall behold thy Face in
Righteousness, that is, thy Righteousness, those that will not submit to the
Righteousness of God, must not look to be Exalted to his Glory; (yet an
inherent qualifying Righteousness, also is by many, and may well be understood
in that Expression.) whom he Justified, them he Glorified.

2. You must be Holy; without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord: you must be
sanctified into a likeness with him in Grace, else look not to be satisfied
with his likeness in Glory.

3. Confess Christ and stand for his Glory; In his Temple should every one
speak of his Glory, Psalm. 29.9. So should we in his Spiritual House; they that
delight not now to be speaking of his Kingdom, and talking of his Power, and of
the Glorious Honor of his Majesty, must not look to have an Inheritance in his
Kingdom: In his Temple is the joyful sound of his Glory: such as now hear the
joyful sound, shall have the joyful sight of his Glory.

4. Do all to his Glory; confess he is Lord to the Glory of the Father; be just
to his Glory, be sober to his Glory, be charitable and merciful to his Glory;
Pray, Hear, Eat, Drink, do all to his Glory; all things are of thee, of thine
own have we given thee; 1 Chronicles. 29.14. all Waters are from the Sea, and run to
the Sea; all flows from the Grace of God, and should be to his Glory: and thus
if Glory be our end in doing all, the sight of his Glory shall be our Reward.

5. C^nsiderations of Christ's Riches of Glory should take off the Heart from
all worldly Glory, Gal. 6.14. Paul was Crucified to the World by the Cross of
Christ, and the World to him, the World was a dead thing to him, and he was
dead to it; the World did not care for him, neither he for the World; the World
did disesteem him, because of his confidence in Christ Crucified, and he did
disesteem the World, knowing that Christ was infinitely better: now if the
Cross of Christ crucified him to the World, much more may the Crown of Christ
raise above the World: Joh. 12.32. If I be lifted up, I will draw all men unto
me: this he spoke signifying what Death he should dye: as the brazen Serpent
lifted up did draw the Eyes of those, that were stung with the fiery Serpents:
So Christ Crucified will draw the Hearts of such as are stung with the terrors
of the Law: and so the Glory of Christ lifted up far above all Heavens, should
draw our hearts unto him:

CHAP. VIII. A General Application of the Whole.
1. WE may learn hence, what reason we have to prize Christ above, and prefer
him before all other things, and to be of the same mind as Paul, who counted
all things but Dung, that he might win Christ, Phil. 3.8. there is little
reason for setting our hearts on Earthly Riches, but greatest reason to set
them on the Unsearchable Riches of Christ; here is the Treasure, and where the
Treasure is, there the Heart should be: This is the better part, which, if we
choose, shall never be taken from us: he that covets and prizes them above all,
may have them without price. The Poor have the Gospel of these Unsearchable
Riches Preached unto them: Men travel far, and take great Pains, and can be
content to endure much, the cold of the Night, and heat of the Day, as Jacob
did in the pursuit of Earthly Riches, how much more should we to get Heavenly
Riches? Take Christ as S^viour and Lord, as Righteousness and ^ife, then the
Riches of Grace and Glory, even the Riches of Heaven and Christ's Kingdom shall
be yours. Those that are young are content to engage themselves in Masters,
that they may learn a Trade to get Wr^^th: of what greater concernment is it to
t^ke Christ for our Master? the like to him is n^^ to be found on Earth:
Masters here seek gain by th^^r Servants, and aims to be enriched by them, but
Christ is such a Master that aims at his Servants gain, and is for the
enriching them; where I am there shall my Servant be, and what I have shall be
my Servant's. Well done thou good and faithful Servant, enter into the Joy of
thy Lord: now Joy by believing enters into them, and they shall at last enter
into Joy, and shall not be called Magor Missabib, i. e. fear round about, but
Joy round about, 2 Cor. 8.9. Ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, when
he was Rich he became Poor, that ye through his Poverty might be made Rich; and
if his Poverty tend to our Enriching, how much more his Plenty? If his
Emptiness, how much more his Fullness?

Here consider.

I. What is forbidden as evil in Relation to Earthly Riches, is commanded in
Relation to the Riches of Christ. As,

1. It Is forbidden to covet Earthly Riches; this is an evil covetousness,
Should thou seek great things for thy Self? Seek them not. Jer. 45.5. Give
me neither Poverty nor Riches, but Food convenient: Prove. 10.8. but it is a duty
to covet Christ's Riches; Covet earnestly the best things: 1 Cor. 12.31. buy of
me Gold that thou may be rich: a little Knowledge and a little Grace should
not satisfy, Here we should love abundance, and seek great things for our
Selves, to be filled with all the fullness of God: Ephesians. 3.19.

2. It Is forbidden to Trust in uncertain Riches; this is a cursed confidence,
lo this is the man that trusted in the abundance of his wealth! Ps. 52.7. But
it is our duty to Trust in Christ's Riches: though worldly wealth is not, yet
these shall be to the Saints their strong City, Prove. 18.10, 11. Isa. 26.1, 4.

3. It Is forbidden to Glory in the Riches of the World, Jer. 9.23. Let not the
Rich man glory in his Riches: Hose. 12.8. Ephraim loved to oppress and boasted
that there by he became Rich. Zach. 11.5. They that sell them say, blessed be
the Lord, I am Rich; this is a glorying that is not good; but having Christ, ye
may well glory in his Riches; Let him that glories glory in me, etc. Jer.
9.24. 1 Cor. 1.31. Having found Christ, you have found you out substance, Prove.
8.21.

II. What is wanting in Earthly Riches is abundantly made up in Christ; as Paul
says, what the Law could not do, being weak through the Flesh, God sent his Son
and he did it, so what Earthly Riches cannot, the Riches of Christ will do for
us.

1. Earthly Riches will not profit in the day of wrath; many will be the worse,
but none the better for them then. The Rich are honored, esteemed, their
favor is sought, and they are feared in the World, but will not be so in the
last day; the Rich Transgressor m^st look to suffer as well as the mean, but
the Riches of Christ will profit in that day, Phil. 3.9. 2 Thessalonians. 1.10.

2. Men carry not their worldly Riches with them; when they dye, they descend
not after them, Ps. 49.17. but the Saints shall carry Christ's Riches with
them, yea gain the fullness of them by death; whence to dye is gain, Phil.
1.21. to dye is great loss to carnal men, loss of the World, loss of the Soul,
but when a Godly man dies there is gain; he knows as he is known, 1 Cor. 13.12.
he apprehends that, for which he is apprehended of Christ Phil. 3.12. he sees
what he did believe; enjoys what he hoped for, and has all the desire of his
heart given him.

3. Earthly Riches do not satisfy; He that loves abundance, shall not be
satisfied with increase, Eccl. 5.10. but the Riches of Christ will satisfy the
Soul, as with Marrow and Fatness; a Man's Life does not consist in worldly
Riches, but it does in Christ: Worldly Men are Fools in saying, Soul take thine
ease; thou have much Goods, etc. but Saints are wise when they say, Soul take
thine ease, thou have all good laid up in Christ, not for many years, but for
Eternity.

III. There are great mischeifs ordinarily attending Earthly Riches, which
Christ 's is no way subject too.

1. They may flee away; and as the Raven from the Ark, never return any more: a
man heaps up Riches sometimes, and begets a Son, and nothing is left in his
hand: but Christ's Riches never flee a way; they are flowing in till there be
fullness, and then they never flee away; concerning Babylon's wealth the cry
will be, Alas! alas! in one hour so great Riches are come to naught, Rev.
18.16.17. but Sion's Riches never came to naught, being the durable Riches.
Prove. 8.18.

2. They many times hinder Men's entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, it is hard
for ^ Rich Man to enter thither, because Riches are loved more than that
Kingdom; but being rich in Christ, and having Virtue, and Knowledge,
Temporance, and Godliness added to Faith, so you may know that Entrance shall
be administered abundantly into the Everlasting Kingdom of Christ. 2. Pet. 1.8
11.

3. The love of Money is the Root of all Evil; a Root bearing Gall and
Wormwood, as Lying, Deceit, Violence, Apostasy, Pride, etc. on the other side
the love of Christ's Riches, will be a Root out of which much good will grow,
as Obedience, Zeal of following Christ, Boldness to Confess him, a heavenly
Conversation, with contentment with food convenient; as the love of Money is
the Root of Sin, so of piercing Sorrow and distracting Cares; but the love of
Christ's Riches will be a Root, out of which much Peace and Joy will grow, even
that Peace which passes Understanding, and Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

2. Let those that are partakers of Christ's Riches take these Instructions.

1. Be poor in Spirit, when you are rich in Christ; being rich in the Spirit of
Christ given you, be poor in your own Spirits; Paul said, in nothing came I
behind the very chiefest Apostles, though I be nothing, 2 Cor. 12.11. whatever
I have now, there was a time when I had nothing, and was nothing; I see now,
but I was blind; I am Righteous now, but I was a Sinner, and by the Grace of
God I am that I am, 1 Cor. 15.10. I have no Sufficiency of my self, but his
Grace is sufficient for me; thus be poor in Spirit, then you are blessed, for
yours is the Kingdom of God, Math. 5.3. blessed are those that are thus poor in
Spirit, for they are rich; blessed are they that are empty, for they are full;
blessed are they that are thus nothing, in Christ they have all.

2. Know, that it is by your Faith you are Rich, Jam. 2.5. rich in Faith, Faith
seeing Christ, Faith receiving Christ, and staying upon him makes Rich. Thou
stand, thou live, thou love, thou followest Christ by Faith; therefore
be not high minded but fear; be not low minded but believe.

3. Such as are rich in Christ, should be rich toward Christ, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.
Charge them that are rich in this World, that they be rich in good works; much
more should those, that are rich in Christ be rich in good works, abounding in
the work of the Lord. 1 Cor. 15 58. -- 6. 20.

4. Prize the Riches of Grace, as well as the Riches of Glory, Isa. 33.6. the
fear of the Lord is his treasure, as the fear of the Lord, and zeal of
worshipping God, was that which brought so much treasure to Hezekiah, and filled
his Treasures with precious things, so the Worship and Service of God, was
esteemed by him as a great Treasure; the Treasures of Grace, which he had in
his Heart, were better than the house of his precious things: he is a sound
Christian that looks on the favor of God, and the fear of God as his Treasure.

5. Communicate of your Riches. As the Ministration of the Spirit, so the
Riches of Christ are given to profit withal, and we should be good Stewards of
them, in trusting as we are entrusted, comforting as we are comforted; when
Christ gives his Riches, he gives his Charge with them, Occupy till I come,
Luke 19.13. with 1 Pet. 4.10.

6. Honor the Lord with your earthly Riches; feed Christ hungry, and cloth
Christ naked; we may argue as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.11. If we have sown
Spirituals, is it a great matter if we reap your Carnal things? If Christ sows
his Heavenly, Spiritual Incorruptible Riches, is it a great matter for him to
reap our Carnal? make you Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness. Covetuos
Men look on Mammon as their best Friend; Saints should not do so, but make
themselves Friends with it; Not Christ; we cannot make him our Friend by our
Riches: Believe, come to him, Reverence him, and so he will be our Friend; our
Riches cannot purchase his Friendship: but make the Saints our Friends; do good
to the Household of Faith, and then when these fail, they shall receive you with
Joy, and consecrate your Gain to the Lord: If Men have not a heart to it
themselves, the Lord will do it for them: Mich. 4.13. I will consecrate their
Gain to the Lord, etc. when covetous Men make a God of their Wealth, Saints
should Honor God with it, 2 Samuel 1.21. Ye Mountains of Gilboa, let their be no
Rain, nor Dew, nor Fields of Offerings; the Fields of Canaan were Fields of
Offerings; of the Fruits of them were made Offerings to the Lord; so sh^^ld the
Fields of Saints be Fields of Off^rings; t^eir Riches, the Riches of Offerings;
and (...) that is in the hands of wicked Men is the Mammon of Unrighteousness,
but shall in the hand^ of Saints, be the Riches of Righteousnes^.

3. Comfort to such as have Christ and his Riches with him; Those that have
the^^ Portion only in this life, and enjoy their good things here, hereafter
may have torment, and as Jam. 4.1. Go too now ye Rich Men, weep and howl, for
the Miseries that are to come upon you. But go too now ye Sain^s, that are so
much scorned, and contemned in the World, so much persecuted, etc. rejoice and
be exceeding glad, great are your Riches ^n Christ; much have you received mo e
is laid up for you; great is your reward on Earth, but far greater in Heaven;
If you are of the Poor of the World, you are rich in Christ; if you loose
outward Riches for Chr^st's sake, you have an hundred fold, and in the World to
come Everlasting Life, and the fullness of heavenly Riches: In every State you
may know how to want, and how to abound; having Food and Raiment, you may very
well be content, and account Food convenient as all: Phil. 4.18. I have all and
ab^und having received of Epaphroditus, the things sent from you; what an
Excellent frame of Spirit was there? and most worthy of our Imitation, and what
cause is there to rejoice in filling up that which is behind, of the Sufferings
of Christ? as Paul did, Coll. 1.24. seeing Christ is filling up, that which is
behind of our Grace and Glory: and is the Lord Proving and Trying you as Silver
is tried? does he bring you into a Net, and lay Afflictions upon your Loins?
does he at any time cause Men to ride over your Heads? what is the Issue of
all? Psa. 66.12. Thou ledd'st us through fire and Water. and brought us out
into a wealthy Place: Heaven is the wealthy place; thither at last must their
Souls be brought: The Kingdom of Christ is the wealthy Place: Into that the
Church at last shall be brought: The Israelites had great Afflictions in Egypt.
and were led through the Water of the Red Sea, and through Fire; afterward the
burning at Taberah, the stinging of the fiery Serpents* and at last were
brought into Canaan the wealthy Place, were they enjoyed Vineyards, they
planted not: Houses they built not: so the Church is under hard bondage in
Egypt, Spiritually so called, and that may have great Trials in the Wilderness,
but at last it must enter into that Rest that remains, and that wealthy place
prepared for it, or moist, well watered Land, as the words import, or into a
Refreshing, as the Greek has it: Suitable to this the Apostle speaks, Of times
of refreshing from the presenee of the Lord, Act. 3.19. After these sore
afflicting times, under the Reign of that Man of Sin, shall be times of most
sweet and abundant refreshing from the presence of the Lord, when he shall
consume Antichrist with the Spirit of his Mouth, and destroy him by the
brightness of his coming, and so make the Kingdoms of the World his own Kingdom.

4. See that you have a true right to those true Riches: you must have Christ,
that you may have his Riches: he that has the Son, has life; 1 John 5.12. he
that has Christ, has his Riches; you must be in Covenant, have the Lord for
your God, be his People, and all is yours; ye are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
you must have Christ as Savior and Lord, and Christ must have you to be his
Servants and Followers, to be his Spouse and Members, do not content your
selves with a Thought and Opinion, that his Riches are yours, but see that it
be so indeed; Laodicea thought her self to be Rich but was Poor, as worldly
Men's inward thoughts are, as Psa. 49.11. that their Houses shall continue; and
so the inward thoughts of some are, that they have an Interest in the Riches of
Christ, when they are none of theirs; as he that gets Riches, and not by
right, shall leave them in the midst of his Days, and in the end shall be a
Fool, Jer. 17.11. So he, that thinks he has Christ's Riches, and has them not
indeed, in the end shall be a Fool? Math. 13.12. From him that has not, shall
be taken away, that which he has: he that has a Name, and not the thing: a
Name to live, to be rich in having Christ, and is dead, and without Christ
indeed, shall have his Name taken away: He that has a form of Godliness, and
not the Power, shall have the form taken away: He that has Gifts and not
Grace, shall have his Gifts taken from him; he that has a Lamp and not Oil,
shall have his Lamp taken from him: as it is said concerning Judas, his
Bishopric let another take it; but on the other side, to him that has shall
be given: He that indeed is partaker of the Unsearchable Riches of Christ,
shall then have them more, yea more abundantly.

The End of the First Discourse.
THE SECOND DISCOURSE. OF Knowing CHRIST Crucified.
1. CORINTHIANS ij.ij. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save
Jesus Christ and him Crucified.


THere were two sorts of men that took offense at Paul's Preaching; Jews and
Greeks, as appears in Chap. 1.22.

1. Jews, The Preaching of Christ Crucified was to them a stumbling block, they
dreamt that the Messiah should abide always, John 12.^4. and never die or be
crucified; they expected a Messiah that should restore the Kingdom to Israel;
and that which was to be understood mainly in a Spiritual sense, they
understood carnally, of outward and mundane Peace and Glory. They that had such
high and large expectations of temporal felicity, would not believe in a
Crucified Messiah; that Life, Salvation, Eternal Glory, and an everlasting
Kingdom should spring from a Cross, from a cursed death upon it; their veiled
understandings, and carnal hearts could not be persuaded of: They expected
likewise some visible convincing Sign to Evidence to all the World that he was
the Messiah, without which they will not believe, Chap. 1.2. The Jews require a
Sign.

2. Greeks, who were Philosophers, Disputers of this World, had wise and subtle
heads, these Greeks seek after Wisdom; they apprehended there was no wisdom in
Paul's Preaching Christ Crucified. 1. Because he did not speak Reason: they
deemed it commendable wisdom to deny assent, to that which was not made
apparent by Arguments, clearing it to Men's Reason. Paul Preached naked Truths,
only upon the Testimony and Authority of God: Now as Thomas would not believe,
unless he did feel, so will not these Greeks, unless these Truths be evidenced
to Reason. The Jews seek after a Sign, the Greeks after a Convincing Reason.
The Jew will have it made evident to his Sense by a Miracle; the Greek by a
sound Argument to his Reason, that Christ Crucified is the Savior of the
World; so Natural Reason and Carnal Wisdom, is made the rule and standard for
the proof and trial of Divine Truths. 2. They dislike his manner of Preaching,
'twas not sufficiently adorned with Wit and Eloquence; the Truths that he
Preached were not set before them in a comely dress, they conceived both wisdom
of Matter and wisdom of words to be wanting. Truths of God, Soul saving Truths
are rejected, because they were not delivered in enticing words of Man's
Wisdom; here is the ground of the Offense.

To these groundless grounds of Offense, the Apostle replies, by urging his
Commission given by Christ, his Practice grounded on and conformed to that
Commission, and the Reasons why such a Commission was given him.

1. He shows his Commission, Chap. 1.17. Christ sent me not to Baptize but to
Preach, not with wisdom of words, etc. not to Baptize, etc that is, this was
not my principal work that he set me about, but to Preach, which is the greater
and more noble work. Verbum est vis Sacramenti.

Preaching is the means to beget Life: Sacraments do but seal and confirm what
is begotten: the Church may sometimes subsist without the Administration of
Sacraments for a time, as the Jews in the Wilderness, but not without the
Preaching of the word: though Hypocrites are of a contrary mind herein: if they
have Sacraments administered, and their ordinary Service kept up, no matter how
little preaching there be: but says Paul, Christ sent me not to Baptize, that
is, to Baptize and not to Preach, or to Baptize as my chief and principal work,
but to Preach, and that not with wisdom of Words: His Commission was not to go
and preach wisdom of words, or to go in the strength of natural Wisdom, or
rational Arguments to convince their Judgments, or with enticing words of man's
wisdom, with well-set Sentences, and Eloquent Phrases to move their Affections,
but declare plain and naked Truths: set Christ Jesus before them as Crucified,
urge the Testimony and Authority of God, which is the only solid ground of
Faith, in the most plain and edifying way: this was his Commission.

And his Practice is answerable hereto, which he declares in the beginning of
this Chapter, I came not with Excellency of Speech, with enticing words, but
sound, wholesome, edifying Language: not that he disliked Eloquence and Elegancy
of Speech, which is to be perceived in many places of his Epistles: but he came
not (...), cum Eminentia, that is, not with vain ostentation of his Gifts, to
gain applause of Men by Excellency of Speech: he did not compose his Language
in the likeliest manner to win applause, but so as to edify: Rhetoric is
useful whilst it may help on good grounds, toward the embracing of Divine
Truths: Non laudatur Ruditas sed simplicitas: nec vituperatur Eruditio, sed
Ostentatio.

And as he came not with Excellency of Speech, so not of Wisdom: He did not
labor to work upon them by Natural Wisdom, by Rational Arguments, but did
declare the Testimony of God. We may say of Wisdom, Reason, Philosophy, Humane
Learning, etc. as the Apostle of the Law, it is good if a Man use it lawfully:
if Natural Reason, Wisdom, and Learning be made subservient as a Handmaid to
Faith and Religion, there is a good use of them: but if it be made the Mistress
and Lord of Faith and Religion, the Standard for trial of Truths to be
embraced, then they are Enemies to Faith and Religion: but Divine Truths must
be urged upon a Divine Testimony and Authority. In the next place now Paul
declares further the grounds of this his Pract^ce, viz.

1. From the great esteem he had of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him
Crucified. I determined to know nothing among you but Jesus Christ.

2. From the powerfulness and effectualness of the plain P^eaching of Christ
Crucified, it is the power of God to Salvation: in this way God's power wo^k^
on Men, to the begetting of Faith and Repentance, and bringing them to
Salvation. Chap. 1.18.

3. From the powerfulness and ineffectualness of that way of Preaching by the
excellency of speech, etc. the Faith and Obedience begotten hereby stands not
in the power of God, but in the wisdom of Men; this is the foundation of it;
and so it is but like the House built on the Sand, 'twill not endure a stormy
blast of wind; a Tempest, a little Persecution arising the whole Fabric is
overturned: It Is observed of Paul, Ast. 14. Preaching at Lystra, with great
Elegancy of Speech, for which the People admired him, and called him Mercurius,
seemed to embrace him with much Affection, so that they were ready to offer
Sacrifice to him; that we find no real good wrought amongst them: Their
affection stood in the wisdom of Man, and so suddenly vanishes away; no sooner
came the Jews among them, who were Enemies to Paul; but they persuaded them
another way; and now verse 19. they stoned Paul, to whom before they were ready
to offer Sacrifice as a God: that Man's Religion is vain that is not grounded
on the Authority and Testimony of God, that stands not on the Power of God.

This Introduction makes way for the better understanding of the sense and
scope of the Text, also to show you what Preaching it is you should look after,
and have in highest esteem, viz. that wherein divine Soul-saving Truths, are in
the plainest manner brought home unto you, and urged upon your Consciences from
the Testimony of God, as Truths which God requires you to believe, and embrace,
and practice for the Salvation of your Souls, and this is Preaching in the
demonstration of the Spirit and of Power.

The words of the Text, are one reason laid down of Paul's way of Preaching,
practiced by him, in plainess of Speech and declaration of the Testimony of God
concerning Christ, and him Crucified; because he esteemed it the most excellent
knowledge to know Christ, and the chiefest piece of service he could perform
for to bring honor to God, or procure good to Men, to Preach and to make known
Jesus Christ, and him Crucified.

They contain a Determination or Resolution of Paul, in the great work he had
to do among the Corinthians; which he sets forth,

1. by way of Negation or Comparative disesteem of the knowledge of other
things, not to know any thing. I count nothing so worthy of my study or pains
to make known, or of your Search, Diligence, or Labor to know.

2. By way of Affirmation, setting forth the highest esteem of the knowledge of
Christ; in these words, But Jesus Christ, and him Crucified Him I account worth
knowing.

Here you have, 1. an Evangelical preacher mentioned, take him for a Pattern,
Paul.

2. His holy Resolution and Affection he had to his work, I determined, I fixed
this Resolution, this I counted my choicest work.

3. The Persons among whom he had a mind to work, viz. the Corinthians,
although by many he was accounted a Fool for his labor, and his Preaching
Foolishness.

4. The subject or matter of his Preaching, Jesus Christ, and him Crucified.

Something it will be needful to speak for the meaning of words. I have
determined, (...) says Calvin is often used to the same sense, (...), tanquam
pretiosum Seligere; to make choice of, as a thing most precious: therefore he
translates the word, Non eximium duxi, I counted it not excellent or valuable.

Herein concur Peter Martyr, and Beza, who gives an Instance of that use of the
Verb, Romans 14.5. (...). One man esteems a Day; so in our Text, I have not
esteemed any thing so precious and worthy to be made known, etc. Not to know,
i. e. to Preach or make known, as the following words, among you declare to be
the sense. -- Any thing. Non quod respuendae sint Arts, etc. Muscul. Not as is
the knowledge of Arts and Sciences were to be rejected, and Secular Learning
despised, which Paul was not unacquainted with, and sometimes expressly makes
good use of, citing that verse of Epimenides in Tit. 1.12. -- But he accounted
all other knowledge as nothing in comparison with the knowledge of Jesus
Christ. This could not add any weight to the knowledge of Christ. But Jesus
Christ: But was he not to Preach many other things concerning the Father and
the Holy Ghost? etc. yea, but the meaning is, nothing but Christ, because there
is no other Name whereby we can be saved, etc. nothing else as the way and
means of Salvation; he alone is the Way, Truth and Life; he that knows him
knows the Father, by whom it is we come to know and enjoy God; from whom the
Spirit is to be received.

And him Crucified. Although Crucified; I am not ashamed to Preach a Crucified
Savior; proud Spirits disdain believing in one hanged on a Cross; but the
Ignominy of the Cross shall be no stumbling block to me: Something further
seems intimated, that Paul apprehended this, to add a great deal of worth, and
esteem to the knowledge of Christ, that he was Crucified, it being of absolute
necessity to Salvation, that Christ must be apprehended and believed in, under
this notion: and when he speaks of the Knowledge of Christ crucified, he means
not only the History of Christ Crucified, that he suffered under Pontius
Pilate, etc. but the mystery of the Cross: the former many may know, and yet be
Ignorant of the latter; but this is the life and excellency of this knowledge,
to know the Mystery, etc: that is, the Eternal Wisdom and Goodness of God in
ordaining such a way for the Redemption of lost Man; the great love of Christ,
the infinite satisfaction made, the virtue of the death of Christ, the glorious
Conquest he made, etc. Some Observations I shall raise, and touch at, and pass
by; and then come to the main point to be insisted on. From that word, I
determined, observe that.

Doct. 1. A Minister of the Gospel ought to put on a fixed and settled
Resolution, to go through with his work of Preaching the Gospel be the work
never so great, difficulties many, oppositions mighty, he must resolve to go
through with it; it is said of Ruth. Chap. 1.18. She did steadfastly set her
self, etc. or she strengthened her self; a fixed Resolution is a strengthening
and fortifying a man's self before hand, against difficulties and oppositions,
the more Resolution, the more strength for the work. A Minister must imitate
Christ his Master, Luke 9.51. He did steadfastly set his Face to go to
Jerusalem. I shall not insist on this, only show what is required to the making
of a Resolution, that it may be a strengthening to a Man.

1. It must be a Resolution of Faith, grounded on Faith. 1. That God calls and
sends a man. Judge. 6.14. God says to Gideon, go in thi^ thy night: have not I
sent thee? God's call and mission. was his Strength; upon this he may safely
resolve and undertake the work, and fear no terrors; God's Mission is our
might; be assured of a divine Call, and then you may resolve to undertake the
work. And, 2. A continued dependence on God for strength; God's sending at
first, is not enough to carry a man through, but he must renew his strength,
rely on God for actual supplies, and in this Faith fix a Resolution, and say,
not by power or might, but by the might of the Spirit of God, going along and
assisting in the work.

2. It must be a Resolution of Sanctifying God's Name, and Glorifying him: This
must be the aim and drift, a Resolution to help to pluck Men out of the fire,
to build up the Spiritual House, and enlarge Christ's Kingdom.

Use. Proportionably hereto, must fix your Resolutions to Hear, Believe and
Embrace the Word; you must determine to walk by it; strengthen your selves with
believing Resolutions.

1 Laying hold on the strength of Christ, to enable you to make good your
Resolutions, and say, I can do nothing without strength from Christ; I can do
all things through Christ that strengthens me.

2. The aim in your Resolutions must be to glorify God; the end of Hearing, of
Worship and Profession must be to magnify Christ; to hold out his Name and
Honor in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation; then resolve: such
Resolutions will be your strength; you must not be half Persuaded with Agrippa,
but altogether resolved to be such as Paul a Zealous Doer, and Patient Sufferer
for Christ; to follow Christ according to the Gospel; as Ministers must have
fixed Resolutions to Preach, so you to live in the way of the Gospel.

Not to know any. 1. Paul was not like some others, who Preached with
Excellency of Speech and Wisdom, to publish their Gifts, rather than to make
known Christ; but I determined not to know any thing, save Jesus Christ, and
him Crucified.

Doct. 2. The aim of a Minister of Christ, must not be to Preach himself, or to
purchase himself applause. His aim must not be to bring himself, but Christ
into esteem with a People; he must not make a vain ostentation of his own Gifts
but hold out the Graces of Christ; not his Wit, but Christ's incomparable
Worth; not to magnify his own parts, but the Power of Jesus Christ: he must
take Paul for his Pattern, 2 Cor. 12.16. Not make a gain of the People, but
labor to gain them to Christ, by showing them that Christ is the greatest gain.

2. He must spend himself for the Peoples Souls, ver. 15. I Will gladly be sent
for you, the Greek is, for your Souls; his Peoples Souls must be more precious
then his own Body.

3. He must love abundantly, though small retribution for love, though he be
less loved, because of the manifestation of his love. v. 15.

4. He must bewail those that sin, any do not repent, v. 21. so that all must
be to persuade a People over to Jesus Christ, and to embrace the Gospel:
proportionably must you carry your selves, that is, you must profess your
Selves to be the Servants of Christ, not to get esteem to your selves but to
Christ, that he may be magnified by you; not that you may be like the Giants of
old, Men of Renown; but that Christ may in and by you have greater Honor and
Renown by your Holy Christian Conversateon and Godliness.

But Jesus Christ) although the Preaching of the Cross was accounted
foolishness.

Doct. 3. A Minister must resolve to Preach Christ, although he be accounted a
Fool for his labor. He must account the Preaching of Christ a most precious
Service, although the World account it foolishness; because it is both the
Wisdom of God which the World accounts foolishness, and the Power of God which
it judges weakness. Proportionably hereto, Although the World may esteem
diligence to hear the Word Preached, Foolishness, and a needless labor, yet
you must not be ashamed; although the world may reproach you for preciseness in
the ways of Christ, and zeal in the cause of Christ; yet after that way which
they account foolishness you must Worship God, and Honor Jesus Christ, which
is the way that leads to Life and Salvation.

Not to know, etc. knowing, is put for making known; that Paul accounts himself
to know, which he is careful to make known.

Doct. 4. Then a Man may be said truly to know Christ himself, when he labors
to make him known to others; they are knowing Men, that communicate what they
know.

This were a Point very profitable to be handled, but I shall have occasion to
make use of it in the main point, and so shall say the less of it now.

1. God does not account you to know, what you do not communicate; you are in
his account ignorant Persons, that labor not to Instruct the Ignorant in what
you know: for the Gift of Knowledge that you have, is given to profit withal,
that you may be Eyes to the Blind: Christ says that he knew not the time when
the day of Judgment should be. Dominus dixit se nescire, quia non erat paratus
aliis revelare. Salmeron.

He accounts himself not to know, because he resolves not to make it known:
whether that be the sense or not, this is a Truth, God will not account you to
know, when you have opportunities to distill Knowledge to others as to your
Wives, Children, Servants, and you neglect.

2. You are in danger of loosing that Knowledge which you have, of letting slip
the Truths you have received: Exercse of Gifts in instructing others, is a
means to preserve and enlarge those Gifts; to hide your Talent will be to
consume it, or else it may provoke God in Judgment to deprive you of it, as he
that hid his Talent had it taken away. To him that has (himself and in common
with others) more shall be given him; but from him that has not, shall be
taken away even that which he has. Here Is a seeming Contradiction: has, yet
has not; if you observe the occasion of this Speech, which was the taking away
of the hid Talent, Math. 25, and 29. you will find thus much imported.

1. He that has a Talent given him, and hides it, and does not improve it to
the advantage of others, he is accounted not to have a Talent: he that knows
and does not inform, and labor to benifit others by his Knowledge, is
accounted not to know.

2. He that has and hides, shall loose what he has, it shall come to nothing:
then what follows, v. 30. Cast ye the unprofitable Servant into utter darkness,
etc. a dreadful Sentence! Cast ye the unprofitable Hearer, the unprofitable
Father, Master, Husband, Wife, etc. that have Knowledge, and hid their
Knowledge, etc. see therefore that you improve in Knowledge, come hither to
gain Knowledge, and go home to communicate Knowledge, let your Families know
what you learn. The Woman of Samaria having found Christ in the Mountain, goes
presently and Preaches him in the City. Paul had no sooner that Voice in his
Ear, I am Jesus whom thou Persecutest, but straight way he Preached Christ in
the Synagogues, that he is the Son of God, Act. 9.20. He accounts himself to
know what he knows among others for their benefit. Paul, according to the
Interpretation given of the words, accounts it a most excellent and precious
thing to Preach Christ Crucified. Hence,

Doct. 5. A faithful Minister of Jesus Christ accounts the Preaching of Christ
a most sweet and precious Service. Non eximium duxi. I judged no Work so
desirable and excellent as this; so sweet to Paul, that he esteems it more dear
than his Life, Act. 20.24. I count not my Life dear to me, so I may finish my
Course with joy, and the ministry received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the
Gospel of the Grace of God; he found Joy enough to carry him through all
Sufferings in his course of Service and Duty; he had reward enough in
fulfilling his Ministry received of the Lord Jesus; Glory enough in testifying
the Gospel of the Grace of God. Christ's Meat and Drink is to do his Father's
Will. Isa. 49.^. Christ complains because of the obstinacy of the Jews, I have
labored in vain, because Israel is not gathered; this seems an uncomfortable
Service; but he replys, no, there is sweetness and contentment sufficient even
in laboring, though in vain among the Jews, surely my Judgment is with the
Lord, and my work with my God; my Judgmen^, etc. or as Junius, Officium meum
penes est Jehovam. My Office is with God that is he gave me an Office, and I
have performed, and returned it to him in fulfilling of it, that is
satisfaction and recompense enough: God witnesses with my Con^cience that my
Duty is discharged, my work is with my God.

In the Margin my reward. His work was a sufficient Reward; O what an excellent
Pattern is this for Christ's Ministers, to account Work for Christ a reward
given from Christ; Gospel work your great Glory.

Likewise whatever Service Christ calls you to, who are no Ministers, know that
there is sweetness enough, even in the Service; that it is your greatest Honor
to lay out your Selves for the Honor of Christ, know you your duty to Christ
to be your Dignity, your work of Faith and labor of Love to be a reward. Paul
calls it a Grace to suffer for Christ, Phil. 1.29. much more to do for Christ;
be so of Inge^uous Spirits in the Service of Christ: Profess the Gospel, and
live according to the Gospel; live according to the Law of Faith, to the Law of
Love, the perfect Law of Liberty.

Account Obedience to this Law to be most Honorable. The Law of thy Mouth, says
David, is dearer to me than Thousands of Gold and Silver: not only the precious
Promises of thy Mouth, not only sweet Expressions of thy Love and Goodness, but
the Law which requires Obedience; Self-denial, etc. this is more precious than
Gold. Labor you for such holy tempers of Spirit, such Son-lke Dispositions, to
be in love with Duty, to account the practicing of Holiness most precious, the
hearing of the Gospel Preached; a Heaven, to enjoy Christ in his Ordinances a
high degree of Glory; to live a gracious Life; to be with Paul caught up into
the third Heavens; well may it be so accounted, it is so indeed; Grace being
Glory begun, and Glory above is but Grace perfected.

But Jesus Christ: Hence learn,

Doct. 6. Of all Divine Truths, none are of so great necessity to be made known
as Jesus Christ, giving himself to be Crucified for the Salvation of Sinners.

This is the main thing for Ministers to apply themselves to make known, and
for People to know. The Law was given on Sinai to drive Men to Christ, to
search more earnestly after him, to be delivered from the Curse of it: To him
give all the Prophets witness. Act. 10.43. he is the Principal Subject of the
Gospel; he is the Kernel of Scripture; the Diamond in that Gold Ring; the Sun
in that Heaven; the Ark in that Holy of Holys: Hereto then all Studies and
Endeavors must be applied to know Christ, etc. Thus briefly for these
Observations.

The Main Points to be insisted on, are these two.

Doct. 1. The Knowledge of Jesus Christ is the most Excellent and Precious
Knowledge; grounded on that, Non Eximium duxi: I counted nothing so excellent
or worthy to be known.

Doct. 2. The labor of Ministers, and the main Care and Endeavor of the
People must be this; the one to make known, and the other to know, as the
History of Christ Crucified, so especially the Mystery of the Cross of Christ.

1. The Knowledge of Jesus Christ, is the most excellent and precious Knowledge.

This is the groundwork and foundation in matter of Life and Salvation, the
Pillar and Gr^und of Truth. Christ is called the Foundation, 1 Cor. 3 11.
because all a Man's Peace, Happiness, and Joy lies on Christ as a Structure on
the Foundation. A Man that hopes for Salvation, must stay and rely on Christ.

He is the sole Foundation, Other Foundation can no Man lay, etc. This
Foundation is laid by the Father, and fixed by his Eternal Decree; and by
Christ's being Incarnate, by being laid down in the Grave, and set up at the
Right Hand of God; it is in vain for Men to lay another Foundation, of their own
Duties, and Good Works; but that you may have Life, you must be laid by the
Father on Christ, in hi^ Eternal Decree, chosen in Christ, that is, to be saved
by him; given to Christ, and actually laid on Christ by the work of the Spirit,
Baptizing you into Christ, Converting, Renewing you after the Image of Christ,
and then actually laying your Selves on Christ by the Exercise of your Faith,
depending on, and adhering to him: so that this is the one thing needful for
Ministers to Preach, and for you to know,

That you may be the more convinced of this, I shall prove it by Scripture, and
add some Arguments for fa^^her Confirmation. I shall begin with Scripture
Testimonies, because that must be my work which Paul Professes to be his, v. 1.
To declare the Testimony of God, to evidence the Truths I deliver by Divine
Authority, out of the word of God: that is a Truth for Faith to rest on, which
is found in the word, and founded upon the Word.

Now both Old and New Testament hold forth this Truth.

This was Abraham's Joy that he saw Christ's Day: the Knowledge of Jesus Christ
was most precious to him: This God requires a People above all to Glory in,
Jer. 9.21. Let not the Wise Man glory in his Wisdom, the wise Statesman, the
Philosopher, etc. but in this, that he understands and knows me.

The meanest Person that knows Christ, has more to glory in than the most
knowing Person in the World, that is Ignorant of Christ If you had with
S^lomon, Understanding exceeding much, and largeness of Heart, that you could
speak of the Nature, Virtues and Excellencies of all Creatures, and Ignorant of
Christ, yet he that knows any thing of Christ, has more to make him renowned.
Well may we glory in this, for Christ is a Peoples Glory, Isa. 60.1.

Christ tells his Disciples, that their condition was more happy than that of
the Prophets, because they knew more of Christ: Blessed are your Eyes, etc. The
Prophets were more blessed because they knew something of Christ, though but
his back parts, because they knew he should come: but more blessed are you
because you see Christ come amongst you, Math. 13.16. what these knew, see
Math. 11.4, 5, 6. If the clearer Knowledge of Christ does make you more
blessed, than Prophets that had more intimate communion with God, and
Revelations from him of future things, then certainly this is the most precious
Knowledge. To know the Scripture, or to know the mind of God, what things he
will bring to pass hereafter, all this is nothing to the Knowledge of Christ;
for blessed are you above and beyond all the Prophets, etc. yea, this puts all
Believers (since Christ did reveal himself to the World in his Offices) into a
degree of Glory above John the Baptist. Math. 11.11. amongst them that are born
to Women there was one greater than John; but he that is least in the Kingdom
of God, is greater than he: none was greater, none of the Prophets, that is,
than John, because Christ was born in his time, and he saw the Lamb of God,
Joh. 1.29. but the Kingdom of Christ was not then so fully set up; Christ did
not so openly manifest himself to be the Son of God. John died before Christ
died and arose, and ascended; before there was a flocking of Men in unto
Christ; therefore it follows, he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e.
in the Kingdom of Christ; his Kingdom of Grace set up in the World, he sees
more of Christ's Glory than John did in his time, and so is greater: Certainly
then the Knowledge of Christ is most excellent and precious; it makes you not
only greater than great Scholars and Learned Men, but than Prophets, yea than
John Baptist: will you hear Paul plainly expressing his Opinion, see Phil. 3.8.
I count all things but loss, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ. The
Knowledge of Christ is the Excellency of Knowledge; so excellent, that in
comparison with him, other things are but Dung. Col. 2.3. In him are hid all
the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge..

Observe what kind of Excellency this is.

1. It Is Secret, Hidden, not outward and visible: the natural Eye cannot
discern the Excellency of it, it is a hidden Treasure. Although Carnal Men
cannot Judge it to be most Excellent, yet in Truth it is so.

Thesaurus dicit absconditos, quod non Eminent magno Splendore conspicul, sed
potius sub crucis humilitate and simplicitate contemplibili quasi delitescunt.
Calvin.
2. There are Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, all Wisdom is in Christ, he
has all Knowledge of all things in himself; but that is not the meaning here;
Treasures of Knowledge are not only in him subjectively but objectively; there
is a Treasure of such glorious things in Christ, in his Person, Nature,
Offices, etc. that he that knows Christ has a Treasure of Wisdom and
Knowledge; he has the most precious and excellent Knowledge and Wisdom that is
to be gotten; such Wisdom, that it may be said of this created Wisdom and
Knowledge of Christ what is said of Christ himself, the Eternal and Increated
Wisdom. Prove. 8.11. Wisdom is better than Rubies, and all things that may be
desired are not to be compared with it; this is the meaning of these words.
Significat nos perfect sapere, si Christum vere cognoscimus. Calvin: That we
are truly wise if we know Christ truly.

This will further appear if we consider.

1. The Excellency of Christ in himself.

2. The Excellent Benifits of the Knowledge of Christ.

1. The Excellency of Christ in himself:

1. In general. Christ is the most glorious Person. King of Glory, Psa. 24.7.
as Death is called, Job. 18.14. the King of Terrors, that is, Omnium
terribilium terribilissimum, the Terror of Terrors, the greatest of Terrors; so
Christ is King of Glory, most Glorious, none like him. Moses was a Type of
Christ, a typical Mediator, and had abundance of Glory from Christ by
reflection. 2 Cor. 2.7. so that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly
behold the Face of Moses for the Glory of his Countenance. What then is Christ
the Fountain from which this Glory is derived? Heb. 3.3. This Man is counted
worthy of more Glory than Moses, because he is the builder of the House: He was
Moses's Lord: Moses had the Glory of a Servant of Christ. Christ is the Lord
and King of Glory: Christ is then most Glorious, Hag. 2.1. The Glory of the
latter House is greater than the Glory of the former, the former was only a
type of Christ, a sign of his Presence; therein was the typical Glory of Christ
contained; but the latter was more than a type, even the place of his real
Presence: Into it the King of Glory came. Christ's Presence in the Temple made
it most Glorious; hence it is that he is most Glorious: If thou then art a
Temple of Christ in which he dwells, if Christ come to thy Soul, and make
himself known there, then art thou filled with Glory, thou have Excellency of
Knowledge, the most precious Knowledge, because of the King of Glory: The Queen
of Sheba beholding the Glory of Solomon, said, happy are the Men that stand
before thee, and hear thy Wisdom; but a greater and more glorious Person is
Christ, infinitely happy are they that stand in his Presence and see his Face;
they will say with the Apostle in the Text, Non Eximium duxi.

2. In particular consider him. 1. In his Natures. 2. In his Names. 3. In his
Relations. 4. In his Offices.

1. According to his Natures, which are two:

1. Divine, so he says, I and the Father are one: what the Father is the Son
is: whatever glorious Excellencies the Father has, the Son has the same; the
same Attributes, Eternity, Incomprehensibleness, Immutability; whatever the
Father does the Son does, the Father works hitherto, and I work. So he is the
Creator of Heaven and Earth, by him all things were made: he is the Fountain of
all Beings, of all Excellencies; and so the knowledge of him must be most
Excellent; he is called Wisdom it self, and so to know him must be the greatest
Wisdom: he is the brightness of the Father's Glory, and the Express Image of
his Person; that is, as a Person distinct from the Father, and the most Express
Image, because he has the very same Nature: Identical Glory with the Father in
a distinct Person. If then to know God the Creator of all things, Eternal,
Invisible, etc. If to know Wisdom, Infinite Wisdom; If to know the brightness
of the Father's Glory be most Excellent, then the knowledge of Christ is most
precious; he that sees me sees the Father. This was Moses's Request, and a most
choice one, I beseech thee show me thy Glory; no greater Glory, than to behold
the Glory of God; and the brightness of that is to be seen in Christ's Glory of
Eternity, Glory of Omnipotency, Glory of Omnisciency, of Eternal Love; even
that passes Knowledge, unspeakable Goodness, etc. hence there is ground to say
Non Eximium, etc.

2. Humane, as taking on him the Seed of Abraham. The Son of God, begotten from
all Eternity in respect whereof it is said, who can declare his Generation? yet
was born in time, and became the Son of Man. The Great God, equal with God,
took the form of a Servant, so he is become Immanuel, God with us. God in our
Nature, in which dwells the fullness of the God head Bodily, C^l. 2.9. that is
by a Substantial and Hypostatical Union, so as that both Natures make but one
Person: this was that God and Man, betwixt whom was a great Gulf; that these
might meet, God comes down to Man, because Man could not come up to God. God
satisfies his own Justice by himself, when Man could not satisfy for himself;
so Justice and Mercy both are glorified; perfect Satisfaction and free Grace
meet together; Christ taking Humane Flesh satisfies for Man; there Justice is
glorified, the price of Redemption is paid, Man is freed from Eternal Misery he
deserved, without any personal satisfaction of his own, there f^ee Grace is
Magnified.

Great now is this Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, a Mystery
of Infinite Wisdom, in contriving Man's Salvation in a way wherein the greatest
Glory of God shines forth: a Mystery of Incomprehensible Love; which makes the
Glorious Angels stand amazed, 1 Pet. 1.12. well might the Apostle esteem the
Knowledge of Christ as most Excellent.

2. Consider him in his Names. And so

1. His Name is called Wonderful, Judge. 13.16. Isa. 9.6. a Name that may be
admired, it cannot be perfectly apprehended; this argues his Name to be most
Glorious: as therefore we cannot behold the Sun because so full of Light; the
greater is its brightness, the less we are able to look upon it; so the more
unsearchable Christ's Name is, the greater is the Glory of it. As the Children
of Israel could not steadfastly behold the Face of Moses for the Glory of his
Countenance, and the Ministration of Legal Ordinances was so glorious, that
they could not steadfastly behold the the Face of Moses, 2 Cor. 3.7. the like we
may say, the less steadfastly we can behold the Glory of Christ's Name, the more
glorious it is: it is Secret, so full of Glory: If Moses's Face was so glorious,
etc. much more is the Eternal Name of Christ, that excels in Glory. Now if the
Name of Christ be so Glorious, as that it is Secret and Unsearchable; then it
must be most Excellent Knowledge in any measure to apprehend the Name of Christ.

2. His Name is The Lord, the Lord God gracious, etc. Exodus 34.5. This is
Christ's Name, v. 4. it is said, The Lord proclaimed his Name before Moses; it is
full of Glory, and Goodness, most Sweet and Precious: this was an Answer to
Moses's Request, I beseech thee show me thy Glory. God reveals this his Name,
that he might show his Glory; his Name is his Glory; so the Knowledge of Christ
is most Glorious.

3. His Name is Messiah, Dan. 11.25. That is, the Anointed, Psa. 2.2. that is,
one that is chosen and set apart by the Father in an Eternal Decree to gather
Jacob. Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me because he has anointed
me, etc. and also fully authorized to execute all Judgment, to set about the
work of Redemption, as Joh. 6.27. Him has God the Father sealed, that is,
given him a Commission to be King, Priest and Prophet; so that he may save to
the utmost those that are given him to save; and lastly anointed, that is,
furnished with all Gifts, Q^^lifications and Abilities, to sit him for the
fulfilling his great work. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me because he has
anointed me, etc. What Spirit? See Isa. 11.2. The Spirit of Wisdom,
Understanding, Counsel, Might, Knowledge, Fear. Now thus to know Christ as
Messiah, such a Messiah must needs be a a most sweet and precious thing. Andrew
having found Christ, and meeting Peter, he cries out he had found the Messiah.
Joh. 1.41 they were so much taken with him, that they willingly leave all to
follow him. it is worth our leaving all to know Messiah, to see where he
dwells, and to abide with him.

4. Jesus, because he saves his People from their Sins; being the good Shepherd
that gives his Life for his Sheep, Joh. 10.11. The Woman of Samaria thought
Christ worth the knowing. Joh. 4.29. because he had told all things that she
had done; she told this in the City, and they went out to see him; but I can
tell you greater things; behold a Jesus that will save you, if you come to him,
from all things that you have wickedly done: will it not be worth your study
and pains to know him? If you should hear of a Physician able in cure you of
all Diseases, what flocking would there be to him? would you not all desire
acquaintance with him? such an one is Christ, he is able to cure you of your
worst Diseases, to heal all your Soul Infirmities, and save you to the utmost;
certainly he is a Person worth the knowing.

5. The Lord our Righteousness. Jer. 23.6. with chap. 33.16. He that will be
for a Wedding Garment to you; he that spreads his Banner of love, and casts the
Mantle of his own Righteousness to cover your nakedness, to hide your
Deformities, that so the Lord may not see Iniquity in Jacob; that he may look
on you as comely through his beauty put on you: surely there can be nothing
more precious to a Self-condemning Sinner than to know this Name, The Lord my
Righteousness, that shelters me from wrath, and that renders me accepted with
God. Isa. 23.24. The Inhabitant shall not say I am sick, they shall be forgiven
their Iniquities: their Righteousness is of me. The knowledge therefore of this
name of Christ cures the Soul of its Sicknesses, of all its discomforts, and
sadness, and fills it with consolation, so is most precious.

3. In Relation to his Church, so he is Head thereof. Col. 1.18. He is the head
of the body, such a head as the Husband is to the Wife. Ephesians. 5.25. so he loves
his Church with his choicest and most tender love; he nourishes and cherishes
his Church, v. 29. he takes care to provide for, and preserve his Church. This
Relation is most sweetly set forth in the book of Cant. Chap. 4.9. Thou have
ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse, etc. thou have taken away my heart;
Christ's Heart is wholly taken up with his Church: none else have his heart;
and from these sweet Manifestations of the love of Christ, and of the
incomperable Excellencies of Christ, which the Church contemplates on, Chap.
5.10. etc. She concludes at last, v. 16. His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is
altogether lovely; thus she hence concludes as the Apostle; Non Eximium duxi,
etc. there is none whose Graces are so excellent, whose Love is so burning,
whose Beauties are so shining, whose Dignities so high; none that has all
Power, all Fullness, as Christ; therefore I determine not to kn^w any thing
among you, save Jesus Christ, etc.

Again, such a head he is as the natural head in the body, that is, the
Fountain of Sense and Motion: there is the Understanding and Knowledge seated:
there is the light of the body; by it all nourishment is conveyed into the
body; now such a head is Christ; in him dwells all Fullness; he has the Spirit,
he has Life in himself; he has Wisdom to inform and instruct, to make us wise
to Salvation; he has Righteousness to Justify, Grace to Sanctify, etc. so all
Spiritual Good, Peace, Life, Grace is treasured up in him: how excellent then
must the knowledge of him be.

4. Consider him in his Offices. And so he is

1. A King, all power is given him to save his Church, and to subdue his
Enemies; he has power to save and destroy, to give Life and to take it away;
to raise up to Heaven, and to cast down to Hell: a King full of Might, King of
Kings, that is, able to cast down all Kings that do oppose him; to bruise them
with a Rod, etc. for he shall overthrow all the Kingdoms that will not set his
Throne to be established amongst them; full of Might to save his Members, of
weak he makes them mighty, even him that is feeble mighty as David, and the
House of David as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them; thus Christ is a
Glorious King. Now of all the Persons in a Kingdom, the People desires to know
the King; and Christ being the greatest King, it must needs be the most
excellent Knowledge to know him as such

2. As Prophet: He is that Prophet, the Inspirer of all other Prophets: The
Woman of Samaria apprehended a great deal of Excellency in this, that Christ
could tell all that she had done: but he was a Prophet that knew and could make
known far greater things; he knew not only what Men had done, and what was in
their Hearts, but what God had done; all his works are open to him, because
what the Father wrought he wrought; and all that was in the Fathers heart, his
eternal saving Purposes, his Good Will toward Men, his Righteous Decrees,
Christ knew all; For he is in the bosom of the Father as Son of God, and knows
all things; he is the word of God, he is that Prophet to make known to Men the
gracious Purposes of the Father, Joh. 1.18. He is the Lord which teaches to
Profit, and tells how Men may be saved; he makes known the things belonging to
our everlasting Peace; is not he worth the knowing above all?

3. As Priest, humbling himself and becoming obedient to Death, Offering
himself without Spot to God, to take away Sin by one Sacrifice of himself; he
bare our Griefs, and received our Stripes. He remains still a merciful high
Priest that has compassion on our Infirmities, and knows how to succor them,
and all this out of mere Love and free Grace: Now the Knowledge of Love that is
most sweet, the knowledge of the greatest Love is the best Knowledge.

2. Consider the Effects of this Knowledge; further to show its Excellency: And
these are,

1. Justification, and Peace with God. This Knowledge of Jesus Christ
surpasses all other Knowledge, because this produces that Peace which passes
all Understanding. It begets Peace in the Understanding, quiets it against all
perplexing doubts that aris^ from the knowledge of Sin, and apprehension o^
wrath, it acquits from Self-condemnation and accusations. It satisfies the
will, and begets a complacency; it is well pleased upon the knowledge of
Christ, and closing in with him in whom God is well pleased. It allays all
Storms and Tempests of Fears, Griefs, etc. raised by the Conscience that is
awakned to see its Sinful and Cursed condition. It says to all di^quieting
Affections, Peace, be still; thus this Knowledge begets Peace in the
Understanding and Will, Affections, a calmed Spirit: a Peace it is that
satisfies; nay it is a Peace that more than satisfies: it surpasses Knowledge,
it exceeds thoughts, it goes beyond desires, it passes all; and that because
Christ is Prince of Peace; that is, that none has power to Command, to make
Peace, to give Peace to a Sinner: He alone has power of Life and Death, of
forgiving, and Retaining Sin: He makes Peace by the Blood of his Cross; dies to
make Peace, that he might satisfy Divine Justice, that it might not take hold
of Sinners. This as Priest. He Preaches Peace. Ephesians. 2.17. as in the days of his
Flesh he Preached to the Jews the things concerning their Peace. This as
Prophet: Then the knowledge of him must needs be most precious. How beautiful
upon the Mountains, are the feet of him that publishes Peace; i. e. Ministers
that Preach Peace, etc. Isa. 52.7. much more beautiful is Christ, Prince of
Peace, etc. the knowledge of Christ as our Peace, is said to Justify, Isa.
53.11. Knowledge is not taken for bare Knowledge of Christ, but as
comprehending Faith, affiance in Christ, which is set forth under the name of
Knowledge, because this is necessary to faith, the beginning of it, its first
Act; now then this knowledge of Christ must needs be most precious. The
knowledge of all the pleasant and most precious Objects in the World will not
Justify; it is not that which can quiet the Soul from trouble at the guilt of
the least Sin, when Sin is truly discoverd: nay not the knowledge of the Nature
and Attributes of God, not contemplative knowledge of the word of God, but only
the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

And to set forth farther the Excellency of this Knowledge in regard of its
Effects, consider, that this alone renders the Knowledge of the highest and
most perfect Object sweet and delightful; that is, of God. It Is Death to a Man
to know God out of Christ, He sees Everlasting Righteousness in God to condemn
and punish; Everlasting Power to punish; and then he cannot see God and Live:
he will cry out, woe is me, as Isaiah; or as the Jews, let not God speak, least
we die: O what Horror and Dread does this beget upon the Spirits of Men! but
when God comes in Christ revealing himself, reconciling himself to Men,
becoming their God and Father, then the Soul can take delight in the Knowledge
of God: then it can request with Moses, I beseech thee show me thy Glory: now a
Man can never know too much of the Power, Justice, and Eternity of God, etc.
It Is Eternal Life to know God, this is through the knowledge of Christ.

2. This transformes into the Image of Christ. The Heart that knows Christ
aright will strive to a conformity with him, 2 Cor. 3.18. beholding as in a
Glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, etc. where there
is a learning of Christ, there is an endeavor to put off the old Man, etc.
Ephesians. 4.21, 22. and is not that excellent Knowledge which will make you like
God, partakers of the Divine Nature?

3. This makes a Man partaker of Eternal Life, John 17.3. This is Life Eternal.

1. This is the way to Eternal Life, to know Christ as Crucified, etc.

2. This formally is Eternal Life, which is begun as soon as this is wrought.
The first Fruits of Knowledge, is the first Fruit of Eternal Life. The
Knowledge of God through Christ perfectly, is perfection of happiness. Simeon
had a sight of Heaven when he saw Christ, as Moses on Nebo, which makes him
desire to depart.

Use. 2. Exhortation. Be stirred up with earnestness of your desires, and
endeavors, to labor after the Knowledge of Christ; as it is said of Samson, he
bowed himself with all his might, Judge. 16.30. So do you bow your Souls with
all your strength and might, to pull down high imaginations, which advance
against the knowledge of Christ; and determine, desire to know nothing but
Christ; search for Wisdom, that is, for the Knowledge of christ, (who is the
Wisdom of the Father) as for hid Treasures. The Knowledge of Chrest is the
richest Treasure, so it deserves all your desires: study, searrh to be employed
for the attaining of it; it is hid, so you must search diligently, take pains
for it; you must hearken diligently, and apply your hearts to get
Understanding, and the Knowledge of Christ. And as the excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ, should be a strong and prevailing motive with you to set
your self to seek after the Knowledge of Christ; so great encouragement you
have from the planty of means, God does afford, whereby you may attain this
Knowledge. You need not say, who shall ascend into Heaven, to bring down
Christ? who shall descend into the deeps to fetch up Christ? But the word is,
nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart: It comes to your hearts, and waits
there for entertainment. Christ in his Ordinances is come down amongst you, he
walks in the midst of the Golden Candle-sticks, in the Assemblies where he is
Preached, John 1.36. John and two of his Disciples stood and looked on Jesus as
he walked, and he said, behold the Lamb of God! This we may affi^m in a
spi^^^al sense now, Jesus walks, he comes to you in (...) word and those that
have Eyes of Faith, do see (...), and (...) say to you, behold the Lamb of God!
Behold C^^ist, here ^e^^! and when you are told of Christ, what should you do,
but as the Disciples (...) they ^^ard him speak, they followed Jesus; (...),
desire more Knowledge of, and acquain^^^e with him, and know then that you
shall find Ch^^st, not going away, ^or hiding himself, but as v 38 when they
followed, Jesus turned, and saw them following, and says, what seek ye? Christ
is willing to come to you, ready to turn to you, and make himself known to you
when you follow him. He will invite you to him, Come and see, I am ready to
entertain you, I will be your Mediator, I will save you: Come and see, I Will
reveal all my worth and excellency to you, as Hezekiah (Isa. 39.) showed the
House of his precious things to the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon, and all
that was found in his Treasures; that will Christ do to you; he will show you
the House of his precious things; that love of his which pass^th knowledge;
that Infinite p^ice of his own blood, the value of which is enough to redeem a
World lying in wickedness, the virtue of it is sufficient to conquer Sin,
Death, Hell: that Infinite merit by which he prepares Mansions and Thrones for
you in Heaven: In a word, all his Treasures of Righteousness, Grace, and Glory.
O therefore awake then that sleep, thou Sinner that art in a natural state,
yet in danger of wrath, being under the curse of the Law, and sleep in that
condition, that is, do take thy rest securely, not knowing the miserable
condition thou art in; awake, be rowzed up, arise from the dead, and look after
Christ, that walks amongst you, and he shall give thee Light! Ephesians. 5.14. He
shall give the light of saving knowledge to thee, in revealing himself, who is
the true light, and as the Prophet exhorts, Isa. 60.1. Arise and shine, for thy
light is come; that is, Christ is come in his Ordinances, therefore arise and
follow him, look after, shine, or be enlightened, know him that is revealing
himself to you, so you shall have the excellency of Knowledge.

For the more effectual pressing of this Use, I shall show, 1. What kind of
Excellency Christ's is. 2. What Knowledge of Christ it is you must have, that
you may have the Excellency of it. 3. What means to use to get it:


For the first, you must know, that the Excellency of Christ, is not an
outward, earthly, or sensual Excellency: we may say of Christ as he does of his
Kingdom, my Kingdom is not of this World, the Glory of my Kingdom is not such
as the Glory of earthly Kingdoms; the great Privileges of my Kingdom are of
another nature, as Freedom from spiritual Slavery, from Tyranny of Lusts,
Remission of Sins, Right to heavenly Inheritance; Members of the Body of
Christ: so we say of the Excellency of Christ, it is not worldly, sensual, it is
not that which can be beheld by the Eye of the Body, nor by the Eye of natural
Reason; it is a Divine and Spiritual Excellency: The Glory of Christ is that
which he had from all Eternity with the Father; his Excellency, that in him
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead; that by assuming Flesh he comes to be a
meet Mediater; that in him is Power to save from sin, Righteousness to Justify,
Grace to Sanctify, and Merit to Glorify: In a word, that by his blood there is
a way into the Holy of the Holies, an entrance administered into the Everlasting
Kingdom: that we are begotten again to a lively hope of an Immortal
Inheritance. The chiefest Excellency of Christ is not that he restores Temporal
Peace; All things are by Christ, there is the Promise of that: for these
outward things shall be added to those that seek the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness. Those that by Christ are made Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven,
shall Inherit the Earth too: but that is not Christ's chiefest Excellency.

2. What Knowledge of Christ must we have, that we may be said to have that
Excellency of Knowledge?

1. We must know Christ in both his Natures, in all his Offices; In both his
Natures, that is the Excellency of Knowledge, to know him to be Immanuel God
with us. If we look on him only as God, we shall but know him to be God against
us; God whose Justice is offended, and wrath provoked. But look on him as God
and Man, then it is God with us; so it is life to know him, you see him then as
Mediator, as making Peace, as reconciling God and Man: there is sweetness,
there is preciousness in that Knowledge. You must know him in all his Offices,
as Priest to Redeem, as King to Reign, as Prophet to Instruct. You must thus
know Christ, that you may see him in the latitude and fullness of his
Excellency; so we see him described Rev. 5.6. A Lamb slain, there a Priest,
having seven Horns, that is perfection of strength; and seven Eyes, thar is,
perfection of Wisdom; In consideration whereof the Saints admire him, and Sing
a new Song of praise, v. 12, 13.

2. Know the Terms on which Christ tenders himself to Sinners; he is that Pearl
of greatest price, an you must sell all to purchase it, you must part with your
Lusts, part with Estates, with Friends; forsake all, to follow him; you must
know the emptiness and vanity of these things, and that there is such infinite
worth in Christ, as that he well deserves that you should part with all for his
sake: you must know that it is a blessedness to be called to suffer for Christ's
sake, that it is matter of rejoicing to be accounted worthy to suffer shame for
his Name, then do you see the Excellency of Christ indeed, when you can account
it matter of Joy to part with all for Christ, and an honor to suffer for him.

3. Know him in a way of propriety, and particular application, that you may be
able to say, as the Spouse, My beloved is mine, and I am his; as Thomas, my
Lord; and as Mary, my Savior; All the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ is
in this Appropiation: If you can say that he was a Lamb slain for you; if he be
your Wisdom making you wise to Salvation, revealing to you the Mysteries, etc.
If your King reigning in your Hearts; if his Blood be yours, his Merit, his
Spirit, his Fullness of Grace yours, that is Excellent Knowledge.

4. Be as diligent to know what Christ's Will is, that you should do for him,
as what his good pleasure is to bestow on you; Benefit and Duty, Promises and
Precepts. Labor as well to know the mind of Christ commanding Duties, as the
will of Christ making Promises; Account as the Blessings of his Mouth, so the
Law of his Mouth, dearer then thousands of Gold and Silver. As soon as ever
Christ revealed himself to Paul, and said, I am Jesus whom thou Persecutest,
Act. 9.5. He reapprehended a great worth and Excellency in Christ, being Jesus
a Savior; so much as might well deserve that he should offer himself a
Sacrifice of Praise to Christ, and so he asks, what will thou have me to do? I
am bent now to do any thing for thee, thou have made thy self known as Jesus,
and thou shall be my Lawgiver; I desire to know thy will, Lord what will thou
have me to do? that I Will do, that alone I will do; I will know no Voice, no
Mind, no Will, but thine: So you must know Christ's Will, and only Christ's
Will, in matters of Religion and Worship: My Sheep know my Voice; They know
nothing in matters of Religion but what is Christ's Voice. The Voice of Men
requiring obedience to their Commands, in matters of Religion, and conformity
to their Institutions, and Ordinances. i. e. a worshipping of God in their way,
that they know not; they will not practice any thing in matters of Religion
unless they can see the Authority of Christ stamped on it, and the mind of
Christ in it.

5. Content not your selves with Speculative, and Historical, but labor for
Experimental Knowledge; this is the Excellency of Knowledge; as Christ knew
when Virtue went out from him, so labor you to know Christ feelingly, by
receiving Virtue into your Selves from Christ. It Is not the Excellency of
Knowledge, to be able to talk and discourse of Christ, to hear of him by the
hearing of the Ear, but to feel Christ; this is the excellency of Knowledge. As
Sin is truly known when you feel the burden, and groan under the evil of it,
and are weary and heavy laden with it; so Christ is known, when you
experimentally perceive the power of Christ in you, the Grace of Christ
Sanctifying you, and the Life of Christ quickening you; that Christ is in your
Understandings as Light and Wisdom, informing them, in your Wills, satisfying
them; in your Affections, ruling in and over them.

We may observe Paul expressing Conversion, by these two Phrases.

1. By revealing Christ in a Man. Gal. 1.16. that is when Men do not only hear
a Voice without, this is Christ, but Christ is inwardly revealed, and the Soul
is convinced, this is Christ.

2. By forming Christ in a Man, Gal. 4.19. I travel in birth till Christ be
formed in you, that is, that he be embraced by your Faith, and held fast in
your Soul, and your Souls are made to live by Christ, and to Christ, so as that
it may appear in your Conversation that Christ is in your Hearts; from both
gather, that where Christ is truly known, he is revealed in a Man; the Soul
comes to see and to be acquainted with Christ; yea Christ is known, not only
Speculatively but Experimentally; Christ is formed, the power of Christ's acts
and works in the whole Soul; and when Christ is thus known, then is there that
Excellency of Knowledge, see Phil. 3.8, 9. where Observe three things, wherein
the Excellency and Experimentalness of this Knowledge appears to be in a Man.

1. There is an accounting all things but dung, that a Man suffers the loss of
for Jesus Christ; many Men may suffer the loss of Goods for Christ's sa^e, that
yet it may be have not attained to this Excellency of Knowledge; but such an
Excellency of Knowledge, such a high degree of Prizing Christ, as to look on
Honor, on Riches, the best of Worldly Accommodations as Dung, that can part
with them, yea utterly contemn them, and cast them away as Dung and Filth so I
may enjoy Christ, and have Communion with him, this is Excellency of Knowledge.

2. A Man will be found trusting in Christ alone for his Justification, he
knows no Righteousness, no Merit of his own, no Duties that he will be found
in, and plead for his Acceptance with God: he sees abominableness in his best
Performances, Iniquity in his most holy things, so that cannot render him
beloved, but the more abhored: but he sees perfect Righteousness in Christ, no
stain, no defect in it, and that his Beauty and Renown may be perfect through
his Comeliness; that Christ's Righteousness is a perfect covering for all his
Spots and Deformities; which if cast on him, that then he is so perfectly
Justified that God shall not see Iniquity in him, and that if it be sought it
shall not be found, and that Christ's Righteousness is not like that Covering,
Isa. 28.20. that is narrower than a Man can wrap himself ^n it. If the greatest
Sinner can wrap himself in this Covering, it will be enough to hide all his
Iniquities.

3. There is a knowledge of the Power of Christ's Death and Resurrection; that
is (...) knows and feels a Power of Christ 's death which make^ him conformable
unto his death, whereby his old man is Crucified as Christ was. Sin ceases to
reign in him, the strength of corruption is abated in him; and a Power of his
Resurrection, whereby you have been quickened, and made to live a life of Grace,
such a life as Christ lived; that is, to glorify God on Earth by doing his will.

6. Your Knowledge must be an affectionate knowledge. A knowledge of the
Excellency of Christ in such a manner, as that your hearts be enflamed with
love to him: Knowledge is sometime put for Love, 1 Cor. 8.3. or else it is to
be interpreted as taking love to it, as John 10.15. As the Father knows me,
so I know the Father: that is, because the Knowledge of God must infer love. As
the Father loves the Son, as Beza. And certainly there is that in Christ which
will beget love if it be rightly known, John 10.17. So the Father loves me,
because I lay down my life. So if we come to know the love of Christ, in laying
down his life; and the unspeakable good that comes thereby, we shall love him,
Cant. 1.3. therefore the Virgins love thee, and Chap. 2.3.4. Let me ask that
question of you as Christ of Peter, John 21. Love thou me? Do you love
Christ? So will you, if you know him. Yea, as he said, Love thou me more then
these? If you do, you love him above all other Excellencies, more than these
Bodies, than these Estates, than these Friends, etc.

7. Your Knowledge must be Operative. Excellency of Knowledge will beget an
excellent practice, a good conversation, 2 Pet. 1.8. They shall not be barren
in the Knowledge of Christ. Rev. 22.4. They shall see his Face, and his Name
shall be in their foreheads: that is, shall know him, and outwardly profess
him, where Christ is seen; his Name, his Honor and Dignity is born forth in a
Christian practice, held out in a holy Conversation, Rev: 21.24. in the
description of the New Jerusalem, i. e. the Church, it is said, The Lamb is the
Light of it: whence follow two things.

1. The Nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it. They
that have light, saving knowledge, and are in the way to be saved, they shall
walk in the light of it, having this Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ they
shall walk by it, they shall walk according to the Lamb's precepts.

2. The Kings of the Earth do (...) their Glory and Honor to it, that is, to
the ^^mb that is light etc.

1. They shall subject th^^ Glory and Honor to the Honor and Excellency of
Christ reigning in his Church. They shall acknowledge all to be inferior to
his, their Glory shall stoop and bow to Christ, as the Moon and Stars made
obeisance to Joseph in his Dre^m.

2. If (...) Glory, Honor, Power, may add any Glory to Christ or may help to
make this Jerusalem a praise, and afford any benefit to the Saints, they shall
bring it in, and freely give it up: So where there is the Excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ, all Glory and Honor will be made to stoop to Christ, and
all given up and laid forth in the cause of Christ, you will rejoice to spend
your selves, and Estates, and be spent in that way wherein Christ may be
magnified, the Gospel advanced, the Church profited, the Saints comforted and
refreshed.

3. Means to get this Knowledge.

1. See a necessity of attaining this knowledge without which you shall never
obtain Life and Salvation. This is Life Eternal, etc. If you want this
knowledge you must be destroyed. Vengeance is to be rendered on all that know
not God. To whom should we go, said Peter, thou have the Words of Eternal Life.
Every one that will not labor to get the knowledge of Christ must needs
perish, Hos. 4.6. Isa. 33.6. Wisdom and Righteousness shall be the stability of
thy times and strength of Salvation. Do as the Wise Man exhorts, Prove. 2.2. so
that thou incline thine Eear unto Wisdom, and apply thine Heart to
Understanding: Yea, if thou eryest after Knowledge, and liftest up thy voice
for Understanding.

2. Look not on Christ after the Flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16. Henceforth know we no Man
after the Flesh, no not Christ. What is it not to know a Man after the Flesh?
This is not to regard those Outward and Carnal Excellencies, by which a Man
gets esteem above others in the World; as Nobleness of Birth, Breeding, Beauty,
Honor, Riches; not to prefer him as better before God by these. So know not
Christ according to the Flesh, that is, do not look upon him in his outward
condition, in his fleshly Privileges, or external meannesses; if so, Christ
will either be utterly contemned or esteemed only according to his Inferior
Excellencies, which will not advance him in your esteem above other men.

1. Look not on Christ in his outward meanness and lowness of his condition, in
respect of which there was no Beauty or comeliness for which he should he
desired. In his Birth he was mean, a Carpenters Son, as the Jews said, this was
a stumbling block to the Jews. What was in him to win their respects, or that
he should be esteemed the Redeemer of Israel? What to persuade a Man to Worship
him? What to be a motive and ground for Faith to be fixed on him? What to
persuade a Man to forsake all to follow him? What to take off the affections
from all other objects, and to unite them to him? There is no outward
appearance of such transcendent Glory and Excellency, to beget a transcendency
in their esteem of and affection to him. This is true when Christ is known
after the Flesh, when you Judge carnally of him, and look on him only with a
worldly Eye. Especially too when men consider that this is the condition of
Christ's Members, who outwardly for the most part are in a mean condition,
hated and Persecuted, and kept under in the World. There is no Excellency in
the Knowledge of Christ if he be only known after the Flesh, therefore you must
labor to have your understanding and your hearts spiritualized, refined from
all carnal conceits and respects: Look on Christ with a new and spiritual Eye,
and so the Apostle adds v. 17. If any man be in Christ he is a new creature: If
any Man would know Christ aright, and be in him, let him become a new creature;
his understanding, his heart must be new made, of a carnal one it must be made
spiritual, and learn to judge of things in a spiritual way, and to see the
spiritualness of Christ and divine Excellency, through all his carnal and
outward appearances: In his natural Birth look through and see his Eternal
Generation, not to be declared: through his swaddling cloths see him Glorious in
his Apparel, decked with Majesty and Honor, which the Wisemen saw and fell down
and Worshipped him. In his Humiliation see him making way for his Members
exaltation; in his becoming mean see him laboring to bring many Sons to Glory;
working Salvation in his Sufferings; taking away sin by being Sacrificed,
laying a foundation of Eternal Life in his Death, And rising and ascending, let
your hearts be raised after him. Now know him no more after the Flesh; but
consider him now as highly Exalted, Crowned with Glory and Honor, set down on
at the Right Hand of the Throne of the Majesty on high. Have high thoughts of
Christ, answerable to his Highness. Have Spiritual and Glorious thoughts of
Christ, answerable to his Spirituality and Glory; look on him as King of
Righteousness and King of Peace. According to that 2 Cor. 10.5. There must be a
casting down of imaginations, and every high thing, etc. that is, because of
Christ's visible and outward meaness and worthlesness there be many things in
the World that get above Christ, and have the upper-hand of Christ; Men's
imaginations and reasonings they are to throw down Christ, to depresse and
undervalue him, and to set up worldly greatness, honor, riches above Christ:
What is to be done now? You must lay aside carnal weapons, that is carnal
imaginations, and fleshly reasonings, which are as a high Wall standing up
betwixt Christ and the Soul, and keeping out the true Knowledge of Christ. Jer.
4.19. there is mention made of the Walls of the Heart; which the Septuagint
renders, the Senses. The Senses, the Carnal Imaginations, are a Wall which
hinders the letting in of Christ; now this Wall must be broken down that the
Spiritual Excellences of Christ may shine in upon the Soul; Math. 16.17. and
every Thought must be brought into Captivity to Christ; that is, all high
Thoughts you have of the Excellency of Worldly things must be made to stoop to
Christ; you must acknowledge him infinitely to surpass all in Excellency. Thus
let us look not on Christ according to the Flesh, in his outward meaness to
undervalue him.

2. Look not on Christ after the Flesh, that is, let not your apprehension of
any thing that is outward and carnal in Christ, be the ground of your esteem of
him: Let not this be the main motive to invite you to him. As to Instance, that
you may the better understand; it is said of Herod that he heard of the same of
Jesus, therefore when Luke 23.8. he was brought to him he was glad, being
desirous to see him, having heard many things of him. Christ had a great Fame
in the World; he was much talked off, so he desired to see him: many now hear
many things, Christ is Preached and much talked off, there goes a great Fame of
him; and this is some Men's ground of coming to hear the Word, and Profession
they make of being the Followers of Christ; This is to know and esteem Christ
after the Flesh; but now you should not do so; all this while you come not up
to see Christ in his Glory, and to behold him in his Chiefest Excellency. Herod
was (upon the Fame Christ had) desirous to see Christ, and exceeding glad when
he saw him; yet what follows? ver. 11. Herod with his Men of War set him at
naught and mocked him and Arrayed him in a gorgeous Robe, and sent him to
Pilate: If on this ground you esteem Christ, because he has a Fame in the
World, and many follow after him; if the World set against Christ, you will do
as Herod did, etc. you will set him at naught (...) he accounted him as no
body: so if your esteem of Christ be grounded upon his inferior Excellencies
only, and on some fleshly respects, you do not esteem Christ as any thing:
Others there were that followed Christ because of the Loaves, they knew Christ
according to the Flesh; and many do still follow him for advantage, to gain
Esteem and Credit, to be freed from Misery, that they may not go into
Condemnation: all this is to know Christ after the Flesh; and if so, when
occasion is given you will leave Christ, you will slight him and set him at
naught; nay you will turn Enemies to him and mock him: See then, that outward
and carnal respects be not the main Motive, inviting you to Christ, and raising
your esteem of him.

Quest. But you will say, How must we know him then? what is it that we must
look on, to raise our esteem of Christ into a transcendency?

Answ. Know him as Isaiah did, Chap. 9.6. To us a Child is born, to us a Son is
given, etc. or as the Wise Men; or as Peter, thou art the Son of God, the
Savior of the World, thou have the Words of Eternal ^ife. What Christ said,
was wanting in them that followed him because of the Loaves, let that be in
(...), Joh 6.26. Ye follow me because ye eat of the Loaves, not because of the
Miracle of the Loaves; thar is, you do not follow me because I am the Son of
God, sent into the World to save Sinners, which you should have been convinced
off by the Miracle of the Loaves; but you follow me for the advantage of eating
the Loaves: Thus you must know Christ, not after the Flesh only, not only as
having Flesh, and being Man; not only as you pereceive something in him to
satisfy your Carnal Desires, of being filled with temporal good things, or
f^^^d from Temporal and Eternal Evil^; but know him as the Son of God, and
Christ anointed of the Father, to be the Savior of the World. You will never
know Christ aright in his Glory, you will never fully resign up your selves to
him till you be convinced of this: O therefore re^ieve this Truth, that Christ
whom we Preach, is the Son of the Living God. Then you know that he is able to
save, and you will believe in him; then you know that he must be worshipped and
served by you, being the Great God, so you will obey him; then you will
apprehend greatest love in Christ, that being God he should die for you; then
you will love him, and your love will constrain you to obey him, and this is
totum hominis, the whole of a Man, the whole of a Christian Man, to believe in
him as the Son of God and Savior of Men, and to be constrained by Love to Obey
him. This is the second means.

3. Take heed of any conceits of a sufficiency of Knowledge. Many think they
know enough of Christ, as much as they need, and content themselves with what
they have; they hear not the Word, they apply not their Hearts, search not for
more Knowledge: If there be any of such an Opinion, I shall leave two places
for you to meditate on. 1 Cor. 8.2. You that think you know enough, know
nothing as you ought, etc. You that dream of a sufficiency of Knowledge that
you have, are like the hungry Man that dreams he eats, but waking he is empty:
You are most deficient, 1 Cor. 3.18. Become a Fool. Though never so wise in
regard of Worldly Wisdom, yet know your selves to be Fools in respect of the
Knowledge of Christ, that you do want, and this you must know that you may be
wise. Joh. 14.21.

4. If you have attained any measure of knowledge, you must follow on to know
the Lord, Hos. 6.3. follow on in Study, Prayer, Hearing, Meditating to get more
Knowledge. His going forth is prepared as the Morning; Christ does not reveal
himself all at once, but as at going forth of the morning-light; it is by
degrees; there is a dawning, and twilight, and then perfect light, when the Sun
goes forth in its might: so is the going forth of Christ, and so you must
follow on to know more still of Christ. You are not capable of receiving
perfect knowledge at once, John 16.12. I have many things to say, but you
cannot bear them now. Men are at first but Babes in Christ; they, we know,
increase in understanding, strength and stature by degrees; what you cannot
bear now you must learn another time; you must go from strength to strength,
from one degree of knowledge to another: you must follow on to know, you must
grow in Grace and in the Knowledge of Christ.

Use 3: Comfort to those that have gained the knowledge of Christ. I shall show,

1. Some Signs whereby to know this.

2. The grounds of comfort arising from thence.

1. The Signs, as,

1. If you know Christ in such a manner as that your Souls are raised up to an
esteem of him above any thing in the World: thus it must be, and this is the
least of Christ that a true Christian can have; he must love Christ more then
these, Esteem Christ more then Honors, Riches, etc. in some degree; otherwise
he has not the true Knowledge of Christ: He that loves Father or Mother more
then me is not worthy of me. The Young man being brought to the Trial which he
loved most, Christ or Riches, left Christ: hence it appears that he knew not
Christ aright, for there is no comparison betwixt Christ and Riches. He that
will nor forsake the World for Christ, is ignorant of Christ: he knows not the
worth of Christ, John 11.48, 49.

2. If the word that has been spoken unto you have been Spirit and Life; if
the Gospel has been the Power of God, to beget Faith in you, to embrace it,
and lay hold on Christ revealed in it, John 6.63. As when Christ said to
Lazarus, Come forth, his words were Spirit and Life to Lazarus; he comes
forth; so if the words of Christ in the Gospel, calling you to repent and to
believe the Gospel have been life in this regard, if that word, Come forth from
amongst them that are Sons of Belial have been life to you, then have you
gained this Knowledge. When Christ said to his Disciples follow me, they
followed him. O this has Christ said to you often; you have been called on
many times, have you left your Lusts to follow Christ? left the practice of Sin
to practice Holiness, have Christ's words been Spirit and Life? have they been
as the Seed that is cast into good ground, that lives, and grows, and brings
forth Fruit? Then may you comfortably assure your selves that you have gained
the Knowledge of Christ.

3. If you can rejoice in the knowledge of perfect Holiness, Righteousness, and
Justice of Christ, as well as the Merit, Grace, and Loving kindness of Christ:
as well in this, that he has no sin, and that he will not have sin to reign in
his Members, as in this, that sin was imputed to him, and that he imputes it
not to his Members. Many love the Knowledge of Grace, to hear of satisfaction
made, etc. but yet would continue in Sin. They love to hear of a Pardon that
might Privilege them to commit Sin: they would be freed from the malediction,
but not tied to direction of the Law. But if you know Christ aright you will
rejoice in him as pardoning Sin, and purging Sin; as in his freeing from the
condemnation of Sin, so in his condemning Sin in the Flesh; as in pardoning,
and exercising Loving kindness toward humbled Sinners, so in executing
Judgment on impenitent and hardened Sinners, Jer. 9.23, 24.

4. If the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, Math. 11.12. that is since
Christ Preached, and men knew him, there is a great slocking and conc^^^se of
People, as if men would take Heaven by force: the meaning is, Men will strive
to enter in at the straight Gate, they will follow hard, and press toward the
Mark, etc. they put on with Zeal, and Resolution in the way that leads to life:
They go to Sion with their faces thitherward: that is, they come to ordinances
with strong affections, as a hungry Man to a Feast: They run with patience the
Race set before them: this is an evidence of the true Knowledge of Christ.

2. Next I shall l^y down the grounds of consolation they have, who have
attained to the saving Knowledge of the Excellency of Christ.

1. You that have attained to Excellency of Knowledge of Christ shall have the
perfection of the Knowledge of Christ. He that knows in part shall know as he
is known: He that sees Christ darkly, as in a Glass shall see him face to face:
He that knows his back-parts shall know his fore-parts. This is evident from
that of Christ to the Woman of Sama^ta John 4.14. Whosoever shall drink of the
Water I shall give shall thirst no more: that is, shall not thirst after other
Waters; he shall not seek other comforts, he finds enough in Christ that knows
Christ aright, and can say as Peter, to whom els^ should I go? then have the
words of Eternal Life, he goes not to the creatures to suck comfort from them;
he shall thirst no more after other things. He shall thirst no more: that is,
he shall be filled with Christ; he shall have enough in Christ to satisfy him,
though as yet he has not; When I awake I shall be satisfied with thy likeness;
satisfied with the clear Vision and Knowledge of Chrest, so, as that he shall
desire to know nothing but Christ, and shall know as much of Christ as he can
desire, 1 John 3.2. Now we are the Sons of God, etc. and we shall see him as he
is: that is, now we see him darkly, then face to face, clearly, perfectly.
Christ now looks through lattess, Cant. 2.9. but Christ shall lay himself open
to our view: Then the Glory of Christ's Person shall be made visible to us;
then Christ in all his Glory shall appear, then the mystery of Christ shall be
made plain; then Christ who is altogether lovely shall be altogether known as
lovely; then there shall be perfect knowledge of that Love of his which now
passes knowledge; then Faith shall be swallowed up in Vision, Desire shall end
in perfect Delight; What comfort then may this afford to those that have in
some measure attained to the Knowledge of Christ, and thirst for more? you
shall have what, yea more than you thirst after.

2. There shall be wrought in you a perfect Conformity unto Christ in Glory;
this shall follow upon the perfecting of your Knowledge: If you behold as in a
glass the Glory of the Lord and are changed, etc. translated, etc. then much
more, seeing Face to Face, you shall be changed from Glory to Glory: that is,
Glory you shall have in some measure answerable to the Glory of Christ: The
Glory of the Members shall be in their measure proportioned to the Glory of the
head; this appears. 1 John 3.2. When he shall appear we shall be like him, for
we shall see him as he is: because we shall see him so, we shall be like him;
and what a glorious condition shall you be then in? Christ, as you have heard,
is a most glorious Person, therefore 'twill be your greatest Glory and
Happiness to be made like him.

3. You have reason to be strong in Faith, you know whom you have believed, to
whom you have committed your Souls for Salvation, and from whom it is you look
for Life and Immortallity, Glory, Honor; you know him to be the Son of God,
and so that he is able to keep what you commit to him; you know his
Righteousness, that it is not a Covering too narrow for a Man to wrap himself
in; but adequate to the breadth of all your Sins: you know him to be
Intercessor with the Father, in the bosom of the Father, nay one with the
Father; so that you need not to fear the wrath of God, nor to fly from him as a
Consuming Fire: you can with Moses go up to the top of the Mountain to talk
with God, when others may justly fear to touch the foot thereof, least they be
consumed: you need not fear the wrath of the Devil; you know one that has led
him captive, that is able to bind that strong Man, and has done it; you know
that there is a Virtue in Christ's Blood, which you know how to make use off,
and by it to overcome the Devil, who is the Accuser of the Brethren. Rev.
12.11. when he comes, and has great wrath; then a woe is denounced to the
Inhabitants of the Earth; but rejoice ye Heavens, etc. ver. 12. you have not
need to fear the wrath of Man; you know Christ who is able to turn the wrath of
Man to his own Glory, and to your Good. Isa. 43.1. etc. in a word, you have in
all your Distresses ground of strong Consolation, and may comfort your Souls as
Job did, Chap. 19.25. etc. you are assured of Safety and Salvation, therefore
be strong in Faith; let not your Hearts be moved at the apprehension of Danger;
hold you your Confidence steadfast to the end; let it be your care to keep a
good Conscience, to hold forth the Honor of Christ; and if your Hearts suggest
Dangers, answer your fears as Abraham did Isaac, the Lord will provide; Christ
will take care of your Safety.

4. You that know Christ are known of Christ, he knows you for his own; he owns
you, he appears for you, he knows your Souls in all your Adversities, and that
as a Father pittieth his Child in all his distresses, and will do his utmost to
relieve and ease it, Psalm. 31.7. I know my Sheep, and I am known of mine. Joh.
10.13, 14. noting his care of them: Gal. 4.9. Since ye know God, or rather are
known of God; those that know are known; as it is said, we love God because he
first loved us; so if we know Christ, he has first known us; if our Earthly
Friends forsake, or will not own you, as Job's, and David's, yet Christ will
not; he will not forget or forsake you: therefore you should be always ready to
own Christ; he knows you in your Sufferings; know you him in his Sufferings,
etc. and you need not to fear that dreadful Sentence of Christ, Depart from me,
I know you not; to all that now know not God, and that desire not to know him
so he shall say; but to you, Come ye Blessed, etc.

Doct. 2. The Principal study and care of a People, must be to know the Mystery
of the Cross of Christ.

This Point I shall endeavor to prove, and then to unfold the Mystery, and
show what it is you must labor to know of Christ Crucified, and so descend to
Application.

I. I shall prove it by these steps and degrees.

1. It Is not enough for a Christian to know the personal Excellencies of
Christ. For although if Christ were revealed in his Personal Excellencies of
Grace and Glory which follow upon the Hypostatical Union, this were enough to
allure the Heart unto Christ, to close in with him; for so he were a fit Object
for Men and Angels to embrace. Angels that are wholly clean and without Sin
would think it an Addition to their Happiness to have him for their Head and
Husband, which Happiness it is probable they have; but Men are guilty of Sin,
and they cannot draw near to Christ to take delight in his Personal
Excellencies except Sin be first done away: Christ as considered in his
Personal Exc^llencies, is not an Object ^^^ted so Sinners; wherefore it is not
enough so to know Christ. When Christ was transfigured in the Mount, Math. 17.
His Face shining as the Sun, and his Raiment as white as the Light; Peter
thought t^^n that they had seen enough of Christ, and seems to be contented
with this Representation of Christ's Glory, ver. 4. it is good to be here, let us
make Tabernacles, settle our abode; but Christ knew 'twas not good to abide
there; something more was to be known of him, so he leads them down from the
Mountain; they had not seen enough of Christ, they must know him in another
manner; therefore ver. 9. Christ says, tell the Vision to no Man, until the Son
of Man be risen again from the dead: Intimating that it was not enough to know
Christ in his Glory, but he must be known in his State of Humiliation; as
dying, etc. buried, and risen again: when the Apost^^s thought they had seen
enough of Christ in beholding his Personal Excellencies, Christ then leads them
to the Consideration of his Death; Christ must be known in his Personal
Excellencies, but that is not enough: we must look on him as dying, as clothed
with his Garments of blood, so he is a sit Object for Sinners.

The Prophets of old did not only represent him in his Glory, but as dying,
Isa. ^3.1, 2. Who is this that comes with dyed Garments from ^ozrah? glorious
in his Apparel, and (...) in his Ap^arel: This Christ himself in his Preaching
of himself, declares, Math. 16.34. From that time Jesus began to tell his
Disciples that he must suffer; this the Disciples were a long time Ignorant
off; and so long were very rude and ignorant indeed, and knew but little of the
Mystery of the Kingdom of God; although Peter could say in the name of the rest
of the Disciples, thou art Christ the Son of the Living God: yet here he was
Ignorant of this Mystery; and when Christ speaks of his Death, Peter rebukes
him, and says, far be it from thee, for which Christ called him Satan, and
said, thou savourest not the things of God: you know nothing of Christ aright,
unless you be acquainted with the Mysteries of his Death.

2. It Is not enough to know the History of Christ Crucified: it is not
sufficient to meditate and contemplate on the great injuries done by the Jews,
the grievousness of his sufferings, and the shame he was put to: this may move
the heart to a relenting and compassion to him, as it will also to read the
Stories of other Martyrs; it may move the heart to indignation against the Jews
for Crucifying of him, this may beget admiration of his noble and heroical
love, which men may think to be Grace: this is not enough. This seems to be the
fault which Christ reproved in those Women; W^ep not for me, but for your
selves and children, Luke 23.28. You weep for me only out of natural pity and
compassion; so indeed you may weep for your selves, and your own miseries; so
you may weep for your Children and their calamities; but you should not look on
my sufferings as such as your selves undergo, or your Children endure, you must
have more spiritual more raised thoughts of my sufferings; not weep at them but
rejoice in them, or weep for your Sins, but rejoice in my sufferings by which
your Sins are done away.

3. You must know the mystery of the Cross of Christ, that is, not only that he
dyed, but the ends for which he dyed, and the benefits thereof; that he dyed
for our offenses, Romans 4.25. That as Caiaphas Prophesied, Christ dying the
whole Nation did not perish, but some were saved by his death: Now that thus
you must look on Christ is evident, because thus Christ is the object of
justifying Faith. Christ in his Personal Excellency is not the object of
justifying Faith, but the formalis ratio, the proper respect and consideration
that makes Christ the object of Faith as justifying, is his dying for Sin, his
sheding his blood, that by it there might be the remission: therefore Christ is
a pleasing and grateful object to the Soul. Christ as humbling himself, and
becoming obedient to death is an object suited to a humble Soul: As the Brazen
Serpent was lifted up etc. so Christ on the Cross, John 3.14. so the Scripture
sets him forth, Rom 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiatian through
Faith in his Blood. Look on Christ as by his Blood there is a propitiation for
Sin: so that then our care must be to know Christ as Crucified. A humbled Soul
must have recourse to Christ, who is glorified and sits on the Right hand of
God, and yet to him as once upon the Cross:

2. Now that I may in some measure unfold the Mystery unto you, consider a
threefold Mystery of Wisdom, Love, and Virtue.

1. Of Wisdom, in these particulars.

1. Christ was delivered by the determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God,
for a most Glorious and Blessed end, that sinners in him might have the
forgiveness of sins, Act. 2.23. And he Blessed with all Spiritual Blessings, Ephesians.
1.3. Of Grace here in acceptance v. 5. and in receiving the Holy Spirit, in
the saving Graces and Workings of it, Act. 2.38. Repent and be Baptized in the
name of Christ, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost; And of Glory hereafter,
Heb. 2.10. He is the Captain of Salvation, by whom many Sons are brought to
Glory. This end see in Ephesians. 1.9, 10. that is, to make a perfect Reconciliation,
and to close up all breaches, betwixt God and the Elect: betwixt them and the
Creatures there was Enmity, even betwixt them and the good Angels. Christ was
sent that by him a Recapitulation might be made, that all might be gathered
under one head, i. e. Christ for the end etc. Isa. 42.1. so that in meditating
on the story of Christ Crucified, we must look back to the Eternal Counsel and
Decree of God, consider that everlasting Design and Plot that was laid therein;
the Covenant made betwixt God the Father and Christ.

2. See a Mystery of Wisdom in a sweet and admirable Conjunction of Justice and
Mercy; such a thing that if the Angels had laid their heads together and
studied to Eternity, to find out a way wherein Sinners should be saved, by the
Satisfaction of Justice, and yet by Free Grace, they could not have found any;
therefore the Angels desire to look into these things. 1 Pet. 1.12. Christ died
for our Offenses, the Son of God that was made Man, so made complete
satisfaction: we have a Righteousness by which we are Justified* yet Justified
freely by his Grace; see this Ephesians. 1.7. and Romans 3.24. and Psa. 85.10. where is
a Prophecy begun ver. 9. of a Spiritual Restoration from the miserable
condition a Man is in, by reason of Sin, unto a glorious Estate of Happiness;
of which the delivery from the Tyranny of Antiochus was a Type, which the
Prophet has respect to, as Interprete^s conceive; which is spoken of, Dan.
8.^4. Now in what way is it that Redemption is wrought out? that the Psalmist
shows ver. 10. Mercy and Truth are met together: Righteousness and Peace have
kissed each other.

3. See the Party offended upon the Cross satisfying for those Offenses which
were committed against himself; the great God that was wronged Righting
himself; him that was dishonored repairing his own Honor: This is a great
Mystery; behold him made Sin against whom Sin was committed: see him that was
the Just God to punish Sin, and will not clear the guilty, bearing the Griefs
and carrying the Sorrows of Sinners; him making his Soul an Offering for Sin
whose Heart was vexed and grieved by Sin. As God equal with the Father he was
the Party Offended: As God and Man he was Mediator, so he satisfies for the
Offense.

4. In that Men are Justified, Redeemed, and Saved by Christ's being Crucified
on the Cross, to which Crucifixion they set a helping hand; this is a Mystery,
that Men should be saved by the Death of Christ, which they were the cause of:
A Man could not have conceived this, that those might be Eternally saved by
Christ's Death, that did help to put him to death: and that that blood should
take away all guilt, the guilt whereof lies on Men. His Blood be on us, said
the Jews; that is, in the guilt of it; which surely was a most horrible Crime,
yet by that Blood they may be saved: there was a Virtue in that Blood to take
away the guilt of that Blood, and all other Sins from them; Is not this an
admirable Mystery? See it, Zach. 12.10. Revelat. 1.7. Act. 2.38, 39.

5. In that all the Elect suffered punishment of their Sins, and satisfied the
Justice of God in Christ's being fastened to the Cross; and so by Christ's once
offering of himself, are for ever perfected: Christ was a common Person: As in
Adam all die, all sinned, so in Christ the second Adam all suffered; the Sins
of all the Elect were laid on him, were imputed to him, and he satisfied for
them all: And so the Elect may reckon themselves to have suffered and
satisfied; according to that of the Apostle, Romans 6.10.11. In that he dyed, he
dyed unto Sin once, etc. likewise reckon you your selves to be dead indeed unto
Sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord: that place is meant
concerning mortification of Sin, and is to comfort Believers, in that the work
of Mortification is yet imperfect. This is true (as if the Apostle had said) if
you look on your selves, for the present in reality you are but imperfectly
mortified; but you may reckon your Selves to be perfectly mortified by being in
Christ your head, who was a common Person on the Cross; and you all were
reckoned to be in him; and you may (...) reason, or reckon your selves wholly
dead in and through Christ. Now as for Justification, that you may truly reckon
to be perfect and complete, your guilt is wholly taken off, and you acquitted
and discharged in Christ's dying.

2. Here is a mystery of Love, in the Crucifying of Christ. Infinite Love
appears.

1. Of the Father; as under the Cross of Christ is contained a Mystery of
Infinite Wisdom of the Father, which the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 1.8. In
Redemption by Christ he has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence, as
you have heard; so likewise under it is contained a Mystery of Infinite Love,
which in the next verse is called the Mystery of his Will, according to his
good Pleasure, which he purposed in himself: now this Mystery of his Will, was
the Infinite and Eternal Love of the Father, which was the only ground of the
gracious Purpose and Decree of his, to give his Son to suffer Death to make
satisfaction, to pay the price of Redemption, that so as it follows verse 10.
In the dispensation of the sulness of time, he might gather together in one all
things in Christ, etc. that is, that by Christ he might destroy the Enmity
which was betwixt God and the Elect; betwixt Good Angels and Sinful Men;
betwixt Innocent Creatures and Corrupt Man; that so a perfect Reconciliation
and Union might be made of Men Elect and of Holy Angels under one head, Christ:
This Love of the Father we have mentioned, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the World
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have Everlasting Life; that is to suffer Death for the World of the
Elect, 1 John 4.9. In this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because
God sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we might live by him, that
by his Death we might live. Romans 5.8. Herein God commended his Love, as if he
had said, here is a Mystery indeed, a glorious Mystery, a most high
commendation of Love; in that while we were yet Sinners Christ died for us.
This is a most sweet thing to contemplate on in the Cross of Christ; God gave
him to die for Sinners; yea for Enemies: this is a Mystery worth the searching
into; and in considering Christ Crucified, this you must labor to know.

2. Here Is the Mystery of the Love of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.14. the Apostle mentions
the Love of Christ was a constraining Love to him, which made him besides
himself in the opinion of Men; that is, so zealous to magnify and set forth the
Honor of Christ, that he was accounted for this as a Madman: But in what does
the love of Christ manifest it self? In this, that Christ died for those that
were dead, to raise them to life: What death were they under? A death of Sin,
Ephesians. 2.1, 2. in which Estate they lived to themselves, contrary to the will of
God; yet Christ died that they might live. Ephesians. 2.6. raised with Christ, and
made to set together in Heavenly Places; Well might this be a constraining love
to the Apostle. This see farther set forth. Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Husbands love your
Wives, as Christ loved his Church; How did he love? He gave himself for it,
that he might sanstify and cleanse it with the washing of Water by the word: by
washing of Water, that is, in Baptism, a Sign and Seal of washing by the blood
of Christ, and by the word, that is, of promise of free Justification by
Christ, and Sanctification to be received by Faith. This is more plainly
expressed, Heb. 13.12. Jesus also that he might sanctify the People with his own
Blood, suffered without the Gate. Here is Love indeed; Christ passing by, and
seeing us weltring in Blood, cast out to the loathing our Persons, having no
loveliness, nothing but Spots from the Crown of the Head, etc. and our defe^t
being to be cast into Hell; then Christ gave himself to redeem us by his own
Blood, to sanctify us by his Blood: Thus you see here is a Mystery of Infinite
Love, of Divine Grace: God herein appears to be rich in Mercy, and that great
Love wherewith he loved us, Ephesians. 2.4. is made manifest.

3. Herein is a Mystery of Virtue. There is an Infinite Virtue in the Blood of
Christ, which in general is set forth by the Apostle. 1 John. 1.7. The Blood of
Christ cleanses from all Sin; particularly, there is a Virtue going upward
expiating guilt, and a Virtue going downwards, taking away the guilt with the
Power and Pollution of Sin out of our Nature.

1. There is a Virtue going upward to the Father taking away the Guilt of Sin.

Quest. How could there be such an Infinite Power in the Blood of Christ?

Answ. Because it was the Blood of him that was God: the infiniteness and worth
of the Person did derive an infinite worth and value to the Blood of Christ;
thereby his Blood became an infinite price, proportionable to the guilt of Sin
which was Infinite. As Sin becomes of Infinite guilt, from the infiniteness of
the Object against whom it is committed; so Sin is an Infinite Evil, because
committed against God an Infinite Good: on the otherside, satisfaction for an
Offense has its efficacy and worth from the dignity of the Person satisfying;
so satisfaction made by Christ, the price of his Blood becomes of infinite
value, adequate to the guilt of Sin because the Person whose Blood was shed was
Infinite: You see how the Blood of Christ has such an Infinite Virtue.

For the proof of it that there is such a Virtue, see it Zach. 9.11. By the
Blood of the Covenant I have sent forth thy Prisoners; (that is, by the Blood
of Christ who is called the Covenant. Isa. 42.6. that is, as the Angel of the
Covenant, Mal. 3.1. as the following words, a Light to the People seems to
confirm;) from the Pit wherein is no water, that is, I have redeemed from under
the Babylonish Captivity, which was a Type of Spiritual Redemption, and
deliverance from that cursed estate a man is in by Sin. Now how is this, but by
satisfying the Justice of God? paying the price of Redemption unto God, by whom
a Sinner was cast into Prison, Luke 22.20. This Cup, that is, the Wine in this
Cup is the New Testament, or New Covenant, that is, a Seal of the Covenant in
my Blood, that is, which is established in my Blood, because thereby is the
Remission of Sins; and so a Person comes to have part in that Covenant. In this
see the Virtue of the Blood of Christ. In the Covenant lies all a Christians
Happiness; therein God is engaged to be his God, not to remember Sin any more,
but to be his God All sufficient. Now this is a Covenant in Blood, that is,
that is established and confirmed in the Blood of Christ; the Blood of Christ
that satisfied Justice; therein was a repairing of all that Injury which was
done to God by the Sins of the Faithful, so Justice has nothing to plead
against them: and the Riches of Grace which are contained in the New Covenant
are revealed to them, and of right do belong to them: So they come to lay claim
to the Love of God, and to that Eternal Inheritance prepared by Christ.

The Virtue of Christ's Blood as looking upwards is double. 1. Satisfying
Justice. 2. Purchasing and Meriting Everlasting Life.

There is Redemption from Misery, and the Purchasing an Inheritance; both these
are called Redemption. Ephesians. 1.1. In whom we have Redemption, that is, the
forgiveness of Sins. ver. 14. until the Redemption; that is, buying again and
putting into actual Possession of that Inheritance. The Blood of Christ redeems
out of Misery inflicted by reason of Sin, and redeems the Inheritance of
Eternal Life which was lost by Sin. Heb. 10.19. We have boldness to enter into
the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus; that is, by the Blood of Jesus the way to
Heaven is opened for us.

2. There is a Virtue going downwards taking away the Power and Pollution of
Sin out of the Nature, and the Guilt out of the Conscience:

1. The Guilt of Sin out of the Conscience. God Condemns a Sinner; the Law
condemns, and so his own Conscience when convinced of Sin condemns also. Now by
the Blood of Christ, God and the Law are satisfied, and so a Sinner is
acquitted in his own Conscience, he is freed from a eondemning Heart. 1 John
3.21. If our Heart condemns us not, etc. It Is the Application of the Blood of
Christ that frees from this condemning Heart, Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with
a true Heart, etc. having our Hearts sprinkled from an Evil Conscience; that is
with the blood of Christ; an Evil Conscience is an Accusing Conscience. The
sprinkling of the Blood of Christ, that is a fiducial Application of it to a
Convicted Conscience acquits it from all Accusations, Horrors, Fears, etc.

2. The Power and Pollution of Sin. Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the Blood of
Christ purge your Consciences from dead works to serve the living God. Which as
it notes the purging of the Conscience in regard of the guilt of dead works,
that is dead Services, dead Duties, performed by Men dead in Sin; so also it
implies a purging of the Heart from the power of Sin, as appears by that which
follows, to serve the Living God. From the Blood of Christ applied to the
Conscience, a Virtue goes forth to the abating of the strength of Corruption,
and enabling it to serve the living God. This see farther. Romans 6.2. How shall
we that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein; That is by Virtue of Christ's
Death, having therein a Fellowship with him the strength of Corruption comes to
be abated, ver. 6. Our old Man is crucified with Christ, etc.

Quest. How is it that there is such a Virtue in Christ's Death, and comes to
be conveyed to us.

Answ. 1. The proper and principal cause to which this work of mortification of
Sin is attributed, is the Spirit. Romans 8.13. If ye through the Spirit, etc. and
ver. 2. The Law of the Spirit of Life has made me free, etc. That is the power
and efficatious operation of the Spirit in me, etc.

2. The formal cause is our union with Christ, and planting into him. For
hereby the Spirit of Christ, the Righteousness, Grace, Merit, Life of Christ
becomes ours. Romans 6. If we have been planted together with him, etc.

The Death of Christ has a Virtue to destroy Sin, as it makes way for the
Spirit of Christ to enter into a Sinner to destroy Sin. The Death of Christ
opens a way to the Throne of Grace for a Sinner, he has boldness by the Blood
of Christ, etc. Because hereby Justice is satisfied, and a Sinner is brought
into favor with God; and by this taking away of the guilt of Sin, that which
did separate betwixt God and us is taken away; that which did hinder the Spirit
from entering into a Man is removed, and so as by the death of Christ a way is
made into Heaven for a Sinner; so by it a way is made for the Spirit of God
into the Heart to reign and rule there, Romans 6.6.

2. There is a Virtue of the Death of Christ going downward, which draws
Believers into a Fellowship with Christ in his Sufferings. The Death of Christ
is a cause of a double mortification. 1. Inward, that is of Sin. 2. Outward; in
regard of Sufferings called Deaths. 2 Cor, 11.23. This is by being planted with
Christ in the likeness of his Death: that is to dye to Sin as he died for Sin;
and to suffer Afflictions and Persecutions with him: Christ being the Head,
Believers his Members, by dying he draws his Members into a conformity with
himself to suffer with him; so that all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer Persecution: It Is as it were essential to them, their Suffering
arise from Christ's Death. Now although Sufferings in themselves be bitter, yet
considering them as arising from his Death, whence there is a Virtue that makes
us to have Fellowship with him in Sufferings; so is there sweetness in
Sufferings: In respect of this Paul did account all things Loss and Dung, so he
might win Christ, and be found in Christ, and know the Virtue of Christ's
Resurrection and Fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable unto his
Death. Phil. 3.10. Because he could look on his Sufferings as having in them
Fellowship with Christ's Sufferings, as being made conformable to Christ's
Death.

Now the comfort and sweetness arises from two Grounds.

1. The cause of Christ 's and his Members Sufferings; therein they have
Fellowship and Conformity: 'Twas for Christ's good works that the Jews
Persecuted him; so wicked men Persecute the Saints, because their own works are
evil, theirs good: It was because Christ preached and proclaimed himself to be
the Son of God and Redeemer that he was Persecuted; so because his Members
believe in Christ and obey him as the Son of God and Savior of the World,
because they set him up as Lord and King, wicked men oppose them: His
Accusation written on the Cross was, This is the King of the Jews; like unto
which is yours who follow him.

2. The end of Christ's and his Members Sufferings are the same, therein is a
Fellowship: Christ was made perfect through Sufferings. Heb. 2.10. And it as
well behooves these Sons he brings into Glory, as Christ himself to be made
perfect through Sufferings. Christ by suffering of Death was Crowned with Glory
and Honor; so are his Members: Suffering with him they Reign with him.

2. There is a Virtue in Christ's Death to overcome all his own and his
Churches Enemies.

1. Death the last Enemy is overcome by Death. Hos. 13.14. O Death I will be
thy Death; that was by dying. By his Death Believers are delivered from Death;
this is a Mystery indeed that Death overcomes Death.

2: The Devil, Heb. 2.14. By Death he overcame him that had the power of Death:
By that he overcame the Devil by which the Devil thought he had overcome him.
In overcoming he was overcome. This was by Death, he ransomed the Elect, paid
a price, and rising again actually put Satan to the worst.

Use. 1. Reproof. 1. Of those that are Enemies to the Cross of Christ; And that
1. In Opinion. Who look on Christ on the Cross as the Jews, a Malefactor, that
think he was justly hanged on the Cross; but it may be only those that are open
and professed Enemies of Christ are guilty of this, not any that bare the Name of
Christians; but many such to be reproved for slighting, and contemning the
Cross of Christ, like those Greeks. 1 Cor. 1.23. to whom the preaching of
Christ crucified was but foolishness. They are Ignorant of the Mystery; they
discern not the Wisdom of God, and the Love of Christ, the infinite Virtue of
his Death: But as those. Heb. 10.29. The Apostle speaks of, that count the
Blood of the Covenant, an unholy thing (...), common blood, no other than the
Blood of an ordinary man; not precious Blood, not Sin-destroying,
Satan-conquering, Soul-saving Blood, not Hell shutting, Heaven opening Blood: I
fear such are the private esteems and secret undervaluing of the Blood of
Christ by too many, whatever outward Profession they make.

And indeed it is too evident to be so.

1. When men esteem no more the Preaching of the Cross, etc. when that word by
which Christ Crucified is set forth, meets not with Faith to mix with it, with
obedient Hearts to submit to it: Certainly they are most unworthy of the great
benefits of the death of Christ, that have unworthy thoughts of Christ
crucified.

2. In Practice; some in a higher degree more open and manifest, as those the
Apostle complains of, Phil. 3.18. Many walk of whom I tell you weeping ('it is a
most sad thing which pierces a Godly Heart.) that they are Enemies to the Cross
of Christ, to Christ crucified. How are they described?

1* Whose God is their Belly. That is that make it all their business to
satisfy their fleshly desires, to take their fill of Earthly Pleasures, that
serve not the Lord Christ but their own Bellies. Romans 16.18. Such as are
Voluptuous Persons, that take care only to satisfy carnal Appetites; Drunkards
that abuse the Creature to riot and excess; these are like profane Esau, that
for one morsel of Meat sold his Birthright: So these for one Earthly Pleasure,
for wine or strong drink sell the precious Blood of Christ. If thou art such a
one, if a Drunkard, etc. I must tell thee thou art an Enemy to the Cross of
Christ.

2. Whose Glory is their shame; who glory in that which is their greatest
shame; that is, who boast themselves to do wickedly, are ashamed of the Cross
of Christ, but not ashamed to commit Sin. Some are grown to such a height in
Sinning, as to be shameless and Impudent, they are open and professed Enemies to
the Cross of Christ.

3. Who mind Earthly things. Those to whom earthly thing are great things, the
desire of their Souls, and delight of their Eye; that could be contented with
the World for their Portion, and would remain on this side Jordan; in a word,
who mind Earthly things more than Heavenly: Ah! wretched men are such, they are
Enemies to the Cross of Christ.

4. And lastly, Those that do in some sort prize the Blood of Christ, but not
according to its full value; that come not up to account it precious in all its
excellent Effects.. As such as prize it as crucifying wrath, taking away guilt,
overcoming Death and Hell, but not as purifying the Conscience, not as washing
from the Pollution of Sin, not as destroying the reigning power of Sin. You
must know that if you prize it not according to its full value, you do
absolutely undervalue it; you are Enemies to the Cross of Christ: and if so, I
must declare what the Scripture says, 1 Cor. 1.18. The Preaching of the Cross
is to them that perish Foolishness. If it be foolishness to you, it will be
your destruction: You perish that do not prize it. So for those that are
Enemies to the Cross of Christ in practice, of you the same Apostle says Phil.
3.19. Whose end is destruction.

Use 2. Exhort. 1. Be not ashamed of Christ Crucified.

1. To Believe in him. This should be no stumbling to your Faith to hinder your
believing, but the greatest motive to believe. This is the Formalis Ratio of
justfying Faith; Faith could not be justifying if it did not look on Christ as
dying; therefore be not ashamed of the Cross of Christ. If Christ had not
humbled himself and became obedient unto Death, we could not have been exalted;
'twas by his Death alone that we could be freed from Death.

2. Be not ashamed to profess Christ Crucified; to fall down and worship Christ
crucified. The four Beasts and twenty four Elders Rev. 5.8. fell down before
the Lamb, they consider him as a Lamb; that is as he was crucified; and for
this they account him worthy to receive Power, Honor, etc. and ver. 9, 12.

3. And do you really manifest this, by not being ashamed to suffer for Christ,
and to bear his Cross with him; if Christ call you to suffer, rejoice with the
Apostle Paul, to fill up that which is behind of the Sufferings of Christ. Col.
1 24. That is, those Sufferings of Christ which he is to suffer in Corp^re
Mystico, not in Corpore proprio. As there was a most glorious design which the
Father had laid to bring to pass by Christ's Death, so there is a most gracious
Design which God has to bring to pass by your Suffering for Christ: Hereby
Christ shall be magnified, by a glorious Testimony that you shall give to him,
sealing the Dignity, Honor, Truth, and Worth of Christ by your Suffering;
hereby others shall be won to Christ, and encouraged to believe in him and to
profess him; your Sufferings will be a support to others Faith; hereby your
Selves shall be much benefited; you have Fellowship with Christ in regard of
the cause, you suffer in an honorable cause as he did; and in regard of the
end etc,

And to stir you up to suffer, there can be no greater motive than love, and
the love of Christ is the greatest Love. Paul Preached Christ Crucified among
the Gentiles. Chap. 3.1. which wrought so much upon them, that their Hearts
were extraordinarily inflamed with love to Paul, Gal. 4.14, 15. That they
receive him as an Angel, and were ready to have plucked out their Eyes, etc.
how much more should our hearts be inflamed with love to Christ who was
crucified, who laid down his Life? Be content to lay aside your Honor for
Christ's sake; he emptied himself: Be contented to part with Riches; he became
poor, etc. Be content to lay down your lives; he was that good Shepherd that
laid down his Life, etc. and in washing his Disciples Feet, he sa d, I have
given you an Example, etc. so we may say of his Death, he gave an Example, etc.
1 Pet. 2.21. 1 John 3.16.

Quest. But how must we Suffer that we may have fellowship with Christ, and
follow him as our Example?

Answ. 1. There are some things in Christ's Sufferings, wherein we must not
imitate him. As he suffered to make satisfaction to God for the Offenses of
Men, his Death was a propitiatory Sacrifice, whereby the wrath of God toward
Sinners was appeased. You must not think that your Suffering for standing in
the Defense of Religion, and the Honor of God, shall be available for such an
end. To suffer Martyrdom for Christ cannot take away the guilt of the least
Sin; your own bloodshed in the cause of God cannot wash you from any Sin, this
cannot free you from Eternal Punishment: As the Apostle says concerning
Charity, 1 Cor. 13.3. Though I give my Body to be burned and have not Charity,
it profiteh me nothing; so it profits nothing as touching the taking away of
Sin, freeing from Condemnation for Sin, appeasing Wrath or satisfying Divine
Justice, that you suffer the loss of all things even of Life it self in
standing for the Honor of God. You must not think that this does merit the
least degree of Glory: If there be different degrees of Glory, that those that
suffer most, and do most for God, have most Glory; yet this is not because it is
merited, but because God freely bestows more on one then on another; however
the thing is not certain but controverted; so that in this Chris;t is not to be
imitated, we must not make our Sufferings our Saviors: Christ's Death cuts off
such a Fellowship; and this were a great injury done to Christ, to think our
Sufferings available to satisfy for our Sin, or merit favor.

2. Some things there are in his Sufferings imitable for us, wherein we must
have Fellowship, etc.

1. The Cause. 2. Mind, etc. his willingness before his Sufferings, and
patience under Suffering.

1. The Cause: therein have Fellowship with him, and herein I mean the Cause
why the Jews did put him to death, and not the reason and cause why God did
deliver him to death; for in that we have not fellowship with him; the reasons
why God gave his natural Son to suffer, and why he calls his adopted Son to
suffer, are not the same for the main: As Christ was given to be a surety for
Sin, not the Adopted, etc. but for the exercise of their Graces, for the trial
of Faith and Love, etc. for the purging of the filth of Sin out of the Nature,
not the guilt of Sin from the Person; yet Christ died to give testimony to that
great Truth, that he was the Son of God, and the Savior of the World; so the
sufferings of the Saints are to give testimony to the Truth: but when I say we
must have fellowship with Christ in the Cause, I mean in respect of Men that
were the Instruments of his Death; 'twas because he did all things well, he
made both the Deaf to hear, etc. because he came to destroy the works of the
Devil, and labored to turn Men from their Vanities, etc. because he Preached
himfelf to be the Son of God, etc. and that Men ought to come to him that they
might have life, because he said that God was his Father, making himself equal
with God, the Jews sought to kill him, Joh. 5.18. because he went about
continually to do good, therefore the Jews sought continually to do him
mischief, Joh. 10.32. Many good works have I showed you from my Father, for
which of these do you stone me? Christ's question implies an affirmation, that
it was for some of these that they did stone him; but the main cause of all
was, that he preached himself the King of the Jews; that was the question
Pilate asked of him, Math. 27.11. and was his accusation ver. 37. this did
inrage the wicked World, this provoked the Red Dragon to muster up his forces
against him, etc. Now be ready to suffer for Christ's sake, and see that we
give the Enemies of Christ no other occasion to speak evil of us, or do evil
against us but such as Christ gave them; take him for our pattern, believe in
Christ with our Hearts as the Son of God, and confess him with our Mouths, let
it be our care continually to go about doing good, to hold forth the Truth and
Honor of Christ; especially acknowledge him as King, and plead for his Power
and Prerogative; this is opposed, this is cried down by Men's words, this is
practiced down by their deeds, let it be our labor to set up Christ as King;
for this the People of God are now and shall be persecuted; hence comes Wars
and Fightings among us; because some will not have Christ to reign; now let us
be zealous in this cause, be content to suffer any thing, in contending to set
up Christ in his Throne. Christ himself suffered that he might be crowned with
Glory and Honor, therefore let us suffer any thing, so Christ may be crowned
among us with Glory and Honor, so he may rule in our Land, and be the L^ght
and Glory of it, and then we shall have fellowship, etc. so by our sufferings
Christ shall be exalted and we likewise.

2. Have the same mind in suffering as Christ had.

1. Be not high minded: the high minded man will not stoop to suffer; if Christ
had been high minded he had never been Crucified; so if you mind high things,
your own Honor and greatness, if you seek great things to your selves, and
worldly advantage, you will not suffer with Christ. Christ was humble and lowly
in his mind, before he was cast into a state of Humiliation; inwardly before
outwardly; in mind before in body, then was brought low by sufferings; now
faith the Apostle, Phil. 2.5. Let the same mind be in you as in Christ, be so
far from thinking your selves too good as not worthy to suffer, etc. Be
contented to descend from the heights you are in, to lay aside Honor, to
become of no reputation; and to empty your selves of your Estates, and become
obedient to the Death, if Christ lead you thereto, to give testimony to his
Truth.

2. Let there be a willingness before hand to endure the Cross, as Christ was:
Christ gave them power against him, that had no power but what was given; he
delivered himself up into their hands, and went up to the Passover, that the
Jews might have opportunity to take him; he laid down his Life, which notes his
willingness to suffer: herein we should be like him, be willing to suffer for
Christ, count it your Joy, etc. this is that our Savior requires when he says
take up the Cross; take it up in the thoughts of it, preparations for it, and
willingness to undergo it: God loves a cheerful giver and cheerful sufferer: as
God accepts the will for the deed, but not the deed where there is no will; so
God accepts willingness in suffering, not suffering without willingness; if you
suffer unwillingly in a good cause, then you suffer as evil doers; the go
heavily to sufferings, and well they may, they take no delight or joy in
suffering; and if you suffer unwillingly, what ever your cause be, if for well
doing, you suffer as evil doers, i. e. with such a mind as they suffer; but if
you suffer for well doing, and willingly, happy are ye, then you suffer as
Christ did.

3. Patience under the Cross; Christ had a patient mind under the Cross, Isa.
53.7. he was oppressed and opened not his mouth, etc. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Christ
suffered leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. How did he
suffer?

1. He did no Sin to deserve suffering; of that step you heard before.

2. When he was reviled he reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened
not; that is to revenge, etc. but committed himself to him that Judges
Righteously; an excellent pattern for us; be patient, not provoked to wrath, be
silent from threatenings and revilings, fiducially and contentedly commit our
selves to God that judges Righteously; with whom it is a righteous thing to
recompense tribulation, to them that trouble you, and to the troubled rest; so
then, because Christ suffered we must suffer, this is a call to us to follow
his steps; that is, as ver. 20. but if when you do well, and suffer for it, and
take it patiently, this is accepted with God.

2. This must be a ground to you of worshipping Christ and giving Honor and
Obedience to him: because he became obedient unto death; so we must become
obedient to him; to whom should we live but to him that died for us? Paul said
that the love of Christ did so restrain him, and whose should we be in service
and obedience but his that bought us? etc. Redeemed us with his own Blood, Heb.
5.8. Christ learned obedience by the things that he suffered; much more should
we learn obedience to him by the things he suffered for us, Ps. 116.8, 9. Thou
have redeemed my Soul from death, etc. what follows? I will walk before the
Lord in the Land of the Living; Christ for suffering of death was Crowned, etc.
and because he suffered we must serve him. Phil. 2.8, 9. He became obedient to
death, wherefore God also has highly exalted him, etc. Rev. 1.5, 6. and 5.9,
and 12. and let Christ have in Service what he has purchased and redeemed;
that is, the Soul from death: that Soul should bow to him; let him have
Soul-services; he redeemed our lives, let our lives be dedicated to him; no
less in thankfulness you can return to Christ than this; let him have that in
Service which he has redeemed from Slavery: Christ satisfying our Debts makes
us Debtors to him, Romans 8.12. as the Jews said, we have no King but Caesar, they
would acknowledge no other King than him that had made them Slaves: let us say,
we have no King but Christ, there is far more reason; he died to free us from
the worst slavery.

Quest. How must we worship?

Answ. We must worship Christ in Spirit and Truth, according to his own Laws
and Rules, in that way alone which himself prescribes.

1. According to his own Laws, etc. acknowledge no other Lord or Lawgiver in
matters of Religion: Lord of Faith, things to be believed; Lord of Worship,
things to be done: know that whatever is more than Christ commands is Sin:
whatever Ceremony to be used in a Religious way, as representing and signifying
some spiritual thing enjoined by Men, is Sin; that is forbid in the Second
Commandment, thou shall not make, etc. i. e. institute and appoint, or invent
to thy self any way of Worship, anything to be used Religiously, to set forth
any spiritual thing, but what God requires, that only thou shall observe;
herein is the great Apostasy of the Papists, and herein consisted that great
Sin of our Land, which above others has provoked God to bring this Judgment of
War; that Men's Laws have been Rules to us in matters of Religion, because Men
did make Ordinances, and enjoin Ceremonies to be used in a Religious way; here
was an Intrenching on Christ's Kingly Office, herein was Superstition,
Will Worship; and because the abomination of desolation was set up, therefore
we like Ephraim are smitten in Judgment, because we willingly followed after
their Commands, so are delivered into the hands of the Cruel; they that caused
us to err, are causes of woe: Now that we may be healed again, let us remember
whence we are fallen, and how fallen from the purity of Christ's worship, cast
off all mixtures in Religion: let not our Heart hang after the Onions and
Garlic of Egypt, after old Ceremonies; be longer the Servants of Men. when the
Corinthians (some of them) ascribed too much to Paul, too much to Apollo, Paul
reproves this, 1 Cor. 1.13. was Paul Crucified for you? intimating he must be
honored above all; his Doctrine, his Laws we must embrace and be led by in
matters of Religion, who was Crucified for us; that was Christ.

2. Do what Christ enjoins in Spirit and Truth, not feignedly but in truth, not
outwardly and bodily only, but spiritually; let the Service we perform be a
work of our Spirits; pray with the Spirit, hear with the Spirit; and when you
receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, It must be done with the Spirit;
and the work of the Spirit amidst all these Services, is especial in a work of
Faith, laying hold on what Christ promises, and conveys in and by his
Ordinances; that Grace, Life, and Strength, etc.

3. That which Christ's Crucifying especially calls for, and most nearly
answers it, is the Crucifying of our Flesh with the Affections and Lusts; that
our old Man be Crucified with Christ, Gal. 3.23. where you see, it is not enough
to have some Members cut off, to forsake some particular Sins; that may be, and
the body of Sin live still; but crucify the Flesh, crucify Original Corruption,
that is, that strength and power of Sin which is in the Heart.

Quest. Now wherein lies the strength of Sin?

Answ. In the Will: when Sin has the Will, so that what Sin a Man commits, the
bent of his will, the disposition of his Soul is to commit them; if a Man sins,
and wills to sin, then Sin reigns. Ephesians. 2.3. fulfilling the desires of the
Flesh, etc. Sin is a King, when the love of Sin constrains a Man to do
Iniquity, as on the other side Grace reigns, when the love of Christ
constrains, etc. then crucify the Flesh, so as that Sin may cease to reign; if
Sin have your Members sometimes, yet let it not have your Wills; let the
strength of all your Faculties be turned against Sin; of your Understandings to
search into the Evils of it, and to study out ways to overcome it; let your
wills be to be freed from it, your Affections turned all against it, to hate,
loath, etc. Sin cannot be wholly purged out in this life: the mortifying of Sin
is a work done by degrees; as those that are hanged on the Cross, dye by
degrees; it is a lingering Death, such is the death of Sin: that railing Thief on
the Cross you may take as an Emblem to set forth Sin in the Saints where it is
Crucified; his Body hanged on the Cross, his Hands nailed, he could not rob or
spoil any more; he ceased now to be a reigning Thief; but then his Tongue he
used in railing against Christ; so for those that are Members of Christ, their
old Man is fastened to the Cross, it cannot reign any longer; some life remains,
it may strugle with the renewed part, the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, it
would fain overcome; but the Spirit of God in the Soul keeps it under, and by
all the striving of Corruption again Grace, Corruption waxes weaker, till at
last it be wholly vanquished. Now this Effect you must labor to show forth of
the Death of Christ, and herein be conformed to him: Be planted together in the
likeness of his Death: now be freed from Sin, and be no longer Servants to it;
let it not reign: and as Christ being raised, dies no more, Death has no more
Dominion over him, Romans 6.9. so labor that Sin may in such manner be
Crucified, as that it never have dominion in you again.

4. Learn hence to make use of the Blood of Christ, for obtaining your
Justification and Peace with God. By the shedding of the Blood of Christ is
Remission of Sins: this is the Sacrifice that makes Atonement: Christ made
Peace by the Blood of this Cross. Labor for Faith to draw forth this Benefit
out of the Blood of Christ, to apply it to your selves, that it may be yours in
the Justifying Effect, that peaceable Fruit of it. Now what is required of us?

1. To believe the Virtue and Value of it, that it is sufficient to redeem a
Soul, and your Soul.

2. To believe God's offer and tender of it to you, and Christ's willingness to
give it to you, if you will but embrace it.

3. That you cast your Souls into that Sea of Blood, and rest only on the
Virtue of it for Life and Justification. Do thus, then rest confidently assured
of acceptance with God, you may go with boldness into the Holiest, etc:

Use 3. Trial. By this you may know what Knowledge you have in the Mystery of
the Cross of Christ, etc. viz. if you so know him as to believe in him, to
count his Blood most precious, to be resolved to obey and suffer for Christ in
a due manner, and draw Virtue from his Cross for Crucifying Sin, and conquering
all the World, and comforting your Hearts in all Tribulations and Deaths, this
is to know the Mystery of Christ Crucified. Gal. 6.14.

The End of the Second Discourse.
THE THIRD DISCORUSE. A Sermon concerning the Divine Authority of the Holy
Scriptures.
1 THESSALONIANS ij.xiij. For this cause also thank we GOD without ceasing,
because when ye received the word of God which you heard of us, ye received it
not as the word of Men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which
effectually works also in you that believe.


IN this Chapter you may observe two things. 1. Paul's Relation of the Story of
his Preaching the Gospel to the Thessalonians, which for the manner was done
with boldness, v. 2. and in sincerity, not in guile, v. 3. not out of
covetousness, v. 5. but his sincerity appeared in two things. 1. Because his
aim was to please God, v. 4. as pleasing God. A service is never pleasing to
God, unless it be our aim and desire above all to please him. 2. In his most
affectionate desire of the Thessalonians, 7.8. that is, that they might be won
to Christ and be saved. Aiming at pleasing God, and a desire to win Souls to
God, are always joined together. Remember these two marks of sincerity.

2. The success of his Preaching the Gospel, the good it wrought, for which he
blesses God.

In the Text observe,

1. The Apostles Thankfulness and Praise offered up unto God: He does not
Sacrifice to his own Net, but casts in his Net to catch Souls for Christ, and
blesses God for what is done by him. The work is only God's, to make his word
effectual, and all the Glory must be his. For this cause thank we God.

2. The matter of his Thanksgiving, and the ground of his praise. Because when
ye received the word of God, ye received as 'twas in Truth, i. e. as it ought
to be received. And therein observe further.

1, The Divine Authority of the word asserted, As it is in Truth the word of
God.

2. The manner how it must be received by men: As the word of God himself.

3. The way in which it comes to work effectually; that is, by believing it.

Doct. The word contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament, is in
Truth the word of God: This is the first Stone that must be laid when you
begin the work of saving your Souls; this is the Foundation of Religion; our
Faith, our Hope, our Profession of Religion is all vain, unless this Principle
be rooted in our Hearts, Heb. 5.12. I may say of some of you as the Apostle of
some of them, Ye have need that one teach you which be the first Principles of
the Oracles of God. Now this is one of the first of those first Principles:
which that you may be instructed in. Four Truths are to be shown.

Truth 1. That word which is held forth as God's, is so in Truth. It has God
for its Author. And if you ask as Christ concerning the Coin, whose Image and
Superscription has it, the Answer is, God's, give then to God the things that
are God's. You must not come with the Devil's Question, no not in your hearts,
yea, has God said it? But be like the Thessalonians here, etc.

That there is a God that made the World and and all Creatures, I hope is
certain to you; and that this God is to be worshipped: There was a Law written
in man's heart, which did teach him how God was to be worshipped: but Sin has
almost blotted out this Law, so that there remains but here and there a
Character of it, and impossible it is that thereby we should come to a saving
knowledge of the mind of God. It Is with us in respect of the things of God as
with the Blind Man, Mar. 8.24. Christ put his hands upon him and asked if he saw
ought: I see Men at Trees walking: So we in our natural condition, we see God
as Man, and as Trees, and so fall to such gross Idolatries to worship stocks:
we look on evil as good, on good as evil. Now as Christ did put his hands the
second time on the Blind Man, and then he saw clearly; so God must give his Law
the second time, and give us Eyes the second time, and restore a divine and
spiritual Light to us; then we shall see the things of God clearly. The former
of these he has done, he lest his will upon Record, in the word, which in
truth is his. The latter we must desire him to do, if he has not done it
already; and as a means to further this, I shall endeavor to prove it to you.
And here take Notice of three things as necessary to establish you in this
Truth.

1. There is the Spirit in Scripture giving Testimony to it, as Christ says,
Though I bear witness of my self, it is true, John 8.14. So the Spirit in
Scripture giving witness to it self, is true, John 3:33, 34. Faith receives
that Testimony, 2 Timothy 3.16. All Sc^ipture, etc. 2. Pet. 1.21. Holy Men speak,
etc.

Truth 2. There are Arguments to be drawn from the word it self to Evidence the
Divine Authority.

As 1. The Power and Efficacy of the word. The word is quick and powerful, etc.
Heb. 4.12. There is a twofold word of God.

1. There is the Eternally begotten word of God, that is, the Second Person,
John 1.1. this is most Powerful, Omnipotent; because he is God: All the great
works of God were done by this word, v. 3. All things were made by him. He is
called the Word, because begotten of the Divine understanding beholding the
Divine Essence: And as a word does express, and is the Image, the Conceit of
the mind, so the Son is the express Image of the Father. Now some understand
that place of this word.

2. There is the written word of God, which may be called the word of the word
of God. Christ is the word of the Father. This is the word of Christ, Col.
3.16. He is the great Prophet that revealed this word. Now as Christ is called
the Power of God, because by him all things were made, so this word is the
power of Christ; it is a powerful Instrument in his hand, whereby he does all
great works, Romans 1.16. destroying Satan's Kingdom, and setting up his own
Kingdom, converting Souls, etc* and in this respect it is said to be quick and
powerful, etc. by this power Christ overcame the Devil, Math. 4.4, 7. 'Its
written; now the power of the word is seen.

1. In conviction of the Conscience, a wing and restraining men's Spirits: How
many proud Hearts have been made to stoop and fall down before the power of the
word, and to stand trembling before it, as Act. 24.25. Felix trembled and said
go thy way for this time, etc. he could not stand before the power of the word;
and experience tells us what a power the word has in awakning sleepy
Consciences, in pricking Men at the Heart, that they know not what to do: in
wounding Men's Spirits in such a manner, as that the wise man says of it, a
wounded Spirit who can bear? so as that the most exquisite torments of the body
are not to be compared with it; the scorching of Fire, the dividing betwixt the
Joints and Marrow, yea Death it self is nothing to it: for would not a wounded
Conscience choose Death to be freed from the torment thereof? what a power is
it that the word has? when Men have gone on in Sin and taken great pleasure in
it, and when they hear what the word says, that such must be damned, banished
from the presence of God, and be everlastingly tormented with Devils; and that
this that the word speaks, should strike such unspeakable terror to the Heart
of Man; what does this argue but that the word is powerful? Joh 18.6. as Christ
spoke but a word, and his Enemies that came to take him fell back; so that Men's
proud and stubborn hearts should fall down before the word, and are made to say
as the Devils why art thou come to torment us? this shows that there is an
Almighty God speaking in the word: and this f^^ther; That some Men yet in a
natural condition, who love Sin as their own Souls, should not dare to commit
some Sins because the word pronounces Judgment; and that Men that hate
holiness, (as it is evident that many do) yet out of fear of Judgments denounced
in the word, should be brought to make some Profession of Holiness* that as the
unclean Spirit fell down and confessed Christ to be the Son of God; so Men of
unclean Hearts not renewed, are forced to confess the word is of God.

2. In the Conversion of Sinners: I may say concerning the Word as Christ in
his Message to John, The Dead are raised, the Deaf hear, the Dumb speak, and t^
the Poor the G^spel is Preached: that a word preached should do this, shows it
to be the word of God: so Men that are dead in Trespasses and Sins are raised
by it, the word does bore some Men's Ears and make them hearken and obey it.
Consider, that Men that take such great delight in Sin, (as we all do by
Nature) working uncleaness with greediness, going to it as an hungry Man to his
Meals, ready to pine away for the pleasures of Sin, and be discontent when we
cannot satisfy our Lusts, as it was with Ammnon. Now that any of us, because
the word says, cease to do Evil, Sin no more, should loath what we so dearly
loved, and that our hatred of Sin should be greater than our love was to it;
and it may be some can tell the time, and remember the word that wrought such a
mighty change: what is to be concluded hence, but that this is none other but
the word of God?

Again, we know how we love our selves by nature, even so as that self-love is
the supreme Law with corrupt Nature; now that such an one should (because the
word says if any Man will be my Disciple let him deny himself,) cast off
self-love, and self-respects, and sacrifice or give himself up to Christ, and
be his only, and prize the Glory of God more than his own good, yea choose to
undergo the greatest Evils rather than dishonor God, this shows the invincible
power of the word.

Again, if you have any knowledge of your selves, you know what bitter enmity
there is in our natures against holiness; now, that because the word commends
holiness, any of us should come to delight in it; this likewise adds a Seal for
the confirmation of this Truth, that the word is in truth Gods word.

Again you know how we naturally love the World, even so much that some can
even in these plundering times, think it better to loose our Lives than our
Goods; now that any should despise the world for Christ's sake, and esteem his
Reproaches better Riches, only because the word does commend Christ above the
World, and propose him as the best Good: What does this argue but a divine
efficacy of the word, and the power of a God, making use of his word as an
instrument of his own to bring to pass such mighty works?

3. In confounding Christ 's Enemies, Psa. 8.2. Out of the mouths of Babes have
thou ordained strength, to st^ll the Enemy: this strength of mouth ^ Prayer,
which is grounded on the word, and preaching: when men come with revengeful
Spirits, and think to swallow up the People of God, the word shall stop and
still them; the word does gather Men together and stir them up to fight against
Antichrist, Rev. 16 16. and Rev. 17.16. The ten horns shall hate the Whore,
etc. why? the word shall discover her: and hence it is said. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. That
Man of Sin shall be revealed etc. he shall destroy him with the Sword of his
M^uth, and brightness of his coming. Dan. 2.34. A stone cut out of the Mountain
without Hands, breaks the Feet of the Image, and that shall overcome the great
Roman Monarchy: What is this stone, etc.? a poor, weak, despised People of God,
called by the word, believing the same, and walking by it; these shall overcome
all Antichristian powers, and as the worm Jacob, thresh the Mountains.

Use. To make some application of this by the way. Is there such a power in the
word? and may that be truly said of the word, which is falsely of Simon Magus,
it is the great Power of God?

1. Then take heed of despising it, Heb. 12.25. see that ye despise not, look
well to it; if you despise the word, you despise the Power and Authority of God
which is in it, and which shall be manifested by it, either in Conversion or
Confusion; either in unspeakable Terror or Consolation; either it shall be the
power of God to save you, and then you must believe it, and receive it with all
readiness; or to condemn you if you despise it: if it do not now work
effectually in you, to turn you from Sin into the obedience thereof, then it
shall Judge you in the last day* now you may hear it speaking comfortably to
you, bringing the glad Tidings to your Souls of good things; of a Savior that
is offered to you, a Pardon proclaimed, Heaven opened to Men that are shut up
under Sin and Wrath, that is, if you will now suffer your Consciences to be
awakned, to see what condition you are in, but if it be not hearkened to, it
shall speak terribly to you, and then you shall not sleep when it is spoken, you
shall not sit carelessly under it as you do now; but then you shall know the
Terrors of the Lord, you shall know the power of Divine Wrath; to prevent
which, you should desire to feel the exceeding greatness of his Power in
creating Faith in you, and the length and breadth of his Love which is revealed
therein: so when the word is spoken to you, let me exhort you as the Prophet
Jer. 13.15. Learn, be not proud the Lord has spoken. Act. 13.41 Behold ye
Despisers and wonder, I Will work that you will not believe: If you will not
believe what I have said in the Word, Precepts and Promises, such Judgments
shall be brought on you which you would not before believe.

2. Believe the Word, rest on it; be strong in Faith: your Faith shall not be
in vain, you rest not then on a broken reed, but on the word of the great God,
on the great Power of that God. The Power of God shall bring to pass whatever
the word has said, if you can believe: Whatever ye shall ask, believe ye shall
receive it and ye shall receive it; it is the word of God. I will never fail
thee nor forsake thee; Believe and the Power of God shall make it good, John
3.36. He that believes on the Son has everlasting Life. If any drink of the
Waters I shall give, when thou passest through the Waters I will be with thee,
and through the Fires, etc. Isa. 43.2. Whoever shall gather together against
thee shall fall, etc. Rest now on these Promises, the Power of God shall make
them good. How much comfort do we loose; what weaknesses and failings are we
subject to; how much Sin do we fall into; and how much sorrow do we create to
our selves, and all for want of resting on the Divine Power and Efficacy of the
word. So say to Unbelief, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me;
the greatest Enemy to Peace and Holiness: Hereby it is that we savor not the
things of God, his precious word; but the things that be of Men.

Arg. 2. It Is drawn from the Holiness of the Word: Holiness consists in a
conformity to the will of God, and giving Glory to him: This is a Principle
ingrafted in Man's heart, That God is to be worshipped, and that all Glory must
be given to him, and that his Will is the Supreme Law: now in the word is the
will of God perfectly revealed. The Moral Law requires that which none can
deny, but it is most just and equal that it should be done. In the Law of Nature
we Sinners could never have read the will of God; but he having given the Moral
Law which is nothing but the Law of Nature; so much is lest of the Law of
Nature, that there is none but in their Judgments must needs be convinced, that
we are bound in Conscience to obey it: so that the word gives us a perfect rule
of Holiness, it shows what God is, it advances him infinitely above all things;
which we must set to our Seals should be so: it says he is God, and there is
none besides him; that of him are all things; that he is the chief good, and
our happiness stands in enjoying him, and in his favor is our life. And it
shows that he must be worshipped with our whole selves, Soul and Body; that it
is the worship of the Heart and Spirit he specially requires, i. e. that we
fear him and love him, and put our trust in him: it shows the vanity of the
Creature, and infinite perfection of God; it discovers the Evil of Sin, and the
Beauty of Holiness, it is a Creature-emptying, and God-advancing word: Whereas
in other Doctrines and Religions besides the word, it is otherwise; as in Popery
and Popish Traditions; there is much Ceremony but little Substance; outward,
pompous and bodily service, little or none of the heart: The honor that is due
to God, is given to Saints; Idols are worshipped instead of God. And in the
Turkish Alcoran, happiness is placed in outward pleasures and carnal delights.
Now it is far otherwise in the Scriptures; In a word, these three things well
weighed, if we can judge of any thing in matters of Religion, viz. That the
Scripture still gives all Glory to God, and places all Happiness in God, and
that it sets forth conformity to God, and communion with God as our perfection,
and also shows an exact way for attaining to both; the Law as a rule for
conformity, and Christ as the way to communion with God; these things being
seriously considered by us, would amount to a demonstrative and most convincing
Argument, That this is the very word of God.

Use. This may show us that if we would be Holy we must look to the word, and
take that for our rule. If we would Glorify God, and be Glorified by God, Study
the word, and if we would worship God aright we must take the word for our
rule: Evermore to the Law and Testimony, Isa. 8.20. if you speak not, and walk
not according to this rule, it is because there is no light in you. If the
Custom and Tradition of men prevail more then the word, it is because you are
ignorant of the holiness and perfection of the word.

Arg. 3. Is drawn from the fulfilling of Prophecies and Promises. Prophecies of
the Old Testament exactly fulfilled in the New. As those great Prophecies of
Christ, concerning which we often find this or that was said or done, That it
might be fulfilled which was spoke by the Prophets, Math. 1.22.2.15. -- 8.17.
-- 12.17. -- 13.35. -- 21.4. -- 27 35. Mark 14.49. -- 15.28. Luke 4.21. John
12.38. -- 13.18.17.12. And many Prophecies of the word have been fulfilled, as
that which is spoken of the Beast, Rev. 13. having seven Heads and ten Horns,
and another v. 11. a Beast having two Horns like a Lamb, which set forth the
Civil and Ecclesiastical Roman Empire; and when the Pope got both into his
hands, he was both these Beasts, and that Babylon spoken of is Rome, for that
is the only City that has reigned over the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17.18.
Those that will Study the Revelations, and observe the workings of God's
Providence, shall see some of those Prophecies now fulfilling.

And so for Promises. Some there are that can say, God has been as good to
them as his word to them: he has said, Call on me on the time of trouble, I
will hear: some do know that God is a a God hearing Prayers: Christ says, Come
to me, etc. some have come to Christ and been refreshed by him; and some having
had unspeakable Terrors, yet thus have been filled with as great Consolations.

Use. This should be a means to strengthen our Faith in the word; know
assuredly, that as Paul said, Act. 27.25. it shall be even as he has said; it
shall be to those that fear him and trust in him as he has promised. The
People of God heretofore have so found, and acknowledged, 1 Kin. 8.56. Blessed
be the Lord that has given rest to his People, according to all that he has
promised; there has not failed one word of all his good promises; and many of
us have had sweet experience of Promises being fulfilled, which is the
sweetness of a Mercy, to see it first in a promise by Faith, and then to
receive it out of the bowels of the promise: now this should be food to nourish
our Faith, Psa. 74.14. Thou breakest the Heads of Leviathan in pieces; that is,
destroyed Pharaoh and his great Host in the Sea, and gave him to be Meat for
the People inhabiting the Wilderness, that is, to be meat for Faith; so should
those promises that God has fulfilled be to us: God has broken the heads of
many Leviathans, some inward Corruptions are subdued, Armies of the ungodly are
many times scattered; this should be food for our Faith: why should we doubt of
the fulfilling any promise, when God has begun to fulfill some? this is our
Manna. Bread from Heaven to sustain us whilst we inhabit the Wilderness.

Truth 3. To make all these Arguments demonstrative and convincing is required
an inward work of the Spirit upon the Heart: to this external light of
Arguments must be added the internal light of the Spirit; For the things of God
knows no Man, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. so says Christ to Laodicea,
that she might see, I counsel thee to buy of me Eye Salve, that is, beg of me
my Spirit. The Spirit inwardly inlight^ing the Heart is the Eye Salve, Rev
3.18. 1 John 2.27. the anointing which you have received of him, abides in you
and teaches you all things, and is Truth: The anointing; that is, the Spirit
wherewith you are anointed: He is Truth, so as that he cannot lie: and he must
give Testimony to the Truth in our Hearts, else we shall not believe it by a
divine Faith; and he is Truth, so as that it is an Office he has undertaken in
the New Covenant to lead into all Truth; as he was promised by Christ, Joh.
16.13. The Spirit of Truth will guide you into all Truth. Joh. 15.26. The
Spirit of Truth shall testify of me; and so of the Scripture he shall say to
the Soul, that Christ who is spoken of in the Gospel, is the Son of God? that
the Scripture is the word of God: he shall ascertain the Heart of this, and
this two ways.

1. By a moral work, as the opening and expounding the word in the Ministry of
it by exhortations, persuasions. Therein Truth is held forth and propounded to
be embraced, and believed as the word of God; and this work of God may be
resisted, as the Jews did resist the Holy Ghost. Act. 7.51.

2. By a Physical work upon the heart, working a change in the Faculty,
renewing us in the Spirit of our Minds, bringing in a spiritual light into the
Soul, to enable it to discern the things of God* when this is done, then we
shall know the word of God with as great, yea greater certainty than that the
Sun shines when we see it; for certainty of Faith is greater than certainty of
Sense. Then we shall see the Authority of God in his word: when thus we have
the Spirit of Truth, then shall we receive the word as it is in Truth the word
of God; so that we may attain the full assurance of Faith in this particular,
we must wait for the promise of the Holy Ghost, as Act. 1.4, 14. we cannot
believe the word as it is outwardly propounded to us, unless it be inwardly
revealed to our Hearts: now the Spirit of Truth who of necessity must be
received by us before we can believe, is the Spirit of Promise, Ephesians. 1.13. that
is a Spirit promised: ask him so, and he shall be given to us.

2. The knowledge of the Scripture to be the word of God containing the
Mysteries of Salvation, is necessary to Salvation, Joh. 17.3. This is Life
Eternal to know God and Christ; the distinct knowledge of God as Creator, as
Omnipotent, most holy is necessary; and as most good, and that Man's happiness
consists in the enjoyment of God, and that Man is fallen from God, and has
lost his Image in Holiness, and his presence which is Life: this is evident
that we in our natural condition are alienated from the life of God, and are
ignorant of him. Ephesians. 4.18. now the Scripture makes God known, and shows how we
fell from G^d; and the principal scope of it is to discover Christ to the World
as a Savior and Mediator, by whom Sinners are reconciled to God, and restored
to Communion with him: now then that we may be saved, its necessary that we
search the Scriptures, for these only are able to make us wi^e to Salvation; so
we shall know God, our Selves, and a Savior. 2 Timothy 3.16. there is knowledge
of God by his Creatures, (...), are known by the things that are made, Romans
1.2^. and there is Scripture-knowledge of God; there God is known in his Son,
the fullness of the Godhead is in him, he is the express Image of the Father.

3. The knowledge of what the Scripture reveals is sufficient to Salvation;
this is enough to make the Man of God perfect, there is no need of Men's
additions; there is nothing more that is needful to be done; this furnishes to
all good works, nothing more to be believed. Joh. 20.31. Many more Signs Jesus
did, but these are written that ye might believe: what the Scripture reveals is
Gold and Silver, fit to help toward raising up a spirit^al building; what is
added by Men is Wood, Hay, and Stubble. 1 Cor. 3.12. we say in matters that
appertain to the worship of God, and our Salvation, as our Savior of
Communication, Math. 5.37. let your Communication be yea, yea, nay, nay; for
whatever is more than these comes of Evil; so whatever more than the word is
urged or practiced in matters of Religion, comes of Evil, i. e. from the Devil
principally, and from our own corrupt and proud hearts immediately, as if they
were wiser than God, and could teach him how he may be served and we saved: God
has sealed up his word in such a manner, as that no addition may be made to
it. See the Law, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add to the word which I command, nor
dimin^sh from it: by that the Jewish Talmud is excluded; and for Prophets, we
may observe that the Gospel is begun with what the Prophets are concluded: as
Malachy the last Prophet concludes Mal. 4.5. with this, Behold I will send you
Elija the Prophet, and Mark begins with this, Chap. 1.1, 2. The beginning of
the Gospel as it is written in the Prophets, behold I send my M ssenger. By
this those Books justly called Apocrypha are excluded; and the last book of the
New Testament. Rev. 22.18. is concluded thus* Whoever shall add unto these
things, God shall add unto him the Plagues that are written therein: Consider
two things; first, that there must be no detracting, and secondly no adding,
etc.

4. The Scripture is clear in those things which are absolutely necessary to
Salvation, it shows plainly what is to be believed. Three Persons, One God:
what is to be done, the word is nigh in thy mouth and in thy heart; if thou
shall believe in thine heart, and confess with thy mouth, the Lord Jesus, thou
shall be saved; that word does most plainly deliver things necessary to
Salvation: true indeed, some things are hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16. yet
enough to Salvation is plainly discovered: so that if any do perish through
Ignorance, their Ignorance shall not excuse them; the Scripture is clear in
this, that we are lost and undone Creatures by nature, that all we like Sheep
have gone astray, and that Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners;
and that only such as believe in him, renouncing their own Righteousness or
abilities, to do any thing in the business of their Salvation; I say such only
shall not perish, but have everlasting life: the Scripture is plain in this,
that only Saints shall see God; that no Whoremongers, etc. shall see God: If
Persons be of very weak capacities, yet such is the plainess and clearness of
the Scriptures, in things that are absolutely necessary, that they may
understand them: here is milk for Babes, as well as stronger meats for more
experienced Christians. As there are great Depths for Elephans to swim, so
shallows for Lambs to wade through: as there are some things hard to be
understood, which the unlearned do wrest, etc. so there others easy to be
understood, which the unlearned may follow to their Salvation; then let none
plead their want of parts as a ground of their neglect of the word, as if it
were only for men of Learning to search into it; but as all have Souls to save,
so let all that have the use of Understanding and Reason, search the word that
they may be saved; and great encouragement there is, because if Men are willing
to learn and know the things of their Salvation, and of Christ's Kingdom, they
have a Promise from God to be taught; Joh. 6.45. Hebr. 8.10. we know God did
enable Children to sing Hosanna to Christ, Math. 2^. Isa. 32.4. The heart of
the rash inconsiderate Men shall understand knowledge, and the Tongue of the
Stammerer shall be ready to speak plainly; they shall be all taught of God that
are willing to learn of God; and the Spirit that leads into all truth is a
Spirit of Promise.

Use first. Reproof of two sorts.

1. Those that receive not the word of God with so much respect as the word of
Man: And it is to be observed for the most part, that if the word be not
received with the respect that is due to the word of God, then it is received
with less respect than is due to the word of Man. If the word be not embraced
as God's, it is despised more than Man's. If Men love it not above any word,
they hate it more than any word; and what is the reason?

1. Because it is a great Enemy to what Men do naturally love as their own
Souls. If they receive not the word so as above all to desire to yield
obedience to it, then they hate it; for it reproves for an Herodias, it forbids
that which is Men's great delight to follow; it contemns the World, and it
condemns Sinners: Hence if the word be not embraced as the word of God, with
that Fear, and Reverence that is due to it, it is hated and despised more than
the word of Man. Thus it is with all those that take delight in Sin, and
greedily hunt after the things of the World, and care for nothing but to
satisfy their own Lusts and desires; they cannot but hate the Light because
their deeds are evil. There is hardly a medium betwixt these two, a receiving
of, and submitting to the whole word as God's, and a hatred of it in some parts
at least: every Sinner has such a disposition to the word, as Ahab to
Michaiah, I hate him because he Prophecies not good to me; so the word gives
not a tolleration to commit Sin, which is only good in a natural Man's Eye, and
therefore it is hated.

2. Pride is another reason: That which is generally condemned to be the
Devil's first Sin, is our great Sin, Pride; the Devil thought himself too high
to submit, so he rebelled against God; that he might Rule, he will uphold and
maintain a Kingdom against God, rather than submit to God, though he know that
he shall be destroyed for it in the end: now there is this devilish disposition
in every one of our hearts; the pride of them lifts us up against God; we of
our selves choose to be our own Lords, though we destroy our selves hereby,
rather than Christ rule over us that we might be saved: Who is Lord over us is
a question arising from that proud disposition of our Hearts; the proud Men in
Jeremiah said, as for the word thou have spoken in the Name of the Lord, we
will not do it; this we all do, if God do reveal his word, and not work by his
Spirit.

2. Those are to be reproved that receive it but as the word of Man: some do in
a sort receive the word, and think that they receive it aright; yet it is but as
the word of Man, as

1. When they have nothing else to ground their Faith upon then humane
Testimony; if the should be asked, why they believe the word to be God's? can
give no other reason, then that their Fathers and Mothers said so; and it is
generally so believed and embraced: now those that believe it because others
believe it, receive it only as the word of Man; so the Papists receive it as
the word of Men; and all that have no testimony from the Spirit, no true work
on their hearts, etc.

2. Those that perform Duties that are required in the word to be seen of Men;
as did the Pharisees, they Fasted, Prayed, and gave Alms; were zealous of the
Law, all to be seen of Men; they sought the praise of Men: now they that do any
thing that the word requires, to be seen of Men, see not God in his word; they
that love the praise of Men, and out of that seem to be Religious, receive the
word only as the word of Men: then says our Savior, how can ye believe? it is
impossible ye should receive the word as God's, and believe it by a divine
Faith, if ye seek Honor one of another. Joh. 5.44. therefore if you come to
pray and hear, only to satisfy Man's expectations of you, you receive it but as
Man's word.

3. Those that take up Men's Ordinances as of equal authority with the word, are
as zealous for a humane form of prayer as for the word, etc. they that make
Man's words equal with God's, make God's word no better than Man's, therefore
said our Savior, Math. 15.3, 9. By your Traditions you make void, etc. you
urge your Traditions, as if they were so necessary as the word; and hereby you
make void the word. That has not any authority amongst you as the word of God;
for Men to set their Thresholds by God's, their Posts by his, is to defile his
holy name, Ezekiel. 43.7, 8. that i^, by making God no better than Man.

4. When Men look on the word as binding the outward Man, and not the heart:
that Religion consists in a bodily exercise; that it is sufficient if we come
with our bodies before God, and honor him with our lips; as Men think it
enough if you yield outward obedience to their commands, for they have no power
over the Conscience: Now if it be thus in matters of Religion, that our hearts
are not brought into obedience to the word, that we think our thoughts and
affections are free, and our hearts being loose, etc. The Pharisees gave this
Interpretation of the Law: anger, hatred, speculative uncleanness they thought
were no breaches of the Law; when it is thus, the word is received but as the
word of Man. Now how many are there that in these ways only receive the word of
God?

5. When the word is received but in word only. 1 Thessalonians. 15. The Gospel came
not to you in word only, but in Power. The word comes only in word, when it is
not accompanied and set home on the heart, by power of the Holy Ghost; as on
Lydia and the Jailor. Act. 16.

Use 2. Exhort. To stir you up to look on, and to receive the word as the word
of God. Hear, and give ear, be not proud for the Lord has spoken. Jer. 13.15.
It Is God that speaks in the word, God speaks Promises, God speaks Threatenings,
and Commands; look on each of these as coming out of the mouth of God: the word
is called the Spirit of Christ 's mouth. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. you must not only
receive it in the Letter, so indeed only it comes from Man; but as the Spirit
of Christ's mouth, as breathed out of his mouth, and so as that it proves not a
dead and an ineffectual Letter, but a quickening Spirit in you; that is, a new
principle of Life, a new Soul in you; so as that you live by the word, act, and
do all according to it.

Now for direction, that the word may be received by us as the word of God,
know that something is due to the whole word, and every part of it, as more
general duties; and something is to be done (that is some special Duties) with
respect to the several parts of the word, as distinguished one from another.

1. That which is due to the whole word, consider in these particulars.

1. Faith: you must believe it to be the word of God, upon a clear apprehension
of the Divine Authority of it: your assent must be grounded on the testimony of
God: Consider, there is a divine Faith, and a humane Faith; this is, when we
believe a thing upon Man's testimony given of it, as the Samaritans believed in
Christ for the saying of the woman, this was but a humane Faith: Divine Faith
is when we believe a thing and give an assent to the truth of it upon a divine
testimony that is given to it; as the Samaritans believed in Christ when they
heard him, and said, now we have heard him and know that this is the Christ;
this was a divine Faith: now this is necessary to a right receiving of the word.

Quest. Where is this Divine Testimony that is given to the word?

Answ. It Is contained in the word it self; for as there is a light in the Sun
sufficient to discover it self, so that when the Sun shines, its own light
shows it to be the Sun; so there is a divine Light in the word, sufficient to
show it to be the word of God.

Quest. Why do not all then believe it to be so?

Answ. Because Men are blind, and know nothing of the things of God, neither
are they able to judge of them: the light of the Sun discovers the Sun, but
it is to those that can see the light of it: so the word shows its divine
Authority but to those that are enlightened; so we must have the Spirit as
eye salve restoring our Spiritual Sight, and then we shall see clearly the word
to be the word of God; and this is the first duty: we must receive the word as
the These. Chap. 1.15. the Gospel came not in word, but power, and in the Holy
Ghost, and much assurance.

2. Fear. Isa. 66.2. To him God looks that trembles at his word. There is
twofold trembling at God's word.

1. Slavish, only out of fear of Judgment, thus Ahab, and thus Felix trembled.

2. Filial; this is here meant, God looks to that heart that when it looks to
God, and sees any thing of him, trembles: now this is a disposition of heart
that is required to the right receiving the word; you must tremble at the word:
that is, first, there must be in you an holy awfulness, humility and ^everence
of Spirit, suitable to the Greatness and Majesty, Goodness, Glory of that God
that gave his word: this is contrary to that pride of heart which is in every
one of us by nature: when ever we have any manifestations or goings forth of
the Glory of God, the out goings of our hearts must be suited hereto.

2. You must have an apprehension of your own vileness and nothingness. Ezekiel.
2.18. there was an appearance of the Glory of God, when I saw it I fell on my
Face, as apprehending his own unworthyness to behold it.

2. There are special duties that respect several parts of the word.

1. Histories related; as of the Creation, of the fall of Man, drowning the
world, etc. here you must believe the report as made by God, and give not God
occasion to complain as the Prophet, Lord, who has believed our report? and
look on all these as written for our Learning, on whom the ends of the World
are come.

2. There is a Savior described and set forth; which is the main scope of the
Scripture: the eternally begotten word revealed in the written word, that came
to destroy the works of the Devil, to save Sinners, etc. him you must embrace
withal your hearts, entertain him as Abraham did: the whole word is a Gospel
bringing glad tidings of Christ: the old Testament is Gospel throughout, in
which Christ is (though more darkly) set forth; and in the New Testament more
clearly: so that this is to embrace the word, to receive him whose name is the
word of God. Rev. 19.13. to see Christ in his fullness of Glory, Merit, etc. and
to receive him as the word of the Father; this is to receive the word in power,
to receive Christ into our hearts, and to have him revealed in us, and to have
him formed within us; so as that Christ live, acts, and rules in us*

3. There are Promises: Now to receive these as the word of God, is to quiet
our Souls in dependence on them, and assurance that they shall be fulfilled;
that as his faithfulness hinds him, so his Power shall bring forth his Promises
into Act. Say as Paul, I believe God that it shall be as he has said, that not
one jot shall pass unfulfilled: you must know Christ to be the faithful
witness. Rev. 1.5.

4. When Judgments are threatened; know that there is a Righteousness, and
Faithfulness in God that engages him to make them good; we are as averse from
believing Threatenings as Promises: therefore as God has confirmed his Promises
by an Oath, so Threatenings likewise. Amos. 9.8.10. The Sinners among God's
People said, Evil shall not overtake nor prevent us. Deuteronomy. 32.40. If I lift up
my hand to Heaven and say, I live for ever, I will make mine Arrows drunk with
Blood: Now to receive this word, is to fear God and to prepare to meet him, as
Jacob by wrestling, etc. Isa. 26.8, 9. Hos. 12.2, 3, 4, 6.

5. When God gives Precepts and lays Commands on us, know that the Holiness,
Majesty, and Goodness of God deserves Obedience, and sing as the 24 Elders.
Rev. 4. ult. Thou art worthy O Lord to receive Honor, etc. you must see the
greatest reason of yielding Obedience.

Now these qualifications make up that honest and good heart. Luke 8.15. That
having heard the word keeps it, etc. by this try the honesty of your hearts;
many think they have honest hearts, because they hate no man, do no Injury, but
are upright in their dealings; but here is a way to try the honesty of your
hearts indeed; do you not hate some part of the word; there is self-denial,
mortification of Lusts required, heavenly mindedness, a seeking the praise of
God only, and not of Men. Joh. 5.42, 43, 44. Romans 2.29.

Signs of true receiving the word of God.

1. Holding fast the word under Persecutions. Luke 8.15. there are four sorts
of Hearers, only the last that believe the word a^ight, and they grow by it and
live on it, and according to it; and when Persecutions do arise for the word's
sake, a mock or scoff from Men is not so grievous as the word is precious: As
Christ endured the contradiction of Sinners, so can they; this is set forth as
the highest of Christ's Sufferings. Heb. 12.3. Consider him that endured
Contradiction of Sinners, etc. and mockings are called Cruel, they are hard to
be born. Heb. 11.36. these will try whether the word be received and blessed, so
as to see Sin the greatest Evil.

2. If it work effectually to thorough Conviction, and Conversion, so that all
high Imaginations stoop, and the strong holds of Sin are demolished. Agrippa
was almost persuaded: So the word did not work effectually in him: The Jews did
halt between two Opinions, when the word works effectually, then Men will pitch
on Joshua's choice, I will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. and the World will be
despised for the word's sake. You will go into Patmos for the word, as John
did. Revelat. 1.9. rather than leave the word to escape Persecution.

This Discourse concluding so abruptly seems Imperfect, but the Authors Notes
proceed no further.
THE FOURTH DISCOURSE. Of working out our Salvation.
PHILIPPIANS, ij. xij. Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling;
ver. 13. For it is God which works in you, both to will and to do of his good
Pleasure.
THese words contain 1. An Exhortation, work out Salvation.

2. A Direction, intimating the way and manner in which Salvation is to be
wrought out; which is, with fear and trembling.

3. An encouragement in this work, for it is God which works, etc. or a
reason the Apostle gives of his Direction; it is to be wrought with fear and
trembling, because it is God's work. And the Soul of a Believer eyeing and
beholding God going on in this work, appearing in his glory, ought to fear and
tremble, even at that glory ^^^ifested forth therein.

The Exhortation is to a duty of very great consequence, there is no work that
so nearly concerns us, as this the Apostle here persuades us to set about; work
out, etc. so we should give diligent heed to this work.

Sect. 1. Explaining the sense of the Text.

Take the meaning of the words thus, work; he means not, either that Sinners in
their natural state, can by working raise themselves into a state of spiritual
Life; nor that Believers when they are spiritually quickened, can or should so
perform Duties, as to think they shall merit Salvation thereby; nor so work as
the mercenary Pharisees did, trusting in their own works. Paul was no such
Legalist, but his meaning is, consider the condition of your poor Souls, that
they are wretched and miserable, etc. look to the saving of them, study the way
of Life; give not rest to your eyes till you have found it out; search the
Gospel, wherein Salvation is revealed, labor to be acquainted with the
Mysteries of Christ: work out Salvation; this is meant two ways.

1. Give Diligence to make Salvation sure to your Souls, desire that it may be
made out to your Spirits in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit.
Rejoice in nothing but the assurance of Salvation; that as it is wrought out in
Christ, so also in your Hearts.

2. Work out, that is, Salvation being begun to be wrought, desire the
perfection and accomplishment of it. Christ having begun to save you, look to
be saved to the utmost by him, having received the first fruits of the Spirit,
groan for the adoption, viz. the redemption of the body, leaving the first
principles of the Doctrine of Christ; that is, these being well laid, go on o
perfection. Heb. 6.1. Labor to know more of Christ, and to receive more from
Christ, till we attain to the measure of the stature of the f^lness of Christ.

Your own Salvation: Your Hearts desire and endeavor must be that others also
may be saved, but especially look to the saving of your own Souls. And indeed
you cannot desire the Salvation of others, unless the Spirit of God have first
stirred up your hearts to desire the Salvation of your Selves.

With fear and trembling: The Apostles meaning is not, that you should have
doubtful thoughts and perplexing fears about your Salvation, like such as are
under a Covenant of works, whose condition the Apostle sets forth. Romans 10.5,
6. Who shall ascend into Heaven, etc. who can tell whether we shall go to Heaven
or Hell? Fear and trembling is not opposed to Faith and full assurance, but to
highmindedness, to glorying in the Flesh, or to carnal Confidence. Romans 11.20.
Be not high minded but fear.

Again, with fear: that is, see God in Christ working your Salvation,
reconciling you to himself by his Spirit, calling in your hearts, and
conforming you to himself; and so fear and tremble at the glory of Wisdom,
Power and Love that shines forth from this work.

For it is God which works, this is a reason why we should fear; take notice
of the work of God in Christ, and the work of God in the Heart, causing his
Spirit to dwell in an unclean Soul, to make it a holy and spiritual Temple for
himself to dwell in; let the discovery of God and his glorious approach to your
hearts in this great work, work fear and reverence in your Hearts; this also is
an encouragement to work out Salvation, and look to be ^aved and to be assured
of it, because it is a work that God has undertaken: whatever difficulties
there are in it God has undertaken he will master them; whatever is to be done
by Men, as they are to believe, they are to repent; they are to deny
themselves, and to take up their Cross and to follow Christ; all this God will
work in them.

To will and to do, so work it out by Faith, in the good pleasure and power of
God, for the perfecting of your Salvation; look that when God has begun, God
should finish: The words are a full answer to the Goaler's question; What shall
I do to be saved? and being thus cleared, offer several Propositions.

Sect. 2. From the first sense of those words, work out, i. e. make it evident,
get assurance.

Doct. 1. The great business, that requires greatest diligence is making
Salvation sure.

That which most nearly concerns Men to set about with all diligence, is the
working out their own Salvation, the full assurance thereof in their own
hearts; your work should be to make Salvation sure, Heaven sure, God and his
All sufficiency; Christ and his fullness sure: The Apostle says, he that
provideth not for his own is worse than an Infidel: If it be so great a fault
to be so negligent of making Provision for your Family, Children, etc. then how
great a fault must it be to neglect your own Salvation, not to make provision
for the Soul, especially when great Salvation is offered, when the way of Life
is discovered, when Christ is preached, that he is willing and able to save
them to the utmost: This is a work you should set about with so much zeal, as
never to rest satisfied, till the Spirit of God evidence it to your Spirits,
that you are the Children of God; till you see your selves founded on that sure
foundation Jesus Christ; and till by Faith, you can see Heaven opened, and
Jesus sitting at the right hand of God making Intercession for you, preparing
Mansions for you; so that you may say where Christ is, I shall be; what Christ
is, I shall see. For the clearing of this point, weigh seriously these
particulars.

1. Sa^vation may be made sure.

Here consider, First. That for such as are ordained to Life, or are Heirs of
Salvation, and have ^elieved in Christ, their Salvation is a thing in it self
most su^e; Salvation is entailed to them, and this entail shall never be cut
off: they shall never be disinherited, no Angel, Principality nor Power, etc.
shall be able to separate from the Love of God in Christ, it is as sure as the
whole Trinity can make it.

1. On the Father's part sure. He has written their Names in the Book of Life.
And if God writes them who shall blot them out? God the Father does own them.
The Lord knows them that are his, and this the Apostle calls a Foundation that
stands sure. God's knowing, is choosing in his eternal Decree, that is, of
ordering to Salvation: That Is a sure Foundation, nothing shall make it void, 2 Timothy 2.19. And the Father has covenanted with Believers to bestow Salvation
and Li^e upon them, and for the making good his Covenant, has given his Word
and Oath, Heb. 6.18. The Salvation of Believers depends on immutable causes, so
is most certain: If Believers should perish God should break his Word and Oath:
now it is impossible for God to lie, so that ^^om this place you may gather,
that it is now as impossible that a true Believer should come short of Glory and
eternal Life, as it is that God should Sin. So that we may argue thus, God
cannot sin, so a Believer cannot dye. Were a Man nder a legal condition, under a
Covenant o^ works, he might argue thus concerning himself I have sinned, so
ought to dye, I have broken the ^^w, so the Law curses and condemns me, and
that justly: But a Believer in a Gospel estate, under the Covenant of Grace,
may argue thus, God cannot sin, so I shall be saved, God cannot lie, so I shall
never dye. A Believer slips sometimes and may sin out of infirmity, but the
comfort i^, though he may sin, yet God cannot sin. And it is not a Believers
not-sinning that is the Found^tion on which Salvation is built: but on the
impossibility of God's sinning: this is the sure Found^^ion.

2. O Christ's part most sure. He has undertaken to ^ave that is mighty to
save, that is able to save to the utm^st.

1. He is able to conquer the Enemies of Salvation.

1. The Law, that is an Enemy to the Salvation of Sinners. Those that are
Enemies to it, it says Curse; And it has dominion over men that are under it.
Christ was made under the Law who was above the Law, he obeyed the Law, being
Lord of the Law. So has fulfilled the Righteousness of the Law, which it
required of men, and undergone the Curse due to Sinners as Sinners, and
conquered the dominion and killing power of the Law, so that the Law is not
against the Promises, against the Salvation of such for whom Christ is made a
Curse, so that there is no power in the Law to kill a Believer.

2. Sin. Christ was made Sin, it being imputed to him; he dyed under the Sin of
the Elect, underwent punishment, and being an innocent and infinite and most
Glorious Person, he suffered as much punishment as Sin deserved, so Believers
Sins shall never be punished on them. And Christ dying under Sin, he now
undertakes to be the destroyer of Sin; there may be motions of Sin, but motions
of Sin in Believers are but Sin's death-pangs. Christ has given Sin a deadly
wound: Our Old Man is Crucified with Christ, Romans 6.6. Christ dyed for the Sins
of Believers. Christ will be the death of Sin in them: This is a sure
Foundation so they shall not dye.

3. Satan. Christ ascended and led captivity captive. He has taken the Devil
captive that had the Elect in captivity. Satan seeks to devour, but shall but
seek to devour the Elect. Christ is conqueror of Satan, the Lord shall tread
Satan under your feet, Romans 16.20. and Christ shall make them his footstool.
Thus amidst the many Enemies of Salvation, Christ shall keep Believers to
Salvation

2. Christ is able to make meet for Salvation, Col. 1.12. Know ye not, that no
unrighteous Person, etc. shall enter, etc. 1 Cor. 6.11. into the new Jerusalem,
etc. Now Christ can Wash, Sanctify, Justify: his obedience is more able to make
Righteous, then Adam's disobedience to make Sinners; his Righteousness is
infinite, perfect, immutable, Romans 5.15, 17. The Justification of Believers
depends on a sure Foundation. Adam's Righteousness is a slippery Foundation,
Christ's a sure Foundation. No unclean thing shall enter; but Christ of unclean
can make clean.

3. Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to day and for ever: so that still
Salvation depends on immutable Causes, and an immutable God, and an immutable
Christ. His Righteousness is the same, sufficient to cover all Sin. His Power
is the same, his Love is the same; ground not so much your hope of Salvation on
your selves, on your abstin^nce from Sin, or activity in Duties; there is a
great deal of change, yesterday happily, lively and quick in Duties, to day dead:
let an immutable Christ, Christ the same yesterday to day, etc. be in you the
hope of Glory, so your Peace, Joy and assurance shall be the same.

3. On the Spirit's part sure. The Spirit dwells in Believers, and whatsoever
is required of Believers, the Spirit has undertaken to do in them, I will put
my Spirit in you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, Ezekiel. 36.27. That
Covenant which is confirmed unto you by immutable things, has this Promise in
it: He is a Spirit of Faith, Love, Meekness, and of Light to lead into all
Truth, to make the heart willing to follow Christ as King, to deny self. This
Spirit is the earnest of Heaven and perfect Glory. The Father has made a
bargain, confirmed by his Word and Oath, and by giving earnest: This bargain he
Seals, and the Seal is the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. This is a Seal that is sufficient
to confirm Believers, that Glory shall be perfected, because they have the
Spirit of Grace. That Spirit that dwells in them shall quicken their mortal
bodies, Romans 8.11.

2. As the Salvation of Believers is in it self most sure, so it may be made
sure to them.

1. Some have attained it, Job 19. I know that my Redeemer lives etc. David,
Paul, Romans 8.38. I am persuaded, etc. He includes himself; and this was not a
singular p^iviledge given to some Saints more eminent then others, or an
extraordinary gift. But,

2. That which ordinarily God was pleased to bestow on the Saints, Romans 8.15.
Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption whereby ye cry Abba Father. This is
true of all Believers, and the Spirit bears witness. The Spirit where he is a
Spirit of Adoption is usually a witnessing Spirit, sealing up their hearts,
sealing up and treasuring Salvation in the heart. The assurance of Salvation is
a precious Jewel, which ordinarily the Spirit does treasure and seal up in the
hearts of Believers: giving the first Fruits of Heaven to their hearts. And as
Moses on Nebo had a view of the Land of Canaan, so it is not unusual for the
Spirit to carry up the hearts of Believers above the World into the third
Heavens, and give a sight and taste of that most Excellent Glory.

3. A way is shown in the Gospel in which it may be attained, Romans 10.9. Say
not who shall ascend into Heaven, etc. Do you doubt of Salvation? Are you in
fears about it? Consider, Christ has been in the deep, Christ is in Heaven;
Confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe with thine heart, and thou
shall be saved. As Christ coming into the Ship when tossed and almost full of
water, there was a great calm, an end put to the Disciples fea^s. So Christ
coming into the heart, rebuking fears, revealing himself as dying, rising and
sitting at the Right hand of God, there shall then be a great calm in the
heart, Christ the Peace, Joy, hope of Glory in the heart.

3. Salvation ought to be made sure, it is the Duty of all that look toward
Heaven, to make their Salvation sure, this is that which should be in your aims
and desires, Rejoice that your names are written in Heaven, says Christ, Luke
10.20. This should be the matter of the Saints Joy; this implies that we ought
to seek after the assurance of this, that our names are written in Heaven: Heb.
10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart, that is, ye that look on God as the
Life of your heart, God in Christ reconciled, loving, embracing us, the Peace,
Joy, Delight, Contentment, and Rest of the Heart. A true heart, is a heart that
says concerning God, as the Rich Man concerning Riches, Soul take thine ease in
God, and with full assurance of favor and acceptance with God. And then shows
how it may be attained, for the Gospel as it requires things to be done, so it
shows us the way how: The Gospel requires not impossibilities, but makes all
its Precepts possible; The Law did not thus, it did not make its Precepts
possible, but the Gospel does, it leads to Christ, by whom whatever is
required, is or shall be accomplished as to Believers: Now look to Christ, and
so your hearts shall be sprinkled, fear and guilt shall be purged out of the
Conscience, and Peace, Joy and full Assurance brought in, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give all
diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. And if Election, then
Salvation; there is a Golden Chain mentioned, Romans 8.29, 30. if you get hold of
one link of it then you have hold of all; this reaches from Eternity to
Eternity; from Eternity of Election, to Eternity of Glorification; Now our care
should be to fasten on this Golden Chain, this Golden Chain is fixed in Heaven,
let it also be fixed in your hearts, so shall you have hope as an Anchor fixed
in Heaven, and so Heaven shall have fast hold in you, and you shall have fast
hold in Heaven; Heaven shall not loose you, nor you shall not loose Heaven.

4. Nothing besides Salvation can be made sure. The Life of your Bodies cannot
be made sure, the Life of your Souls may, 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know that if our
earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved we have a Building of God, an
House not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens. Earth cannot be made sure,
Heaven may be made sure. So lay not up for your selves treasures on Earth, but
in Heaven. The favor of Man cannot be made sure, the favor of God may. Riches
on Earth cannot be made sure, they will fly from you, or you shall fly from
them. Riches of Glory may be made sure, worldly prosperity and happiness cannot
be made sure. Earthly Men in their best estate of prosperity stand but in
slippery places. But everlasting happiness in Heaven may be made sure. Honor
amongst Men cannot be made sure, Honor with God may. Creatures cannot he made
sure, Christ may: Comforts flowing from Creatures cannot be made sure:
Consolations abounding by Christ may be made sure. So for other things those
that have them should be as if they had them not; Those that buy as if they
possessed not, those that have Wives should be as if they had none, those that
have Riches as though they had not, and those that labor in the World as if
they did not: because nothing of them can be made sure. So then take heed of
spending your selves for them. Salvation alone, Christ, Heaven, the favor of
God alone can be made sure; so labor to make that sure and nothing else. Judge
the making Salvation sure the one thing that is necessary, because that alone
can be made sure.

5. Salvation and nothing besides Salvation is worth the making sure. If you
have Riches, worldly prosperity and abundance, if you have health, and Houses
to dwell in, Children, Men Servants, Women Servants, Sheep, Oxen, Shops full of
Wares, etc Hearts full of contentment in enjoying of these things, what shall
all this avail you? Riches cannot profit you in the day of wrath; all these
things cannot redeem your Souls yet in bondage still, going to condemnation:
What shall it profit you to gain the whole World and loose the Soul, Math.
16.26. Creatures are but broken Cisterns, these are not worth the making sure,
but the Fountain of living waters is worth the making sure. The Father who is
the Father of Lights, his Love is worth tho making sure. Christ in whom is
Righteousness, Merits, Glory, in whom all fullness dwells. The Spirit, who shall
be a Well of Water springing up to everlasting life, who shall be in the heart
as flowing Rivers of Grace, Comforts, Joy, Fullness of Joy, Pleasures for
evermore: these are worth the making sure.

Sect. 3. For the further clearing of this consider 1. What Salvation is. 2.
And what the Assurance of it is.


1. Now Salvation is the restoring of an undone Creature from fullness of
misery, to fullness of Glory.

1. Salvation begun in this life is a Translation of a Sinner from a state of
Guilt, Unrighteousness, Condemnation, to a state of Righteousness and
Justifica^ion, from Polution to Purity, from Profaneness to Piety, from Wrath to
Grace, from a state of Emptiness and Poverty into a state of Fullness in Christ,
from the Power of darkness into the Kingdom of Christ.

2. Salvation perfected is the bringing of a Creature into the presence of God,
making it partaker of the Glory of Christ. God shining to the Soul in all his
Glory, Christ in his infinite Excellency: God shining on the Soul in perfect
likeness and suitableness to him, We shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is, 1 John 3.3. This is that which is worth the making sure.

II. What assurance of Salvation is. Now that is, when that is done in the
heart which the Apostle speaks of. 2 Cor. 4.6. God that commanded Light to
shine out of Darkness has shined in our hearts, giving the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, unto the Soul, then
the Soul is at rest. God appearing in the Glory of his Love, reconciled in
Christ: in the Glory of his All Sufficiency, Power and Wisdom; God appearing as
your God to your Souls; the seeing of your selves to be partakers of the Divine
Nature with Christ; that as Christ has the Divine Nature, so you partake with
him in it; this is assurance of Salvation. Now is not this a Pearl worth the
selling all to purchase it?

Sect. 4. Use 1. Fxhort. To persuade you that amidst the multitude of your
Affairs and Employments in the World, this may not be neglected, but with the
greatest diligence prosecuted, the making your Salvation sure to your selves:
As Solomon says, above all keeping keep the Heart; so above all working work
out your own Salvation, make sure that which may be made sure, and is indeed
worth the making sure: You are made for ever, if once your Salvation be made
sure; and whatever you are, you are most miserable, if the Salvation of your
Souls be not made sure. Be not like Martha troubled about many things, cumbred
with much serving, with serving your Lusts, serving of Men, serving of the
Body: Take heed of loosing your Lives, in seeking to save your Lives. Take heed
of loosing your Souls in seeking the things appertaining to the Body, of coming
short of Heaven. in your toiling in Earth: but choose with Mary that better
part: She sat at Jesus his Feet and heard his word, Luke 10.39. Look on this
as the one thing needful, as the best part that you can choose; to hear the
word of Christ, to search the Gospel of Christ, to study that Salvation that is
in Christ. And wrought out in their hearts that come to Christ: behold that
life and immortality that is brought to light in him.

To provoke hereto, consider,

1. The Father makes it his great work to save Souls: a greater work than the
Creation of the World, wherein more of his Glory is manifested, the greatest of
God's works next to the Incarnation of the Son of God. Now as God makes it his
great work; so next to the glorifying of that God in Christ, this should be
your greatest work, to get an assurance of your Salvation.

2. Jesus Christ died to make Salvation sure to the Elect, to the Children of
Promise; it is so glorious a work that Christ valued it above his own Life; he
delighted not so much in his own Life as in the Salvation of Sinners. The Son
of God pleased not himself, that he might do whatsoever pleased him: He denied
himself, that might do what he pleased: He humbled himself that was Lord of
Glory, that he might save poor lost Souls: He put himself into the miserable
condition of Sinners, that they might be translated into his estate of
Happiness and Glory; so this is a most glorious work; for to take Salvation
from Christ, or make Christ sure; or the favor of God, Eternal Life in him,
should be your great work; and such a work as you should not leave, though you
may be reproached and persecuted in it: we should be contented to loose
Temporals to make sure of Eternals; to loose Life to save Life. If you were in
a Ship at Sea that was full of Gold, and in danger of drowning, you would cast
out all to save your Life; so let all things stoop to this work of saving of
your Souls: yet it is not always so, you may make Salvation sure, and keep your
Riches, happily enjoy Peace, and not endanger your temporal lives.

3. Salvation assured shall be an Anchor sure and steadfast to your Souls, you
shall see Christ holding you fast, and hereby you shall hold fast Christ. And
hereby you shall have Hope, and Joy in the greatest troubles, there is no
Tempest of afflictions shall carry away your hearts from Peace. Your Joy is
sure Joy, your Comforts sure Comforts, if you have this sure and steadfast
Anchor; nay there is no sin shall trip up your heels of Joy and Peace in Christ
with the Father, in Christ's Righteousness to cover your Sin, in Christ's
satisfaction for Sin; it should work in you Godly sorrow for doing any thing
repugnant to his Glory; but it should not disturb a Believers Joy in God. And
hereby you shall be kept steadfast in the Faith, and in the profession of
Godliness, and in following the Lord Jesus; you shall be armed against all
trials and oppositions, Ephesians. 6.13. Take the whole Armor of God, v. 14. Have on
the Breast Plate of Righteousness, make that sure, and that shall be the Armor
of proof on your hearts, and nothing shall kill the heart of your Peace and
Joy, whilst you keep that as a Breast Plate v. 15. Have your Feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace. By Feet are understood also Legs. It was a
custom anciently to wear a kind of Brazen Boots on the Legs, 1 Samuel 17. Goliath
had such greaves of Brass on his Legs to defend him against darts, etc. And
they that have such may walk on Thorns and Briars and not be hurt. Now, have
your Feet shod, that is, walk in Gospel-ways, have the Gospel of Peace in your
hearts, believe the Gospel Promises, Gospel Grace, Gospel Righteousness: have a
Gospel Spirit. So you are well prepared and walk through troubles, dangers and
oppositions, in the midst of Satan's fiery darts, and the World's reproaches,
and still the life of your Peace and Joy in the Love of God in Christ be
preserved, v. 17. Take the Helmet of Salvation; Salvation being made sure shall
be an Helmet on your Heads, whereby you shall receive the blows of Tongues,
etc. and not be hurt; this shall defend you against all the Curses of the Law,
1 John 4.17. Herein is our Love, or Love with us made perfect, that we may have
boldness in the day of Judgment. When others shall fear the Wrath of the Lamb,
etc. you shall have boldness and not be ashamed in this World, etc. when your
Salvation is sure, the Soul dwells in God, in the Love of God, All Sufficiency,
Power, Wisdom, etc.

4. The more assurance you have of your Salvation, the less earthly will your
thoughts and hearts be; this will raise your Spirits and carry them up to God
in Christ. So that,

1. You shall dwell in Love, you shall dwell in God and God in you. He that
dwells in Love dwells in God and God in him, 1 John 4.16. And this is a
glorious habitation for a Soul to dwell in the Love of God in Christ. The World
will be but the habitation for your Bodies. The fullness of the Lord Jesus, the
Love of God, which has length and breadth, etc. shall be the habitation of
your Souls: The want of this, the not breathing after the Assurance of
Salvation, makes men so earthly that their Souls are still traveling in the
Creature, seeking Joy and Contentment in the World.

2. You Will dwell safely and secure, who can hurt those that dwell in God. God
must be overcome before they can be destroyed: God is a better habitation then
the World, so whilst you dwell in the World, above all labor for the assurance
of the Love of God.

5. The more Assurance you have, the greater abounding of Grace there is from
Christ* 2 Pet. 1.11. Give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure,
so an entrance shall be administered abundantly to you into his everlasting
Kingdom; then shall you expect the more and receive the more, you shall come
with the more boldness and receive the more Grace.

6. Now is the day of Salvation, the day wherein great Salvation is offered to
you. Behold now is the acceptable time* now is the day of Salvation, 2 Cor.
6.2. Now in my absence work out your own Salvation. Now is the day to make
Salvation sure, now Salvation is offered to you and revealed: Christ now calls
on Sinners and beseeches them to be reconciled to God. Now God lets down the
co^ds of his love in Christ, that you may take hold on them and live: Now is
the Righteousness of God revealed for Sinners to embrace, that they may be
justified: Now is the day in which the Spirit is poured forth: Now is the day
in which Christ is working the works of God; that is, for calling of Sinners
out of the World, and gathering the Elect into his Kingdom; by the preaching of
the Gospel, for the saving of Souls, and reconciling them unto God. And this
day shall have a night: And now is the day and season for you to work out your
Salvation, to make it sure: A night shall come when none shall have the means
and opportunity of working out their Salvation, the Night of Death or day of
Judgment, which is a Night in this respect; then it is too late to work out
Salvation, if you neglect Salvation now, you shall not escape wrath in that
day. Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at
first begun to be spoken by the Lord? it is great Salvation; Salvation from the
greatest misery, to the enjoyment of the greatest Glory; to an exceeding
eternal weight of Glory: it is great Salvation spoken to, not hid from you, but
spoken to you that you might make it sure* And if the Gospel be hid when
spoken, consider what the Apostle says. 2 Cor. 4 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is
to them that are lost.

Section 5.

Use 2. Direct. 1. To Sinners: Such as are yet strangers from Christ, and from
the Covenant of Promise, that you may make Salvation sure. To this end.

1. Build on a sure Foundation; let your hopes of Glory be founded on Christ:
Christ is a sure Foundation. Isa. 28 16. A foundation of Justification,
Sanctification, and Life that will not fail. You may be as sure of acceptance
as Christ, an^ ^o continue in favor with God: as sure of Glory as Christ; and
to remain in a state of Glory; and as sure of Life as Christ; as sure to live;
because I live, ye shall lille also. Joh. 14.19. Christ's Life is a sure
foundation of a Believers Life; Christ's Acceptance a sure foundation of his:
Christ's Glory a sure foundation of his Glory: so then hearken to the Lord's
call. Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the Earth:
Sinners, look to me who came to save you from your Sins; know that there is
death in Sin; there is Damnation to all that are out of me, your Lusts are
hurtful Lusts; if you follow them they will work out your ruin, will bring
everlasti^g hurt to your Body and Soul. Fleshly Lusts war against the Soul,
they war against the Salvation, Life and Peace of your Souls; your Life
consists not in the abundance of your Riches, etc. It Is no profit to you to
gain the World and loose your Souls in the Creature; Neither is the^e any life
in you^ D^ti^s: These a^e no sure foundations to build you^ Sal^ation upon;
hopes of Salvation built only ^n them* is like a House built on the Sand. So
(...) Christ to you, look off from all those; Behold me behold Life in my
Death, Peace in my Blood, Righteousness in my Obedience: Behold Love in me and
B^wels of Compassion with which you shall be received by me; thus look to
Christ* and you shall ^e Salvation in him, he that believes on him shall not be
ashamed, for he shall be sure of Salva^^on; You are all by nature of the World
that lies in wickedness, on which condemnation is coming apace. Now prepare an
Ark for the saving of your Souls; Christ is this Ark; as Noah in the Ark was
safe, and sure of being safe, let the Waters rise as high as they would, the
Ark ca^ried Noah still above them; and when he was in the Ark God shut him in;
and then if any would have entered in, none could. Christ is the Ark prepared
for the saving of Souls, the Door of the Ark is not yet shut, Christ calls you
to come in unto him; if you come not before God shuts the Door of this Ark,
there is no escaping of Condemnation. O whilst it is to day, if you will hear
his voice harden not your hearts, etc. the refusing to hearken will harden your
hearts against Christ; there is no other name given whereby you may be saved,
neither is there Salvation in any other, Act. 4.12. look whether you will there
is no Salvation: you may look to the World, you may look to your Riches, Lands,
etc. but there is no Salvation in them; so then say to your selves, that its
vain for me to say to my Soul, sit down here; in Christ alone is Salvation to
be had; then look to him; say that it is good to be here, here I will dwell,
this shall be my rest for ever. I Will commit my Soul to him, who is able to keep
what I shall commit to him against that day. Christ in you the hope of Glory,
Christ formed in you, Christ revealed to you, Christ appearing with his Blood
in the heart as well as in Heaven, Christ sheding abroad his Love, Christ
believed on, Christ judged worthy of Glory, etc. most worthy of Love and
Obedience, Christ esteemed as the chiefest of Ten Thousands, as altogether
lovely. Christ being thus in the Heart, is the hope of Glory in that Heart, and
assurance of Salvation in that Heart: when the Sun of Righteousness thus shines
into your Hearts, then you shall see Salvation sure. It Is not the performance
of Duties, praying with fervency, hearing with delight, and abstaining from
this or that Sin, that is a sure ground of assurance of Salvation: any Duty and
Grace if there be a beam of Christ that you see, derived from Christ the Sun of
Righteousness, coming from him, and tending to him, may afford some light
toward assurance; but then is full assurance, when Christ the Sun of
Righteousness shines in the Soul, God shines in the Face of Christ, and sheds
abroad his Love in the Heart by Jesus Christ.

2. Consider the properties of true assurance of Salvation, and the
concomitants, etc.

1. The more assurance of Salvation, there is, the more Purity, true assurance
is purifying. The more you dwell in the love of God, the more will you labor
to be like unto God: and the more will you abhor impurity; and the more will
you follow after holiness. Assurance will not make licentious; dwelling in love
and walking in your Lusts; hopes of Glory, and conforming to the courses of the
World; a looking for new Heavens and a new Earth wherein Righteousness dwells,
and not a putting off the old Conversation; these will not consist together: He
that has this Hope purifies himself, even as he is pure. 1 John 3.3. Seeing we
look for such things, be diligent, that we may be found of him in peace,
without spot and blameless.

2. It makes fruitful in good works, the abounding of the Love of God in the
heart will cause an abounding in the work of the Lord, it will constrain you to
serve the Lord, and to live to him.

3. The more Assurance, the more heavenly mindedness, our conversation is in
Heaven whence we look for a Savior: when Heaven is sure the mind will be most
in Heaven. If there is your hope, there will be your hearts. This will make you
willing to leave all these things, here below, this will make you sojourners
here in the World: By Faith Ab^aham sojourned ^n the Land of Promise, as in a
strange Land; If you look for a City that has Foundations, then will you be
strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth.

4. An earnest desire of Christ's appearing: Where there is true Assurance, a
Man shall say, to be with Christ is much better. Let my beloved be like a Roe
on the Mountains of Spices, let him make haste to come, let him come quickly.
When there is a taste of the Love of God, the Soul would have it fully. When God
shines into the hearts in some beams of his Glory, the heart would know him
perfectly, and enjoy him fully. That heart that enjoys Assurance of everlasting
Love, would have an everlasting and uninterrupted sense of that Love. That Soul
that sees its self above danger of wrath and loss of Love, would be above
danger of the with-drawings of Love. That Soul that is Assured of Eternity of
Love, would be in such a condition, as not to be subject to any moments
displeasure in regard of the hidings of God's face.

3. Take heed you give not the Right Hand of fellowship to the Enemies of
Assurance. As,

1. Do not love darkness and hate light: there is no greater Enemy to the
Assurance of your Salvation then this. This is the most direct way you can
take, to make your reprobation, your damnation sure: This is the condemnation,
this makes condemnation sure, that light is come into the World, and men love
darkness rather than light John 2.19. Do not shut your Eyes from beholding the
things of your Pe^ce: How should you be assured of your Salvation, if you now
shut your eyes from Salvation that is spoken to you, etc. or if you refuse him
in whom Salvation is to be found, and no other. Romans 1.28 Because they liked
not to retain God in their Knowledge, God gave them up to a reprobate mind etc.

2. Be not enslaved to the World, to the Riches and to the Pleasures of it,
this will hinder you from desiring or seeking Salvation to be made sure. The
Love of Money is the Root of all Evil, which while some have coveted after,
have erred concerning the Faith: to deny the Faith to keep Riche^, this is a
great cause of Men's erring so dangerously concerning their Souls; that they do
not provide better for them, that they study not the good of them; because
their Hearts are so much glued to the World.

3. Let not Sin reign in your Mortal Bodies, that you should obey it in the
Lusts thereof; so long as Sin ^^igns, you are in danger of Death; for Sin
reigned unto Death, and you cannot say you are under Grace; for that Spirit
that speaks peace to a Sinner, proclaims war against his Sin: that Spirit that
sheds abroad the love of God in the Heart, will lust against the Flesh: that
Spirit that brings Chyist into the Heart as the hope of Glory, will write the
Law of Christ in the heart: and cause a walking in newness of Life.

4. Take heed of grieving and quenching the Spirit; the Spirit strives in the
preaching of the Gospel, as with the men of the Old World: Noah was a Preacher
of the Righteousness of Faith. Assurance is a Grace of the Spirit, a Gift of
the Spirit: and if you resist the Spirit, the Spirit will not witness with you,
that you are the Children of God: but against you that you are Enemies to God.

2. Be not Enemies to the dominion of the Lord Jesus Christ's Kingdom of Light.
Assurance is a Privilege of his Kingdom, and of those that belong to it. When
you can see your selves translated out of the Kingdom of darkness into the
Kingdom of Christ, then happy are you, then you are past all danger of
perishing. Christ will ^ose none of his, but ^aise them up at the last day. And
know, that if you are o^ Christ's Kingdom, you do Judge him worthy and are
willing to serve him. And t^ere is nothing that more directly opposes the
Assurance of your Salvation, than an unwillingness to come under the yoke, and
opposing the Kingdom of Christ; a walking contrary to the Gospel, which you
shall see cl^^r from that glorious Promise which Christ makes Rev. 3.12. Him
that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, etc. Such as
overcome the Enemies of Christ, Sin, Satan and the World, and come and live
under the dominion of Christ, so as that they have their conversation in the
Gospel of Christ, such as walk in Christ, in his will, to his Glory, They shall
be made Pillars in his Temple: This Temple is Spiritual, the Church Militant
and Triumphant, this Pillar is Spiritual and notes the stability of the Sons of
God, a confirmed Estate of happiness, from which they shall never fall: it is
spoken in allusion to the Pillars of Solomon's Temple, 1 King 7.21. He set up
Pillars in the Porch of the Temple; the right Pillar he called Jachin, which
signifies, he shall establish; so I will make them Pillars, this notes an
establishment in the favor of God through Christ, an establishment in a state
of Grace and Glory. The left Pillar he called Boaz, this shall always remain in
its strength; so that they are Pillars, and their Salvation is sure; that is,
they shall not be overcome, but remain in their strength; that have overcome by
the Spirit of Christ poured into them, whereby they are translated out of the
Kingdom of Darkness, into the Kingdom of Christ. They shall go no more out;
such as are in favor, shall go no more out of favor; such as are in Christ,
shall go no more out of Christ: And I will write upon him the name of my God;
that is, he shall be acknowledged to be the Child of God, he shall be able to
see and read his Adoption, by the Spirits witnessing it in his Heart and
sealing it up: and others shall read his Adoption in his holy Conversation, and
in his zeal of following Christ, and his love to the Saints, etc. I will write
upon him the Name of the City of my God; he shall be known to himself and
others, that he is one of God's City and Household. And my new Name; he shall be
honored for King and Conqueror, he shall be highly Exalted and Crowned with
Glory like to Christ. Rev. 2: 17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of
the hidden Manna; an allusion to the golden Pot of Manna kept in the Holiest of
all. Heb. 9.4. which is meant of Christ. the Spiritual Manna; he shall feed on
the fullness of Christ, whatever is in Christ he shall take for his own most
freely, and nothing shall be withheld from him. Now Christ's Kingdom is the
golden Pot wherein this Manna is hidden; so that if you come to Christ as your
King, and be his Followers, you shall feed on him as Bread of Life. I will give
him a white Stone. The Ancients did absolve Persons accused of any Crime, and
cleared of it, by giving them a white Stone; to this Christ alludes and says, I
will give him a white Stone; by this is meant, assurance of a Discharge of all
their Sins, the Spirits witnessing to any that they are the Children of God. A
new Name, that is, of Sons of God: this shall you know, and read, and rejoice
in. By this know that assurance is part of the Glory and Privileges that they
enjoy who are of Christ's Kingdom. You have not this white Stone, this new
Name, that are Enemies to his Government; over whom Sin reigns, and who commit
it with greediness.

Sestion 6.

2. Direct. To Saints and Believers, to show them how assurance may be
obtained, confirmed and continued.

To make way for this, let these things be premised.

1. The Salvation of a Person may be sure, and yet he want the assurance of it.
Salvation may be made sure in Heaven, yet not in the Heart; sure in regard of
God's knowing them to be his, but not in regard their knowing God to be
their's, or themselves to be God's, An Interest in Christ, and an evidence of
that Interest are not always Companions; there may be Peace with God, and not
Peace in their Conscience.

2. Assurance is a Gift of God, bestowed upon whom, and at what time God
pleases; it is a fruit of free Grace, it is the shining of God in the Face of
Christ in the Souls of Believers. Now as when the Sun arises, it fills the
World with light, and makes it day, though it may be under a Cloud, and the
beams thereof are not to be seen; so God sometimes shines into the Heart, and
brings out of darkness into light, so far as that there may be trust and
affiance in the free Grace of God through Christ; yet the light beams of his
loving kindne^ may be so far withheld, as that the Soul may not have the
evidence of his favor. There is a direct act of Faith, whereby Believers look
on, and trust to the Grace of God in Christ* as the Foundation of their
Salvation; this all Believ^^s (...). There is a reflex act of Faith, a Person's
^elieving that God is reconciled to his Soul in particular, and that Christ
died for him, etc. ^his God gives at what time he plea^es: ^^ith in the fi^^^
act is sometimes given, and (...) in the la^ter.

3. The assu^^^^ of Salvation having been given, it may be lo^^ again;
Salvation shall not be lost, assurance of it may: For a small moment have I
forsaken thee, Isa. 54.7, 8. I hid my face for a moment. This God may do,

1. Out of his Sovereignty, that the Soul may acknowledge, it is the Lord, let
him do what seems him good.

2. Out of his Love, that the Soul may set a higher esteem on the light of
God's Countenance: and may be more abundantly satisfied in the beams of his
Glory shining in the Soul, more than in all worldly Excellencies. And that he
may look on God's Favor and Loving Kindness, as that which is better than
Life; and that he may say as the Spouse, thy Love is better than Wine.
Spiritual Joy is sometimes in danger to be overwhelmed in worldly Joys. The
Souls of Believers are sometimes oppressed with carnal security, as the Spouse
when Christ came. Cant. 5. I have put off my Coat, etc. Then Christ withdrew
himself; worldly things withdraw the Heart too much from Christ; and that may
cause a withdrawing of God from the Soul.

Now the Directions to Saints. 1. How to get assurance are these.

1. Take heed of surfeiting with worldly Joys and Contentments. If with
Solomon, you will not withold your Hearts from any Joy, God may withold Joy
from your Hearts; the Earth being betwixt us and the Sun, this makes it night
with us; if the Earth get betwixt our Hearts and God at any time, they being
overtaken with worldly Contentmentt, this may intercept divine light, and keep
it from you; so let your Souls dwell in God, and not like Satan, walk to and
fro in the Earth and wander up and down in it. The Apostle's Rule is an
excellent one: Let them that have Wives be as if they had none, and those that
be Rich, as though they had no Riches, 1 Cor. 7.29.30. and those that buy as if
they possessed not; that is, let not your Hearts find rest in these things; but
let the love of God in Christ be your rest; live above, let your Souls dwell in
God, and God will dwell in your Souls.

2. Give not way to Sin, especially take heed of doing any thing against the
light of your Conscience. There is nothing more likely to cause a withdrawing
of light, than a walking contrary to light: hereby light is rejected and
stifled: and when Believers will have Fellowship with Sin, God may teach them
to take heed of Sin by hiding himself, and suffering of their Souls to be
filled with terrors. By Sin Believers may fall, though not from the love of God
in Christ, yet from the light of his Countenance; That is the Apostles triumph,
Romans 8. Nothing shall be able to separate me from the love of God in Christ:
yet there may be a falling from the love of God in the Heart, by Sin; so then
take heed of being over taken with it; have no fellowship with unfruitful works
of darkness, but reprove them.

3. Walk not in the light of your own fire, and sparks of your own kindling,
the Children of Promise that are free are yet too much in bondage to the
Covenant of Works, looking to a Righteousness of their own, to Duties.
Grounding their hopes of favor and acceptance hereupon: God may suffer those
to lie down in sorrow, that look not higher for ground of Joy: When the Wise
men left following the guidance of the Star, it left them, they walked in their
own light, and they go to the Highpriests, etc. and enquire of them, but when
they returned then they saw the Star.

4. Be well Principled in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and labor to understand
it aright. As,

1. That though the Sins of Believers have abounded, yet Grace abounds much
more: that is, there is Grace enough in God and to spare, for the pardon of all
Sins. God has an infinite and inexhaustible treasure of Grace, What God's
answer was to Paul may be applied to all Believers. My Grace is sufficient for
thee, 2 Cor. 12.9: Paul was the chief of Sinners, and God had Grace sufficient
for him, 1 Timothy 1.16. He obtained Mercy that Jesus Christ might show forth all
long suffering for a pattern to them that should believe on him to everlasting
life. Believe the abundance of Mercy in God through Christ, and you shall taste
the fullness of it: look on Sin, and from Sin to Grace, and there is Grace
sufficient for you, so you may have Peace in your heart.

2. As their disobedience bath abounded, so has Christ's obedience much more.
As by one man's disobedience many were made Sinners, Romans 5.19. So by the
obedience of one many shall be made Righteous. There is more Power in Christ's
obedience and Righteousness to Justify a Sinner, than there is in Sin to
Condemn him. God is more honored by Christ than dishonored by Sin: because
Christ is an infinite Person equal to the Father, he fulfilled the Law that was
Lord of it. It appears, because sufficient to make a Sinner as Righteous as if
he had never sinned, sufficient to blot out all Sin that there is no more
remembrance of it. Sufficient to recompense God, etc. And besides there is
merit in it. It Is a price sufficient to purchase Glory, Life, etc. So that as
^here will be frequent acts of disobedience, against these set the infinite
obedience of the Lord Jesus, abounding beyond them all, as a Sacrifice
sufficient to take away the evil of all.

3. God had never suffered the Elect, such as are ordained to life, to have
been in a state of Sin before Conversion, etc. or to do any act of Sin after
Conversation, but that he intended to glorify his Grace and Mercy in pardoning
their Sin, and saving them notwithstanding their Sin: this was his design from
all Eternity, to magnify his Grace and Mercy toward the Vessels of Mercy. That
he might make known the Riches of his Glory, Romans 9.23. So he suffered them to
Sin, Romans 5.24. The Law entered that the offense might abound: that is, that it
might be known how far, and how exceedingly it abounded. Also by the entering of
the Law Sin was irritated, etc. And this that Grace might be magnified toward
the Elect in pardoning them, and giving Christ to dye, and saving them
notwithstanding their Sin. Now this may uphold the Soul in the apprehensi^n of
Sin, God never intended that Sin should hinder the Salvation of the Elect, but
to work good even out of sin, and to take occasion from thence to magnify his
Grace more abundantly; so let us have recourse to Grace manifested in Christ.
But though God by his absolute power might suffer sin, etc. yet sin is never
theless sinful, and so we ought to withstand sin to the utmost; and we must not
do Evil that Good may come of it: that is the note of Reprobates whose
damnation is just. Romans 3.8.

4. The sin of Believers may cause the hiding of love, but no hatred; they have
not Indignation and Wrath, but Compassion: God looking on the relics of sin
as their infirmities, that he will heal. Now as Believers out of infirmity do
sometimes sin, so it is an infirmity to infer hatred in God towa^ds them for
it; for if so, then the Grace of God is not sufficient for them, and Christ
died in vain for them, etc.

5. The sin of Believers may grieve the Spirit, but does not make the Spirit an
en^my to Believers. Greive not the holy Spirit wh^reby ye are sealed to the day
of Redemption, Ephesians 4.30. The sins of Persons sealed by the Spirit, do greive
the Spirit; this is not to be understood properly, because the Spirit is not
subject to like Passions with us, but he is said to be greived,

1. Because sin is contrary to the mind of the Spirit. Romans 8.27. We grieve at
any thing that happens against our minds.

2. Contrary to the motions of the Spirit.

3. To the Graces and Comforts of the Spirit, which call for an obedient
walking and an holy Conversation.

4 Contrary to the Office of the Spirit, viz. to comfort; the Spirit delights
in comforting; so it does as it were grieve the Spirit to be hindered from it.

5. The sins of Persons sealed by the Spirit are said but to grieve the Spirit,
not to stir up Wrath and Indignation, and a readiness to revenge.

6. Consider that sins should grieve, and but grieve the Godly; they should not
doubt of Love, and fear Wrath, if once the Soul trusts in the Name of the Lord,
and stay upon God: If once ye be founded on the Rock Christ then your sins
should work grief for God dishonored, not fear of God's Wrath: Grief for God
dishonored, and Joy in God well pleased by Christ, may consist together: This
is the way o^ the Gospel, but indeed a narrow way, too hard to keep in it; if
ye joy in God notwithstanding sin, then not to turn to the left hand, of making
light of sin; or if ye grieve, then not to turn to the right hand of
questioning the love of God, and so remitting joy.

7. God may afflict yet not hate; he may afflict and that grievously as he did
Job and yet be well pleased, whom I love, I rebuke and chasten, etc. Rev. 3.19.

8. For a Believer to doubt of Salvation that takes hold of Christ, and is
founded on him, is his sin: For

1. The Spirit of God does not witness that he is not a G^ild of God. If the
Spirit of God does convince a natural Man that is out of Christ, of his carnal
and cursed Estate, and then he say he cannot lay claim to the Promises of the
Gospel, to the Benefits of Christ; this is not his Sin, because it may be that
the Spirit is a Spirit of bondage in him, and witnesses this to him, and so
it is true: But, for such as believe in Christ and look for Salvation no other
way, such never receive the Spirit of Bondage again to fear, Romans 8.15. that
is, the Spirit does not bring them into bondage: The Spirit does not witness
that they are not the Children of God, for he should witness untruth then; but
their doubting Hearts bring them into bondage.

2. It Is through wan^ o^ Faith that such doubt of Salva^ion; it is for not
believing as they ought, and that is their Sin: and Christ may rep^ove them as
he did Peter, O thou of little Faith, wherefore did it thou doubt? As God has
made the Salvation of Believers sure in Christ, etc. so they ought to believe
it to be sure^ and it is their Sin to doubt of it; not to believe is to make God
a Liar. 1 John 5.10.

Section 7.

2. How Believers ought to carry themselves in the want of Assurance.

1. Desire it, thir^^ and long for it; account it a Mercy worth the enjoying,
better than all the World can afford; and God has promised to satisfy the
hungry with good things, and not to send them empty away: so then breath after
it, as the Heart pants after the waterbrooks.

3. Wait with patience of God, till he return with joy and peace into the Soul.
I will wait on God that hides his Face from the House of Israel. Isa. 8.17.

3. Exercise Faith of adherence when you want the Faith of evidence, this is
the advice of the Prophet, Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord,
and obeys the voice of his Servant, that is, Christ. I^a. 42.1. That fears
the Lord, and serve him in Christ, being acquainted with the great Mystery of
Godliness; here is Faith of adherence, which Judges Christ worthy of Glory; and
walks in darkness and sees no light; here is want of Faith of Evidence: now
what should be done in this case? Still trust; still hold fast Christ, look for
Salvation in him and none else; trust in the name of the Lord, trust to the
mercy of God, his abundant Grace manifested in giving Christ as sufficient to
^ave you; and stay on his God. God i^ his God though he knows it not; stay upon
him, let the Soul he fixed on him, and say as Job, though he kill me I will
trust in him: If I perish, it shall be at the feet of Mercy; and then though
you may walk in darkness for a time, yet the Lord shall be a light unto you.

S^ction 8,

From the second sense of these words, work out; that is, desire and endeavor
this that Salv^tion begun to be wrought out, may be perfected; so much the word
signifies. Romans 7.18. How to perform that which is good I find not.

Doct. 2. The perfecting of Salvation that is begun should be the great desire
of all Believers; when it is begun to be wrought, they should desire that
Salvation may be wrought out: a Person begun to be saved, should long to be
saved to the utmost. Here consider a few things.

1. The Salvation of Believers shall be perfected. This is a work that shall be
finished. As in the first Creation of the World, things were imperfect at
first; but God did not cease Creating till Heaven and Earth were finished, and
all the Host of them: so at the first Conversion, when Salvation first comes to
the Soul, it may be it is very imperfect, a little Faith, a little Love, but
weak and faint breathings of Spirit, but smoking Flax, a bruised Reed: But God
will go on in this work till every Saint be made perfect and all the Host of
them. Phil. 1.6. He that has begun a good work will perform it until the day
of Jesus Christ: He wi l keep Believers till the day of Christ, and perfect
their Happiness in that day which shall endure for ever. Christ dying, said it
is finished; that is, the types of the Law are fulfilled: what Christ had to do
toward the obtaining Man's Redemption was finished; for Satisfaction,
Reconciliation, Merit, all are fi^ished; and nothing remains but the
application of Christ to the Soul, and bestowing the Benefits purchased for the
Elect by Christ; that Christ lives to finish; he died to finish the work of
Satisfaction and Reconciliation; he lives to finish the work of Sanctification
and Glorification: He died to finish the work h^ had to do respecting God's
paying the price (...) Redemption, recompencing him for the d shono^r that was
done him by Sin: and he lives to finish the work he has to do respecting the
Elect; which is, to pour out h^s Spirit into their ^^^^ts, and to form them for
hims^^l, and to fashion Soul and Body like to himself, this is the meaning of
that place. Romans 5.10. For if when were Enemies. we were reconciled to God by
the death of his Son; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his
Life. He died to finish a work with the Father for Men, making peace for them;
he lives to finish a work in them, which is to make them Holy and Happy: and
whatever Enemies there are to the happiness of the Saints, Christ shall subdue
them. 1 Cor. 15.25. He must Reign till he has put all his Enemies under his
Feet; and till all his Members be conformed in glory to him, and placed in
Glory with him. Joh. 17.22.24. The Glory that thou have given me, I have given
them. Now Believers have a right to, but they shall also have the possession of
it; they shall partake in Christ's Glory, in all his Glory. As the Son of God
has the Divine Nature, so they are Sons of God and partakers of the Divine
Nature. As Christ is at the right hand of God, so they sit with him; Christ is
King, they Kings, etc. There Is no Glory that Christ has, but they that are
Saints shall partake in: see Ephesians. 4.12, 13. He gave Apostles for the perfecting
of the Saints, till we all come to the unity of Faith and Knowledge of the Son
of God, to a perfect Man, to the Stature of the fullness of Christ. Christ had a
twofold State; first, of Humiliation, subject to Infirmit^s; inward, as
Hung^ings, Weariness, Grief, etc. and outward, as the Reproaches of Men,
Contrad^ction of Sinners, etc. But in this State he was the Son of God, though
he did not outwardly appear in the Glory of the Son of God; and he did the will
and work of him that sent him: he went about his Father's business, and he had
the Father with him, because he did always those things that pleased him: this
was Christ's Stature that he did grow to on Earth: Now Believers in this World
grow to this measure of the Stature of Christ, or this age of his whilst he was
in the World. Secondly, His Glorious State of Exaltation. This is a state of
fullness. Christ being advanced to fullness of Glory. In his first estate he had
the fullness of the Godhead bodily. In this latter the fullness of the Godhead
clearly manifested forth in him. And he had as much Glory in his humane Nature
as the fullness of the Godhead in him can bring into him: this is Christ's
measure and portion of Glory. Now the Saints shall come to the measure of the
statute or age o^ Christ's fullness, that is, which Christ has as Man, be like
to Christ in state of Knowledge and of Glory; as in his growing estate, so in
his perfect estate. Christ had as much Glory as he is capable of from the
fullness of the Godhead in him; So they shall have as much Glory as they are
capable of from Christ dwelling in them, as the Father in Christ, as it is John
17.23. I in them, thou in me, that they might be made perfect in one. This is
the Saints measure.

2. There are several degrees by which the Salvation of Believers is carried on
to perfection. It Is much disputed amongst some whether there are degrees of
Glory in Heaven: whether one Saint differ from another in Glory, but this is
besides the business I have in hand, nor need it to be spoken unto. Somewhat
may be gathered against that Opinion of different degrees of Glory, from the
place last cited, till all come to the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. All shall have such a measure as they are capable of from Christ. But
this is evident, that it is by several steps and degrees that Saints attain to
that measure of Glory. As it is said of those that did come from the remote
parts of Judea to worship at Jerusalem, Ps. 84.7. They go from strength to
strength to appear in Sion. They increase in strength and courage till they
they come to Sion. So Believers increase in strength in Faith, Love, Knowledge,
Holiness till they come to Heaven. Believers go from strength to strength. The
Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith, Romans 1.17. that is, there
are degrees of Revelation. We are changed from Glory to Glory. The Glory of
Saints is pe^fected by degrees, 2 Cor. 3.18.

The Saint^ are first Bab^s, then Men in understanding; they know first in
part, after as they are known; first darkly, as through a Glass, and then Face
to Face. Now is our Salvation nearer, etc. Romans 13.11. Saints at their first
conversion are further off from Salvation; then they come nearer and nearer to
it daily. Christ reveals himself gradually, as Cant. 2.8. Christ coming toward
the Spouse did reveal himself gradually; She first hears his Voice, The Voice
of my Beloved, and then has some sight of him: Behold he comes, leaping on
the Mountains, and skipping upon the Hills; overcoming difficulties, leaping
over all, so as that nothing hinders access. And he comes swiftly, verse 9.
Behold he stands behind our Wall, and looks forth, or in at the Window, yet
without doors, not so near as he will be, yet nearer now then he was before The
Spouse first hears his Voice, and then sees him coming, and then at last enjoys
his presence. I have many things to say, but ye cannot bear them now, John
16.12. In that condition they were not capable of bearing more: In this mortal
estate Believers cannot bear all, that they shall hear o^ Christ: they must
dye, and this mortal must put on immortality* and so shall they see and enjoy
Christ perfectly. And as Christ reveals himself so the Spirit is poured out
gradually, perfecting knowledge, perfecting holiness by degrees. As the ways of
God manifesting himself to the World, have been by degrees, proceeding from
less perfect to a more perfect way of manifesting himself, as first in
Creatures made, then in Christ, and in Christ first, set forth by carnal
things, Types, and Shadows representing him; then through Christ coming in the
Flesh, raised up to Glory, and ruling the World by him, till all his Enemies
are subdued, and the Elect perfected, then the Son shall be subject that God
may be All in All; Then the Godhead shall most gloriously appear: So it is by
degrees that God manifests himself in the hearts of the Elect; and by degrees
that they are brought nearer and nearer to him. Here they enjoy him by Faith,
in Heaven by Vision: here by Fellowship with the Spirit, having the Spirit
bringing in Light, Grace and Comforts into the Soul; in Heaven they shall see
God to be All in All, and be in his presence.

3. The great Desire of Believers, and Endeavor ought to be that their
Salvation may be perfected. When God has begun to save them, they should
desire to be saved to the utmost. As God did require of the Jews three times a
year every Male to appear at the place, which God did set apart for worship;
and leave their Wives and Estates to the Protection of God, who promised that
the Enemy should not so much as desire their Land at that time: This is to show
that Believers ought above all to desire to appear before God, and to be in his
presence; and should be content to leave all worldly enjoyments. There Is
nothing to be so much desired, so much prized as to be with Christ. This you
may see both in Precepts and Examples, Heb. 12.1. Let us run with patience the
Race that is set before us. The business of a Christian should be to run
toward Heaven: As the Jews going out of Egypt, their business was to go to
Canaan; so the great business of a Christian is to travel toward Heaven, and
this should be their great desire. As those that run in a Race strive to be at
the Mark; they put forward with all their might: so do Christians with all
their Souls and strength. Heaven, and nothing but Heaven should be looked on as
the place of rest, looking unto Jesus. Make Christ your pattern. What was his
great desire? Father glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee. Glorify me
with the Glory I had with thee before the World was. There was Joy set before
him: so Christ is set before the Saints, revealed to their Faith; they should
long to see him as he is, Glory is set before them, etc. In the World is
Vanity, in themselves Corruption, Crosses on all hands, Shame, Reproach, etc.
Before and above all, in Heaven is set everlasting Joy, Pleasures for evermore.

Where this Joy is there Believers hearts should be; the mind, the will, and
affections of a Believer should still be traveling toward this Joy, running a
Race toward Heaven: as it is said of the Creature, Romans 8.21. The earnest
expectation of the Creature waits, etc. The Creature is in Bondage to
Corruption, Slaves to Lusts; this is contrary to the end for which the Creature
was made; they naturally make toward that end, to be Servants to the Saints,
and to be instrumental toward the manifesting the Glory of the Creator, and to
be free of Bondage: So should Saints desire perfect freedom from Bondage, to
enjoy the Liberty, the Inheritance, portion, and perfection of the Sons of God,
in the presence of God.

This has been the great desire of Believers, Romans 8.23. We which have
received the first Fruit of the Spirit; What is meant by these? The beginnings
of Grace, Knowledge of Christ, Faith, Love, Humility, Heavenly Mindedness, the
Comfort and Consolations of the Spirit; we that have received these, groan
within our selves. We would receive the whole lump of the Spirit, there are
burdens we groan under. Sin is a burden, when the Spirit has wrought Holiness,
earthly things are a burden; they cannot be gotten but by the sweat of our
brows; when Salvation that is purchased by Christ, is believed, then mortal
estates are a burden: when immortality is brought to Light, then to be out of
Christ's presence is a burden; where Glory and the fullness of Christ is
revealed, we groan waiting for Adoption, etc. There Is Adoption in making you
Sons, and there is Adoption in bestowing the Inheritance, Glory, and Liberty
which belongs to them, as they are the Sons of God.

They that are Sons, and have the Spirit of Sons crying to God Abba, would
fully enjoy all the Privileges, all the Glory, and all the love which belongs
to them, as the Sons of God in Christ, Phil. 1.23. To depart, and to be with
Christ is far better, beyond all comparison better: there is Joy without Sorrow,
Holiness without Sin, Knowledge without Ignorance, Eternity of all. So to be in
Christ in the World is infinitely better, then to be in the World enjoying the
contentment of it, without Christ: And to be in Heaven with Christ is
exceedingly much better, then to enjoy Christ only in the World. The state of a
Christian in Heaven is exceedingly beyond the state of a Christian on Earth,
though the Body may dye and be laid in the Grave. Phil. 3.13, 14. I count not
my self to have apprehended, I have not Knowledge enough, I have not Grace
enough, I have not enjoyment of Christ enough; it was much he had, yet not
enough, but this one thing I do, this is my main business forgetting the things
behind, earthly things behind, and Grace received behind, so far as not to be
satisfied there with, I reach forward to the things before. The heart reaches
out, Faith is the hand that reaches out after; earnest desire carries the Soul
out unto them. I press toward the Mark, as a Man in a throng, etc. through a
throug of Lusts and Temptations, etc. For the price of the high calling, that I
might enjoy all that Glory and happiness, that God has provided in Christ. 2
Pet. 3 12. Looking for, and hastening to the coming of the day of God. That day
hastens, and is coming, be you hastening to it, i. e. your Hearts, and Souls,
by Faith, and desire that it may come, hasten to it.

Sect. 9.

Use ^. Information. By this it appears that many there are, that as yet are
not in the way of Salvation. Because they cannot say as Paul, this one thing I
do. Who?

1. Such as have nothing before them, but worldly things, worldly profits and
pleasures, that have their hope only in this Life, and not Hope as an Anchor
fixed in Heaven, but the love of the World fixed as an Anchor in the Earth,
whereby their Hearts and Souls are fastened to the World; that (with the two
Tribes) could be content to have their Portion on this side Jordan; that their
Houses, Lands, and Temporal Lives might continue for ever; would desire no
better Portion, that see more gain in Life than in Death: this is an evidence
that they have not drunk of the Water that Christ gives; their Souls have not
been filled with the Glory of the World to come; they are not acquainted with
the Riches of Christ; they know not the price of the High Calling of God in
Christ Jesus. This is an inseparable property of a true Believer, a desire to
have his Salvation wrought out, and finished; where ever this work is begun,
the Heart would have it finished; where Holiness is begun, the desire of the
Soul is to have it perfected. There Is no greater burden than Sin to a Gracious
Heart; all the Contentments of the World cannot content a believing Soul;
nothing beneath Heaven, nothing without the Presence of God, nothing besides
the Glory of Christ, can make it perfectly Happy: to be where Christ is, that
is best of all.

Faith will make us sojourn in the World; when you are in the way of Salvation,
perfect Salvation is the mark which the Soul presses toward. Now lay your
Hearts to the bond of this undoubted Truth, and do not conclude your selves to
be in the way of Life, if perfect Salvation be not the mark you press toward;
if it be not the presence of the Lord, that you account the perfection of
Happiness: if you could be contented with worldly Felicity, and your Desires
are only toward the things of this Life; then the root of all Evil is yet
alive, and growing in you.

2. Such as dream of a present perfection; that think they know as much as they
need to know, and do as much as is needful to be done. He that thinks he knows
enough knows nothing as he ought, 1 Cor. 6.2. He that thinks he has enough of
Christ, has nothing of Christ. Where there is true Knowledge of Christ begun,
the Soul is carried out with such earnest desires to know more, that it
accounts it self to know nothing. I forget that which is behind. Gal. 4.9. Now
we know God, or rather are known of God; we are known perfectly, but we do not
know perfectly. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended: I follow
after, I do not sit down satisfied with that I have, but I follow after that
which I have not, that I may apprehend that, for which I am apprehended of God.
God apprehends the Elect in Love; he apprehends by his Spirit, to bring nigh to
himself, to make Vessels of Mercy and Glory: and they desire to apprehend God,
and to be nigh him, and to be filled brim full with Mercy and Glory; they that
are full already, are most empty. Luke 1.53.

Use 2.

To stir up the Saints with more diligence to labor, to work out their
Salvation, as Peter exhorts Believers, 2 Pet. 1.5. Giving all diligence, add to
your Faith Virtue, to Virtue Knowledge, etc. So to add Faith to Faith, Virtue
to Virtue, Knowledge to Knowledge, Holiness to Holiness, Hos. 6.3. Then shall
we know, if we follow on to know the Lord. You that know any thing of Christ,
should follow on to know more, and you shall know more, if you hear, if you
search the Scriptures, if you ask more Wisdom and Knowledge. 2 Pet. 3.18. Grow
in Grace and in the Knowledge of the Lord. Grow in all Graces, in Faith,
Humility, Heavenly mindedness, and, as a great furtherance hereto, grow in
Knowledge.

That Salvation may be perfected, Consider what it is. The Apostle describes it
by two parts.

1. We shall see him as he is. 2. We shall be like him.
To see Christ as the Express Image of the Fathers Person; to know God in
Christ, and to enjoy him as your God, and to bear the Image of Christ perfectly
in your Soul and Body, this is complete Salvation. To see him in whom all
fullness dwells, and to be like him, that is the brightness of the Fathers Glory,
is Glory enough. So these are two great things that ought to be your mark.

1. Grow in the Knowledge of Christ. Math. 13.11. To you it is given to know
the Mystery of Christ. To know the great Mystery of Godliness; to you a Spirit
is given to lead you into all Truth; to you the Promises are made of being
taught of God: Desire Knowledge, and believe this Promise, so more and more
still of the Fullness, Excellency, and Glory of Christ shall be revealed to you.

2. Grow in a conformity to Christ. Christ is perfectly Holy, labor to be more
like him in Holiness; let the same mind be in you as in Christ, the same
Meekness, Compassion, Heavenly mindedness, and Zeal for the Glory of the
Father. Fashion not your selves to the World, but fashion your selves according
to the Pattern of Christ, and believe that your vile Bodies shall be fashioned
like to his Glorious Body; and let this Hope he your Happiness, till you
actually enjoy this Happiness.

Use 3. Direction about this great work, of working out our Salvation.

1. Propose right ends to your selves. Intermediate, and Mediate.

1. Intermediate ends, that you may have perfect Happiness, perfect Redemption
from all Evils, and that an end may be put to Sin and Sorrow, that there may be
no more sinning, nor no more sorrowing. The desire of your own good is not
unlawful, if you desire Heaven as your Happiness, Christ as your Life, the
presence of God as your best portion; this you ought to desire as your
happiness, the enjoyment of God as your chief good, and perfect likeness to
Christ as the most perfection, that you can be made partakers of. Thus did Paul
desire his own happiness, and good, 2 Cor. 6. We which are in this Tabernacle
do groan, etc, To be clothed upon, that immortality may be swallowed up of
life, that Vanitv may be swallowed up of fullness, Earthly things of Heavenly,
Temporal of Eternal; that is, you must not make it your Business to be Rich,
Great, Renowned, and Happy in the World; but to be Rich, Glorious and Happy in
Heaven. Lay not up for your selves Treasure on Earth, but in Heaven; say not to
your Souls, there are Goods laid up on Earth, but much Glory in Heaven,
Treasures which Moth and Rust cannot corrupt, nor Thief break through and steal.

2. Your own Happiness must not be your chief and ultimate end, but the Glory
of God. Desire that perfection of Glory may be given you, that God may have all
that Glory which he expects from you. Mark that Petition. Father glorify thy
Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee. Joh. 17.1. Desire your own Glory for
the Glory of God: Desire perfect Knowledge, and perfect Holiness, that you may
do nothing besides Glorifying God, that you may not come short of any degree of
Glory that he expects from you. It is the Everlasting Exercise of the Saints in
Heaven, to sing Hallelujahs.

2. Lay aside every Weight: As those that run in a Race will not load
themselves with unnecessary weights, and he that strives for Masteries is
temperate in all things. 1 Cor. 9.15. He will take heed of Surfeiting and
Drunkeness; so in running this Spiritual Race toward Heaven, lay aside every
weight, whatever may be a clog to your hearts, to slacken your diligence from
endeavoring after the increase of Heavenly perfections, whatever may draw down
your hearts from Heaven, what may remit your desire of Christ's appearing, and
of being in his presence. As,

1. The Love of the World: This will be a heavy weight on hearts to hinder
their ascending to Heaven. If the Mountains should fall upon your Bodies, these
would be such a weight, that you would not be able to stir in the least motion
under them: the love of the World in the heart, is as great weight upon the
Spirit, it suppresses breathings of Spirit after Heaven, it quenches thirstings
after Heavenly Glory: Take heed of loading your hearts with this weight, do not
load your selves with thick clay. So much immoderate love as there is to the
World, so much weight is in your Spirits, pressing them down from Heaven.

2. The cares of the World: These are a weight, they beget Heaviness in your
Spirits, and deadness unto Spiritual things, Luke 20.34. Take heed of
surfeiting, and drunkeness, and the cares of the World. Provident cave is not
forbidden, but immoderate car^king cares; take heed of being drunken with
cares; these cares are choking things; Spiritual desires, joys, motions, and
breathings, are in danger to be choked by worldly cares: This our Savior
shows in that parable of the Sower. Some Seed shall fall among Thorns, and the
Thorns sprang up with it, and choked it, Luke 8.7. By this is meant such
hearers as hear the word, and go forth and are choked, with the cares, riches,
and pleasures of the World, and bring no fruit to perfection, ver. 14. If you
give up your selves to these, this will hinder the bringing Fruit to
perfection. Worldly Men bar Fruit but not Fruits to perfection, no Faith, no
Love, Repentance Reformation; so if Saints be overtaken with these, this will
hinder much their growing onwards to perfection, in Knowledge, in Grace.

3. Worldly Sorrow. The Sorrow of the World works Death. 2 Cor. 7.10. The
sorrow of the World, that is, grieving more for Suffering than for Sin, growing
under the want of Temporals, more than of Spirituals: this is a weight, it
hinders desire after a Heavenly Life, pressing on to Salvation; this depresses
the Spirit. Godly Sorrow, what carefulness it wrought? what zeal? what vehement
desires, etc.? Lay aside the weight of worldly sorrow.

4. Sin. Especially the easily besetting Sin. Heb. 12.1. Who shall deliver me
from the body of Death? This is a weight in Paul's Spirit, when I would do
good, evil is present; there is a Law in my Members, etc. Desire that Sin may be
subdued, look to the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ, to free you from the
Law of Sin and Death; especially the Lusts that are most prevalent, that do
most easily prevail, that the Soul is usually overtaken with; your Dalilah,
Herodias, your Right Hand, your Right Eye. The following a Lust, takes off the
Heart from following after Knowledge, etc.

3. Run your Race with Patience; that is, first, be not angry if the Blessing
longed for be not presently bestowed: be not like those that ask, where is the
promise of his coming? Hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of God. Lam.
3.26. All my appointed time will I wait till my change come. Secondly, Be not
angry at the Crosses you meet with in the way of Salvation, etc. This was
Israel's prevailing Sin, whereby they vexed the Spirit, etc. They could not with
patience bear any Cross, in the way to the Land flowing with Milk and Honey.
Satan and the World set themselves against the Heirs of Salvation, that labor
to work it out, and with patience endure their buffetting: There Is great reason
for it; for our light Afflictions, which are but for a moment, work for us a
far more Exceeding, and an Eternal weight of Glory. Afflistion is not worthy to
be compared with the Glory that is to be revealed. Romans 8.18. and 2 Cor. 4.17.
Skin for Skin, all that a Man has, will he give for his Life; endures any
thing, parts with any thing, rather than part with his Life.

He that will loose his Life, shall find it; loose Earth to find Heaven, etc.
Psa. 84. Going through the Valley of Baca, a dry place, make a Well: this is a
Well; they going to God can satisfy themselves with his Law, etc.

Thirdly. Look to Jesus the Author and Finisher of Faith and Love, etc. The
Author and Finisher of Grace and Glory: Believe that he (who is mighty to save)
will carry on the work to perfection. The Jews had the Angel of God's presence
with them to keep them, and to drive out the Canaanites, etc. In a Wilderness
he fed them with Bread from Heaven; when they were ready to perish with t^irst,
he brought Honey out of the Rock, etc. When Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og
opposed them, he slew those mighty Kings, and he made a way through the Sea and
Jordan. Isa. 63.9. The Angel of his presence saved them, and in his Love and
Pity redeemed them, and bare them, etc. even thus Believers have the Angel of
God's presence, Christ Jesus, etc. He will bear in his Love and Pity, as by his
power, as the tender hearted Mother bears her Child in her Arms: Believers they
have Christ to overcome their Spiritual Enemies, Christ to feed them, and
supply them with Spiritual Nourishment, Bread from Heaven, and with water of
Life, giving by his Spirit; so look to Christ as the Author and Finisher of
Salvation. As the Cloud and Smoke by day, and the flaming fire by night, etc.
was a sign of God's presence, so God promises. Isa. 4.5. I will create on Mount
Sion and her Assemblies a Cloud, etc. the shining of a flaming Fire; Shining,
for Light to the Saints; Flaming, for Terror to the Enemies. Christ will be as
careful of Believers now, as of the Jews of old; believe that you have the
Angel of his presence, to conduct you to his presence: and so hold fast your
Confidence firm unto the end, and you shall receive the end of your Faith, the
Salvation of your Souls. Heb. 11.14. Christ is passed into Heaven as Priest, he
bare Sin on Earth, but now he is entered without Sin; Jesus the Son of God. So
hold fast your Profession.

Here Is an encouragement, there is no infirmities, but Christ has felt the
like. So then come boldly to the Throne of Grace, by Faith go to the Throne of
Grace in Heaven, for Grace to help you to Heaven; have Hope as an Anchor fixed
in Heaven on a Throne of Grace, fixed in Christ, so shall you be drawn nearer
and nearer to Heaven.

Section 10.

With fear and trembling. As the Gospel requires Men to set about a work of
following Christ, and of saving their Souls; so it gives directions for the
way, and shows where strength is to be had, etc. Here you have a manifestation
of the way and manner, in which Salvation is to be wrought out.

Whence the Doctrine is.

Doct. 3. Salvation is to be wrought out with fear and trembling. Whereas in
the former Exhortation somewhat seemed to be ascribed to the Will and Power of
Man, as if he could do somewhat toward the perfecting of his Salvation: This
that the Apostle adds in these, and the following words, takes away all color
and ground of attributing any thing to Nature in this great work. But shows it
to be the sole work of God's Grace and Power in Christ. And there being a
glorious manifestation of God in this work, revealed in the Hearts of
Believers, that is a ground of fear and trembling.

Now for the opening of this point, I shall show, what is not meant by Fear and
Trembling.

1. Not a slavish fear of Judgment. The fear of Christians should be filial, i.
e. fear of dishonouring God should restrain from Sin, not fear of being
destroyed, but an earnest desire of being accepted; Not a dread of Vengeance
should move you to walk in Holy and Gospel ways. Christians should not be
driven to seek Heaven merely out of fear of Hell; but drawn by the Glory of
Heaven, and Pleasures for evermore in the presence of God. Not driven by fear
of the wrath of the Lamb, but drawn by the Cords of the Love of the Lamb. The
fear of Christians should not be the fear of Slaves, but the fear of Sons: Not
the fear of Cain. Every one that finds me shall slay me, but the fear of
Joseph. Genesis 42.18. I fear God. Exodus 20.20. When Israel feared because of the
thunderings, etc. Moses said, Fear not, for God is come to prove you, that his
fear may be before your faces that you sin not. Fear of Evils God does not
account his Fear, his fear is not Sin. Believers are set beyond the fears of
Evil; they have no ground to fear wrath and vengeance: It Is an Infirmity to do
it, and proceeds from weakness of Faith. Psa. 23, 24. 4. Every Believer ought
to say as David: I will fear no Evil. But they may rejoice in Love, and expect
good, and count that all things shall work for good to them. In Christ they are
carried above all fears of Evil, for their Hearts should not fall down in them,
so that fear of Evil is not the thing here required; this is forbidden
elsewhere, as by Moses, fear not: so not enjoined here.

2. Fear of Doubting and Distrust. Trembling opposed to Confidence and full
Assurance is not here meant. Men in a natural condition out of Christ, may well
be under the tortures and rackings of this fear, they may be in bondage through
fear of Death. They may be tossed with fear and doubting, and say, as Romans
10.5. Who shall ascend into Heaven? Who shall descend into the Deep? Or, who
can tell whether we shall go to Heaven or Hell? But for Believers that are in
the way of Salvation, they ought not thus to fear; it is for such that have no
other Spirit, but the Spirit of Bondage; which Believers do not receive: If
they are in bondage, it is not the Spirit of God, but the unbelief of their own
Spirit is the cause of it. We have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we
may cry Abba Father. They are Sons, having the Spirit of Sons. Now as Christ
says, the Servant abides not in the House for ever, Joh. 8.35. He may be cast
forth; and so is subject to fears: So Men in a natural estate, are in danger to
be cast forth into outer darkness. But the Son abides ever, he is beyond fear:
so Believers are Sons, they are always in L^ve.

The Apostle Exhorts. Let us draw near with a true Heart in full assurance of
Faith, etc. Heb. 10.22. Let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace. Now if he
should exhort to fear and trembling, because of doubtings of Salvation; he
should conclude it to himself, and make void his other Exhortations. Again,
Believers are exhorted to be in a constant frame of rejoicing. Rejoice in the
Lord always, Phil. 4.4. We rejoice in hope of the Glory of God, Romans 5.1. But
fear of doubting is directly contrary to this joy. Of it the Apostle says. 1 John 4.18. Fear has torment. But against this, that place may be objected.
Heb. 4.1. Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest,
any of us should fall short. Where he seems to exhort, to fear of doubting, of
coming short of Heaven.

For answer, Consider. Because some there are that put their Hand to the Plow,
and look back again; some that have Lamps, and not Oil; a form, and not the
power of Godliness; a Faith that is not saving, but vain; so they may seem to
stand and walk in the way of Life* but because they have no more; not true
Faith in Christ, no^ real Interest in, nor Union with him, they come short, or
come too late; as it is said of the foolish Virgins. They came when the Door was
shut. So the Apostle Exhorts all to fear, that is to look well to themselves,
and to be searching for Salvation; and not content themselves with a form, with
shows and shadows; so as to think that their Profession and the performance of
some Duties, is enough to bring Men to Heaven. But they should labor to see
themselves stated in Grace, interested in Christ; that so they may know that
they shall not come short. The ground of this Exhortation is the Examples of
the Jews, they had the Promises, the Gospel was Preached unto them: that is,
Promises of rest in Canaan.

But many came short. Why; They did not believe. Now there are Promises of a
rest, a better rest in Heaven. Heb. 10.34. We have in Heaven, etc. Now fear,
etc. that is, look well to your selves, take heed you be not deceived, lest
your Hopes prove vain: Believe the Gospel, the promises of Life made in Christ,
and let the word of hearing be mixed with Faith. Take heed of an evil heart of
Unbelief: if the Gospel be not mixed with Faith, the Promises of the Gospel will
not profit you* Christ is of none effect to you, if you believe not in him: so
that this is an Exhortation to those that have not yet received Christ in their
Hearts, and entertained the Gospel Promises: and fear is to be taken for
heed-fulness, wariness, and utmost Diligence. If once they believe, and are
interested in Christ, they may be sure then, that they shall not come short.

2. What is to be understood by Fear and trembling. For this, consider the
Apostle is Exhorting you to work out your Salvation; that is, make it sure to
your selves; see God in Christ, reconciling and saving; and desire that it may
be carried on to perfection. Now amidst the beholding of God in Christ, and
desires of perfect enjoyment; there being so much of God declared in this
business, in giving Christ; and so much of his Glory shining forth; you must
fear, i. e. admire, and stand amazed at the love of God; giving Christ himself
to a wretched polluted Creature full of Enmity. Tremble at the infinite
greatness of Divine Love; be humble, and trust not to your own strength, but to
that infinite Grace and Love, in which God comprehends poor Creatures, for
carrying on Salvation to perfection.

S^ction 11.

That this may be the better understood, consider these particulars.

1. The Salvation of Sinners is the work of the whole Trinity.

Of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself. God in Christ through his Spirit, saves the Elect, and will make them
perfectly happy. The Salvation of Sinners is the Father's work by ordination,
he predestinates them to be conformed to the Image of his Son; he chooses to
Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. It Is Christ's
work by Mediation, he makes their case his own, they being under Sin, under a
Curse; he represents their Persons in undergoing Punishment, suffering Death,
Rising and Entering into Glory. Believers in him died, rose, etc. Romans 6.3 to
11. It Is the Spirit's work by renovation. God will have a change, of Carnal to
Spiritual; of Sinful to Holy; of Enemies to be made Obedient to the Lord Jesus:
In a word, to be conformed to the Image of Christ. Christ's work is to make
Peace, and to reconcile to God. The Spirit's is to conform to Christ in Grace
and Glory, to fashion Soul and Body like to him. Not that the three Persons are
divided in their Operations, that one does what another does not; but this is
to be understood by way of Appropriation. The Scripture does Appropriate to
each Person one work. The Salvation of Sinners is the Father's work by purpose,
Christ's work by price, Redeeming out of Misery; the Spirit's work by
performance, shedding abroad God's Infinite Love in the Heart, showing God in
Christ, God giving Christ, Christ giving himself to suffer Death for them: the
Spirit works to will and to do, to consent to be saved by Christ, to take
Christ for Savior and Lord, and to believe in him as the Author of, and to
follow him as the C^^tain of Salvation.

2. There Is a most glorious manifestation of God in this work. All God's works
are God's manifestations: they are his visible appearances and outgoings. The
Creation was the first manifestation of God; The Heavens declare his Glory, and
ths Firmament show his handy work, Psa. 19* 1. Romans 1. His eternal Power, and
Godhead is seen by the things that are made, as it is said of Christ. Joh. 2.11.
This beginning of Miracles he did, and manifested forth his Glory. The most
glorious manifestation of God is in Christ, the Word being made Flesh, the
fullness of the Godhead in him being made Flesh, made Lord and King. He has
Love, Power, and Wisdom, to set up his Kingdom, and to make his Enemies his
Footstool. This is the greatness of Gods works, Godman being made by this
work; that is, the Union of God and Man in one Person, the effect of this work.

The second Glorious Manifestation next to this, is in saving Sinners by
Christ. He shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in them that
b^lieve. A Manifestation of Power, exceeding greatness of Power. As great a
work to save a Sinner, as to raise Christ from the dead! Of Wisdom, in finding
out a way to save Sinners, so as that Justice might be satisfied, and love be
abundantly discovered; an infinite Satisfaction, an infinite Obedience, and an
infinite price to be paid. Where should such be found; Men were not able to
give it, Angels could not bring it. The Son of God became Man and Mediator, an
infinite Person undertakes to lay ^down his Life, and to yield Obedience; and
so an infinite Price is paid, and infinite Obedience is yielded, etc. Here the
Wisdom of God is most clearly seen. And,

Lastly. Here Is a most glorious discovery of Mercy and Grace; he makes known
the Riches of his Grace on the Vessels of Mercy. When Sinners a^e Enemies and
nothing lovely, God loves the Elect, so as to give Christ to taste Death for
them; and Christ loves not his Life to Death. He that was in the form of God
humbles himself, and puts himself into the miserable condition of Sinners, that
he might translate them into his own Glorious Estate; whom he will make like to
himself, and partakers with him; of the Divine Nature, and of all his Glorious
Privileges.

3. This Glorious manifestation of God in the Soul, cannot but work fear and
trembling in it. Fear will be the effect of the discoveries of God to the
Creature. There is so much Majesty, Glory, and Greatness in it, that will awe
the Heart of the Creature. When God appears in the Glory of his Justice, and
Almighty Power, Then the wicked shall fear. The Kings and Captains, etc. shall
cry to the Mountains, to hide them from the wrath of the Lamb. And the
discovery of the infinite goodness of God will work fear in the Hearts of the
Saints; they shall fear the Lord and his Goodness, because his goodness is the
goodness of God, that is, infinite and exceeding great goodness to sinful
nothing Creatures. The apprehension of this should work fear. Hos. 3.5.

Section 12.

Now this fear consists,

1. In admiration of this Glory revealed. Such Wisdom and Grace, that if it be
apprehended, will raise the Soul in holy admiration of God. David said, he was
fearfully and wonderfully made. Psa. 139.14. In respect of the excellent frame
of the Body, such variety of parts, and so fitly composed; therein may be seen
so much of the Wisdom and Power of God as may make the Heart wonder and fear
that God that made him: so Persons that are saved, are fearfully and
wonderfully saved; if it be revealed in the Soul, how this work is undertaken
and carried by the Trinity; The Father loving from Eternity, Christ dying in
the fullness of time; and the Spirit living, and acting in the Soul, making it
his own Habitation; Sinners become the Apple of God's Eye, precious, etc.
Christ's Members, Joint Heirs with Christ, Sinners having access to God, and
are partakers of the Divine Nature. What a fearful and wonderful thing is this?
So much favor shown by God to a Sinner, when there is so vast a disproportion
betwixt him and God, may well beget admiration. When Saul said he would give
David his Daughter to Wife. 1 Samuel 18.18. He replys, What am I? What is my
Life, or my Father's Family in Israel, that I should be Son in Law to the King?
The apprehension of the great disproportion betwixt him and Saul, was the cause
of his so much admiring at the favor that was shown him; so there is the
greatest disproportion betwixt God and Sinners. As Men, and as Sinners. As Men,
they are not so much as a drop to the Ocean. And as Sinners, as great as is
between Light and Darkness, etc. That such Creatures should be comprehended in
love, and brought near to God* etc. What am I? and what is my Life, that I
should be brought hitherto? Deuteronomy. 28.58. Thou shall fear this great and
dreadful name, the Lord thy God. God that is Infinite! Thy God that art a poor
and inconsiderable Creature! God that is so holy, thy God that art so unholy!
God that is Just, and will not clear the Guilty, thy God that has^ so much
abounded with Sin, clearing thee of Guilt that have so much abounded with
Guilt! This Name, This is dreadful! this is a wonderful, and dreadful
Manifestation of God: As the Psalmist says. They that know thy Name, they will
put their trust in thee. So they that know this Name, The Lord thy God, will
fear and tremble. They cannot but admire at such Infinite Grace; when the Son
of God was made Man, the Word made Flesh, and Crowned, etc. This was a dreadful
Manifestation of God! There Is cause to admire at the Grace that was shown to
the humane Nature of Christ; whence, as the Apostle says. Heb. 2.6. One
testifies, What is Man that thou art mindful of him, etc. Thou Crownest him
with Glory and Honor. And Christ himself is said to fear as Man: So as Man he
is most deeply sensible of, and affected with the Grace shown to the humane
nature. So a Believer may say, What am I, that God should be so mindful of me?
That he should visit me with Salvation-love? That I, that am the lowest, and
worst of Creatures fit for Hell, and to be a Companion for Devils, should be
Coheir with Christ, and partaker with him, of all his Glory?

2. In Humility. The discovery of such Grace and Goodness, will bring down high
Imaginations; and beget lowliness of Mind; it will convince the Creature of its
own emptiness, and nothingness: This has been the effect of the appearance of
God, both to Men and Angels. Isa. 6.2. The S raphins had six Wings, with twain
they covered their Faces, and with twain their Feet. Showing, that beholding
the Infinite Glory of God, they were as it were ashamed of themselves; of their
own emptiness, and the great disproportion betwixt God and themselves: that
they were far from high mindedness, and boasting in any perfection; they saw
that what they had, they had from God; and that perfection they had, came
Infinitely short of God; and so rejoice in him, and not in themselves. And so
many Saints. Isaiah cried, Woe is me! I am unclean, for mine Eyes have seen the
King, the Lord of Host, etc. And Peter said, when the Glory of Christ's Godhead
appeared in that Miracle. Depart from me, for I am a sinful Man, O Lord. An
Expression of Humility, and of an opinion of his own unworthiness: even so the
Infinite Grace, and Love of God in Christ's appearing, this begets Humility,
this pulls Pride out of the Throne, and high mindedness: Pride falls before the
discoveries of God in the Soul: This is that especially which is to be
understood in this place, by Fear and Trembling. The Scripture uses this
Expression sometimes, and still it signifies Humility, as Psa. 2.11. Serve the
Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling Be humble in your Service, trust not
to your own Strength; be humble in your Rejoycings, take not the Glory to your
selves: say that you are nothing, rejoice in God, and give Glory to him. Again.
1 Cor. 2.3. I was with you in weakness, and fear, and much trembling: that is,
I did not boast my self to be some body. I was not with you in a proud and
stately deportment; I did not seek Glory, with ostentation of Eloquence; but I
carried my self with humility amongst you. Ephesians. 6.5. Servants be Obedient to
your Masters with fear and trembling; that is, be humble and submissive, not
proud and stout against them: so work out your Salvation with fear and
trembling, and be clothed still with Humility, both in Heart and Life; be far
from high mindedness, and carnal Confidence; think not to travel toward Heaven
in your own strength. Romans 11.20. Be not high minded but fear. So see the love
of God, let your Eye be fixed on Christ, who died to reconcile, and lives to
save you. Behold the Trinity carrying on the work; the Father loving from all
Eternity, Christ mediating; and rejoice in the first fruits of the Spirit;
believe that the Spirit of Christ that is dwelling in you, shall renew and
Sanctify you, till Sin be wholly abolished; and shall quicken your Mortal
Bodies, and make them like to Christ's glorious Body: and know that you can do
nothing of your selves; and so you shall work out your Salvation with fear and
trembling. So that Fear and Trembling is to be taken here.

1. As opposed to Hardness, Stupidity and Insensibleness. That when God
manifests forth the Glory of his Infinite Goodness in Christ unto Sinners, the
Heart is no way affected or moved herewith, a fearing and a trembling Heart,
that is here meant is a Heart affected with the shining forth of God's Glory in
Christ. God that commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our
Hearts, giving of the light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of
Jesus Christ. Now when the Heart is affected herewith and raised in admiration,
then it fears and trembles.

2. As opposed to high mindedness, to high thoughts of a Man's self, of his
worth and goodness. A fearing and trembling heart, is a heart sensible of its
weakness and nothingness,

3. As opposed to Carnal Confidence, to trusting in a Man's own Righteousness
and Power; as if a Man could merit Heaven by his Righteousness: or travel
thither in his own strength.

Section. 13.

Use 1. Is of Information. By this it appears, that many there are, to whom the
way of Life and Salvation is not discovered: All that think they are traveling
to Heaven are not indeed going thither. Many there be that think they are
working out their Salvation, but there be but few that work it with fear and
trembling* This is the temper of those that God has brought into the way of
Life; their hearts are fearing and trembling hearts; hearts admiring at the
Riches of Divine Grace; hearts that are humble, and broken off from Carnal
Confidence: But how few among the multitude that would be thought to be
traveling toward Heaven, have these fearing and trembling Hearts? Romans 3.17,
18. The way of Peace have they not known, there is no fear of God before their
Eyes. Christ is the way of Peace; Life and Salvation is the wo^k of the whole
Trinity. If the way of Peace be known, and the Trinity be looked on as engaged
in this work, it will work fear: but the fear of God is not before the Eyes of
many; and so the way of Peace have they not known. As many as are without fear
and Holy trembling, (I do not mean slavish fear, but reveren^ial fear) are yet
ignorant of the way of Life.

1. As many as have not their Hearts deeply affected with, and s^nsible of the
Glory of Divine Grace and Goodness in Christ to Sinners. As many as do not fear
the Lord and his Goodness, as many as hea^ing yet do not taste that the Lord is
gracious. The Apostle speaks of some that counted the Blood of the Covenant as
a common thing; they not apprehending the price and value of it, So many there
are that look on the glad Tidings of the Gospel, the discoveries of Divine
Grace, and of the Infinite Love of the Lord Jesus, but as common things; and
are no way taken with the Glory of the Gospel, and the Riches of Divine Grace
therein discovered, This insensibleness of Heart toward the precious things of
the Gospel, this unaffected Spirit bewrays their Ignorance of the way of Life:
and what a common thing it is for Persons to make light of the Gospel, and to
neglect their Salvation that is spoken therein; nay, to despise the Gospel, and
to discover enmity against it? There Is nothing more contrary to fearing
Goodness, than the making light of, and despising Goodness: and there is nothing
more common than that. And what greater Evidence can there be than this, that
Men are not in the way of Salvation? Hos. 8.12. I have written unto them the
great things of my Law, but they were counted a strange thing, etc.

2. As many as are full of high thoughts of themselves. As the discovery of
this, that Salvation is the work of the Trinity; the beholding of God in Christ
will bring down high thoughts, so where high Thoughts are in the Throne, and an
opinion of Righteousness in Men's selves, this bewrays an Ignorance of the way
of Life. They do not fear and tremble, etc.

3. As many as work uncleaness with greediness, as freely yield up themselves
Servants to Lusts; fearing and trembling does not consist with such freedom in
Sinning: the fear of goodness will restrain from wickedness. A trembling at the
Infinite Glory of Divine Grace, will teach us to deny all Ungodliness. So
thought the Psalmist: Psa. 36.1. The Transgression of the wicked says within
mine Heart, there is no fear of God before their Eyes. There is no fear of God
in them that delight so much in wickedness; there is no trembling at the Glory
and Majesty of God; where there is so much delight in walking contrary to God.
They have not learnt Christ as the way of Life, that have not put off the old
sinful Conversation.

4. As many as do not fear an Oath. Where there is the fear of that great and
dreadful Name, The Lord thy God; where there is trembling in admiration of the
Glory of God; there cannot but be fearing of an Oath. Where Mouths are so full
of Oaths, Hearts are void of Fear. They do not reverence the Name of God in
their Hearts, that do so abominably profane it with their Tongues: Vain
swearing and fearing of God do not consist together. Eccl. 9.2. A continued
custom of profaning the great and dreadful Name of God, and working out
Salvation with fear and trembling, are things inconsistent. He counts the Name
of God but a common Name; he has very slight thoughts of God, that takes his
Name in vain,

Section 14.

Use 2. Exhort. To consider well this that the Apostle says. Work out your
Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Believers should have full assurance of
their Salvation, and great confidence that God will carry it on, and yet fear
and tremble. This fear is not contrary to, but the Fruit of Faith and
Confidence: The more is known of Divine Love and Grace, the more we should
fear. This fear and trembling shall continue, even when the Saints are made
perfect, and their Salvation accomplished. The Seraphims fear and tremble in
the beholding of Infinite Glory; and Christ as Man fears and trembles at the
Glory of the Godhead dwelling in him. This is the best frame of Heart, a
fearing and trembling frame, Reverencing, Admiring, and Adoring the Infinite
Greatness and Goodness of God to poor Sinners. Hereby God is acknowledged in
his greatness, and advanced; and the Creature brought low, and its nothingness
is acknowledged, amidst the boldness of access we have. Fear and Trembling is
planted in the hearts of Believers, that the infinite distance, and
disproportion betwixt God and the Creatures might be acknowledged. So endeavor
to abound in this excellent grace of fear. God is called the Fear of Isaac, he
was the God of Isaac. So said God, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,
and Jacob, and the fear of Isaac. So God your God in Christ, God appointing you
to Salvation in Christ, should be your fear. Fear, so as to adore his Glory,
admire his Grace, and fear to do any thing contrary to his Glory. Take heed of
a senceless benumbed Spirit, unaffected with the glorious discoveries of the
Divine goodness; take heed of high-mindedness, and of carnal confidence: be
like the Church that walked in the Fear of the Lord. So walk toward Heaven in
fear; run your Race in fear and trembling: you are running toward God, the
presence of God; to see him in Glory. God has given you some glimpses of
Glory, so fear the more you know of it, and the nearer you ^raw to God, fear
the more still, and be the more affected, 1 Pet. 1.17. If ye call on the
Father, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear, forasmuch as you are
Redeemed with the precious blood of Christ. There is a duty and the ground of
it, because you can call God Father, God that is infinite in glory, so
infinitely distant: can you call him your Father? What fear and reverence does
this call for from you? And how should you be affected with this unspeakable
goodness? And were you Redeemed with precious blood? How should this goodness
be admired and adored? So pass your time here in fear, all God's works are
God's manifestations, and all God's manifestations are a ground of fear, Rev.
14.7. Fear God and worship him that made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and the
Fountains of Waters. So fear him that gave Christ to dye for you when you were
Enemies, that loves you when you are Sinners. Here Is a greater work than making
the Sea and Fountains of Waters; the opening a Fountain for sin and
uncleanness; the Fountain of Christ'^ blood. Fear so as not to sin, Exodus
20.20. Let his fear be before your faces that you sin not. Let the fear of God
singly, without any other considerations restrain you from sin. As Levit.
19.14. Thou shall not curse the Deaf that cannot hear thee curse, nor put a
stumbling bl ck before the Blind, but thou shall fear thy God. That is, if you
may sin and conceal it from men* yet let the fear of God restrain thee from
sin. Fear so as to yield that glory, service, and obedience, which the
greatness, grace, and goodness of God calls for. This is a most excellent
grace. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom. It Is the most comely
frame of the Creature, that knows God; as praise is comely for the upright, so
^ear is comely: God delights in this temper. The proud he beholds afar off:
such as fear and tremble he dwells with, Ps. 34 8. O taste and see that God is
gracious. To give Christ, to give Heaven, what infinite goodness is this? v. 9.
O fear the Lord ye his Saints, etc.

Sect. 15.

Work out, etc. For it is God that works in you both to will and to do, etc.
The Apostles Exhortation, work ou^ etc. does not argue any free will in Man, or
power to save himself. Man considered in his pure natural state is wholly dead
to this work, he has no will to be saved, and is without strength to work it
out. A will to be saved and of doing any thing in the way of Life, is of God's
working. All are exhorted, because it is the duty of all to will to be saved;
and to walk in the way of Life: and all in Adam had once power, but as all
sinned in him, so in him they last the power. As for the Elect, God out of his
mee^ grace and love, intending to make known the Riches of his Glory, on the
Vessels of Mercy: works in their hearts a will and consent, to be saved by
Christ; and a walking in obedience to Christ, who is the Author and Captain of
Salvation, which is here meant by willing and doing.

So these words contain the ground, why Salvation is to be wrought out with
fear and trembling. Look on it as the sole proper work of God, see God willing
it and Christ working it out in himself; and God working in the heart: here is
infinite grace and power, tremble at the manifestation of it. Believe that your
Salvation shall be wrought out, and tremble at the glorious way in which it is
wrought. It Is God that works, so work it out with fear.

Doct: 1. They are willing and doing Christians that are in the way of Life.
They will and do, that are in the way of Life; they will good, and do good,
they will to take Christ, and they will Christ should save them: they will
Christ should reign over them; and are careful to do the will of Christ. Thy
people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Ps. 110.3. They are willing to
receive of Christ, and are willing to give to Christ; they are willing to
receive grace, and willing to give glory. Willing to live by Christ, and
willing to live to Christ. This is the will of a sound Christian, Cant. 6.12.
Mr Soul set me on the Chariot of Amminadab, i. e. of my willing people. That
which the Apostle speaks in relation the duty of ministering to the Saints, 2
Cor. 8.10, 11. you may apply to the whole duty of Christians. It is expedient
for you to do, and also to be forward. That is to do good, and do it willingly.
Now so perform the doing of it, that as there was a readiness to will, so there
may be a performance also. The sum is this* let Will and Action go together,
perform willingly, and will performingly. Let there not be performance without
a willing mind: nor a willing mind without performance of that which is good.

Sect. 16.

Now for opening this point. First shall be showed, how and in what respects,
such as are in the way of Life are willing Christians?

Now they are willing Christians in two respects.

1. In respect of consent of heart to be saved by Christ. They are made to will
this. To receive Christ as he is tendered in the Gospel, as the Way, Truth and
Life. As Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. Christ complains
of the Jews, How often would I have gathered you as a Hen gathers her Chickens
under her Wings, bu^ ye would not? Ye refuse to be gathered, and to be saved by
me. Christ says, I am come that they might have life, and complains of the
Jews, ye will not come to me that you might have life. Your hearts do not
consent to the taking of me as li^e. Now what the Jews refused and would not,
that ^^ch as are in the way of life do consent unto. They are willing to be
gathered by Christ. They disclaim a Self-sufficiency, Merit, or Righteousness,
and will have none but Christ. Christ my P^ace. Buy of my Gold, says Christ: I
offer it and will freely give, to those that are willing to take what I offer.
Now to Buy, is nothing but to consent to take what Christ offers. A Will to
embrace Christ in all his fullness, and glorious excellencies. This see in
Peter, To whom shall we go? We will abide in thee, and with thee: we will seek
life no other way. This Will was in Paul, I desire to be found in him, not
having mine own Righteousness. God offers a Covenant, he is ready to bind
himself to men: he calls on men to take hold on the Covenant, to take hold on
the Promi- Privileges, Grace, Blood, and Blessings of the Covenant. Now this
is to take hold of the Covenant: Consent to God's Covenant, be willing it
should be Ratified, and stand firm, betwixt God and you; that God may be yours
and you his. Con^ent to take God in Christ as your God and Father, and Consent
to be his in Christ. There is none good but one, that is God. God in Christ the
Supreme good: then the will is made perfect, when it closes in with God as the
Supreme good. Now this upright Will, this Consent of heart, is wrought in all
that are in the way of Life. Observe the steps by which Salvation is wrought.
First, the Father wills it, he chooses to Life in Christ. And wills that the Son
of God should be made Man, and dye, etc. This Christ was willing to do. Lo I
come to do thy will. Then the Spirit is given to the Elect, he makes their
hearts to Will to be saved by Christ; and draws forth a Consen^ from the heart
to be saved by grace in Christ, and no other way: then God and the Creature
both Will it.

God works two ways, for saving the Elect.

1. God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself. That is, God gave
Christ. Christ Satisfied his Justice: he punished sin on Christ, and God did
accept of what Christ did as perfect satisfaction. And God was in Christ. That
is, while Christ was Mediating, Redeeming, Dying, and Rising, God was in him.
Hereby he was strengthened for the work, and supported in it; hereby the price
of his blood is of infinite Value: his Obedience of infinite Merit, sufficient
to Redeem out of Misery, and to purchase an Inheritance of Glory.

2. God in the heart persuading to live to God in Christ, and to accept of Life
that is offered. Thus drawing in their hearts to God as the Life of the Souls.
God in the heart reconciling it to himself, making it willing to have Christ
rather than the World: and God rather than the Creature.

2. In respect of Consent of heart to serve God, in Christ. The heart of a
Christian is thus made willing, that God's will should be its Rule above its
own, it is made Subordinate unto it, as Israel said when the Law was given. All
that the Lord has spoken we will do. There was their consent that the Lord
should Rule them, and they would fear him. So this is the will of a Christian
under the Covenant of Grace, and in the way of Life. All that the Lord speaks I
will do. Lord (says Paul) What will thou have me to do? The Angels and Saints
cried with a loud Voice, etc. Expressing their willingness that Christ should
be honored as King, Rev. 5.11, 12.

There are two things to be observed, about the tenders of Christ in the Gospel
unto Believers.

1. The fullness of God that is held forth in him, even his Blood, the Way to it:
that is, Faith in his Blood, Mediation, and Intercession: hereby is access to
God.

2. The Terms on which Sinners must take him. For that, Christ says, If any Man
will follow me, let him deny himself, Self-righteousness, Pleasure, Profit, and
any thing that stands in opposition to Christ. Let him take up his Cross, and
choose to suffer rather than sin: and lose any thing rather then me, Math.
16.24. He must love Christ more than all things; then he will consent to leave
all things for Christ: So let him follow me, and go whither I lead him, walking
in such ways as I command him. Then the Man does will uprightly, when he
consents to take Christ in both these respects. There is fullness of good in
him, and I will take him, and depend on him for every good thing. This shall be
my Hope, Joy, Rest, and Life for ever. All good is treasured up in Christ, the
fullness of the Godhead is in him. He seeks no further, I have found him whom my
Soul loves, and am abundantly satisfied with him. I am Empty, Poor, Blind, and
Naked: I will buy of him Gold, White Raiment, Eye Salve, etc. And he has
bought my Life, bought my Service, and he is worthy of it. And I am not my own,
I will glorify him. This is the will of a sound Christian that is in the way of
Life.

2. They are doing Christians, Math. 7.21. Not every one that says Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father
which is in Heaven. He that is traveling in the way toward, Heaven, is
careful to do the will of the Father in Heaven. Doing his will is not the way,
so as Christ is the way; but such as are in the way are doing Christians. He
that looks on God as the Supreme Good, cannot but look on the will of God as the
Supreme Rule; and the Glory of God as the Supreme End: and if God be in the
heart, he will be in the Life. God is seen in his doings, he that dwells in God
will work in God; and will bring forth Fruit unto God; will abound in the work
of the Lord, and their labor will not be in vain in the Lord. Abound in Zeal
for God's honor, fruitfulness in the work of Righteousness: Labor in the
Lord, in the will of God, live Godly, Righteously, and Soberly, and you^ labor
shall not be in vain. Although your work deserve not a Reward, yet God will not
forget your work of Faith, and labor of Love. So Christians that are in the
way of Life, must be doing in the Lord; such as are traveling toward Heaven
must have their conversation in Heaven: they that walk toward God, must walk
with God.

Sect. 17.

Use. By this it appears that few there be that walk in the way of Life. Few
there be that WILL like Christians, and that DO like Christians; that act like
such that are in the way of Life. How few that set their Souls to the Gospel
that is full of precious Promises of tenders of Mercy, it holds forth the
glorious things of Christ: his infinite fullness to Sinners, and their freedom
of access to it. But are not these by most counted a strange thing? Are they
not made light of? How rare is it to find a plenary, and full consent of heart
to the proffers of the Gospel? A full will to take Christ and to enjoy God as
the Supreme Good. Hos. 5.4. They will not frame their doings to turn to God. So
you that follow the course of the World, that wallow in the pollutions of the
World, as Drunkeness, etc. Your doings are not framed like the doings, of those
that are turned toward God; that go toward Heaven with your Faces
thitherwards: your Faces, your outward aspects, and appearances are not
thitherwards; if the hearts be thitherwards, then the Face and outward
appearance are so also. The will is not right in many: as Particularly.

1: You that allow your selves in Sin, and consent to Lust. What I do, said
Paul, I allow not: That is, in doing any thing that is contrary to the will of
God he did not allow himself. Now if you allow your selves in Sin, if you Sin
with a secret allowance of Heart, that is contrary to the will of a true
Christian. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, if you consent to the Flesh,
and have no lusting against it, then your will, and consent is not the will of
those that are in the way of Life.

2. You that delight not in the Law of God after the Inner Man, your Wills are
not upright. That Will that is spoken of in the Text, is not wrought in you.
Romans 7.2^. I delight in the Law of God after the Inner Man. There Is a
suitableness in my will to the will of God: the will of God's working is, that
the will of God should be the Rule, or that it should stand. The Will of God's
working delights in the will of God, and rejoices in acknowledgement of his
Highness. Isa. 13.3. Let God be acknowledged as God, and be feared and loved,
etc. his will is against Sin, and it is for Holiness. Romans 7.16. If I do that
which I allow not, I consent to the Law that it is good. There is consent to
the Law, and dissent from sin; for where there is no consent betwixt your Wills
and the Law, your wills are not those in the Text.

The Will that is mentioned in the Text, is

1. A Will altogether persuaded to embrace Christ. Not like Agrippa's Will,
almost persuaded; not an imperfect Will, but a through Will; a Will that
consents to God as the supreme good; consents to come to Christ as the way of
Life, to take hold of Christ as the one thing necessary, and as most lovely;
and to walk in the way of the Gospel as the best way. Not like ths young Man's
Will, he was willing to follow Christ, but not to depart from his Riches to
follow Christ: He did love Christ, but his Riches more than Christ; this is but
an imperfect, an almost persuaded Will. Here was not a full consent, I will
take Christ whatever it costs me, though it cost me Lands, and Life, etc. This
through Will, this willing altogether to take Christ, and to obey the Gospel, is
the Will of such a one as is in the way of Life. Whoever go through to Heaven,
have this through Will. The young man that was but almost persuaded and had but
a half Will and Consent to take Christ, was but almost come to the Kingdom of
Heaven; not far, but almost willing, etc. and so but almost a Christian. Math.
12.34.

2. A Will altogether persuaded to take a whole Christ: a whole Will to have a
whole Christ. Christ as Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.
Christ to Redeem, and Christ to Reign over. I count all things but Dung to win
Christ, etc. Every thing in Christ is precious to a perfect Will. As his
Humiliation so his Exaltation over them: as his Obedience imputed (...) his
Dominion exercised over them. His Mouth is most sweet, yea he is altogether
lovely, in every part, in every Office. As the Will in the Text is not divided,
so not a dividing Will: as a Will not divided, halting between Christ and the
World; so not a Will dividing Christ, parting his Offices; which is a grea^er
evil than parting his Garments. As not half persuasion to have Christ, so not a
persuasion to have but half Christ; but a whole Will, to have a whole Christ.

3. A Will that is altogether toward Heaven; that is, that consents to this,
that Heavenly things are better than Earthly, Eternal better than Temporal; and
to be with Christ, is better than to be in the World: It Is better to be in
Heaven than in the midst of Earthly Pleasures and Delights.

2. For Doing consider, that their doing who are in the way of Life, is

1. A doing the will of God. When the Will is that God's Will may stand, there
will be an answerable doing. Such as are in the Flesh and broad way, have their
Conversation in Lusts, but such as are in the narrow way, have their
Conversation in the Will of God. Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this World, but
be ye transformed, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and
perfect will of God. An upright mind is that which proves, and finds out the
will of God, and is able to distinguish it, and say this it is. An upright will
is that likes it, and approves it, and consents to it; as it is Holy, Just and
Good. The doings of Christians, the just and upright doings, are obeying the
good and acceptable and perfect Will of God.

2. Obeying the Law as good, 1. because it is better to obey the Law than to
obey Lusts; God's will, than our own; not for our good only, but because the
Law is good; being drawn by goodness of Obedience, more than by the goodness
that comes from Obedience; because it is the Beauty of the Creature to be in
subjection to the Creator.

2 Because Obedience is acceptable, and approved of God. Obedience pleases God,
though it does not pacify him. To do goood and to distribute forget not; for
with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. Heb. 13.16.

There Is a double Head of Sacrifices.

1. A Propitiatory, purifying Sacrifice, that prevents displeasure from
breaking out because of Sin: as the Sacrifice of Christ offered on the Cross,
and none but this.

2. A Sacrifice that God is well pleased with, and accepts of, when he is made
propitious to a Person by Christ's Sacrifice, and by his Spirit works
Obedience. Thus doing good is a Sacrifice of Praise which God is well pleased
with. This is that which moves a sound Christian to do good; because it pleases
God: this is an excellent temper. Christ pleased not himself. So Christians
must not please themselves; it is God's Prerogative to do whatever pleases him;
but it is Piety in Christians, to do whatever pleases God. This is the will of
God, even your Sanctification: God's will is that Believers should be Holy,
doing good

3. Obeying the perfect will of God; that is,

1. There Is no Law, nothing that God wills to be done, that a sound Christian
rejects; although he fails in many points, yet he rejects not, nor despises any
point of the Law. The Carnal Mind is enmity against, and makes void the Law,
but the found Mind does not; he does not Sin out of contempt of the Law, but
through infirmity of the Flesh. As renewed, there is a delight In the whole will
of God. I delight in the Law of God after the inner Man. Romans 7.

2. The doings of those that are in the way of Life, are not for Life, but from
Life. i. e. They do not this and that Duty, they love not the Saints, they
abstain not from the Pollution of the World, that they may live in their
doings: their doings proceed from Life, and are not to procure Life. They know
that Christ has done enough to procure Life, he has obeyed the Law, and
undergone the Curse of it, for Righteousness to them: they look on Christ as
their Life, and not on their doings as their Life. They do not to deserve by
their doings, but because Christ has deserved their doing^. They do not count
themselves worthy by their Service, but do account Christ worthy of their
Service and Obedience. Their doings are not for Love, but ^hey flow from Love.
They serve not in the oldness of the Letter, but in the newness of the Spirit:
their Service is not old Covenant, but new Covenant Service.

Sect. 18.

Doct. 2. A will to embrace speritual good offered, or to do spiritual good
enjoined, is of God's working. Ephesians. 2.10. We are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works. A willing and doing Christian that is in the way
of Life, is God's workmanship* a Mind ^i^led with the Knowledge of God in
Christ, filled with his Glory shining in the Face of Jesus Christ; a Will drawn
out to God in Christ, in sweet embraces of his Love, full of spiritual
dispositions and desires, living in God, and living to God; a life full of good
works, abounding in the fruits of Righteousness to the Glory of God, is the
special and peculiar work of God. As God at first created the World out of
nothing, there was no prae^xisting matter which God did make use of, in forming
Creatures out of it, they did all come forth from God, and spring out from his
Divine Power and Godhead, who said, Let there be, and they were. So consider a
Man as spiri^ualiz'd, his Heart set into a spiritual frame, enjoying God as his
life, and living to him: thus he is made out of nothing, there is no
prae-existent will or disposition, to embrace good offered, to do any good that
is commanded, out of which he is educed. God does not by moral persuasions only
stir up any good in him, or blow up Coals of spiritual good in him, that are
lying hid under the ashes of Carnality and Corruption, like a Talent wrapped up
in a Napkin, and hid in the Earth; but by a Physical work, creating Life out of
Death in the Soul: he does not bring a greater Light out of a lesser, in the
Conversion of a Sinner, but commands Light to shine out of Darkness, as in the
first Creation; bringing in Spiritual and Divine Light where there was none. He
does not bring forth a full, perfect and complete will of Embracing Christ, and
of laying hold on the Covenant, out of a Velleity or imperfect will toward
spiritual good, toward the embracing of the Lord Jesus: but in all that are in
the way of Life, he creates such a will out of nothing; or out of that which is
worse than nothing; Enmity, Contrariety, etc.

God does not bring perfect Health out of Sickness, Strength out of Infirmity,
Soundness out of Wounds, Life out of an half Death, as the good Samaritan did,
by pouring in Oil and Wine into the wounds of him that was half dead: but God
in the Conversion of Sinners, brings Life out of Death, absolute, perfect
Death. He creates Holiness out of nothing; where there is nothing but
sinfulness, Purity out of nothing but Impurity, Obedience out of nothing but
Disobedience: So this work is called a new Creation. 2 Cor. 5.17. There is
nothing of the Spiritual Man remaining in them. The influence of God on the
Souls of Sinners in their Conversion is not like the influence of the Sun only
upon the Earth that is the Mother of Trees, Plants, Herbs, etc. the womb in
which they are begotten; there is a seminal Power and Virtue i^ the Earth to
bring them forth; but that is weak and inefectual in it self, till the Sun by
its enlivening and quickening influence, does strengthen and draw forth that
seminal Virtue: So there is no seed of Grace, no root of Holiness, no seed of
God, till God sow his Spirit in the Heart; he is the Well of Water that is
springing up to everlasting Life.

For Explication of this point, before I come to the proof, I shall
distinguish, first of Good, which is two fold.

1. Carnal, Outward, Worldly good, good that pertains to the Body and outward
Man. As the enjoyment of the things of the World in a sufficiency, for Food and
Raiment to preserve the Natural Life. This good Men can embrace, and they can
be diligent in their several Callings to get this Worlds good.

2. There Is a spiritual good that appertains to the Soul, which is the life,
perfection, and peace of the Soul. Eternal, Everlasting good, Meat that endures
to everlasting life: That is an All-sufficient God. There Is none good but one,
that is God: a God reconciled, believed, and enjoyed in Christ. This good a
natural Man cannot will or desire, because it is not possible for him to
apprehend it: There Is no suitableness in Man for it.

2. I shall distinguish of God's working, which is two fold.

.I In the old Creation. So 1. God gives to Creatures a being, some of one kind,
and some of another kind, and puts several faculties and dispositions into them
to work in several ways, and to bring forth Fruits of several kinds. He Created
the Sun and filled it with Light, and put into it a faculty, and disposition to
run a race in the Heavens, and to be the Light of the whole World. He Created
the living Creatures, and gave them a power to propagate after their kind.

2. God does by the same power, by which he created, preserve and continue them
in their beings. So it is said, they are created by God. That is confirmed, Rev.
4.10. Conservation being a continued Creation.

3. God does stir up the ^aculties, and Powers put into several Creatures,
determining to several operations. This or that every Creature shall do, God
concurring with them in their operations; so they all act and move by the power
of God in them: So it is said, In (...) we live, move, and have our being, Acts
17.25.28. The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters, Genesis 1.2. Which
imports the effectual quickening power of the Holy Ghost, which upholds, and
sustains, and gives virtue to all Creatures; whereby they live, move, and have
their beings. So that of all Creatures this is true, whatsoever they do, it is
God works them to do. What a Rational Creature wills, God works it to will i^ a
way suitable to the faculty of Rational Creatures, that is, in presenting of
objects to the understanding, thereby moving, and inclining the wi l. Now in
this old Creation there is no willing or d^ing that which is good without
special grace. There s no disposition or faculty toward it, there is no willing
of God to take him as the Supreme Good, and the will of God as the Supreme
Rule, the glory of God as the Supreme End. There Is no Piety, no Holiness left
in the Old Creation. Men are Corrupt, the Creature is subject to Vanity, and in
Bondage to Corruption.

II. Th^re is God's working in the new Creation, this begins in the Souls of
Men, etc. Herein God works, i. e. of Carnal makes Spiritual; from Spiritual
Death raises to a Spiritual Life, and stirs up to Spiritual Operations, and
brings into Holy ways. Now as in the Old Creation it is said, all live, move,
and have their being; so in this New Creation all live, move, and have their
being in God. God makes New and places Holy dispositions: and God preserves and
upholds them once made. God determines and stirs up by an actual influence of
his Spirit. So God works to will and do of his good pleasure.

For the proof of this Three things are to be cleared.

1. Consider. In the Natural man there is no free will to Spiritual good, no
embracing or doing of it. There is free will to Sin in the Men of the Old
Creation: Free will to natural actions, in as much as herein they act by
Knowledge and Election, choosing to do this, and not that. There Is no free will
to Spiritual good.

1. Because they are under such darkness that covers it, that they cannot know,
and apprehend Spiritual objects: Spiritual things cannot be apprehended but by a
Spiritual Eye. Now the Soul of every Man is Carnal, it is imprisoned in Flesh,
it dwells in thick darkness. As God is said to dwell in thick darkness, because
his glory is veiled and hid, 1 Kings 8.12. He is hid by the thick covering of
Carnal things, that he does not shine forth in Spiritual glory in the World: so
the Soul of man dwells in thick darkness. God is above it, and full of Glory,
Splendour, and Majesty in himself; Men are under it, they are darkness, so that
they cannot look beyond things Carnal: they see no good but in things Carnal.
The Carnal Man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he
know, 1 Cor. 2.14. So cannot choose and embrace them. What the mind cannot know as
good, the will cannot embrace as good. Now this mind cannot judge and apprehend
God in Christ to be the chief good. When Peter confessed Christ, who he was, he
replies: Flesh and Blood has not revealed this to thee, but my Father which is
Heaven, Math. 16.17. There Is no more of saving Spiritual Light in the Carnal
Man before the New Creation then there was of Natural Light before the Old
Creation. The Men of the Old Creation have Light whereby they know the
Creatures, and have Souls terminated in them: but not Light whereby they know
God. Whence the Apostle sais, Ye were darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. Men naturally dwell
in the darkness, and not in the Light of the Lord. They walk in the darkness of
Creature Comforts, and not in the Light of Divine glory. And that which
strenghtens this argument is, that Men love darkness that covers them. They had
rather dwell in darkness than in the Knowledge of the glory of God. Men do turn
from Light, and would turn the Light from them. A Man has free will toward
darkness that he chooses: but not free will toward Light, that he refuses.
Light is come into the World, into the Old Creation, but Men as Men in a
nat^ral temper as sinners, do evermo^e love darkness. There must be a New
C^ea^ion before Light will be received with Joy.

2. They are under a state of deadness to all Spiritual good, there is no free
will in a Dead Man to Spiritual Actions, and there is no m^r^ ^n a Natural Man
to Spiritual Actions. Ye are Dead in Trespasses and Sins. As Dead to Spiritual
Life, as the Bodies that lie in the grave to Natural Life: As dead to a Life of
God, as Dead Bodies are to a Life of Man. God lives in himself, he lives to his
own glory, to this whatever he does, tends. A Natural Man is alienated from
this Life of God.

3 Under a state of ^nmity against Spiritual good The Carnal mind is Enmity
against God, it is not subject neither indeed can be. So there is no free will to
Spiritual good in a Natural Man: the Carnal mind and Spiritual good are in
opposition one to another, Romans 8.7.

2. Man renewed and raised, made Spiritual, and having the Seed of God in him,
has free will to Spiritual good. As a Natural Man has free will in Natural
Actions, he acts with deliberation and Election: So Man renewed has free will
to Spiritual Actions. This is implied, God works to will, so in a renewed
estate a Man has free will. The Lord has shown what is good and what he
requires, and the S^irit in them stirs them up to good. God has shined in the
Heart, and in the Face of Christ, and has appeared in his Glory, shed abroad
his Love, and has taken away the Heart of Stone, in which there is no free
will to God, and given a Heart of Flesh in which there is a f^ee will to God, a
consent to be saved by Christ. The Spirit acting by Light and Love, convincing
the Soul of the worth of Christ; and stirring up to a following of the Lord
Jesus, that heart can reason out service. Christ is worthy because a Lamb
slain, etc. Rev. 5.9. And the heart chooses to serve Christ: here is free will to
the doing of good. When Christ is revealed in his Glory as most lovely, and the
Soul is brought into the treasures of good that are in Christ; and sees a
fullness in him, and then embraces him: here is a free will in embracing of good;
a choosing of Christ above the World. You are not sound Christians unless you
have such a free will as this.

3. That free will to Spiritual good which is in the renewed man, is of God's
working. As the Apostle sais, I live, yet not I, but Christ in me, Gal. 2.20.
So that a Believer has free will, and he acts freely in the ways of God, he
embraces what God shows to be good, he ch^ses the things that please God; yet
not he but Christ in him. Christ lives, Christ wills, and Christ works that
which is good in him. Without me ye can do nothing, John 15.5. There Is no free
will nor power to do good, till Christ be in the heart. I can do all things
through Christ strenghtening me. I can will as I ought, and do as I ought
through Christ. Christ determines to good actions, Christ stirs up to good
actions.

Now this will further appear by considering the great design of God in saving
Sinners. As all God's works are God's manifestations, so God intends in this
work a glorious manifestation of himself.

1. In his Power, as in the first Creation, his Eternal Power and Godhead is to
be seen, so in the second Creation, Ephesians 1.19. The Apostle prays that the
Ephesians might have the Spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation, to know the
exceeding greatness of his Power to them that believe. God's design is not to
make known the power of Nature and Free will: but his own power in the
exceeding greatness of it. If the Conversion of a Sinner be but by Moral
persuasion, by holding forth of Spiritual objects to be embraced; then how is
it that the exceeding greatness of power is manifested to them that believe, if
Faith come forth from free will, and power of Nature, only excited and stirred
up by Divine Grace? etc. So certain it is that Faith is made out of nothing:
there is no disposition in us toward believing, but it is a work of Divine Power
creating it in a Soul most empty of Spiritual good.

2. In his Grace, which he declares, first in the freeness of it. For it is by
mere Grace that any are called and justified. There Is nothing that that puts a
difference betwixt one and another, nor why one embraces the Gospel and another
does not, but mere Grace, 1 Cor. 4:7. These things I write that no one be
puffed up against another, for who makes thee to differ? If Men have free will
to good, if that Will be not merely of God's working, whereby one Man does
embrace Christ and lay hold on the Promise of Life, God does not make him to
differ, but his own free will does so: and so this opinion directly opposes the
design of the Gospel to commend Grace in its freeness. Free will established in
natural men makes void free Grace. As the Apostle says, If of works then not of
grace, else grace is no more grace, Romans 6.11. So likewise if of free will,
grace is no mo^e grace, and if of grace then nor of free will. So when the
Gospel is Preached to all and some lay hold on it, and embrace Christ in their
hearts, and follow him, and others refuse, and go on in evil ways leading to
destruction: What makes the difference? Divine Grace God works a will in one
and not in another; the one he brings out of darkness, and the other he leaves
in darkne^^: and so all gr^^nd of glorying in a Man'^ ^elf i^ taken away, that
he that glorys may glory in the Lord. So that free will to good is nor in
nature, but where it is it is a fruit of free Grace. God works to will.

Secondly, in the sufficiency of it, when the Creature is insufficient and can
do nothing to procure pardon, and to make his Peace, Grace gave Christ. And
when Christ is offered, and there is no power to embrace Christ, then Grace
gives to believe in Christ, and works a consent in the will to take Christ.
When there is no power against Corruption, and to do good, Grace gives the
Spirit to be a living, conquering Law causing Obedience.

Objection. Some may object against this truth, for establishing of free will
in the Natural Man, from the general and Universal render of the Gospel. Go
preach the Gospel to every Creature. God gave his Son that all that believe,
etc. Romans 12.17. Whosoever will, let him take of the Water of Life freely. To
what purpose are these tenders, if there be not free will and power in Man to
embrace them?

Answ. 1. These general tenders of Grace do not argue in Men a freedom of will
to receive Grace, or a power to believe, but only a duty to Believe: Men ought
to believe, so all are called on; and unbelief is Men's sin and greatest sin.

2. The Election only shall lay hold on the Grace of the Gospel, Romans 11.7.
Israel has not obtained, but the Election, that is, such persons as were
Elected, has obtained it; and the rest were blinded. Now because the Election
is secret and hid the Gospel is preached to all alike.

3. The Preaching of the Gospel, the holding forth of the Promises of Life in
Christ to Sinners, is the ministration of the Spirit to those that are ordained
to Life: that is the way in which the Spirit comes down into their Souls, and is
a Spirit of Faith and Love in them, 2 Cor. 3.

4. Reprobates having the Gospel Preached, and grace offered unto them, they
out of hardnes^ and unbelief in refusing, are made the more inexcusable: their
Mouths are stopped not only by the Law, but the Gospel; and the Justice of God
is more glorified in their Condemnation. This is the Condemnation that Light is
come into the World etc.

Obje^tion. Why is unbelief and not laying hold on Grace charged on Men as
their Sin, if they have not free will and power of themselves to consent to the
taking of Christ?

Answer. Unbelief is never the less sin for that a Man has not power to
believe. As transgressing the Law, is never less sin because a Man has not
power to keep the Law; because Man had once power given him, 'twas given him in
Adam, and lost in Adam, who was the Head of all Men, and representatively every
Man. There is the more of Divine Grace seen in giving Faith to any, and
nevertheless of sin in any to refuse it. As it is Man's sin that he does not
believe, so it is Man's sin that he cannot believe. Sin caused the Impotency,
and Impossibility of believing, so Impotency, and Impossibility does not make
unbelief no sin.

Sect. 20.

Use 1. Of Instruction. God works to will, and to do, the will of the Creature
is determined by God to this or that, to will good to consent to embrace
Christ, and things that please him. Now if the will of the Creature be
determined by God, Then,

1. The will of God is not determined by the Creatures. God works in a Creature
a will and consent to be saved by Christ: so the Creatures willing and
embracing Salvation, does not work a will in God to save him: as the Apostle
says. We love God, because he first loved us. 1. Joh. 4.10. The love of the
Creature is not the cause of the love in God; but the love of God is the cause
of love in the Creature: so Man wills because God wills, and works to will: God
does not so will the Salvation of Man, because Man wills it. There Is an Opinion
abroad that advances the Creature, and the power of Nature to embrace good
offered, and that makes the will of God in relation to Salvation, wholly
dependent on the will of Man, and determined by it. They say, God wills
Salvation to all alike, and is not determined to this or that Man but by the
right use of free will. This day if Man's will consents to take Christ, etc.
then God wills his Salvation. To morrow if he be off from willing what he did
before, then God is off from willing his Salvation. And thus God's will is not
the first mover and cause of things but Man's will. This is overthrown by this
Text, God determines the will of Man. I^ it be determined by God to will the
embracing of Christ, this is of God; God works Man to will: so Man does not
work God to will; because God wills it, he makes the Creature to will it.

For further clearing it, Consider.

Consid. 1. God wills the Salvation of some, but not of all; the Gospel says, 1 Timothy 2.4. God will have all to be saved. But this is meant of some of all
sorts; not of all, of all sorts, and God wills it; that is, calls on all Men to
receive the knowledge of the Truth, invites all to come to Christ; so he wills
it with his offering will, but not with his ordaining will. That thus appears.
Esau was a Person God never did will to save: For before they had done either
good or evil, that the purpose of God might stand; God said, the Elder shall
serve the Younger, Jacob have I chosen, Esau have I hated. Romans 9.11. There is
Election of God. What is that? A choosing of one; that implies a passing by of
another. If there be any such thing as Election from Eternity, which the
Scripture so often speaks off, then God does not will the Salvation of all.

Consideration 2. The will and decree of God in relation to Man's Salvation, is
absolute and peremptory.

1. In respect of any cause without God, no foresight of Faith, or of what the
Creature will do, if it be placed in such a condition, and Grace be offered to
it. Romans 9.5. He says to Moses, I will show Mercy to whom I will show Mercy.
It Is not of him that wills, but of God that shows Mercy. Man's will is not
the cause of God's will to show Mercy.

2. Absolute without alteration, the foundation of the Lord stands sure, etc.
2 Timothy 2.19. Romans 8.30. Whom he pred^stinated, them he called, and whom he
^alled, them he justified, etc. The immutability of his Council, etc. Heb. 6 18.

Consid. 3. Christ was given to dye for such as are ordained to life. It Is true
as in Adam all dye, so in Christ all are made alive. Romans 5. It does not follow
that Christ died for every Man; Hence if any will conclude that Christ died for
every Man, it may be as well concluded, that every Man shall be actually saved:
but that is clear against Scripture. For,

1. Christ shall save all that he died for. For this is the will of him that
sent me; of all that he has given me, I should not loose nothing, but raise it
up at the last day. Joh. 6.39. But all are not saved, so Christ died not for
all.

2 Christ did not pray for all, so did not die for all. Joh. 17.9, 19. For
their sake I sanctify my self; that is, sacrifice my self. For whose sake? For
the Men thou have given me out of the World* verse 6.

Consid. 4. God in due time works in their Hearts, a consent and will to take
Christ for a Savior, whom he did will to save by Christ: As many as were
ordained to Eternal Life believed. Act. 13.48. God was willing to show to the
Heirs of Salvation, etc. Heb. 6.18. God makes Heirs of Salvation; his will to
save them, makes them Heirs. And God shows to them his will, and counsel, and
the immutability of it, and then God makes willing. None can come except the
Father draws, and it follows; they shall be all taught of God. Joh. 6.45. All
are drawn, and made willing, that are ordained to Eternal Life: So that God's
will is the cause of the Creatures will; and not the Creatures the cause of
God's. God's free will is the cause of Salvation, and not Man's free will.

Use 2. Of Consolation. To such as do will to be saved by Christ, and to take
him as he is offered in the Gospel; herein you may see a saving work of God on
their Souls: or God in their Hearts working them to will.

1. If your will he to embrace Christ, and close in fully with the Gospel
Promises; then you may re^d the will of God to save you, the will of God in
giving Christ for you: this is an evidence of God's will for good. God by this
writes a Book of Life in your Hearts; in which you may read your Names: read
the Ete^nal love of God in your Electing, or accepting Christ on the terms
offered, choosing him above the World, and to serve him rather than your Lusts.
You may read your own Election or God. As it is said of Mary Magdalen, much was
forgiven her, for she loved much: Pardoning love was to be read in her love:
this is one fruit of the love of God on the Soul. So you may say, God wills,
for the Creatures wills. This will is of God's working, and this testifi^s of
God's will.

2. Such as once will to be saved, shall continue to will, and to do what they
ought in the way of Life. They shall not reject Christ, they shall not cast of
his Yoke, they shall so live and do, as those that are in the way of Life
ought; for God will work; the immutability of God's Counsel, shall cause an
immutability in their will of following Christ. As nothing shall separate them
from the love of God, Angels, Principalities, Powers, etc. nothing shall alter
God's will toward them, so nothing shall alter their will toward God. They
shall not grow out of the Love of Christ, into utter dislike or dis-esteem of
him; their Conversation shall be in Heaven, they shall breath, and long for
Salvation. They shall deny themselves, and walk contrary to the World; they
shall ^vercome by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of their Testimony, and
not love their live^ o the Death. For God shall work in them both (...) will
and do of his good pleasure, etc:

The End of the Fourth Discourse.
THE FIFTH DISCOURSE. Of Sanctifying the Sabbath, or Lord's Day.
ISAIAH lviij.xiij. If thou turn away thy Foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy
Pleasure on my Holy Day, and call the Sabbath a delight* the Holy of the Lord,
Honorable, and shall honor him; not doing thine own ways, not finding thine
own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words.

Verse 14. Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee
to ride on the high places of the Earth and feed thee with the Heritage of
Jacob thy Father: For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.


THe occasion of making choice of this Text, is a late Discourse concerning a
Reformation, which there is ground to hope there will be in the World, which
will be ushered in with some sweeping Judgment: and therefore our present work
is to prepare for a Storm. Many Directions were given how we may prepare for a
Storm. The last was this: Furnish your selves with those Graces, with which the
day of Reformation will flourish when it comes. Now of many Graces mentioned
which will live in that day, this is one; in that great day when the Church
shall be glorious, through the destruction of Antichrist, by an increase of
^ight; so that the Earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Glory of the
Lord, as the Waters cove^ ^he Sea, and the Spouse shall be prepared as a Bride
adorned to her Husband; when the Jews shall be called and the fullness of the
Gentiles shall come in, and these shall be filled with all the fullness of God;
and there shall be a Church which shall be the fullness of him which fills all
in all: In this glorious day the Sabbath shall be an Holy and Honorable day in
the Churches of Christ; and the Duties thereof shall be performed with great
delight. Now if you will prepare for a Storm, and have some h^ding place in the
day of the Lord's anger: See that you be found in a strict observation of the
Lord's day.

Doctrine. When such a Reformation shall come, which shall mak^ (...) church
glorious on Earth, then shall the Sabbath be looked on by the People of God, as
H^ly and Hon^urable and shall be observed as with ver^ much strictne s so with
great delight.

Or in fewer words thus. In the last and purest of Gospel time, there ^^ll be a
very strict observation of the Sabbath Day, ^ich now we call the Lord's day.

Quest. You will ask, what ground there is to conclude this from these words.

Answ. Let the context be well considered, and we shall see a Prophecy of such
things, which as yet have not had a full accomplishment, but shall in the l^st
days. And the observation of the Sabbath, is made the condition of the Promises
here made; if the Sabbath be duly k^pt, then what is promised before, and in
the Text, shall be performed; and if it be so then God commands the keeping a
Sabbath under the Gospel. And as there was before, so there was when the Law
was given on Sinai, a Sabbath given. There remains a Sabbath, a day of holy
rest for the People of God. Let us search this Scripture then, and see whether
there will not come forth of it a Jus Divinum for a Sabbath now under the
Gospel.

The Prophet was sent to show the House of Jacob their Transgressions, and in
particular to reprove them of their Hypocrisy in the Duties they performed; and
especially in their fasting, which was a counterfeit Fast, and then shows them
what is the true Fast, and then makes many gracious Promises; which is his
usual method after reproving present Evils: he makes Promises, which not only
had respect to present times, but chiefly to the times of the Gospel, as we see
plainly in the next Chapter. He mentions present Sins and present Judgments.
ver. 16. He complains that no Man did endeavor to set things right, and so
declares the Lord putting on Righteousness, and an Helmet of Salvation, to
execute Vengeance on his Enemies: and then the Effect of this, They shall fear
the Lord from the West. And then the Redeemer shall come to Zion. And in this
observe how suddenly he falls into Prophesying of Gospel times, and the last of
them. For so he does, as appears, Romans 11.26. There shall come out of Sion the
Redeemer, and shall turn ungodliness from Jacob. Those words are brought in as
a Proof for calling the Jews, and bringing in the fullness of the Gentiles.

In like manner he does here; which will the better appear if we consider the
particulars of this Prophecy in this Chapter, which will manifest that these
chiefly respect the last Gospel times.

1. See ver. 8. Thy Righteousness shall go before Thee, etc. that is, The Lord
thy Righteousness, as he is called in Jer. 23.6. When we consider that their
Righteousness shall go before, that is some evidence of this sense as best.

Besides, in what time is it that Christ and the Church of the Jews shall be
called by this Name? and why? In the place before mentioned it is said: Behold
the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a Righteous Branch,
and a King shall Reign, and prosper, and shall Execute Judgment and Justice in
the Earth. In his days Judah and Israel shall dwell safely. So it is to be
fulfilled when Israel as well as Judah are brought out of bondage: then he
shall be The Lord our Righteousness. Jer. 33.14. At the same time the Church of
the Jews shall be called, the Lord our Righteousn ss. So here, Thy
Righteousness, that is, the Lord thy Righteousness, etc. So this Prophecy
reaches to that time of the Gospel, when the Jews shall be called; especially
considering what follows, The Glory of the Lord, shall be thy Rereward; that
is, there shall be a time, when the Lord's presence with, and providence
toward his Church, shall be as eminently (happily more eminently) on, with, and
toward the Jews, than when they came out of Egypt. Then the Lord their Ruler,
went before them in a Cloud and Pillar of Fire; and when Pharaoh pursued them,
the Cloud and Pillar went behind them; so then the Glory of the Lord was their
Rereward. And now in this time, not only the Lord as Ruler, not only David
their King, but the Lord their Righteousness shall go before them, and the
Glory of Power and Grace, shall be their Rereward.

2. Verse 10. Then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as
the noonday. Compare Isai. 60.1. Thy light is come, the Glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee. One observes that the word in the Original is of the Dual
number, and so translates it, Sicut Duo meridies. As two Noons, as if two Suns
should shine together: there shall be greater light then ever was before. The
Lord shall appear in greater Glory, so that it is no more said, the Lord lives
that brought them up out of Egypt but that brought them out all Lands, Jer.
16.15. which was not fulfilled at their return from Babylon, but must be in the
last days of the Gospel.

3. Verse 11. The Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy Soul in
drought, as he did in the Wilderness, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be
like a watered Garden, and like a Spring of Water whose Waters fail not. The
best exposition is Psa. 72.7. In his days shall the Righteous flourish and
abundance of Peace as long as the Moon endures. They shall be in a flourishing
condition; their Souls shall wonderfully prosper, their Garden the Paradise of
God shall yield them Fruit enough. The Tree of Life shall yield them all manner
of Fruits to nourish and refresh their Souls. And the Waters of life, better
than the Jews Honey out of the Rock, shall flow abundantly. And observe that
the flourishing state shall continue. He shall guide thee continually, and
Waters f^il thee not. And in the other place, so long as the Moon endures, or
till there be no Moon, that is, no change in the Chu^ches Prosperity and Peace.
The Moon is often changing, then the l^ght of the Moon shall be as the light of
the Sun, Isa. 3^.26. That i^, as there shall be a greater, so a never-failing
^ight. Light fails in the Moon, but not in the Sun; Light shall not fail,
Waters shall not fail. Now was it thus with the Jews after their return from
Babylon? Can we find any thing like a full accomplishment of this Prophecy? No
ce^tainly. We must wait for the full accomplishment of it hereafter.

4. Verse 12. And they that be of thee shall build the old waste places. The
Captiv^ty in Babylon lasted but one Generation, the waste places thereby could
not be very old. Thou shall raise up the Foundation of many Generations. That
is either

1. Which have lain waste many Generations, much longer then during the
Babylonish Captivity, so had not its full accomplishment after their return
from thence. Or,

2. After their return from Babylon the Foundation of their Temple was laid,
and then the work was interrupted, which after some Generations was revived,
and that Temple built, and the top-stone laid. So one in answer to this under
the Gospel says, the Foundation was laid by the Apostles, but Spiritual
Temples have not been built up answerable to the Apostles Foundation; Satan and
the Man of Sin have hindered this work; but at last there shall be a Temple and
glorious Church built upon those Foundations, like to them that were laid by
the Apostles, and the top-stone shall be laid, crying to it, Grace* Grace. The
Grace that shall appear to be in it, shall make to cry Grace, Grace to it.

3. Calvin gives the sense thus, We may refer it to the times to come, thou
shall raise up the Foundations that shall continue very long, etc. As if he had
said, other Buildings have not long continued as the Temple, etc. but this
shall continue many Ages. It has been but a day of small things with the
Church; yet these small things, small Assemblies, and the small numbers of
witnesses have continued in all Ages since the Apostles: much more that large
and glorious Temple and City of God, which is to be built up, will continue
many Generations, till at last it will be translated into Heaven, when as
before Christ presented it to himself a glorious Church, so at last he shall
present it to the Father, when he shall deliver up the Kingdom to him, and God
will be All in All.

5. There is more yet in this Verse, Thou shall be call d the Repairer of the
breaches, the restorer of the Paths to dwell in. All breaches made in the
Church, either by the Persecution and Violence of Enemies, or by the Saints
divisions, shall be made up. And the Restorer of Paths to dwell in. By Paths we
are to understand the ways of God's Commands and Ordinances, the way of Divine
worship instituted by God. And all ways and paths of will worship, made and
invented by Men (Antichristian Paths) shall be for ever forsaken. And the
Paths of the Apostles and Primitive Christians, which they walked in, shall be
perfectly restored to the Church, which for a long time the Man of Sin has
hedged up. Compare with this Ezekiel. 43.11. Show them the form of the House, and
the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof,
and all the forms thereof, and all the Ordinances, Forms, and Laws, that they
may keep the whole Form thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof. The meaning
is, the paths of the Temple, the goings out, and comings in shall be restored,
and be as well known to the Saints as the ways are now to the places of
meeting, and they shall walk freely in them.

Lastly. Observe the expression, they shall dwell in these paths, they shall
continue and abide in them, they shall not turn out of them to the Right Hand,
or to the Left Hand, but as Isa. 30.21. Thou shall hear a Voice behind thee,
saying, this is the way, walk in it, when thou shall be ready to (or should
without this Voice) be turned to the Right Hand or Left. See what these paths
are Isa. 38.8. where is a Prophecy of Christ's Kingdom. An high way, and a way
it shall be called, the way of Holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it. No
Profane or Hypocritical Persons, for they are most unclean, and within are
like Painted Sepulchers, but it shall be to those, The Reading in the Margin is
very considerable, for he shall be with them, the unclean shall not be there,
because the Lord shall be with them there, as before the Lord their
Righteousness, the wayfaring men though Fools shall not err therein. Though in
themselves Fools without Divine teaching, yet being taught of God they shall
not err. Verse 9. No Lion shall be there, nor any Ravenous Beast shall go up
thereon. None to affright them out of those Paths, but the Redeemed shall walk
there, and as here, Dwell there. They shall be Pillars in the Temple of God,
and go no more cut, Rev. 3.12. We read of lively Stones, 1 Pet. 20.4. made so
by coming to Christ the living Stone; so are Saints the Materials of the
Church, Stones, but living Stones, seeing Stones; upon one Stone was Seven
Eyes, Zech. 3.9. So hearing Stones, speaking Stones, and walking Stones: so
these Pillars shall be lively Pillars, walking Pillars, going in the House of
God, but never going out of its Paths, they shall be Paths to dwell in.

6. Verse 14. I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the Earth, thou
shall get above all former troubles and Persecutions. Rev. 17.7. The Woman, the
Mother of Harlots has a Beast carrying her, on which she rides, having Seven
Heads and Ten Horns, and this Woman, Verse 15. Sits on People, Multitudes,
Nations and Tongues, on these she rides, they carry her, and on those she rides
over the Saints, and treads them down who are the true worshippers, and rides
over their backs. This Woman rides upon the High places, and High Persons of
the Earth, which carry this Woman, giving up their strength and power to the
Beast, which is called before the Woman; here is a Beast riding over the true
worshippers, whose condition is suitable to what is said, Isa. 51.23. They said
to thy Soul bow down that we may go over, and thou have laid thy Body as the
ground, and as the street to them that went over. The great Whore says to the
Soul, bow down; and would have them submit their Souls and Consciences to her,
and to receive her Doctrine, Commands, etc. But observe, when Souls are called
for, the Saints will not yield them to bow down; but thou have laid thy Body as
the ground. Saints choose to have their Bodies trodden down, rather then to bow
down to an Idol with their Souls. This has been long the condition of the true
witnesses, and so will whilst the Woman rides; but what is said there? I will
take the Cup of trembling out of thy hands, and put it into the hands of them
that af^^ict thee, which say thus to thy Soul. Observe Rev. 17.16. The Ten
Horns, that is, the Ten Kings that give up their power and strength to the
Beast, shall hate the Whore, shall throw off their Rider, and shall make her
desolate, and naked, and eat her Flesh, and burn her with Fire. And then shall
the true Church ride upon the High places, and be above former troubles. How
was this fulfilled to the Jews after their return from Babylon, when they were
subject to their Enemies, and had seldom any breathing time from their
troubles? Doubtless then this Prophecy looks far beyond these times.

7. It Is Promised and Prophesied, I will feed thee with the Heritage of Jacob
thy Father.

Q How does this prove that this Prophecy respects Gospel Times, and in special
those times when the Jews shall be called?

Ans. Thus. When the Jews came out of Babylon it was but Judah that returned:
And so one upon the place, who would understand it only of the Jews returning
from Babylon, straitens the sense thus: The Heritage here meant is the land of
Canaan, part of which was the Land of Judah: and so when it is said, to ride
upon the High places of the Earth, by Earth in general, says he, we are to
understand the Land of Judah in particular. But, observe, the promise is, I
will feed th^e with the Heritage of Jacob thy Father, and it was the whole Land
of Canaan was Jacob's Inheritance, and so the Promise of being fed thus,
includes the calling and bringing back of the Ten Tribes, when the stick of
Joseph and Judah shall become one: Jacob gave all his Sons an Inheritance in
Canaan, and now when this Prophecy shall be fulfilled, then all the Tribes
shall be called, and have their Lot as is foretold, Ezekiel ult.

Now observe, as it appears that these Promises have respect to the Gospel
times, so the condition of them is a strict observation of the Sabbath Day
under the Gospel. And so in this Prophecy of the Old Testament, we find a Jus
Divinum for the Christian Sabbath, which may well go under its old and first
Name, though another also be given it under the New Testament; The Lord's day,
which now we are to observe by virtue of the Fourth Commandment, though the day
be changed, and the Fourth Commandment does require us now to observe the first
day of the week, that being made a Christian-Sabbath by divine appointment; as
much as it did the Jews to observe the seventh day, which may be cleared by an
Instance in the Second Commandment, which has a negative part, not to make any
graven Image, forbidding Men to institute, and appoint ways of Divine Worship;
and an affirmative part, requiring us to worship God in these ways, and in the
use of these Ordinances which he has commanded. So under the Law the Second
Command did bind Men, to observe the Ordinances of Circumcision, the Passover*
and offering Sacrifices. And now under the Gospel, it bind us to observe Gospel
Ordinances, as Baptism, the Lord's Supper, etc. But the Second Commandment
remains the same, only has different respects: so the Fourth from the
beginning, and under the Law did oblige to the observing of the seventh day,
and now the first day; yet the Command is in matter the same; there is no change
in the Command, only it has different respects.

Quest. How does this change appear? and how will it be made out, that Christ
commanded the observation of the first day?

Answ. It Is evident there was Apostolical and Christian practice of it in the
Primitive times, and so ever since; then were the solemn meettings for Worship.
Act. 20.7. Upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to
break Bread, Paul Preached unto them till midnight. And then Collections were
made for the Poor. 1 Cor. 16.2. As on the first day of the w^ek when Christ
rose, the Disciples were assembled, Jesus came and stood in the midst of them;
so from this time, this was kept as the Christian-Sabbath; and it may be well
thought that Christ commanded the Apostles to observe it, Act. 1.2, 3. Christ
gave Commands by the Holy Ghost unto the Apostles, and spoke of the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God. Now this is a great thing that pertains to
the Kingdom of God upon Earth; or if Christ did not then, yet after by the Holy
Ghost in the Apostles he gave this Command.

And that a Christian Sabbath is now to be kep^ by Divine Institution, may be
gathered.

1. From Mark. 2.27. The Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath.
ver. 28 For the Son of Man also is Lord of the Sabbath Day. I gather this
hence, Man did need a Sabbath, and it was given to Man because he does stand in
need of it; Men do need and cannot be without it* therefore the Son of Man who
is Lord of the Sabbath, must give him a Sabbath, God shall supply all your
need, Phil. 4.19. If Christ did not, then he was not so faithful as Moses; he
gave a Command for a Sabbath, because the Jews did want it: therefore it is not
to be questioned, but that Christ gave a Command for the Christian-Sabbath. Let
this then be well considered, the Sabbath was made for Man's benefit, for his
good; and he so needed it, that he cannot well be without it: and Christ being
Head, will give what the Members do need; the Lord will give what the Servants
do need; the Husband will give what the Spouse shall need.

2. When it was given Adam in Innocence, 'twas made for Adam's good, and
because he stood in need of it; and if Adam in Innocence did need a Sabbath, do
not we much more now? that we may the better recover what was lost by the fall.

3. It was made for the Jews, this was one of their advantages. Romans 3.1, 2.
What advantage had the Jews? Much every way, they had Oracles, and the word of
God, they had his Laws. Psa. 147. He dealt not so with other Nations; and in
particucular the Law of the Sabbath was a great advantage, and as much profit
in it. Now if Christians under the Gospel should not have a Sabbath given them*
than the advantages of the Law were above the advantages of the Gospel; and the
profit which the Jews had, beyond the profit of Christians; whereas the
advantages of the Gospel, are beyond the advantages of the Law; the
ministration whereof exceeds in Glory, in Profit, and Advantage.

Quest. How was the Sabbath made for Man?

Answ. 1. For man to rest in, for the rest of his Body from labor; and of his
mind from thoughts, care and study about his worldly Affairs.

2. It Is for Man that he may set himself in a more solemn, and serious manner
to praise the Lord for the great work of Redemption by Christ. i. e. the work
of the new Creation begun, and for the works of Providence. Sabbath work is the
work of Heaven, begun on Earth. It was made for Adam, that on the seventh day
he might contemplate and praise God for the work of the six days; and he was to
think on God manifest in the Creatures, and to see the invisible things of God,
his Eternal Power and Godhead in the things that were made. The
Christian-Sabbath is made for the Saints to contemplate the great Mystery of
Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, etc. As Man was Redeemed, Quickened,
Called, Sanctified, that he might be to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace,
and to show forth the Virtues of him that died and rose again, etc. So this is
the day the Lord has made for the solemn Performance of this work.

3. It Is for a Man to gather Manna for the six Days. The Jews were to gather
Manna for the body on the sixth day for the seventh, we on the Sabbath for the
six days; this is a day to trade for the Soul, to buy of Christ Gold, white
Raiment and Eye Salve, and to be digging for Wisdom, and to search out for hid
Treasures. As God has given Apostles, and Prophets for the w^rk of the
Ministry, for edifying the body of Christ, so a day also for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ; and to continue with the
Ministry, till we all come in the unity of Faith, and knowledge of the Son of
God. Ephesians. 4.13.

Thus you see the Sabbath is made for Man, for his use, good, and benefit, and
he cannot be without it: his Body and Soul need it, and Christ is Lord of the
Sabbath; and it being so necessary for them, he would make a Sabbath for them,
and not make it void. He came not to destroy, but to establish the Law. Math.
5.17.

The next thing to be handled is, that there ought to be (and when the Church
shall be Gloririous in the World, there will be) a strict observation of the
Sabbath. As appears in this place.

1. If thou turn away thy Foot from the Sabbath Day, to unlawful Works, to
sinful Company, not go any unnecessary Journeys, or to Sports, and Recreations;
you must not walk your own Steps, as well as not speak your own Words. Now
there is more understood when there is less spoken; as thou must turn away thy
Foot, so the Hands, the Eyes, the Ears from the Sabhath-day: the Hands from the
works of thy Calling, the Eyes from the delightful beholding of Earthly things,
the Ears from hearing vain Discourses and Talks about worldly matters, Men's
own words. Likewise the Feet of the Soul, as thoughts and affections; with
these Feet many Souls, many times travel on the Sabbath, as the Devil does,
that is, to walk to and fro in the Earth, and by observing lying Vanities, (to
allude to that in Jonah) forsake th ^r own Mercies. Now as Solomon exhorts,
keep thy Foot when thou go into the House of God. Keep your Feet when the
Sabbath comes, and turn not these away from it; let not these be Instruments of
Profanation on the Sabbath Day.

2. Turn from doing thy Pleasure, self-pleasing works, are Sabbath profaning
works. God's pleasure is to be fulfilled then altogether, and nothing of our
own pleasure is to be done in that time; all bodily Recreations are forbidden,
all works tending to our worldly profit are unlawful, for we must deny our
selves in point of Pleasure, and so also in point of Profit.

3. Not finding thy own ways. Most properly the works of Men's Callings are
their own ways: Let every Man abide in his Calling; the works of our Calling
are our own works, these must not be done on the Sabbath Day, they are the
works of the six days.

4. Not finding thine own Pleasure. As we must not set our selves to
self-pleasing works, so if any pleasurable Objects are presented and come in
your way, you must not find them, that is, you should not take notice of them,
nor regard them: If they find you and tempt you, do not you find them. Satan
lays matter of Pleasures in your way, but do not find and take it up.

5. Nor speaking your own words. Such words as you may speak at other times: we
ought not to be speaking of worldly Matters: what we must not do, what we must
not find pleasure in, that we must not talk of: as we must not work, so we must
not talk of work, we must not Buy, Sell, Plow, etc. so we must not talk of
these things on the Sabbath; it is profane and profaning talk.

This is the negative part, showing what is forbidden. Next is the affirmative
part,

1. Call the Sabbath a delight. The Jews did bear burdens on the Sabbath, and
thereby profaned it; many there are, who if they bear no burden on their
backs, yet when they are engaged in Sabbath-work bear burdens on their Hearts.
The Sabbath it self is a burden; these do but profane the Sabbath, to whom
Sabbath-Duties are a burden. This is Evangelical, True, Spiritual keeping a
Sabbath, to call it a delight. Psa. 43.4. I will go to the Altar of God, unto
God my exceeding Joy. So when you go about Sabbath-work, and come to
Ordinances, your aim should be to have Communion with God, and to meet with
him, to worship him, and to receive Blessings from him, that you may be able to
say; I will go to God my exceeding Joy. Call Sabbath-work, as well as
Sabbath-blessings, Sabbath-profit, Sabbath-advantages a delight. Delight to do
the Will of God, as well as delight in the Mercies he bestows upon you. If you
will remember the Sabbath to keep it Holy, you must remember it, and call it a
delight: and not only call it a delight, but let it be so indeed; and then your
keeping of the Sabbath is the delight of God.

2. The Holy of the Lord. 1. Made Holy by the Lord's Institution. If you
obser^^ a Sabbath as Commanded by Men only, or as ^ ving but the stamp of
Humane Authority that ^s bu^ the Holy of Men; but see the stamp of Divine
Auth^rity, and look on the Sabbath as being from Heaven, and not of Men. Honor
Christ as Lord of (...) Sabbath. 2. And made Holy to the Lord, to his Praise
and Glory, made for Holy Work and that for this High and Holy End, to Glorify
God.

3. Honorable. It has been dishonored, and made contemptible by Men that
have denied the Divine Right thereof; and Men have been made Lords of it, and
many make themselves Lords of it, doing and finding their own Pleasure, and so
make void this Law to themselves: But as God will have a time to magnify his
whole Law, and make it Honorable; so this of the Sabbath. Isa. 42.21. Thus you
see with how much strictness and spirituality the Sabbath ought to be kept.

As there was an outward strictness required of the Jews for its observation,
beyond what is now, as for not kindling a Fire, etc. so this was a type of that
spiritual strictness here foretold, which should be under the Gospel in the
observation of it: God forbad the kindling a fire on the Hearth. That was a
Type to show that we should not kindle a fire of worldly Lusts in your Hearts,
nor warm your selves with any delightful thoughts of any matter of Profit or
Pleasure, etc. and this reason may be given, why God should forbid the kindling
of Fire to the Jews. God dealt with the Jews as a Sovereign, and many things
that were commanded was to declare his Sovereignty, and to prove them whether
they would be obedient to him. So was the multitude of the Sacrifices and
Oblations; and so this command for not kindling a fire, must be to declare his
Sovereignty. But under the Gospel it is a time to declare his Kindness and Love,
his abundant Grace, after that the Kindness, and love of God appeared toward
Man. Tit. 3.4. Now God will have Mercy and not Sacrifice: In this sense, that
he will declare his Sovereignty, but will deal in a more gracious and merciful
way; as all Providence, So all Ordinances and Commands are full of Grace.
Observe, when God proclaims his Name before Moses, Exodus 34.6. it is thus, The
Lord, the Lord God, gracious and merciful, etc. And that will not clear the
Guilty. We may take notice of three branches of this Name of God, which have
respect to three different times, for the more convenient manifestation of
them; not but that all of them are manifested enough at all times.

1. The Lord. So the time of the Law was for the manifestation of this branch
of God's Name.

2. The Lord gracious and merciful, long-suffering abundant in goodness; so the
accepted time, and day of Salvation under the Gospel, is the time for the
manifestation hereof.

3. 3. That will not clear the guilty. Now the day of Judgment will be the time
for the manifestation of this part of God's Name. Those that come in their
guilt before him, shall feel the power of that wrath which now perhaps they
little fear.

Quest. If the Sabbath be to be kept with so much strictness, Who then can keep
a Sabbath?

Answ. 1. This is the Law, and thus it ought to be, though we cannot come up to
that strictness, and spirituality which we ought to do.

2. The Will and Desire should be as exact as is commanded, and should beget in
you your utmost endeavor and care, and then shall you be accepted.

3. Call it Holy and Honorable, a delight. Be sound in your Principles, set
your Seal to the truth of it. 1. Call it so in your Judgment, and inward
Conviction, or Assent and Consent. 2. Call it so in word, Justify it as the
Holy of the Lord, speak Honorably of it and for it. 3. Call it so in your
works; do that which may honor the day, and the Lord in keeping it. When we
consider the high degree of exactness, and spirituality, which there ought to
be in keeping a Sabbath, which is here laid down, it much confirms the
Interpretation of extending this to Gospel times, and to the last and best
times of the Gospel: in which, as God will liberally fulfill promises, so he
will in such a measure give his Spirit, that the Saints shall more liberally
fulfill this and other Commands; when as all the Law, so this of the Sabbath
shall be written in the Heart. God will have a time to make Men more Holy and
obedient, more agreeable to his Laws, both for substance and circumstance,
matter and manner; and it shall bear much more proportion and run more parallel
with his Laws then hitherto. Thus much I can boldly affirm, happily more,
Consider Psalm. 102.18. This shall be written for the Generations to come, and
the People that shall be created shall praise the Lord, or the new ercated
People, etc. As this strict injunction binds always, and makes it our Duty to
keep a Sabbath: so the new created People, the Saints of the new Heaven and
Earth shall praise the Lord, they shall observe it in this manner, etc. when
the Divine Nature shall deeply overspread all their Faculties, when the Saints
in Duties shall fly on the wings of the Spirit, and show the vigor of the new
Nature, which is part of that day of Reformation: then will something be done
to purpose, as in all other Christian Duties, so in this of turning away thy
Foot, etc. Rev. 22.3. The Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his
Servants shall serve him. Then they shall serve him, and not their Enemies any
more; and they shall serve him in-deed. Now his Servants in name do serve other
Lords, Hypocrites go for the Servants of God: but then his Servants shall serve
him. All Servants in name shall serve him indeed, that is, all shall serve him
in sincerity, so his Servan^s shall serve him thoroughly and to purpose. It Is so
little Service that God has now from his Servants, that they can hardly be
said to serve him: but when they are before the Throne of the Lamb, then shall
Christ have abundantly more Service from his Saints. As there shall be more
light, more warm Affections, heat of Love in a high degree, So there shall be
much better Service.

Quest. Shall there be a keeping of a Sabbath in the new Jerusalem? the Holy
City? it is said thus, no Temple there, no Sun nor Moon. No Ordinances, because
the presence of the Lamb shall supply them, and so make them useless; and if no
Ordinances, then no First-day-Sabbath, but every day a Sabbath.

Answ. We must distinguish between the Holy City, New Jerusalem, and the
Nations of them that shall be saved and shall walk in the light of it, Rev.
21.24. Who bring their Gl^ry, and Honor into it, mentioned Chap. 20.9. That
is, the Nations of them that shall be saved in the time of the Thousand Years,
as it is the same word which is used for the Congregation of Israel when they
went out of Egypt, traveling toward Canaan; In like manner in the time of the
Thousand Years, besides the beloved City there will be a Camp of Saints, there
will be saved Nations, called and converted, then traveling toward the Holy
City. The Law shall go forth from Sion, and the w^rd of the Lord from
Jerusalem. And they do walk in this light toward it. Now in the beloved City
Ordinances cease, and the keeping of one day in seven ceases: but in the Camp
of the Saints, etc. amongst the Nations saved and walking in the light of the
New Jerusalem, there will be Ordinances, and the keeping of the Sabbath in
manner as is here prescribed.

Uses. If there ought to be so strict an observation of the Sabbath day: then,
how short do men come of the keeping of it! Where are the Persons to be found
that walk on the Sabbath according to this Rule?

1. How loose are some in their Principles, in writing and speaking against a
Divine Institution of it, as if there were not ground for the keeping of it,
but from Custom and the Commands of Men; and so it shall be but the Holy of
Men, and not the Holy of the Lord: whereas this is that which makes it H
nourable, and is the ground why we should call it Honorable, because it has
the stamp of Divine Authority upon it. And it is Christ that is the Lord of it,
and not Man.

2. And what looseness is in the practice of almost all? Who be they that turn
their Feet, the Feet of the Body and Soul from it? Where are any to be found
that do not find their pleasure, and speak their own words? etc.

2. Learn what reason there is to long for that glorious Reformation which
shall be in the World. As the Creatures groan to be delivered for the bondage
of Corruption, and from being in such bondage to Men's lusts, who do abuse them
so much to the dishonor of God, and make them the matter of Sin: So those that
have the first fruits of the Spirit, should groan within themselves, waiting
for the Adoption. That is, as they that believe have the power of Sons, so they
should wait for the Inheritance of Sons, and long to have more of the Spirit of
Sons, that thereby they may be enabled as in their whole course to carry
themselves as Sons toward their Heavenly Father: So on the Lord's day they may
come before the Lord in that Holy, Spiritual, and Heavenly frame which is here
required. What a blessed time will that be, when he that is feeble and fails so
much in Duties, shall be as David, the Man after God's own heart, doing all his
will? Christ advised the Jews to pray that their flight might not he on the
Sabbath Day. Many times there is flying on the Sabbath Day, and this is sad
times: Sometimes there is flying from Meetings, flying from Duties for fear of
Enemies; and too often our Hearts on that day are flying away from God, and the
duties of his worship; upon the wings of worldly thoughts and affections. A
happy time will it be with the Saints, when there shall be no flying on the
Sabbath, no flying upon the wings of fear, nor no flying upon the wings of
worldly love: but then David's wish shall be fulfilled to those that shall
serve the Lord, and David their King, and fear the Lord and his goodness. They
shall have the wings of the Dove, wherewith they shall fly to the Holy,
Spiritual, Soul-refreshing rest of the Sabbath, and fly to Heaven to the Throne
of God and the Lamb, etc.

Use. 2. Exhortation. Let that Holy, Spiritual Strict Observation of the
Sabbath, which shall be hereafter, be your pattern now.

1. It will be a good evidence of your being in Covenant, and of the truth and
reality of Grace, when you can thus holily and spiritually keep a Sabbath to
the Lord. This is the Man that is likely to perform the duties of his Calling
on other days, to the honor of the Lord: he will work, he will Buy and Sell,
he will Plow and Sow, he will Eat and drink to the honor of God; and he will
be careful that his business in the World be acted in Religion, Isa. 56.1, 2.
Keep Judgment, do Justice. Keep the Sabbath from polluting it. The former
comprehends the duties of the Second Table, the latter the duties of the First.
So necessary is it to the right worshipping of God, to keep a Sabbath, that
this is put for, and made comprehensive of all the duties of God's worship.

2. Thus shall you be the better prepared for a Storm. For as here are Promises
of being above troubles, of riding on the High places of the Earth, etc. So
hence you may conclude you shall have protection under trouble. The true
worshippers who worship God in Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, may have
great confidence, and peace in their hearts in such a day, Psa. 27.4, 5. One
thing have I desired of the Lord, etc. In the time of trouble he shall hide me
in his Pavillion, in the secret of his Tabernacle, etc. Those that come to his
pavillion-love, to be where God is, and to be near him, and to have communion
with him, etc. When the Woman is in the Wilderness, she is nourished there, and
when a stream comes and the Dragon casts out a flood out of his Mouth to
swallow her up, the Earth shall help her: this is the Storm falling on the
Remnant of the Woman's seed, during the time of the witnesses lying dead, Rev.
11. and 12. being compared 'twill appear that, those keeping the Commandments
of God and testimony of Jesus, are Heirs of those Promises that are made of the
Spirit of Life to enter into the witnesses, which shall make them stand upon
their Feet. These shall ascend in a Cloud, and be above the Earthquake, and so
in this great Storm be preserved as seed of that Glory which shall follow to
the Church.

3. This is some ground to hope that God has some special favor for England,
because the Sabbath has been called the Holy of the Lord and Honorable, more
here than in any other Nation. And so to streng^hen thi^ Hope, be the more
zealous of a s^rict obs^rv^tion of it. Here the Doctrine of the Sabbath has
been better taught, and a strict of s^lvation of it has been enjoined,
cou^tenanc'd and encouraged by Humane Laws; and the prophan^tion of it has
been made punish^ble, and although the best have come too far short of what is
here required, yet a generation ha^h been here, coming nearer to this pattern
than other Churches abroad have done: and God ha^h said, them that Honor me, I
will honor. God will have a day to honor those that honor him on his day. I
will make thee to ride upon the High ^laces of the Earth.

4. Make the Sabbath a delight, and then God himself will be your d^light.
Delight your selves in the Lord's work, delight your selves in the Law, and so
you shall in the Lord's favor, in the Light of his Countenance: if Grace be
put in your Hearts, so that you delight to Honor God, then gladness shall be
put in your Hearts, more than when their Corn, and Wine, and Oil increased.
Thus you may delight in him in trouble, our rejoicing is the Testimony of our
Conscience; a good Conscience witnessing our Sincerity towa^ds God in
worshipping him, is a continual Feast. Thus you shall delight in him, in a
state above troubles, and shall go to God your exceeding Joy, and shall enter
into the Joy of the Lord, and the Lord himself shall be your Joy.

1. Then you shall delight in God more clearly manifesting himself, and better
known. The Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Glory of the Lord. And
there shall be none to hurt you for end^avouring to know him. The Glory of the
Lord shall be revealed and all Flesh shall see it, Isa. 40.5 i. e. His love
better known. As now it is shed abroad in the heart; so then it shall be shining
upon the Person. The Church at last shall be a Philadelphia. Christ mentions
not any thing that he had against that Church; a Type (happily) it was of the
Glorious Church in the day of Reformation. Now what says Christ of that? Rev.
3.9. I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan to come and worship before thy
Feet; and to know that I have loved thee, and if they indeed, then much more
the Saints themselves shall know that they are beloved of God: and so delight
themselves in the Lord.

2. They shall delight themselves in the works and ways of God toward them.
The Providence of God shall be all delightsome Providence. Not good dispensed
in and by Evil, but good apart from evil: A^ Israel shall dwell al^ne, so good
shall come alone, and not evil with it. Then God's works shall be like his
thoughts, of good and not of evil, to grant an expected end So his works are
good and there is no afflicting evil in them, and God will give the Saints their
expected end, that is, what from his word they did expect to be accomplished
here in the World, not the last and utmost end, that is, fullness of Joy in
Heaven.

1. The groaning Creature shall have its expected end, the liberty of the Sons
of God, in which its Liberty is wrapped up. Then upon all shall be written,
Holiness to the Lord; and not be then the Lusts of the Flesh, tho Lust of the
Eye, and the Pride of Life, as all in the World is so now: Men lust after
Worldly Pleasures, and satisfy their Lusts with them; the Voluptuous Man does
so, and the Glutton and Drunkard; The Lusts of the Eye being coveted by an Evil
Covetuousness. The Covetous Man makes his Riches the Lusts of his Eye; and the
Pride of Life, Men that have much are usually proud of it. This is the
Creature's bondage and burden to be so, but then the Sons of God that possess
and use them well, will honor God with their Substance, their Fields are like
those of Canaan, Fields of Offerings; they shall Consecrate their gain to the
Lord, etc. when thus the Creature shall have its expected end.

2. The groaning Saint and Servant of God shall have his expected end, the
Adoption, the Redemption of his Body. They shall sit under their Vines and none
make them afraid, and stand before the Lord, etc. and shall have Peace flowing
in like a River; and Grace flowing in abundantly. I will pour out a Spirit of
Grace and Supplication: Now it is but dropped out upon the Saints, then it shall
be poured out. As Christ was anointed with the Oil of Gladness above his
Fellows; so the Saints shall be anointed with the Oil of Gladness above their
Forefathers, with the Oil of Grace and Gladness above them.

5. Thus shall they be fed with the Heritage of Jacob their Father.

What is that?

1. God himself was Jacob's Heritage, as he said to Abraham, he would be his
exceeding great Reward: so Rev. 21.3. I will be with them, and be their God,
for they shall be satisfied with favor.

2. Canaan the Land flowing with Milk and Honey, was Jacob's Heritage; and what
was Typed out hereby will be given to the Church, and is meant Deuteronomy. 32.13. He
made him ride on the High places of the Earth, that he might Eat the increase
of the Field; and he made him suck Honey out of the Rock, etc. Butter of Kine,
Milk of Sheep fat of Lambs, the fat of Kidneys of Wheat; Thou did drink the
pure Blood of the Grape; these were a Type of Christ, and that fullness of Grace
and Glory that is in him. There is Honey and Oil out of this Rock,
Righteousness and Peace, the Joys of the Holy Ghost, the substance of that
shadow, fat of Lambs, Kidneys of Wheat. He is the Bread of Life, and h^ the
pure Blood of the Grape. Christ will feast them at his Table, in his Kingdom.
Christ himself, his Grace and Glory, the blessings of his Kingdom,
Righteousness, Peace and the Joys of the Holy Ghost, is the Heritage of the
Saints, and this they shall be fed with. Jacob had an Inheritance, viz. Canaan,
but there were times when he was not fed with his Heritage; as 1. when he fled
from his Brother Esau, who threatened to be avenged on him, and to kill him:
then he was forced from his Heritage, and not fed with it: and 2: When there
was a Famine in the Land of Canaan, then his Heritage failed him, and he went
down into Egypt to be fed there. But there shall be a time when the true Israel
of God shall not only have, but be fed with their Heritage, their Heritage
shall not fail them. There is no Famine of Bread in the true Canaan, Bread
shall be given them; and their Waters sure. There shall be no profane,
persecuting Person, as Esau to make them fly from it.

6. A Sabbath rightly kept is as the Gates of Heaven, as Jacob said of Bethel,
this is the Gates of Heaven. The Rest of the Sabbath is a figure of the Rest of
Heaven, and of Christ's Kingdom. The work of the Sabbath is a figure of the
work of Heaven; the Joy in communion with God, tasting in his Ordinances that
the Lord is gracious, is the first Fruits of the Joys of Heaven. Heb. 4.4, 5.
He speaks of the Seventh day, God did rest then from all his works, and in this
place, if they shall enter into my rest. Observe. Those that keep a Sabbath
aright to the Lord, do enter into the rest of the Lord: they rest from their
own work, and refresh themselves in the Lord. v. 9. There remains a rest, or
Sabbatism to the People of God, that is, a day to rest in, and rejoice in the
Lord, and honor him, and this is the figure of the Eternal rest the Saints
have in Heaven.

Directions for a Gospel keeping of a Sabbath.

To what was spoken before from the Text let the 92 Psalm be added, where we
have a pattern and directory for it. The Title of it being, A Psalm for the
Sabbath Day.

1. God is to be praised for making us glad through his work. v. 4. It Is a good
thing to give thanks, etc. to show forth his loving kindness and faithfulness;
his loving kindness in giving Christ to be made Flesh, and Sin, a Curse, etc.
Thou Lord have made me glad through thy works, through the work of Redemption,
Justification, Sanctification. Our own works make us sad; when we think of
them, it is with grief and Godly sorrow: but thy works, etc. The works of the
Redeemer, fulfilling Righteousness, making his Soul an offering for Sin, and
making Intercession, changing me into thine Image, these make me glad. I will
triumph in thy works. I am ashamed of mine own works, but I will glory in
thine; I am ashamed of mine own Righteousness, which is as filthy Rags, but I
will triumph in Christ's which is most perfect and glorious. I trust not to my
own works, but I trust in thine, and not only trust but triumph in them, over
Sin, Satan, Death and Hell. How great are thy works, and thy thoughts are very
deep! We should not only take a sl^ght view, but have very serious thoughts of
them, and be much in meditating on them. As the Angels desire to look into
them, and with a holy admiration of them; Such Knowledge is too wonderful for
me, etc. When Christ took not on him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of
Abraham, and took Sin upon him, and so loved us as to give himself to suffer
Death; and passing by many, so loved me as to give his Spirit to quicken me
when I was dead in Sins, and to prepare me unto Glory, what a great work is
this? Now it is proper for the Sabbath to cease from our own works which weary
us, etc. To contemplate on, and make our selves glad with the work of the
Redeemer.

There are also the works of his gracious Providence, in which God gives great
experience of his Love, Mercy, etc. to his People.

Object. When we consider how much the Saints are afflicted in the World, the
are chastened every morning, and in the mean time the Wicked spring as the
Grass, and the workers of Iniquity do flourish; How can we be glad through God's
works of Providence?

Answ. Here God's thoughts lie deep; but enter into the Sanctuary of God, draw
nigh and search into them, and so you shall understand that which shall make
you glad. As for the wicked they spring as the Grass, but it is that they may be
destroyed. the wicked in their Prosperity are but as Grass, and the best of
them but as Grass on the Housetop: Grass soon withers, and that on the
Housetop the soonest of all. Thou Lord art most high, if they be more high in
Worldly Prosperity, etc. As for the Godly if they now suffer, and are afflicted
in their outward Man, in worldly things, it is that they may be saved for ever.
The Wicked now prosper that they may perish for ever. This he further sets
forth. Lo thine Enemies shall perish, my Horn shall thou exalt, etc. The World
being high in worldly Prosperity, are in the way to be thrown down: Saints
being low, are in the way to be exalted: the wicked exalting themselves,
glorying in their wickedness, in their worldly enjoyments, having exalted
thoughts of themselves, shall be abased; but the Godly humbling themselves
under the mighty Hand of God, shall be exalted.

2. On this day a Spirit of Prophesy should be exercised, as to praise God for,
and make our selves glad in the works that are done; so by the Spirit of
Prophecy to consider from the word, what God will do, and make our selves glad
in the works that are to be done. ver. 10. I shall be anointed with fresh Oil:
I have some Light, I shall have more: somewhat I know of the Mystery of
Godliness, and I shall know more: Some Grace I have received, I shall have
more; I have a little strength, I shall have more: the little Faith and Love I
have, shall be increased: thou were a a Spring to me heretofore, I had Grace in
Conversion, and all my fresh Springs are in thee, and thence I shall have fresh
Oil. It Is good to exercise a Spirit of Prophecy, it will make us glad amidst
all our weaknesses and wants, etc. ver. 11. Mine Eyes shall see, and mine Ears
shall hear my desire of the Wicked; the Church's Eyes shall see her desire on
Antichrist, the Man of Sin on Babylon the great. ver. 12.13. The Righteous
shall flourish as the Palm trees; the Righteous are oppressed, but they shall
flourish in and under their oppressions, and shall grow under their burdens,
and take root downward, and bear fruit upwards: so does the Palm Tree bear more
fruit when it is burdened. He shall grow like the Cedar in Lebanon, the wicked
grow but as the Grass, the Saints grow like the Cedar, That is lasting, and a
Tree that continues long, and the wood is very durable and lasting.

Those that be planted in the House of God shall flourish, even when old. And
then are most green and flourishing in Grace. When the outward Man perishes,
the inner Man is renewed.

Lastly: All this must be, that God may show himself upright; he will put a
difference betwixt the Godly and the Wicked at last, to show himself upright,
and that there is no unrighteousness in him. Here then we see the proper work
of the Sabbath Day, and other Duties; as Preaching, Prayer, Meditation, Holy
Conferences, that help forward the main Duties thereof.

The End of the Fifth Discourse.
THE SIXTH DISCOURSE. Of Christ's Judging all the World.
ROMANS xiv.x. But why do thou judge thy Brother? or why do thou set at
naught thy Brother? We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ.


THe words are a strong and forcible argument to hold Men back from doing that
which they are very prone to, that is, to judge one another. There was a great
deal of dissension amongst the Believers that Paul wrote to, about the use of
things in themselves indifferent; as Meats, and observation of Days; the
occasion was the inequality of Believers; some converted from Gentilism,
Strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, did live in a freer use of time and
meats, not observing the Jewish Feasts; not tying themselves to the use of
meats that the Jews were stinted to under the Law. Others that were Jews, and
were called, and embraced the Faith of Christ, being weak in Faith, did not
understand that the Legal Ceremonies were abrogated by the coming of Christ; so
out of reverence and respect to the Law, did abstain from meats therein
prohibited, and did observe Fasts and Feasts therein enjoined. The believing
Jew now contemned the believing Gentile as a contemner of the Law: on the other
side, the believing Gentiles did condemn the Jews for their Judaizing, and
walking contrary to the liberty of the Gospel: and the difference grew to such
a height as that each side seems to condemn the other, as not having a part in
Christ. Now this proud contempt of each other the Apostle strikes at, and
labors to bring them down to a more charitable opinion and loving carriage one
toward another. We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. For us
to Judge, is to place our selves in Christ's Throne, to which we shall be all
cited by sound of the Trumpet and voice of the Archangel, and there appear to
receive a Sentence suitable to what we were in the body. We are to be all
Judged by Christ, so be not Judges of one another.

The words hold forth the last and most glorious part of the Administration of
Christ's Kingdom: Hitherto you have heard only of Christ's ruling in the midst
of his Enemies, over his Church in the midst of Enemies, or mingled with
wicked; i. e. Enemies not at all subdued and made his Footstool: but at the
last day he shall sit in a Seat and Throne above his Enemies, which are at his
left hand to be cursed; and his Church come out from the midst of Enemies
standing on his right hand to be blessed.

Doct. 1. There is a Judgment Seat prepared for Christ, on which he shall sit
at the last day.

2. All Men shall stand and appear before his Judgment Seat, to receive a
Sentence out of his Mouth.

1. Christ has a Judgment Seat prepared. Jude. 14. Math. 25.31. He shall sit
on the Throne of his Glory; that is, he shall not appear in the form of a
Servant, as when he came first in the Flesh, and was despised; but ln the form
of the Son of God, made Judge, Act. 17.31. He will Judge the World by the Man
Christ Jesus: he shall be Judge not only as God, but as Man, 2 Cor. 5.10. We
must till appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. After Death comes
Judgment, Heb. 9.27. Judgment shall come, that is by Christ's coming to
Judgment.

Quest. What is meant by Judgment Seat? whether to be understood properly of a
material Throne, that Christ as Man shall sit on, as Earthly Judges use to sit?

Answ. That which may make for the clearing of this, consider in these
particulars.

1. Christ shall descend from Heaven: in that nature which ascended, he shall
descend: He was in the World, and shall come into the World again, as said the
Angel, Act. 1.11. This same Jesus which was taken up from you into Heaven,
shall so come, etc. that is, locally and in the same body; thus said Christ
himself, I will come again, and receive you to my self, Joh. 14.3. And Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. The Lord himself shall descend, and Saints shall meet him in the
Air: as he that ascended is the same that descended into the lower parts, that
is, the Grave, so the same shall descend again. He descended first by virtue of
a Sentence pronounced against him; next he shall descend to give Sentence
against those that were against him.

2. Christ shall visibly appear in the World, he shall not hide himself as he
did many times at his first coming, but to be seen, Men shall see their Judge,
Zach 12.10. They shall look upon me. Rev. 1.7. Every Eye shall see him; Saints
shall see him in whom they have believed, Sinners shall see him whom they
pe^secuted and despised. It was Job's Comfort and Confidence; I shall see my
Redeemer, he shall stand the latter day on Earth: It seems he then comes
further than the Air: not only Saints see, but Sinners. Numb. 24.17. Balaam
said, I shall see him, but not nigh.

3. He shall appear gloriously. A Judgment seat is an honorable Place. Judges
sit in their Robes in the Seat of Justice: So Christ shall be seen in his
Glory. Math. 24.30. with Power and Glory: that is a visible brightness and
fulgor, Math. 25.31. in his Glory; the Glory of the only begotten Son of God,
i. e. that becomes such a Person: what this Glory is, we cannot yet know, but
shall when we see him. Math. 24.30. The Sign of the Son of Man shall appear in
Heaven, that is, as some exceeding Glory and Majesty in Heaven, which shall
bear witness, that Christ the Lord of Heaven and Earth draws near to Judge
the World.

1. In the Glory of the Father, Math. 16.27. that is, such Glory as declares
him to be God equal with the Father, which the Jews denied; and then shall see
it shall declare him to be an Infinite Person. Heb. 1.2. He is the Express
Image of his Father's Person and brightness of his Glory. And as he is, so he
shall be seen at that day. God shall be seen in Christ as he is in Christ, the
fullness of the Godhead in Christ's humane nature shall shine forth.

2. With innumerable companies of Angels, who shall be his Ministers in
gathering the Elect. He has glorious Attendants, Math. 25.31. He shall come,
and all the Holy Angels. Now he has but a few Poor Men of the World to attend
him: his followers are esteemed as himself in the days of his humiliation,
Rejected of Men, despised of the People: Christ chooses now the weak things of
the World, but then all his Angels shall come with him, Jude 14. Ten Thousand
of his Saints, according to Enoch's Prophecy: that is, as it is expounded Zech.
14.5. The Lord thy God shall come, and all his Saints with thee, and Christ
shall be glorified in his Saints and admired in them that believe, in making
them of Sinners, Holy: of Corruptible, Incorruptible; changing vile bodies, etc.

4. At this time he shall have subdued all his Enemies, he shall appear in the
Glory of a Conqueror. This is hinted in that word Seat; he shall sit down in
his Seat: He appeared to Stephen as standing at the Right Hand of God, Acts.
7.56. ready for Action, taking his Power, rising up to scatter his Enemies. And
to John as Riding on a White Horse, going on Conquering and to Conquer, which
work he is now about. Then he shall sit on a Seat, having Conquered by his
Power, and taken his Enemies, as Rev. 19.21. The Beast and false Prophet were
taken; he shall judicially proceed against them for opposing him. As God
Creating the World in Six Days, rested the Seventh, so Christ having Conquered
the World, shall sit down and rest from fighting, and shall proceed to Judge:
for that he shall appear in the Glory of a Conqueror.

1. Of Sin; by having satisfied for it, removing the guilt and condemning power
as to the Saints, Heb. 9.28. he shall appear the second time without Sin: the
meaning is, the first time of his appearing in the Flesh, he came with the
guilt and burden of Sins, the Sins of the Elect imputed to him, then made Sin;
the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all: as Aaron confessed the
Sins of the Israelites over the head of the Goat, and sent him into a Land not
inhabited. But the second time he shall come without Sin, without guilt ^ Sin's
no longer imputed; he being sent away with Sin imputed, to the Grave, he
returns without them, having left them in the Land of forgetfulness, i. e. the
Grave, never to be brought in remembrance against Saints, because of the full
satisfaction he made: so that he shall appear without Sin: that is, to the
Saints a Conqueror of Sin.

2. Of the Law. He was made under the Law, being Lord of the Law, he suffered
that to try its strength upon him, and the Law wrought wrath, and brought death
on him; but by the merit of his obedience overcame: for he being Lord of the
Law that suffered the Curse of it, God was more honored hereby than
dishonored by the transgression of the Law, for which he suffered and so
Conquered the Law.

3. Of Death. O Death where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy victory? And
Christ shall appear as Conqueror of Death, Rev. 1.18. I am he that lives, and
was dead, and am alive for evermore. He has the Keys of Death and Hell; he
that was dead and laid in the Sepulcher, with a Stone rolled on the mouth of
it, and Sepulcher sealed, he has Conquered Death, and gotten the Keys: that
is, Power to deliver over to, or keep from Hell.

4. He shall appear as Conqueror of wicked Men and evil Angels; Against such
Men he shall pronounce Sentence of everlasting Condemnation, for their opposing
and not believing in him. As for evil Angels, Jude 6. he has reserved the
Angels in chains of darkness to the Judgment of great day. As Prisoners are
kept in Prison bound till the Assizes come, so are they by God's Power, that
they cannot escape.

Doct. 2. All Men shall stand and appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to
receive a Sentence out of his Mouth suitable to what they were, and had done in
the Body. Christ shall be Judge of all, Heb. 12.23. Abraham called him the
Judge of all the Earth, Genesis 18.25. in which negative question is implied an
affirmative position, that God above all others must and will do right, because
from his Judgment there is no appeal. Acts 10.42. Judge of Quick and Dead: of
those who being found alive at his coming shall be changed, and and of those
which shall be raised from the dead to come to Judgment, 2 Timothy 4.1. Christ
shall Judge the Quick and Dead at his appearing and Kingdom: when his Kingdom
shall be manifest to all the World, as well as over all the World. Yea the Man
Christ Jesus shall be Judge of evil Angels, they are not in full torment. Why
art thou come to torment us before the time? Math. 8.29. All their ease and
mitigation of torments is that they have a power over the wicked, and rule in
them, tempting to Sin; thus revenging themselves on God, and revenge is sweet.
Luke 8.31. They besought him much that he would not command them to go out into
the deep, into Hell.

For Explication shall be shown after what form and manner Christ shall proceed
in Judgment.

1. All shall be cited and called to appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ.
None shall hide himself then: the wicked shall seek to hide in holes of the
Rocks, and call on the Mountains to hide them, etc. but thence shall they be
taken, Math. 24.31. He shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet
and they shall gather his Elect, 1 Cor. 15.52 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. As the people of
God were Assembled in their Solemn Feasts and Fasts by the sound of a Trumpet;
and as an Mount Sinai the Law was given with a most loud and dreadful sound; so
the Summons of all to Judgment shall be some such sound, which is here called
the last trump. When it shall be, all shall know what this sound means. And
those that would not hear the sound of the Gospel, nor understand what that
meant, and called Men to, shall know the meaning of the Voice of the Archangel,
and shall hear the sound of the last Trump.

2. As all, so in this order: That is, first the Elect shall be Summoned and
Judged, and then the wicked; this may be gathered from diverse places. Math.
24.31. he shall send his Angels, and they shall gather the Elect, etc. and
25.34. the King first speaks to them on his Right Hand, 1 Cor. 15.23. every Man
in his order: first Christ, then they that are Christ's; then shall he put down
all rule, etc. 1 These. 4.16. the dead in Christ shall rise first.

You may take this Argument for a further declaration of it. The Godly shall be
Judges of the wicked. 1 Cor. 6.2. Do ye not know that the Saints shall Judge
the World? etc. Christ is primary Judge that has authority to give Sentence;
Saints by way of astipulation, applauding the equity and righteousness of his
Judgment, and in and through Christ triumphing over the World. Now this dignity
affirmed of Saints, argues their being first judged, that they have received
their Blessing. Ye shall sit on twelve Thrones, Judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel. Math. 19.

3. Those that are called to Christ's Judgment Seat shall be examined, and give
account of the things done in the Body, that is, of thoughts, words and works.
2 Cor. 5.10. that every one may receive the things done in the body; that is,
reward agreeable to their actions whether good or bad.

1. The Godly must be brought to an account, Romans 14.12. every one of us shall
give account of himself to God, how he has behaved himself; we must answer the
Judge concerning our Persons, Conversations, etc. our Thoughts, Faith, all
shall be enquired into.

2. Christ shall take notice of the sincere and holy works of Saints: whatever
proceeds from a pure Heart, good Conscience and Faith unfeigned, out of a
desire to serve the Lord Jesus. Math. 25.35. I was hungry and ye gave me Meat,
etc. God is not unrighteous to forget your works of Faith and labor of Love,
Heb. 6.10. which ye have showed toward his name. Show respect and reverence to
the name of Christ, etc. 1 Cor. 3.13. every Man's work shall be made manifest,
for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire; which is in
part made good in this Life, by the work of the Holy Ghost through the
Preaching of the Gospel; causing a discerning Light to shine, to put a
difference betwixt Truth and Error: and this work shall be perfected at the day
of Judgment, when all Truths shall be made manifest by the revealing brightness
of Christ, and all errors discovered thereby.

Quest. Whether the Sins of the Godly shall be at all mentioned, or taken
notice of in that great day?

Answ. 1. The Sins of the Godly shall not appear against them for Condemnation,
for then they must appear against the Judge, who took the guilt and punishment
of their Sins upon himself: but the Godly shall triumph over their Sins,
because they stand before him that died for them; therefore no fear of Death.

2. Nor to their shame; all sorrow and so shame done away; therefore if the
Sins of the Godly be mentioned, yet this shall not make them hang down their
Heads with shame; they shall not do as Adam, hide themselves from their Judge;
these things are clear. Now some hold that they shall not be at all brought to
light, because by Sentence of Justification they are covered and taken away. To
this may be answered, that in the time of this Life, Believers are absolved in
God's gracious sentence toward them, and in their own conscience, more
privately and secretly by the witness of the Spirit; but at the day of Judgment
they shall be absolved and acquitted of all Sins more publicly, even in the
sight of Angels, and the whole World: Now the Spirit speaks to the Heart and
Conscience, then Christ shall openly pronounce Sentence, Come ye Blessed of my
Father, etc. therefore it seems not contrary to the analogy of Faith, to hold
that the Sins of the Godly shall be brought to light. Nay it seems very
suitable to the great design of the Gospel, which is to illustrate and commend
in the highest manner the free Grace of God, the great love of Christ, the
power of his Death, and Infinite Virtue of his Sacrifice. As that day is a day
of Wrath to the Wicked, etc. so a day of Love to the Saints, wherein the Love
of Christ shall in the fullness of it be displayed; and to commend it the more,
it seems not incongruous to affirm that the Sins of the Godly shall be brought
to light; even their secret Sins. He shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in them that believe; his great love to Saints shall cause great
admiration; that is, they shall admire the love of Christ, not only to
themselves, but other Saints; and Angels shall admire Christ in the Saints: now
the knowledge of Sin, and of free Grace rejoicing over it, or of the love of
Christ, etc. this shall be a means to heighten much their admiration, and se^
of the great love of Christ with the more luster.

3. If the Sins of the Godly be recorded and to be read, it is in the Book of
Life, it is that they may have some advantage thereby, etc. and they are all so
recorded. Rev. 20. Ergo.

2. For the Sins of the wicked, that is most clear, they shall be all laid open
to the view of Men and Angels at that great day: there is a Book in which all
Sins are written, from an idle word to the highest Blasphemy. Math. 12.36. all
secret Sins are set in the sight of the Sun. Romans 2.16. He shall judge the
Secrets of Men; there is nothing hid that shall not be manifested, this day
shall declare it. Rev. 2.23 All the Churches shall know that I am he that
searches the Hearts and Reins. Rev. 20.12. the dead are judged out of those
things that are written therein. Whatever you now go about to conceal and hide,
shall not be ever hid; all wickedness that lay hid under a form of godliness,
etc. then the Vail shall be removed, etc. Eccles. 12.14. God shall bring every
work to Judgment, with every secret thing. Eccles. 11.19. Rejoice, etc. yet
know that for all this God shall bring thee to Judgment. Take notice of some
particular Sins, because the Scripture does particularize them, as Whoredom and
Adultery; Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Heb. 13.4. Neglect and
abuse of the means of Grace; this is one of the greatest Sins, that Men shall
be brought to Judgment for; it shall bring a very heavy Punishment: It shall be
more tolerable for Tire and Sidon than for this People, if you live under the
light of the Gospel and walk in darkness; sit and hear the word, yet are settled
on the lees of Sin: then at the last day this shall be brought in upon your
account, so many Sermons you have heard and never benefitted by them; so many
times Christ came to gather you, and you would not; so many times the Gospel
came knocking at the door of your Hearts, and you refused to open: know that
all is Recorded: likewise hard speeches, Jude 15. spoken against God, or his
People, or the Commands, ways and Administrations of God, as to say, his
sayings, his dealings are hard: Christ endured, and his Members endure the
Contradiction of Sinners, but you must look to be called to the Judgment Seat
of Christ for Contradiction. Christ shall give Sentence against those that did
speak against him. Yea not only hard speeches, but Idle words, the least Sins:
if you were guilty of no Sin but one idle word, Christ might very justly cast
you into Hell for it. Some are mentioned to show that all shall be remembered
against you. And there is no deluding or deceiving the Judge by your colorable
pretenses and excuses; for he is most Wise, and knows all things, So there is
no covering your Sins, for he is most Just, and so no corrupting him with
Gifts; no overcoming with entreaties, for then wicked Men shall try and call
hard, but he is most severe: no appealing from this Bar, for he is the Supreme
Judge: there shall be Verity in his Inquisition, Impartiality in Sentencing,
Severity in Execution.

4 Godly shall stand apart from the wicked; the Just by themselves, Unjust by
themselves, Sheep by themselves, and the Goats by themselves: in this life the
Wicked and Godly are mingled together, Chaff with Wheat, therefore it is that in
this life all things happen alike to all, Eccles. 9.2. There are calamities
that are common to the Godly and Wicked. The evil despise and persecute the
good, and Godly as well as the Wicked dye, and rise again; but great difference
appears when brought to the Judgment Seat of Christ; then the precious are
perfectly separated from the vile. Then the Righteous shall have the upper
hand, Ps. 49.14. The upright shall have dominion over them in the morning.

5. Christ shall publ^ckly and solemnly pronounce Sentence to the Godly and
wicked according to the word, and their own Consciences, which shall set a Seal
of approbation to the justness of Christ's Sentence, Math. 25.34. The King
shall say to them on his Right hand, Come ye blessed, etc. to them on his
Left Hand, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels.

For the time when Christ shall come to Judgment, nothing can be said, but that
it is most certain, yet most uncertain. Most certain that he shall come, but
most uncertain when he shall come to Judgment. The Lord shall come, but he so
comes as a Thief in the night. And the time is of purpose on weighty reasons
concealed: that one day is concealed that it might be looked for every day: As
the Lightening comes out of the East and shines unto the West, so shall the
coming of the Son of Man be, Math. 24.27. that is, sudden and at an instant
appear to all the World, that all shall at once know that he he is coming, as
the Lightening in a moment shines from the East to the West.

For the time how long, it is called a Day, but longer space than artificial or
natural day contains, as the great and manifold work of that universal Judgment
day will require.

Use 1. For exceeding terror to the Wicked, who now with Dives enjoy their
good things, who are not in troubles, nor plagued as other Men, that live in
pleasure, serving diverse lusts, going whither they would; doing what is right
in their own eyes, running to excess of Riot; know, that for all this, God will
bring thee to Judgment, Eccl. 11.9. The wickedness that is now sweet in thy
Mouth shall be bitter in thy Belly. Sin is now a wicked Man's pleasure, than it
shall be his pain. A Wicked Man would not have his sins remembered and
discovered, he hates the Light of the word that reproves him; when the Book of
the Law is now opened to convince him of sin, he shuts his Eyes and stops his
Ears, and hardens his Heart, and will not suffer himself to be convinced of
sin; he fears his Conscience: but then the Book wherein all is Recorded that
you have done, shall be opened, and by him that opens and no Man shuts,
Rev. 3.7. and Conscience shall be opened. And out of that Book not only Christ
shall Judge you worthy of death, the second death, but your selves shall Judge
your selves: Christ and Saints shall Judge the Wicked, yea their convinced
Consciences shall be Judges too: all ^^ose shall bear Record against you.
Judgment (...) and t^ere is no escaping of it. Sudden (...) shall come as
travel on a Woman with (...), shall not escape: Then shall you (...) Mountains,
etc. Rev. 6.16. As when (...) was destroyed by the Flood, and the (...)
arising, the People did get up to the tops of Mountains, hoping that the Waters
would not (...) ^b^ve the Mountains; in allusion hereto it is s^d the Wicked
shall cry to the Mountains, etc. Put a^ Amos 9.1. He that flees of them shall
not flee away; and he that escapes of them shall not be deliver^d; though they
dig to Hell, thence shall my hand t^ke them: that is, if they hide in Holes and
C^res of the Earth; as the Grave is called Hell. Your Judge shall be Omniscient
or all seeing: all things are naked to him, etc. the Wicked shall know as well
as the Churches, Rev. 2.23. That he is the searcher of the Heart and Reins. And
an Omnipotent Judge. His Hand shall execute the Sentence he passes. Now let
this dreadful day possess your thoughts, and be not so overcome with the
pleasures of sin ard delights of the World, as to banish all serious thoughts
of Judgment: know that it is appointed to all to dye, and after Death the
Judgment. After Life comes Death, and after living and rejoicing in sin, comes
Judgment for sin. Now let this Doctrine be to all Wicked Men as the
Handwriting to Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 'twas said to him, Thou have brought the
Vessels of the Temple of God, drunk Wine in them, and praised the Gods of
Silver and Gold, and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy
ways, have thou not glorified, and then this Writing was written, Mean, Mean,
etc. God has numbered thy Kingdom, and it is finished; Tekel, thou art weighed
in the balance and found too light; Peers, thy Kingdom is divided, even so for
you that drink wine, etc. and praise the Gods of Gold and Silver, Brass, Iron,
Wood and Stone; that love these earthly things, delight more in them than in
God, and so praise them, and glorify not God in whose hands your breath is;
that is, who is Lord of your Life, whose are all your ways, that is, without
whose Providence you cannot move a step, yet that God you glorify not; know
that there is a hand writing against you, for all this God will bring you to
Judgment.

To strike greater terror, Consider, 1. That day shall be the day of Christ 's
wrath: now is the day of Christ's love, now is the accepted time, and the day
of Salvation, a time for Sinners to make their peace, to make supplication to
your Judge; but then, if this day of Grace be slighted by you, and you make it
a day of sinning, of security, Impenitency, then shall that day be to you a day
of Christ's wrath, wherein he shall in as great degree, declare his wrath to
the Wicked, as ever he did love to his Saints. Rev. 6.17. The great day of the
Lambs wrath is come; Now you hear of wrath in a day of Grace, when yet is a
time and opportunity left you to make peace, and to escape wrath; but then you
shall hear of wrath in a day of wrath, when the day of Grace is ended: as for
the wrath of the Father, that may be escaped by flying to Christ for refuge;
being in Christ, wrath cannot break out against us, because in Christ the
Father is well pleased, and he is a propitiation for sin; but if the day of
Christ's wrath come on you before you have made your peace, there is none to
deliver from Christ's wrath, for this is dreadful wrath: The time of this Life
is the day of wicked Men's wrath, of Satan's wrath against the Godly, now they
breath out threatenings; but the comfort is, their wrath shall turn to the
praise of God, because wicked Men's wrath shall work for the good of Saints,
therein the power and wisdom of God has praise; but the last day is a day of
Christ's wrath against the wicked; and it is true this wrath shall turn to the
praise of God, but who is there to restrain his wrath? To be under the wrath of
Man or Satan is a most miserable conditon, if there be none to restrain it; but
worse under Christ's wrath.

2. All sinful works shall be remembered, and brought in upon an indictment
against them, blessed is he at that day, whose iniquity is forgiven, and sin
covered; that has Christ for his Righteousness, and Faith to put him on. But
the wicked shall have nothing to do with this blessedness; now they seek it
not, now it is not esteemed by them, so great a blessedness as it is; now Men
establish their own righteousness, and will not submit to the Righteousness of
God; but at the last day when Wicked Men shall know the worth and want of
Christ's Righteousness, then there shall be no possibility of having it; then
the Books are opened and the sins of the ungodly discovered; and as the Spirit
Promised to the Godly, to bring to remembrance what Christ said; to open the
mysteries of the Gospel, etc. So on the other side, then the Spirit shall bring
to remembrance all that the Wicked have done; all idle words, all oaths, filthy
communication, all vain thoughts, sinful affections; so many times eating and
drinking to excess, etc. All their sins shall dog them to the Judgment Seat of
Christ, Christ shall take notice of all the unkindness shown to him; those only
are mentioned Math. 25.44. to show they are great and most provoking sins: but
as under one great duty commanded, all are employed, so under one great sin
forbidden, all others are forbidden. And so under these great sins and injuries
done to Christ, all others are included: I was hungry, etc. and these shall go
away into everlasting punishment: and in the upshot these were injuries done to
the Members of Christ, which he makes his own injuries by Compassion, as the
Head suffers when the Members suffer: this you reckon a small matter, to pass
by a Member of Christ, and not supply his wants; and if so for not feeding
Christ in his Members how much more for going about to starve Christ in his
Members, by taking away the Bread of Life from them; if for not visiting when
sick and in prison, how much more for wounding of Saints in Name, Body,
Estates, and for casting of Saints into prison.

3. No works of theirs which for matter are good, shall be remembered and
accepted of in that day; every work being weighed in the Balance, like
Belshazzar being found too light: whatever proceeds not from Faith in Christ,
nor is done out of zeal to the Glory of God, shall be found too light: and for
wicked Men's works, as hearing the Word, doing Justice, giving Alms, they
shall not plead any thing for you; your Holy things shall not plead against
iniquity, because there is iniquity in your holy things: self-love; seeking
Men's praise; no sincere love to the Lord Jesus, no judging Christ worthy of
obedience. If you do a good turn to a Man for your own ends, what thanks do you
deserve? For know, whatever good you do, if it proceed not from a pure heart, a
good Conscience toward God, Faith in the Lord Jesus, etc. it shall be reckoned
but among your sins, Math. 7.21. Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, that in
words will call Christ Lord, but deny it in works, shall enter into Heaven;
shall be judged meet for that Kingdom: But he that does the will of my Father.
It Is not enough to do what is good, but to do it as the will of the Father, out
of obedience to his command, with an aim at his honor: yet that is not all; but
he that does the will of my Father, that obeys the will of the Father as he is
Christ's Father, knowing the Son as the Father, doing the will of the Father
for Christ's sake, coming to the Father through the Son, moved with love to
Christ, he shall enter Heaven.

Objection. But is this necessary, will some plead at the last day, that the
will of the Father, of thy Father, as thy Father must be done? Is it for thy
sake? etc. Why, that we can plead, Lord* Lord, have we not Prophesied in thy
Name? etc. Then Christ shall say, Depart from me, I never knew you, I never
knew you Born again, Converted, made new Creatures. I never saw you deny your
selves out of sincere love to me, and zeal of my honor, I never saw you in my
Kingdom of Grace, so I will not now admit you to any fellowship or acquaintance
with me: Depart, ye workers of Iniquity, whatever you have done, I look on you
but as workers of iniquity; your good works that you plead, I reckon but
amongst your sins. How sad a time will it be then with Wicked Men, who shall
say, is our Religion vain? Shall none of our works and doings proffit? Have we
prayed and taken so much pains from time to time, Sabbath after Sabbath, and
all in vain? will God forget all? what a miserable case are we then in? Even so
it shall be, nothing remembered, if you are not regenerated, if not a new
Creature, if you have not true Faith in the Lord Jesus, resting in him alone
for Salvation.

4. When their sinful works shall be set before them, in order and imperfection
of their good works shown, then the wicked shall be convinced of both in their
own Consciences: now Wicked Men will not be convinced of sin, nor judge aright
of their performances, they are past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. The Greek word
signifies, them that having done any thing amiss cannot grieve, or take shame to
themselves, as Drunkards past feeling, Swearers past feeling, 1 Timothy 4.2.
Having the Conscience seared with a hot Iron: That is, either professing
themselves to be the people of God, their Consciences are stigmatized with the
works of many foul and enormous crimes; a metaphor taken from Rogues who are
burnt in the Hand, or some other part of the body: or Conscience so insensible
of sin and their dangerous estate by it, and of the fearful Judgments of God,
as dead and hard Flesh feared with a hot Iron. Thus it is for the most part with
wicked Men here, but when they are called to Judgment, then their Conscience
shall recover feeling, then it shall do its office in accusing, judging: here
wicked Men make God a liar, they have be^ied the Lord and said, no evil shall
come on us; then they shall set to their seal; that God is true, his word is
true, his threatenings are true: then as Joshua said, ye know that not one thing
has failed, Chap 23.14. so on the other side shall the wicked say at the last
day, they shall know that not one thing fails of the word of God spoken
concerning the ungodly: they shall set to their seal, that God is most just.
Math. 22.12. that Parable of a marriage of the King's Son most probably is to
be understood of the day of Judgment: There one was observed that had not a
Wedding Garment, and when the King asks, How came thou in hither? is it fit
that thou should be admitted to this Feast, etc. he was speechless, he had
not a word to say for himself, he was muzled, as 1 Cor. 9.9. he could no more
speak for himself then a muzled Ox can eat of the Corn he treads out: his
Conscience speaks against him, so how shall he speak for himself when it shall
be said, that thou were a Drunkard, and never did repent of this sin, and is
it fit that having drunk of the Cup of Devils in thy lifetime, and delighting
in nothing else, that thou should be admitted to my Feast, to partake in
Eternal Life? Thou that made nothing of profaning my Name, is it fit thou
should dwell in my presence? Thou that had a form, but an Enemy to the
power of Godliness; when Christ shall thus accuse, Wicked Men shall be muzled:
the Gospel is Preached for a witness. Here when the Spirit of God in the word
strives with Sinners to convince of sin, and would discover their damnable
estate. They have somewhat to say, that as they sin, so they do somewhat that
is good or will repent hereafter, or will repent before they dye, etc. but then
they are all speechless and past excuses.

5. Wicked Men's cries and prayers shall not be heard in that day: they shall
cry, Lord, Lord, they that despised Mercy shall cry, they that made light of an
invitation to Christ shall earnestly seek to him; they that Christ came often to
gather as a Hen her Chickens, and they would not, then shall cry unto Christ to
save them from wrath, as the Devils. I beseech thee torment me not, cast me not
into the great deep. But refusing to cry in the day of Grace, and to hear
Christ crying to them, their cries shall not be heard in the day of wrath.
Prove. 1.24. Because I have called, (that is Christ terming himself Wisdom) and
ye refused. Isa. 51.1, 2. I have stretched out my hand, a gesture of such as
made Proclamation, to get attention, as Acts 21.40. Paul beckened with the hand
and there was silence, intimating, there was no means left untried to persuade
them to hearken unto him: but what was the Fruit? Ye have set at naught my
Council, and would none of my reproof. But Christ will deal with you as you
with him; I will laugh at your calamity: that is, the wicked which make a jest
at God's word, and mock, shall have the just reward of their working; they
shall be requited in the same kind: then shall they call, but I will not
answer, Math. 25.11. The foolish Virgins cry Lord, Lord, open to us: but he
answered, I know you not. Wicked Men would go to Heaven at the last day,
although now they never think of taking the right way thither.

6. Wicked Men shall be rewarded according to their works: and what reward see
Romans 2.6, 8. he will render to every Man according to his deeds, unto them that
are contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation,
wrath, tribulation, anguish upon every Soul that does evil: So many expressions
are heaped together, to set forth the great heap of Judgments prepared for the
wicked: on the Jew first, etc. all transgressors without distinction or respect
to Persons, shall meet with tribulation; yet Judgment shall begin at the House
of God, and those that have better means and more knowledge, and do not
accordingly, shall receive the heavier: He that knows his Masters will and does
it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Amos 3.2. You only have I known of
all the Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you for all your
iniquities. That is, I have chosen, accepted, privileged you, and you only
have known me, therefore those sins of ignorance which are not so great in
others, are in you more inexcusable, proceeding from pure malice: according
hereto at the last day their doom must be sorer. Aall Sinners at that day shall
be full of wrath. All the damned are called Vessels of wrath. Now all are not
of the same quantity and capaciy, one is capable of more, another of less, but
every Vessel full of wrath. As throw many vessels into the Sea, one is bigger
then another and can receive more, but every Vessel will be full, so the wicked
shall be all turned into Hell, and to the great deep, and all shall be full of
wrath, though some may have more and some less. See the reward of the wicked,
Math. 25.41. Depart from me, from me who am the Way, Truth, and Life, the Light
of the World, who am that only name given whereby sinners might be saved, who
am the express image of the Father, by whose Blood sins are washed. Ye Cursed by
the Sentence of the Law, into everlasting Fire, that is, torments prepared for
the Devil; as Wicked Men are Servants to Satan in sinning, so shall they be
companions of Satan in suffering.

Use 2. Exhort. Let it be the great business of every day of your life to
prepare for that one day of Christ's coming to Judgment; that which was Paul's
Prayer for Onesiphorus, let it be your desire, The Lord grant that he may find
Mercy of the Lord in that day, 2 Timothy 1.18.

1. Labor after the knowledge of Christ. He shall come in flaming fire to
render vengeance on all that know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.18. That is, with fiery
indignation, his anger shall sparkle out in a most dreadful manner against
them. Know God in his Allsufficiency, Faithfulness, Majesty, Goodness, or you
shall know him in his wrath. Know Christ in his Sweetness, fullness of Love,
Grace, etc. or else you shall know him in fullness of wrath. Take heed that you
hate not knowledge now in the time of knowledge: if you are in darkness, that
day shall overtake you as a Thief, that is, suddenly, and that day shall strip
and spoil you of all your Joys and Comforts that you delighted most in: If you
know the Lord aright then will Christ say, I know you. If you know, you shall
be known; now hear and so hear as that you may learn the Knowledge of Christ.

2. Obey the Gospel. 1. Believe what Christ commands you to believe this is the
first and great command of the Gospel, Believe in the Son as God-Man, as
Mediator and Savior, one that is able to save you to the utmost. Then you
shall be prepared for that day, 2 Timothy 1.12. do as Paul He is able to keep that
which I have committed to him against that day: That is, my precious Soul,
which I have committed to his care and custody, to bring it forth a glorious
So^^at that day, and my vile Body that he may make it a glorious Body like his
own: This I have committed, by Faith, and Hope deposited with him. This is the
great Command of the Gospel that you give up your selves to Christ, that you
deposite your Souls and Bodies with him, and trust him for the saving of both,
that he is able and willing to do it.

2. Do what Christ would have you to do, deny your selves to do Christ's will:
Let not his Commands be grievous to you. Let your conversation be as becomes
the Gospel, in Holiness, Meekness, etc. This some do conceive to be meant by
the Wedding Garment, a conversation becoming the Gospel. The Gospel calls to a
Feast, it contains fullness of Blessings, as Romans 15.29. I shall come in fullness
of the Blessing of the Gospel of Christ: Blessings for Soul, Body, enough for
both, Eternity of both: He that believes on the Son has everlasting Life. He
shall live and reign with Christ. This is the Feast that believers are called
to. Now it is required in all that would be meet Guests, that they be Holy,
Obedient in carriage. As you know it is an unseemly thing for a Man to come to
the Marriage Feast of a King's Son, only to enjoy the pleasures of that solemn
meeting, without respect of decent apparel befitting such solemnity. So you
that would eat of the Feast of fat things contained in the Gospel, must have
decent apparel, a Conversation beseeming a Christian Calling, becoming the
Gospel, suitable to it in all holy conversation and godliness: as you would lay
hold on the promises and blessings of the Gospel, so you must have a
Gospel-garment, a Gospel-frame of life: herein many come short, they do profess
to believe in Christ, and hope for Pardon, and Mercy at that day, but have no
Wedding Garment, no Gospel Garment, no Conversation becoming the Gospel: and to
such Christ shall say How come thou in hither? out with him, here is one that
lays claim to Promises, and would not regard the Precepts; he comes in his
filthy Garments of sin; now this is to be so doing, Mat. 24.46. Blessed, etc.
that so doing; trusting in Christ, and walking in Gospel ways; endeavoring to
honor the Lord Jesus as Lord and King: this is Oil in your Lamps, a heart
believing the Gospel, subdued to Christ, established with Grace; Oil in the
Lamp is Faith and Love; a Lamp without it is an empty Profession, and form of
Godliness: your hearing, praying, professing to believe in Christ, that is your
Lamp, your Eaith, Love, Zeal for the Honor of Christ is your Oil in the Lamp;
have not this to seek when you should come to meet Christ.

3. Look for this day; looking for the blessed hope, Tit. 2.13. all the hope of
a Christian is in that day of Christ. If in this Life only they had hope, then
they were most miserable; then more miserable than wicked Men; they have
pleasure and enjoy their good things; and Saints for the most part in regard of
their outward Condition, have torments: So look for that day and long after it,
be not overcharged wlth the cares of the World, say not, this is your rest;
look for rest, for your portion and inheritance at the day of Christ's
appearing: to them that look for him, he shall appear without Sin, etc. Christ
has so foretold it: and before his coming, he shall give evident signs that he
may be looked for; so look beyond Friends, Estates, beyond the end of the
World; beyond Life, Death, even to Christ's day; be frequent and serious in
your thoughts of it, 'twill disengage your thoughts from the World. Enoch the
seventh from Adam that lived in the beginning of the World, his thoughts did
reach to the end of it, to Christ's appearing; though the Vision be far of, and
a great while to come, Judge. 14 Enoch prophesied. The Lord shall come with ten
thousands of his Saints: how much more should we look after it upon whom the
ends of the World are come? now the time is so near, that Christ is as it were
at the door: so watch and wait for him. 2 Pet. 2.12. Looking for, and hasting
to the coming of the day of God. or hasting the coming: going forth to meet
Christ; let your thoughts and desires be sent out to meet him.

Use 3. Comfort for Saints; here they find trouble, etc. but they shall find
mercy at that day: there shall sure right be done them, and be avenged of the
wicked, as the Jews are wont to comfort themselves when they meet with any
knotty place of Scripture in the old Testament that cannot understand, Elias
veniet, et euodabit omnia. So Christ will come, and then woe to the wicked, it
shall be ill with them: say to the Righteous, it shall be well with him. Isa.
3.10. it is the day of the Saints Redemption and Adoption, when they receive
Inheritance, as well as have right to it. As Romans 8.23. we wait for the
Adoption, even the Redemption of our Bodies.

FINIS.

