Judicial Astrologers Totally Routed, And their Pretense to Scripture, Reason
and Experience, Briefly, yet Clearly and Fully ANSVVERED.

Or a Brief DISCOURSE, Wherein is clearly manifested, That Divining by the
Stars has no solid Foundation.

In the First Part of this Book are several Cases of Conscience Answered, both
from the Word of God, and from the Experience of Eminent Divines of different
Judgments.

In the Second Part of it, are the Maxims of Judicial Astrology Examined and
Answered; and many Eminent Examples added, of the Frustration of the Tokens of
these Liars.

Published by J. A. for Public Good.

Jer. 10. Isai. 44. 25. Read the words:

Printed for John Allen at the Rising Sun in St. Pauss Churchyard, 1659.

THE BOOKSELLER to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Have once more (by the Providence of God) published a second Impression of
this little Treatise, against Judicial Astrology, a practice if seriously
considered, does not only undermine the Providence of God, (that works all
things according to the counsel of his blessed Will) but also cut in sunder the
Sinews of common prudence, and lays a man open to the practice of the vilest
and wickedest actions.

The Book is divided into two Parts. The first consisting of several Cases of
Conscience concerning Judicial Astrology, answered from the Word of God, and
from the experience of eminent Divines, who in their generations were bright
and shining Lights: And how much the godliest Divines of our Nation, (of
different judgments) have spoken and written against the practice of it, of
late days, is very apparent.

The Second Part of this Book consists of several grounds and reasons by them
alleged, which are clearly answered; and their pretense to reason and experience
of no value. To which is added some rare examples of the frustration of the
Tokens of these Liars; whereby their pretended Art to all Generations has been
rendered odious.

The former Part of this Book finding a general acceptance with the Judicious,
(and Gods wonderful deliverance of me from so great a snare, when I was for
many years a Student in this abominable practice of Judicial Astrology) These
considerations with many others, as so many Alarm's to awaken me to my duty,
viz. to manifest and declare to others the odiousness of this practice, so
much displeasing to God, and a trouble to the Consciences of those that have
the power of Godliness, desiring to wait upon God in all those ways that are
pleasing unto him, and leave the success of all dispensations to his wise
Providence. I have with relation to the premises, published a second
Impression, with additions; to the end, that the reading over of this small
Tract, may be instrumental to recover such from the practice of it that are
Students in it, and to persuade others whose minds are too inclineable to the
study of it; my humble request to them both is, that they would flee from the
practice of it, and shun all the occasions leading unto it, knowing the ways
of it lead to the Chambers of death.

That this little Book may (through the Blessing of God) attain these ends and
purposes intended, and that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus
Christ, shall through his Gracious Assistance be the desires, prayers and
endeavors of him who is willing to acknowledge himself unworthy of the least
of Gods Mercies, yet is willing to subscribe himself,

Thy cordial friend to his power, John Allen.
October. 19, 1659.
An advertisement to the Reader.
There is lately published a Book worthy of thy perusal, called the Vanity of
Judicial Astrology, by that Learned Scholar and Mathematician, Petrus
Gassendus, Mathematical Professor to the King of France.

Questions, and Cases of Conscience about Astrology, and Seekers to Astrology.
Quest. WHO are Astrologers?
Answ. Such as gaze on the Heavens, to read the fates and fortunes (as they
term them) of men and States, persons and people in them, and to foretell from
thence what good or evil shall befall them; such were of old held in high
esteem with the Babylonians, Dan. 1. 20. and 2. 2. and 4. 7. and 5. 7, 11, 15.
Also with other Nations, Dan. 2. 10. and with the ungodly Jews, Isa. 47. 13,
14, 15. with whom they did consult about their weighty affairs, because they
took upon them to foretell things to come. They are called Star-gazers, and
monthly Prognosticators, Isa. 47. 13. They are joined with Magicians,
Sorcerers, Caldeans, Dan. 2. 2, 10. Soothsayers. Dan. 4. 7. Wise men, Dan 5. 15.

Quest. How may it be proved that this kind of Divination' is unlawful?
Answ. First, That which the Word of God condemns as a grand oftence, is not to
be practiced, countenanced or tolerated: But divining by the Stars is condemned
by Gods Word: as Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11. There shall not be found amongst you any one
that uses Divination, or an Observer of times, or an Enchanter, or a Witch, or
a Charmer, or a Consulter with familiar spirits, or a Wizard, or a Necromancer:
for all that do these things are an abomination to the Lord. And the looking
after them is expressed by going a whoring after them, Lev. 20. 6. So Isa. 2.
6. Thou have forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because they are
replenished from the East, and are Soothsayers like the Philistines. And Isa.
47. 13, 14. Thou art wearied in thy counsels: Let now the Astrologers, the
Star-gazers, the monthly Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from those
things that shall come upon thee: Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire
shall burn them. God forbids his people to learn these Arts, Jer. 10. 2. Thus
says the Lord, learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at them.
They are called Liars, Isa. 44. 25. That frustrateth the tokens of the Liars,
and makes the Diviners mad. Such are reckoned up with other Diabolical Arts,
as being of the same kind, Dan. 22. and Acts 19 18, 19, 20. -- Many which used
curious Arts (such as this is) brought their books, and burned them before all
men, and counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of
silver, etc. and this is ascribed to the power of the Gospel, v. 20.

Secondly, That Art whereby men assume to themselves what is peculiar unto God,
must needs be sinful, neither to be practiced, countenanced, nor tolerated: But
this is done by such as take upon them to divine of events to persons and
Nations by the Stars; therefore, etc. The Major is clear from Isa. 41. 22. Show
things to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods: where we see that
knowing, and declaring things to come, is as peculiar a prerogative of God as
to know men's hearts.

Thirdly, That which withdraws the heart from God the Father, and Christ the
Son, from considering the works of the one, and heeding the words of the other,
is an evil not to be practiced, countenanced, or tolerated: But Astrological
predictions draw from God and Christ. Therefore. etc. The Major is evident: Not
to consider Gods works, is a sinful omission condemned, Isa. 5. 12. and the
Apostle is as severe against every one that withdraws from Christ, Col. 2. 8,
18, 19. Now that these Prognosticators withdraw men's minds from Christ, may be
gathered from that opposition that is put between them by Moses, Deuteronomy. 18. 10.
to 16. where they must not hearken to Sorcerers, that they may hearken to
Christ: and whilst men ascribe successes good or bad to the Stars, they
withdraw their minds from beholding God in his works.

Fourthly, That which is false, delusive, and uncertain, is not to be
practiced, countenanced, or tolerated: but such is foretelling things by the
Stars; therefore, etc. That they are false, is clear, Isa. 44. 15. That
frustrateth the tokens of the Liars, and makes the Diviners mad. If they speak
true at any time, it is more by hap than skill. For though Eclipses of the Sun,
and Moon, and Conjunction of other Planets may be certainly foreknown; yet
there is no such certainty of the effects, that we may divine thereby, for they
are but general, partial, and remote causes of Events in States, and affairs of
men: and there is no certain connex on between Causes general, partial, and
remote, and their Effects. Besides, those Effects which depend on other Causes,
upon which the Heavens have either none, or no direct power, cannot be
certainly known by the Positions of the Heavens: but so it is with humane
affairs: therefore the affairs of men depend principally on Gods Providence,
and under him, on the wills and minds of men. That Gods Providence orders
things concerning Men and States, is proved, Ephesians. 1. 11. He works all things
after the counsel of his own will; and that not always according to the
ordinary disposition of second Causes; but turning and overruling things in a
secret way, beyond the intentions of men, and the ordinary virtue of second
Causes: so we see in Rehoboams folly, 2 Chronicles. 10. 15. Amaziah's frowardness,
2 Chronicles. 25. 10. Hence Eccles. 9. 11. The race is not to the swift, etc. and
Psalm. 75. 4. etc. Promotion comes neither from the East, etc. But God is
Judge, he pulls down one and sets up another. Again, the Stars have no power
over men's souls and minds: The Heathen could say, Sapiens dominabitur Astris; A
wise man will rule over the Stars. At the most, that which they have, is but by
way of inclination; which grace, education, civil wisdom, and many other things
may oversway. Besides, the affairs of men and Nations are prospered, and
blasted, not according to the use of natural means, but according to their
carriage toward God, as they are sinful or obedient, penitent or impenitent;
and men act in these moral performances, as they are assisted, or deserted by
God, for which see, Isa. 6. 9. etc. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 33, 34.

Object. But though they be not certain Causes, may they not be certain Signs
of things to come?
Answ. No: for if they be signs fore-shewing events, they must either be so by
nature, as smoke is a sign of fire, or by institution, as an Ivy-bush is a sign
of Wine to be sold; but they are so in neither of these senses: therefore they
cannot be natural signs, because there is no natural connection between the
Constellations, and humane Events: and whereas it is said, Genesis 1. 14. Let them
be for signs, and for seasons; for days, and for years: the meaning is, they
are signs for the things which they cause, as the seasons of the year which
they do both make and signify: or if they should be granted in general to be
signs, yet could we not certainly prognosticate any thing by them, except we
had particular Comments on them to declare what they signify, either by divine
revelation, or by solid experience: but no such Comment is to be had, and
therefore we have no certain foreknowledge by them. Divine revelation is not
pretended to, and a certain experience we have not: for experience arises from
often observing the same thing, as a Physician knows by experience that Rubarb
purges Choler, because he has often tried it: and ever finds it so: but we can
have no such experience of the effect of the Stars: 1. Because the Heavens do
scarce ever return to the same Position: for though some great Conjunctions be
the same, yet there are infinite numbers of Stars (which also have their
influences) that agree not with, and so may vary the effects of the other. 2.
When Events follow these Conjunctions, it cannot certainly be known that they
are the effects of them, for that many things fall out together accidentally,
without connection or dependence one upon another 3. We see experience is
uncertain, for that Twins born under the same constellation differ extremely in
disposition, and event, as we see in Esau and Jacob. And whereas they say, that
by reason of the swift motions of the Heavens, a little time makes a great
difference in their Position; Saint Austin answers, that yet their conceptions
were both in an instant, though their birth differed a little: and Ludovicus
Vives adds, that this overthrowes all certainty of divining by the Stars,
because by reason of the swiftness of their motion, they suddenly alter their
positions, so that a man can never give an exact judgment of any birth, because
he cannot exactly know the minute of his nativity. 5. Identity of effects does
not only depend upon the efficient, but the matter also: so that if we could be
sure that the Position of the Heavens were the same as they were a hundred
years ago, yet the same events will not follow, because of the difference of
men in diverse ages and climates, of diverse tempers, educations, moral and
intellectual principles, etc. and why may not the influence of the stars
produce diverse effects upon men of diverse dispositions, as we see a hen
sometimes hatches chickens, other times ducks, partridges, etc. because of
different eggs set under her.

5. Arg. That which nourishes vain, and forbidden hopes and fears, is not to
be practiced, countenanced, or tolerated: but so do Astrological predictions;
therefore, etc. Fear and hope by reason of the signs of heaven, is forbidden,
Jer. 10. 2. Learn not the way of the Heathen, neither be dismayed at the signs
of heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them.

Object. But Astrologers often hit right in their predictions, therefore it seems
there is certainty in their Art.
Answ. First, Do Astrologers tell right sometimes? so do Witches; yet all
confess that it is by the help of the Devil, and therefore unlawful.

Secondly, Astrologers do also many times miss in their predictions. For Isa.
44. 25. The tokens of these liars are frustrated. Only this favor they find
amongst the multitude, that their mistakes are not regarded, though they be
many: their predictions that fall out right, are observed, and remembered,
though they be few.

Thirdly, More is ascribed to Astrologers in point of truth from some tricks
they use, than indeed they deserve: For as the Devil used of old in his
Oracles, so they use ambiguous expressions which admit of a double
construction, and men interpret them according to their events: they add also
many ifs, and cautions to their predictions, whereby if the event answer not
their prediction, they do with the vulgar avoid the shame of it, but if it fall
out right, they go about with credit.

Fourthly, Its the opinion of judicious Divines, that much of that truth that
is in their predictions, is from the assistance of the Devil, who either by an
open contract, or else in a voluntary secret way insinuates himself to draw on
a league, and assists them with his knowledge, and guesses, which exceed any
man's. Hence Saint Augustine, Mr. Perkins, and others tell us of conscientious
men, who have been glad to leave off this study, because of the uncertainty
they have found in the Rules of it. And Satan may help curious heads in this
way, because besides his own knowledge, which enables him oft-times to guess
shrewdly, he may be permitted by God in a judiciary way to be a true Spirit in
the mouth of liars, as he was a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets.
See for it, Deuteronomy 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Object. But its said, Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians,
Acts 7. 22. and Daniel of the Caldeans, Dan. 1. 17, 20. and Astrology was part
of that Learning, and therefore its lawful, or they learned an unlawful Art.
Answ. There be two things in Astrology. 1. The Theory. 2. The Practice. Now
many have studied the Theory, that have renounced the practice, finding that
nothing could be done by it in a natural way. And its very probable that all
the Learning that these holy men had in this art (if they had any) was but in a
Theoretical way: there is no footstep of their practice of it in all their
stories, but of the contrary. For we read in the second, fourth, and fifth
Chapters of Daniel, that he was never called in with the Magicians, but after
them; which shows that he was not of their society: also when he went about
searching out secrets, he went not to his Books, but to his Prayers: not to
consult with the Stars, but with God, as Dan. 2. 17, etc.

Object. But are not the Stars very powerful, and causes of many strange
effects? and are not effects known by their causes? why then may we not divine
by them?
Answ. Though they have a great influence upon inferior bodies, yet we cannot
divine by them touching humain affairs: For

1. They cannot act but within their own sphere, which is in corporeal things:
but humane affairs, though acted by men's bodies, yet they are guided by their
spirits, which in nature are out of the Sphere of the Heavens operation: and
their successes and miscarriages are from divine providence: therefore whatever
may be prognosticated by them concerning elementary bodies; yet for men, their
virtue is so far short in working on them, that it can give no light to judge
of their future affairs.

2. Where the power of working is acknowledged, yet our knowledge of their
virtues and operations is so dim, that we cannot divine by it: For the
influences of all or most of the stars are unknown to us; and when all of them
have their influences conjoined, who can say, this effect is from the virtue of
this star, and not from another.

A sixth Argument to prove that Astrological predictions ought neither to be
practiced, countenanced, or tolerated, is this;

That which most godly and learned men upon experience have renounced, and
repented of, that is neither to be practiced, countenanced, nor tolerated: But
godly men have renounced and repented of their study of Astrology; therefore,
etc. The Minor is thus proved; St. Augustine, the glory of his age for piety,
learning, and solid judgment, confesses that he had been adicted to these vain
studies: But by the grace of God he afterward renounced them, as an art
condemned by true piety, affirming that it was a great error, a great
madness, and a suspicion that might easily be refelled: He also mentions
another on Psalm. 63. that repented of, and renounced this wicked Art, as being
as bad as Paganism and Judaism. Aug. de Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 21. So says
holy Mr. Perkins; I long studied this art, and was never quiet till I had seen
all the secrets of it: But at length it pleased God to lay before me the
profaneness of it, nay, I dare boldly say, Idolatry, although it be covered
with fair and golden shows: therefore that which I speak with grief, I desire
thee to note with some attention. Mr. Briggs also, sometimes Geometry-Reader at
Oxford: a man eminent for piety, and his skill in the Mathemeticks, upon a
question moved to him by my author, touching Judicial Astrology, told him, that
when he went first to Cambridge, he thought it a brave thing to be of Gods
counsel, to foresee, and foretell secrets; resolving to attain to that skill,
whatever labor it cost him; so accordingly after a while he fell upon the
study of the Mathematics, laying good foundation by going through Arithmetic,
Geometry and Astronomy, not resting till he attained exactness therein: Then
he fell upon Judicial Astrology: But there he found his expectation wholly
frustrate, for there was no certainty in the Rules of it: Having therefore
tired body and wits in vain, he at last repaired to a man in Cambridge, famous
in that art, and a maker of Prognostications, to whom he bemoaned himself, for
that he had bestowed so much pains to be an expert Astrologer, but the
uncertainty of its Rules did now deceive his hopes: whereto the Astrologer
replied, that the Rules of that Art were uncertain indeed, neither was there
any cure for it. Whereupon Mr. Briggs left that study. Yea, he affirmed that he
would undertake to the skilfullest Astrologer in the world, that let him
setdown any conclusion touching either man or State, yea, or weather, and he
would prove that it would fall out so, and that it would not fall out so, from
their own Rules and Principles: He said also that his opinion was, that they
that addicted themselves to the practice of divining Astrology, the Devil did
at first lend his secret assistance, and at length by degrees, if God prevented
not, entice them into a contract.

Quest. But who may be said to practice this unlawful Art?
Answ. First, All such as calculate men's nativities, and thereby divine what
their condition shall be, whether good or bad: such also as by the stars take
upon them to foretell the success of particular enterprises: such also as
erect figures to find out things lost: and such Almanack-makers as take upon
them to foretell future contingents, as what weather it will be every day, etc.

Quest. Who be the countenancers of this unlawful Art?
Answ. First, such as go to them to have their nativities calculated, to know
their Fortunes, as they call it: or that seek to them for things lost, etc.

Secondly, Such as buy or read their Books, unless it be with a purpose to
confute them. This is to go a whoring after them, forbidden, Lev. 20. 6.

Thirdly, Such as believe their predictions, and are affected with joy or
sorrow, as they prognosticate good or bad.

Fourthly, Such as talk of their predictions as things that have something in
them, and that they are not to be contemned.

Fifthly, By applauding their predictions, applying them to other events.

Quest. How and when are Astrologers tolerated?
Answ. First, When their Books are licensed, or not prohibited: when they are
suffered to go abroad, and not suppressed.

Secondly, When the Astrologers themselves are suffered to go unpunished, who
do so cheat and delude the people. When Ministers hold their tongues, and
preach not against them, nor consute their lying vanities; and when Magistrates
hold their hands, and punish them not. Or when there are no Laws made against
them; or if made, yet not executed. Geree's Astrologomastix.

Quest. How many sorts of foretelling things are there?
Answ. Three. 1. Divine: such as are by God himself, or by the Prophets
inspired by him.

Secondly, Humane, and natural; which are from natural causes to their natural
effects. Thus the Astronomer may foretell the Eclipses: The Physician the
effects of some diseases: Of which sort are politic predictions, which wise
men can sometimes presage about Commonwealths, though indeed these are but
conjectures.

Thirdly, Diabolical, which are by Gods just judgment suffered to be upon a
people: and these are either by the Devil, or by his instruments, as Witches,
Sorcerers, Astrologirs, etc,

Quest. Are these Diabolical predictions lawful?
Answ. No For 1. It is only the property of God and of the Scriptures to
foretell things to come: and therefore such Astrologers as take upon them to
foretell things not natural, but voluntary, and such as are merely subject to
men's wills, do not only undertake a vain, rash, and false thing, but that also
which is very abominable and wicked.

Secondly, It has been the Devils way always to disturb the Church, and to
endeavor the damnation of many men's souls, by making them credulous in these
things. And as Christ has set in his Church Pastors and Teachers, to instruct
them in the way to Heaven: so the Devil has raised his Witches, Sorcerers,
Soothsayers and Astrologers, to seduce the world out of the right way. As
Cardan, who rose to that height of impiety, as to calculate Christ's birth; and
made his power to work miracles, to flow from the influence of the stars under
which he was born Others have been bad, though not so bad; as Petrus de Aliaco,
who thought that the time of Christ's birth might have been foretold by the
stars: and Kepler contends, that those Wise men by the Rules of Astrology might
have presaged, not only some strange event, but the birth of some great
Monarch: as if Christ were not born after an extraordinary and miraculous
manner. I deny not but that the Heavens have influences upon men's Bodies: hence
that man possessed with a Devil was said to be lunatic, probably because the
Devil took the opportunity at that time of the Moon, wherein humors do most
abound, then to disturb and distract him: but the Heavens were never made for
Books to reveal what should come to pass.

Thirdly, Witches, Sorcerers, and Astrologers are often condemned in Scripture,
as Lev. 19. 26. and 20. 27 Deuteronomy. 10. 11. etc. Isa. 45. 12. etc. Besides, all
the Fathers speak with much vehemence against them: Many Councels have
condemned them: yea, diverse of the wiser fort of Heathens have cried out upon
them. Tully wrote several books de divinatione, condemning such Diviners
Instancing that before a great battle, the Mice had gnawn the Buckler of a
Soldier, whereupon the Soothsayer concluded that that war should be fatal and
unlucky: as if (says Tully) because mice did gnaw some books that I have of
Plato's, De Republica, therefore I should conclude that our Commonwealth shall
be destroyed. And we read, Acts 19. 19. of many who being converted, brought
their books about such curious arts, and burnt them. We may read more hereof in
Perr^rius, Spanhemius, Zanchy, and others.

Fourthly, If the Heavens were true and proper causes, or necessary signs, yet
no man could certainly prognosticate any thing by them; because no man knows
the number, nor the virtue and efficacy of the stars. The Scripture makes it
peculiar to God only to know the stars, and to call them by their names; but if
any man could certainly divine by the stars, he must know their number,
activity and influence, yea, and the degree of their activity, without which
they cannot but grossly err.

Fifthly, If the Heavens be Causes, yet they are only universal causes: now
from an universal, indeterminate cause, there cannot be any special particular
effect foretold: for besides universal causes, all particular inferior causes,
which are many and uncertain, must be known also.

Sixthly, If Astrological Predictions were allowed, it would bring in a
contempt of God, and flat Atheism into the word, The Scripture carries us out
to God in all things, to his Wisdom, Power, Justice, etc. But these would bind
us to the Planets: yea by this means also the Scripture would be despised and
laid aside, and all profaneness would be introduced thereby: and every one
would excuse his vices, with How could I help it, seeing I am born under such a
Star? As St. Augustine tells us of the servant of a certain Astrologer, who
having robbed his Master, his Master went about to correct him for it;
whereupon he cried out, that he could not help it, for he was born under
Mercury, (and the Astrologers say that such as are born under that Planet, are
given to stealing) and thus he silenced his Master by the Rules of his own Art.

Object. But we see that many times they foretell the Truth.
Answ. First, And many more prove false and untrue: and if one thing fall out
true, its more observed than a hundred things that prove false: Besides, when
they foretell many things its hard if some one at least prove not true. A blind
man that shoots many arrows, may chance with one to hit the Mark.

Secondly, If such things as they foretell do come to pass, its either from
their express, or vertual contract with the Devil. And if not so, yet as St.
Augustine observes, its a just judgment of God upon thee, that thou should
have wherewith to stumble and fall, and undo thy self, as Deuteronomy. 13. 1 etc. Thus
a wicked Prophet may foretell that which comes to pass. And why? God does it to
prove and try you.

See Mr. An. Burges on John, p. 396.

Quest. What use may we make of this which has been said?
Answ. First, Let all be persuaded to flee the study, and to abandon the
practice of this black art. The Scripture condemns it as abomination to the
Lord, Reason witnesses against it, as being irrational and uncertain. There is
vanity in it, danger by it. Satan is a subtle Serpent, and insinuates into many
this way before they be-aware. Find you pleasure in it? Its but a sweet poison.
Think you to get honor by it? you may be applauded by vain men, but are
disallowed by God: Perkins reckons it up amongst the kinds of witchcraft: Saint
Austin counts it ungodly dotage, and inconsistent with Christianity. Does
profit entice you? Its but Balaams gain, the wages of iniquity, money that will
perish with you.

Secondly, If notwithstanding all that can be said, Astrologers will persist in
their wicked practice; all should take heed of countenancing them, lest
partaking of their sins, they partake in their plagues: Have therefore no
fellowship with these unfruitful works of darkness; abhor all commerce with,
and resort to such persons: flee from them, as from the devil himself: thou
breakest thy Baptismal Vow, if thou renouncest not such Diabolical practices.
Shall we countenance what God abominates? and strengthen men in that which
makes both them, and the Land liable to wrath? Let them not have the
countenance of thy cost to buy them, nor of thy time to read them, no of thy
tongue to mention or applaud them, nor of thy affections to fear, hope, or
rejoice in any thing they say. Forbidden, Jer. 10. 2, 3. If there were no
buyers of such Almanacks, there would be no Sellers; and if there were no
Sellers, there would be no Makers, at least no Publishers of such lying
vanities, and truly if the Astrologer be guilty, the Buyer and Reader cannot be
innocent. God has forbidden seeking to such, under a grievous penalty, Lev.
20. 6 -- I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off from
amongst my people. Indeed learned men have observed that such delusions have
prevailed amongst Popish and anabaptistical spirits. But that England should
countenance such! and in a time of Reformation, Oh let us blush for shame! etc.
How often (said Tully) did I hear such men promise Pompey and Caesar, that they
should live long, and die a peaceable death! whereas both of them not long
after were murdered. And Cornelius a Lapide the Jesuit, in his Comment on Acts
19. bewaileth, that whilst he was at Rome, they were so much given to this
wickedness, whilst the Astrologers promised to some long life, to others a
Cardinalship, to others the Popedom, and yet at last all were miserably deluded.

Thirdly, If Astrologers should be tolerated, then they which are in authority
are to be entreated, First, That their books be not suffered so ordinarily to
pass the Press: O how does the world dote upon them! I have been credibly
informed, that near thirty thousand of Lillies Almanacks have been vended in a
year. If devout men burnt their own books of this kind, how should devout
Governors see to the burning of such Books? sure if those Books deserve the
fire which derogate from the honor of Princes, how much more such as withdraw
the minds and hearts of men from God? It were well, if Astrologers were put
into the same Catalogue with other Sorcerers in the Statute of the first of
King James, chap. 20. and to suffer the same punishment with the other: for the
Scripture makes them birds of a Feather, etc. See as before.

Quest. But may we not use Charms, wherein there are none out good words?
Answ. No; Its the usual craft of Saran to present things and ways in
themselves indifferent, to silly minds, which consider not that the harm does
not constable in using such words and actions, but in ascribing to them an
unnatural virtue, without the warrant of God, who is the Master of nature.

Quest. Is it not lawful to exquire of Astrologers after things to come?
Answ. Certainly since God has hidden the future time from us, to go about to
lay it open, is a work proper to the professed Undoer of Gods words.

Quest. Why may we not enquire after future times?
Answ. Curiosity to know the future, carries many so far as to make a Covenant
with the Devil, who yet stands not so much upon his points, as to refuse to be
consulted with by those that have made no Covenant with him: No doubt but his
pride is tickled with a mischievous delight, when he sees men seeking to him
for that which is proper to God; and thereby yielding him Divine service.

Which service that he may receive in a hidden way from the finer sort of wits,
he has devised some seeming sublime Divinations, persuading them that the
decree of God about humane events is written in the motions, and several
aspects of the stars, and that therefore this kind of Divination is lawful,
yea, Divine.

Quest. What are the evils that proceed from hence?
Answ. First, They are innumerable: For 1. That silly reverence which vulgar
persons give to these Predictions, makes them wild, and sets them upon the
fulfilling of them, because they esteem them unavoidable.

Secondly, The worst evil is, that thereby man's mind, which ought to dwell at
home, is transported out of himself; and in stead of reposing upon the wisdom
and love of God, is suspended upon the Dragons Tail, and the ascendent (...)
Horoscope.

Thirdly, It cuts in sunder the very sinews of industry, and makes men idle,
greedy, and inconsiderate. The Histories of the Greek Emperors, Alexius and
Manuel, are lamentable examples how credulous persons are undone by the
impostures of Astrologers, when they expect from the stars those successes
which should have been wrought out by Piety, Prudence, and Valor.

Quest. What further reason is there against these Astrological Predictions?
Answ. Consider, that all affirmation is grounded either upon Reason, or
Authority. The assertions of Judiciary Astrology are of the last kind: For no
reason can be given of their Maxims. Now the authority upon which these
Maxims are grounded, must either be Divine, or Humane, or Devilish. They are
not grounded upon Divine authority, but are expressly forbidden by it, Jer. 10.
2. Isa. 47. 13. And humane authority in this case is of no weight: for who has
given power to men to dispose of the several Offices, and Pre-eminencies of
Celestial bodies: It remains then that these Maxims are grounded upon
Diabolical authority. In brief, since they are not grounded upon reason, either
they are forged by men, or delivered by revelation: and if that revelation
comes not from God, it must needs come from the Devil.

Dr. du Moulin, of Moulin, of Contentment.

The Fundamental Maxims of Judicial Astrology examined and answered.
THE first general maxim whereby Astrologers endeavor to gain credit and
reputation to their documents, is what all men readily confess; viz. that the
Stars are not mere signs, but also natural causes of very many effects; as if
men were bound to admit the same Position for truth concerning other effects
which they boast the divination of aforehand. It is well known (say they) that
inferior natures are not subjected to superior in vain, since they are so
manifestly cherished, moved, and governed by them. That the Sun is the cause of
light and heat, and that by its access and recesse annually, it does introduce
the Series and Vicissitude of seasons, that it does procreate Plants, and
Animals, and in particular men, according to that common saying, Sol and homo
generant hominem: that it does extract Vapors from the earth, which become the
matter of rain, of winds, and the like. That the Moon does fill and empty all
shel-fish, the bones of animals, the brains of Conies, and has great power
over all moist bodies; and especially the Sea, whose Tides are conformed to her
Motion. Lastly, That there are certain influences, by which not only these two
principal Luminaries, but also the other lesser ones exercise their virtues
upon sublunary bodies: For since the stars ought not to be conceived idle and
ineffectual, and that there are some certain effects which cannot be referred
to any other causes but them, as the critical mutations of diseases, and the
inequality of seasons, etc. And this is the sum of what our Astrologers allege
for support of their pretense, and whereby they study to endear their art, and
prepare the minds of men for the more smooth and easy admission of what they
afterward impose with prodigious confidence: and indeed what they urge
concerning the Sun and Moon, seems so plausible, that judicious men at first
are drawn diligently to listen unto what they say concerning that, thinking
they would proceed to prove the rest of their suppositions with the like
evidence, not suspecting that upon such specious foundations they should so
soon erect nothing but ridiculous Fables and wild absurdities. But alas how far
are they from making the members of their artificial body respondent to the
head of it; but they have no sooner laid down this ground, but with admiration
we may see they instantly run out to such super-structures which have no
solidity nor strength, either from experience or reason. Indeed I cannot but
wonder and blush when I observe the first writers of this art, Ptolomy,
Fermicus and Manilius, after they have begun their discourses seriously and
with gravity beseeming Philosophers, and men professing the severity of reason,
in a moment to fall upon mere childish toys, and old wives dreams. It is very
dishonorable for learned men, by the pretext of such Positions as are
generally confessed, so to impose upon the credulity of their Readers, and
would make them believe that these fopperies which they intend to foist in
afterward, were of the same evidence and certainty with the premises. Yea it
is not only dishonorable, but odious and detestable to delude men, by drawing
such a consequence as really is no consequence, that the Sun does vary the
seasons of the year, and the Moon fatten shellfish in her Full, and make them
lean in her Wane, this common experience will aver for a truth; but does
experience attest the like of the twelve Signs in the Zodiac, and of their
several degrees, and the Planets positions in the twelve Houses with their
aspects one toward the other, adding the influence of the fixed Stars to them?
Certainly no, nor can any of our Astrologers by observation, show any one of
the least effects that ought to be referred to this or that particular
Constellation or Star rather than to any other cause that is sublunary. What
then, have they any reason to flee unto? No, doubtless none at all; since all
reason rests on experience, and of that here can be none; and all that can be
inserted is this, that each Luminary being a Lucid Body, does in proportion to
his Orb enlighten, warm and work such effects as arise from such light and
heat. I add, that forasmuch as the Stars are general Causes only in respect of
sublunary things: I may well demand a reason why any singular effect may not be
ascribed to some singular cause here below, where are such multitudes of
natural and convenient Actives and Passives, rather than to those remote ones,
the Planets and fixed Stars. Instance, When we give an account of the causes of
odours in compound Ointments, we refer one kind of smell to the Roses, another
to Jasmine, a third to the Orange flowers, and no particular smell to the Oil
which is the common matter of the composition, and the cause of the fragrancy,
neither to one nor to the other of the Ingredients: as for example, in a
Garden, this Plant grows here and not there, and this there and not here, we
refer it to their seeds, which were sown in those places where each one
grows, not to the water where with they are irrigated, which is only a
general cause of the growth of the Plants, and indifferent nourishment to each
sort: So are we to Philosophise concerning those effects that are ascribed to
Heavenly Bodies: For since the heat of the Sun (for instance) is general, why
it should harden clay and soften wax, is to be referred to the different
dispositions of those bodies, not to any various efficacy in the Suns heat; and
why the Sun produces a Plant in this place and not an animal, an animal in
another place and not a Plant; this is to be referred likewise to the virtue of
the seed which is plantary in one place, and animal in another. The same may be
said of other things that arise from the influence of the Suns heat (as for
example) the Sun raises Vapors from this part of the Earth and not from
another, because in one part is moisture, in another none: One year it raises
more vapors than in another, because one year yields more moisture than
another; one year the exhalations are healthy and good, another infectious and
Pestilential, because of the different matter from which they are drawn: Hence
we learn, that since it is besides all reason, when there may be many causes of
any particular effect, without the concurrence of all, which that effect will
not follow, for us to think it sufficient to our Prognostication of that effect
absolutely and positively that we know any one of all these various causes that
must concur to the production thereof; it must be likewise besides all reason,
when besides the stars there are other the Inferior causes, that must conspire
to the production of particular Effects, for any man to foretell the
contingency of those effects only, because he knows but generally the influx of
the stars, but not any of the other inferior particular causes that are
required thereunto: again, when there are some effects which have no dependence
at all (or what is exceedingly obscure) upon the stars, but a manifest and
necessary dependence upon sublunary causes. I would willingly know what reason
there is why we should not rather have recourse to those sublunary and
particular causes, than to those superlunary and general ones, the stars: thus
when grounds manured and enriched by compost, do yield more plentiful crops of
come than before. It is plain that we are to ascribe this fertility, not to the
influence of the Sun and stars, but the faming of the ground by the dung or
soil, seasonably laid upon it by the careful Farmer.

I shall not need to add any thing more by way of argumental confutation of
Astrology, as to show you the vain Fictions concerning the fixed stars, the 12
Celestial Houses, the 7 Planets, positions in them, and their several aspects
one toward another, with the several imaginary effects they attribute to them.
I think for my own part enough has been said in the general discourse for the
confutation of it; and I hope every judicious man that reads it, will be
satisfied with it. I shall only add some memorable examples of the frustration
of the tokens of these Liars, and end this work.

One eminent Example. All Histories assure us that Henry the 3d* of France died
in the Fourtieth year of his age complete, of a wound received in his eye, in
the exercise of Tilting; and yet see the Prophecy of Gaurious, concerning him
in his Prognostication of the year 1556, because in the Scheam of his Nativity,
he had the Sun almost partitely conjoined to Venus: under the degrees of his
altitude, and also the Moon and Venus advancing through his Horoscope, under
the Constellation of Arics, therefore he shall live most happy and glorious
till the seventieth year of his age, deducting only two months; and if by the
favor of God he escape the dangerous years of sixty three and sixty four, it
will be very long before there be an end of his renowned life. You have also
the prediction of Cardan, when speaking of the same King Henry, he shall be
(said he) in his old age so much the more happy, by how many the more
difficulties he has passed through before. And how acutely these two famous
Prophets did foresee these things, let the Event be Judge.

A second Example is that of Cardans predicting the lamentable misfortunes of
men that were his dear friends, Check of England, and Raconet of France, and
diverse others, all whose Nativities he erected, with all possible exactness,
and afterward printed them.

I cannot hold from noting that John Rudolphus Camerarius. when writing against
Sextus ab Heminga, to declare the certainty of Judicial Astrology, collected an
hundred several Genitures, and amongst them put the Nativities of the Late
Kings of France, Henry the 3d. and Henry the 4th joining also the judgment of
Fredericus Rutelius: as to Henry the 3d. the business succeeded accordingly,
he told his disaster after it had befaln him. But as for Henry the 4th. who was
then living when his Century was published, in the year 1607, nothing was less
foretold by him than the time of his death: for though that best of Kings was
murdered by a sacrilegious hand, in the year 1610, and that in the Month of
May, our famous Prophet never suspected the least danger to him in that year or
month, but cast his death upon the year 1613, and the month of October, as
threatening some eminent danger to his life, in the 59 year of his age, nine
months and one and twenty days, he being born on the 24 of December, at two a
Clock after Midnight, in the year 1553, and that because the Sun would then
come to the body of Saturn by direction, the Horoscope to a Quartile of the
same, and the middle Heaven to a Quartile of the Sun: but truly as the death of
that Prince was deplorable, so was the hariolation ridiculous.

A Third Example is that which Suffredus Judge of Salona showed some friends of
his his Fathers Nativity, with the judgments thereupon given, under Nostradamus
his own handwriting; they were pleased to require of him concerning his
Father, whom he knew well, a not dying till his Son was almost arived at man's
estate. The Father according to that scheam was born in the year 1544, on the
13 of January, 22 minutes after high Noon, the altitude of the Pole being
supposed to be 44 degrees, which is more by the third part of a degree than
ought. The Son John Suffredus not being able to give any account of those
accidents which Nostradamus had foretold should befall the Father in his youth:
as that in the 16th. year of his age he should fall into a dangerous Dysentery,
or bloody Flux: that he should fall into a violent Fever in the 17th. year of
his life; and in the 20 fall into love, and relinquish his studies, etc. There
were some accidents which he did certainly inform his Friends of, viz. that the
Prophet told him that the Father should wear his Beard long, and crisped (but
he always shaved his chin bare) that in the middle of his age his Teeth should
be rotten) but he had very white and firm Teeth to his dying day) that in his
old age he should go almost crooked and double (but he went to the last upright
and straight as any young man whosoever) that in the 19th. year of his life he
should become exceeding rich by inheriting a strangers estate (but besides what
his Father left him, he never had any wealth or estate) that he should suffer
by the treachery of his Brethren; and in the 37thyear be wounded by his own
Mothers Son (but he never had any Brother, nor had his Father more than one
wife) that he should marry a Forreigner (but he married a French woman of
Salona) that in the 25 year he should be so addicted to Natural Philosophy, and
the secrets of Magic, as no man more; as also to Geometry, and Arithmetic in
an extraordinary manner; but he never had any particular affection to, or care
of any of those studies (but entirely devoted himself to the knowledge of the
Laws; that in his old age he should apply himself to Navigation and Music
(but he never delighted much in Music, nor was ever at Sea in his whole life)
that he should not pass the 75th year (but he passed not the 54th. year of
which Nostradamus said not a word) And these things are the more particularly
handled, to the end that men may judge what credit is to be given to such vain
predictions. I may say, old women, children and fools sometimes do tell truth,
and why may not Astrologers? Its more by hap than skill if they do. Cardan
himself gives this advice to his Astrological Friends, if you have (says he)
an itch to be divining, be sure you foretell the quite contrary to what
Astrologers promise or threaten.

Fourthly, Historians report of a pregnant example of an Astrologer, that
predicted that Henry the 7th. of England, a wise, valiant and prosperous King,
should die in such a year; the King sent for him, and asked him, if he could
tell in what place himself should be in the next Christmas (then near at hand)
the Prophet being surprised with this unexpected question, stood mute a good
while, and at last confessed he could not tell (thereupon the King smiling,
said (then my friend) I am more skilful in Divination than you are, for I can
foretell that you shall keep your Christmas in the Tower of London, and
accordingly commanded him to be sent Prisoner thither, as a just reward of his
impudence, and besides, the King did not die in the year predicted.

A Fifth Example: It is memorable what we read in History, that when some
Astrologers had (by some great Conjunctions of the Planets in watery signs)
predicted a general Deluge, and so great calamities to men and beasts, and that
by the waters, that never the like was seen aforetime; and this deluge to
happen in February 1524, the people in Spain, France, Italy and Germany, being
terrified with this Prognostication, provided themselves of Shipping, Beats,
Victuals, and other necessaries for a long voyage, it so fell out that all that
month of February was fair and clear, and more temperate than ordinary: (and
we may take notice of a special Providence of God in it, in regard of the great
serenity that was at that time: and we may justly deride the vain predictions
of our star-Prophets; for it is not usual to see February pass away without
Rains:) That Cardan and Origanus themselves could not dissemble their sorrow,
for being so much disappointed in their expectations.

Example 6. There is another Remarkable Example recorded by Scaliger, out of
Rigordus, who wrote that the Astrologers had foretold so general a destruction
by the violence of winds and tempests, because of a Conjunction of as well the
Inferior as Superior Planets, in September. 1186, there being an Eclipse of the
Sun on the 11th. of May, immediately foregoing, that many did expect the
universal dissolution of nature then to come; and yet when the time came, there
was not so much as a storm ensued: So that the contrary event derided the skill
of the Astrologers, and foolish credulity of those that believed them.

Besides, these Examples, the commonnesse of every days experience (if
diligently considered) will produce the like Fallacies. Do but read over the
monthly Observations of several Astrologers in their Almanacks for this
present year, 1659, and you will find how grossly they are mistaken: Its
worthy of your noting.

There are many more examples recorded, which I might have added, but then my
Book would have exceeded the Bounds I intended.

I shall only add the sayings of a worthy man (and eminent Mathematician)
concerning Judicial Astrology, and also add something by way of consideration
and petswasion, and finish this Treatise.

I am very credibly informed, that Mr. Norwood a very worthy man, and well
known amongst the Merchants of Barmoodas, should say (speaking of Astrology) to
an eminent Friend of his, that he thought that it was a very hard matter (if
not a thing impossible) to be a noted man in Judicial Astrology, and yet a good
Christian: This will be testified by two known witnesses. But thus much I can
say concerning it, that the very Principles of Judicial Astrology are
inconsistent with the lively and vigorous actings of the Grace of God; and
there can be no other agreement between them, than between light and darkness.

The considerations and persuasions against the study and practice of it, are
briefly these.

1. Its a practice that the Word of God condemns. Do not study it lest ye be
found fighters against God; For who is able to contend with the Almighty, who
is wonderful in knowledge and wise in Counsel?

2. Its a practice that cuts in sunder the very Sinews of common Industry, and
makes a man careless and slothful in business; for diligence is the life of
business: Solomon says, that its the diligent hand makes rich.

3. Consider how miserable the lives and terrible the deaths of those Kings and
Princes have been that have confided in their predictions: Histories are full
of such Examples.

4. Consider another example as notable as the former, of some persons being
told by Astrologers, that they should die by a Rope, to prevent the shame of a
common Gallows, were the horrible Executioners of themselves. Then be advised
(in the fear of God) to flee from all such abominable practices, and have
nothing to do with the Art or Artist in any thing you may be ensnared either by
it or them (I say) flee from it, as you would flee from the Plague or any other
Infectious disease: and in all your necessities make your addresses unto God
through Jesus Christ, and then whatever you want, asking of it in Christ's Name,
and according to his Will, he will grant you your desire in it, or some other
thing that is better for you. To his Care I commit you.

FINIS.
BOOKS sold by John Allen at the Rising Sun in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Viz.

Mr. Caryl's 5th. Vol. on Job. 7th. Vol. 8th. Vol. 9th. Vol.

Beza Novum Testamentum. Fol.

Mr. Allens Scripture Chronology. 4o

Mr. Baxters Call to the unconverted. 12o

Mr. Lukins practice of Godliness. 12o

A Catechism of the chief Heads of Christian Religion, by Mr. Davenport and Mr.
Hook of New England. 8o

The Faith and Order owned and practiced in the Congregational Churches in
England, agreed upon and consented unto by their Elders and messengers at the
Savoy, October. 12, 1658.

Mr. Cottons Treatise on the Convenant o^ Grace.

Johannes Becoldus Redivivus, the English Quaker, the German Enthusiast revived.

A Defense and Justification of Ministers Maintenance by Tithes, and of
Infant Baptism, Humane Learning, and the Sword of the Magistrate, which some
Anabaptists falsely call four sandy Pillars, and Popish Foundations of our
Ministry and Churches, written by Immanuel Bourne Pastor to the Congregation at
Waltham in the County of Leicester.

Presbytery and Independency vindicated in answer to Mr. John Tympsons Treatise
of a free admission to the Lords Table.

Mr. Gattaker against Judicial Astrology.

The vanity of Judicial Astrology written by Gassandus Mathematical Professor
to the King of France.

The Quakers Folly made manifest to all men, in a public dispute with Mr. S.
Fisher, G. Whithead, and R. Hubberthorn, to which is added a Narrative of their
wicked and abominable practices, by Tho. Danson Min. of Gods Word at Sandwich
in Kent.


