THE CHRISTIANS JUSTIFICATION STATED. SHOWING How the Righteousness of Christ,
the Gospel Covenant, Faith, and God himself, do operate to our Justification.
By W. A.

2 Cor. 5.17, 18. Old things are past away, behold all things are become new,
and all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ.

LONDON: Printed by A. C. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1678.

THE PREFACE TO THE Reader.
THere has I confess been so much already written about the Doctrine of
Justification, as may probably incline some to think the publication of these
Papers to be superfluous. But when it shall be considered how much of what has
been written on this subject, has been done in a way of Controversy about
some particular branches of the Doctrine of Justification, and how little to
state and explain the whole of it, and yet how necessary this is for the ending
of such Controversies; it is possible they may be of another mind. Some
Christians when they find in the holy Scriptures that sometimes we are said to
be justified by the Blood of Christ, and by his Obedience to be made righteous;
at another time that we are justified by Faith, at another that we are
justified freely by Grace, at another that we are not justified by Faith only,
but by Works also, and at another time that it is God that justifies, they
become somewhat confounded in their own minds with this variety of things to
which our Justification is attributed. And although all such as are well
minded, may be the Gospel in which these things are revealed, come so to
believe, and so live as to be justified: yet many of them are at a great loss
how to understand in what respect we are said to be justified by the one and by
the other of these. And for want of a right stating and explaining how and in
what different respects these severals do concur to the producing one and the
same effect, which is our Justification; some have confounded them, and
attributed that to one of these causes, which is proper to another. As for
instance, this has been done when they have ascribed to Christ, to his Blood,
and to his Obedience and Righteousness, not only what is proper to these, but
also what is proper to Faith it self; and so have drowned the personal
Righteousness of Faith as necessary to Justification, in the Righteousness of
Christ; whereas these are distinct in themselves, and in the nature and manner
of their operation; and the personal Righteousness by Faith as really necessary
to our Justification in one respect, as the Righteousness of Christ, his Blood,
and his obedience, is in another, though in a way indeed subordinate to, and
dependent upon this.

Some good men have indeed thought they could not attribute too much to the
Righteousness of Christ in reference to our Justification (and in some sense
perhaps we cannot) and that it derogates from it, and from Free Grace, to
interess our own personal Righteousness by Faith therein at all; as if to do so
did imply or suppose his Righteousness not sufficient, unless it were eked out
by ours, as they are wont to speak. When as the question is not about the
sufficiency of the Righteousness of our Savior for all those ends to which the
Father and himself have designed it; but the question is, whether it were
designed by them to justify any actually in their rebel state, or before they
repent of it, and become reconciled to God in mind and heart: and doubtless
there is great reason to say it was not; since to justify the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord; and since also the actual collation of all saving
benefits upon the account of Christ's Mediatory performance, is suspended upon
our being reconciled to God by obedience of Faith, which is our personal
Righteousness; as is showed in the following Discourse.

It is a great mistake to think that the Righteousness of Christ and our
personal Righteousness of Faith, stand in opposition to one another, as if what
is ascribed to the later were taken from the former. Whereas our personal
Righteousness of Faith, is so far subservient to the end and design of the
Righteousness of Christ, as that his Righteousness loses its end upon men for
which it was designed, until they become personally Evangelically righteous.
For the Righteousness of Christ was never designed for the Justification,
Pardon, or Salvation of men, without personal righteousness, but through the
righteousness of Faith. If we did ascribe that to our personal righteousness of
Faith, which is proper only to the mediatorial and meritorious Righteousness of
Christ, we should indeed set the one in opposition to the other; which we are
far enough from doing. But so long as our personal Righteousness of Faith does
but serve under the Righteousness of Christ unto our Justification, it no more
eclipseth the glory of it, than the shining of the Moon does the glory of the
Sun, when it borrows its light from it. But how these two Righteousnesses do
differ, and yet concur to our Justification, you will see further in the
Tractate it self.

Nor does it at all derogate from the Grace of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
to say our personal Righteousness of Faith is one ingredient in our
Justification, or that it is that without which we are not qualified for it;
but that contrarily it does illustriously set forth the Grace of God in being
so. And the reason hereof is, because its being imputed or counted to us for
righteousness, and their being reckoned righteous that have it, is altogether
of grace and favor; for it does not of it self make a man righteous according
to the original law of strict justice. It is therefore another great mistake to
oppose the Grace of God to our personal righteousness by Faith, in reference to
our Justification: When as it is the very act of grace it self to reckon or
impute Faith to us for Righteousness, instead of a perfect legal righteousness,
upon account of Christ's mediatory performance. St. Paul says, It is therefore
of Faith that it might be by Grace. It is spoken so as if it could not have
been by Grace, unless it had been by Faith: Grace reigns through righteousness,
says St. Paul, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So very far is it from
derogating from Grace to interess our personal righteousness of Faith, as an
ingredient in our Justification. We are justified freely by Grace, and yet we
are justified by Faith also. And if the Scripture thus joins them together in
the same work, though in different respects, we shall not do well I think to
separate them, much less to oppose them to one another in it. By grace are ye
saved through faith, says St. Paul in another place. It does not lessen Grace
at all that Faith is interessed in the same work under Grace in the salvation
of men: For Grace shows it self as well in ordaining Faith to be a
righteousness entitling a man to life, as it does in conferring life upon him
that has that righteousness, being otherwise a sinner: So that we can no more
truly say that we are not justified by a personal righteousness of Faith,
because we are justified by Grace, and by Christ; than we can say a man is not
born again of the incorruptible seed of the Word, because he is born of God.

To say as many have been wont to say, that St. Paul renounced his own personal
inherent Righteousness from having any thing to do in his Justification,
because he said that he desired to be found in Christ, not having his own
Righteousness which is of the Law, is so far from proving that he did so, as
that the contrary is plainly his scope and intent in the place where those
words of his are found. It was only his own Righteousness which was by the Law,
and which he trusted in while he was a Pharisee, which he here renounced when
he became a Christian. Which Righteousness is elsewhere called the Jews own
Righteousness, which they went about to establish, as being ignorant of the
Righteousness of God. Which Righteousness of theirs, and of St. Paul, while a
Pharisee, stood in an opinion and conceit; First, that the legal Sacrifices,
the Blood of Bulls and of Goats, did of themselves expiate and take away sin,
and that there was no need of the Blood of Christ to do it. Secondly, that an
external Righteousness without an internal, was all that was necessary to their
Justification, the circumcision of the flesh, and in the letter, without that
which is of the heart, and in the spirit. Thirdly, in an opinion, that, for God
to approve of them, and to justify them as righteous upon this account, was
but a due debt, not a matter of mere grace and favor. Now Justification by the
righteousness of the Law in this sense, this Apostle does indeed not only here
renounce in himself, but also every where in his Epistles disputes against, as
any matter of men's justification before God. And when he became a Christian, he
desired no longer to be found in this righteousness which was of the Law, but
to be found in Christ, as having that Righteousness which is through the Faith
of Christ, the Righteousness of God by Faith. The which Righteousness of Faith
is opposed to this Righteousness which was of the Law, and does summarily
consist in a firm belief and practice of those things which are contrary to
those in which the Pharisaical Righteousness which was of the Law, did consist.
As first, in a belief that the Blood of Christ only does expiate sin. Secondly,
in inward purity of heart by Faith as well as external Righteousness. Thirdly,
in a hearty persuasion that it is merely of grace and favor, that God through
Christ will accept this for righteousness, and that pardon of sin and eternal
life are promised upon this only condition. And this is the Righteousness of
Faith which this Apostle opposes in his Epistles to the other Righteousness of
the Law, as the Righteousness by which men shall be justified, and in which he
himself desired to be found. And this Righteousness of Faith is said to be of
God, not only for that it is of his working in us, but also, and more
especially, because it is of his mere grace and favor to ordain by the Gospel,
that this shall be reckoned to us for Righteousness, and that we shall be
approved of as Righteous if it be found in us, and dealt withal as righteous,
not only in not being punished as sinners, but on the contrary rewarded as
righteous. The other Righteousness by which St. Paul, while a Pharisee, and
other Pharisaical Jews expected to be justified, is said to be their own
Righteousness; not only because what it did consist of was wholly within their
own power to perform, without any supernatural assistance, but also and
especially because it was the true Righteousness only in their own opinion, and
of their own making, but never of Gods appointing or ordaining.

When some good men heretofore did exclude all personal Righteousness of Faith
from having any hand in our Justification, for fear they should otherwise
detract from the fullness and sufficiency of the Righteousness of Christ, they
little considered what a door they thereby opened for Libertinism to enter in
among us, as after experience showed they did. For many from that Doctrine
thought themselves so righteous in the sight of God, by the Righteousness of
Christ imputed to them upon a speculative Faith, as that they needed no other
Righteousness, and thought it a disparagement to the Righteousness of Christ
for any to say they did. They would at first pretend indeed that the sense of
Christ's love, would in a way of gratitude produce a good life, but abhorred it
should be made necessary to our Justification. This I my self had experience of
above forty years ago, which with their neglect of Christian Duties, first
brought me under suspicion concerning the Doctrine of the imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ unto Justification, otherwise than in the blessed
effects of it. At that time the pressing the necessity of Repentance,
Mortification, and a sincere keeping of the Commandments of God, begun to be
called Legal preaching, as the like is still counted but Moral preaching by
some others. After this the foresaid notion was improved to the breaking out of
the grossest Antinomian and Ranting practices, under pretense of magnifying
Free Grace; to the great dishonor of the Christian profession, and the
apparent hazard of men's Salvation.

Upon the observation of all which some worthy men were stirred up to encounter
by writing, not only such abuses and miscarriages of men, but also those
Doctrines out of which they sprang. In which they were opposed by some patrons
of unsound Principles, which has since occasioned many Disputes about some
points in the Doctrine of Justification. In which Disputes many School-nicities
have been agitated, which the generality of Christians little understand, and
which the Scriptures themselves meddle not in. By means whereof such have been
puzzled rather than edified by much of what of this nature has been done; whose
edification yet, they being by far the greater number, ought to be endeavored
as well at least, if not rather, than the edification and satisfaction of those
of more refined apprehensions.

All which things considered, some more discourses than have been yet extant,
tending to state and explain from the Scriptures, the whole business of our
Justification, and to level it to the understanding of Christians of ordinary
capacities, without incumbring it with disputable questions, and arguments pro
and con, seems to me no more than in some sort is needful.

It happens in reference to the Doctrine of Justification, as it does with many
dark providence of God in the world: they are dark and obscure, and to us seem
unaccountable, because we do not see from the beginning to the end of them, but
only a part, which otherwise would appear lovely and beautiful, as effects of a
most wise contrivance for excellent ends. Even so the Doctrine of
Justification, while handled and beheld only in this or that particular part of
it, remains comparatively obscure: But when all which goes to the making up of
the whole is put together in order, and when it is discovered how one thing
depends upon, and answers another in it, it will not be difficult at all to
understand it. And when the whole of Gods design in that way and method by
which our Justification is brought about, is laid open, those things in it
which have been apprehended by some not well to consist together, but to bear
hard upon one another, will appear quite otherwise. For then the grace of God,
the Righteousness of Christ, and the personal Righteousness of him that is
justified, will appear, not in opposition, but in a lovely conjunction, all
operating in several respects to the same end.

The sense of these things has I confess inclined me to offer at something of
this nature in the ensuing discourse by way of essay. Wherein I have
endeavored with what plainness I could, to state and explain the nature and
causes of our Justification: and to show how the Righteousness of Christ, the
Covenant of Grace, Faith, and God himself, do both severally and jointly
operate to our Justification; and how the grace of God is eminent in all. And
likewise to show, how that all that goes to our Justification, is by the Grace
of God founded on the Righteousness of Christ, and immediately or remotely
receives the virtue and efficacy of its operation from it, in conjunction with
Gods gracious ordination. And particularly, that out of this Righteousness of
Christ, and the Grace of God thereby, does arise the Covenant of Grace; and
from that Covenant, the constitution of Faith for Righteousness; and from that
constitution, Gods approving such for righteous, which have that Faith, and his
adjudging them to be so. For which cause our Blessed Savior may well be said,
as he is, to be made to us of God, Righteousness. These things will more fully
appear in the discourse it self now before you, to which I refer you for your
more full satisfaction. Hoping that the usefulness of what is thereby designed
and endeavored, will so far appear, as to stir up and engage some others to
undertake the same work, who may much better go through with it, and complete
it, than I have been able to do.

The Christians JUSTIFICATION STATED.
CHAP. I. Of the signification and use of the word Justification; with a
description of Justification it self.
THE design of the following discourse, is to state the great Doctrine of
Justification, and so to represent it from the Holy Scriptures, as that it may
be adapted and fitted to the capacity of the meanest Christian that is
inquisitive into a matter of that grand importance, as his Justification before
God is. And as a guide herein, I shall first enquire into the Notation and
signification of the word, Justification. For the use of words being to convey
to the mind the Idea and notion of things and the nature of them; it is but
reasonable to govern our selves in our notion of the nature of Justification,
by the signification of such words and phrases, by which it is in Scripture
expressed. After this is done, I shall enquire into the severals which operate to
the producing this great effect, Justification, and how they do it. By all
which, I hope, any Christian of a very ordinary capacity, shall be able to
discern the true nature of justification, what it is and in what it does
consist.

The word Justification in Scripture, signifies either to make just, or to
approve as just, or vindicate and adjudge as just or righteous. The word is but
sparingly used in Scripture as signifying to make just, but another word more
commonly, which is Sanctification. But to be made just is essentially or
absolutely necessary to justification, as we shall see afterward: For God will
not approve of or adjudge any man as just who is not so. But about the more
ordinary and common signification of the word, I find that learned men are much
of one mind and do conclude, that the word, generally in Scripture is used in a
forensick or law sense, and does imply a legal procedure in a Cause or with a
person, by a Judge, and according to some law. So the learned Dr. Hammond in
his Annotations on Romans 3.4. And so learned Mr. Tho. Gataker (to name no more)
in the Assemblies Annotations on Isa. 5.23. which I shall give you in his own
words. To justify, says he, is not to pardon as some would expound it, in the
doctrine of the Gospel: for the word is never found so used, either in the
Hebrew or Greekwriters, Sacred, or profane, nor in our common speech. Nor as
it is a law-term does it ever signify to make just. But to justify in a legal
way, does always signify to defend, or to deem as just and guiltless, free
from the offense wherewith the party called in question is charged. To defend
as just, and so it is the office of an Advocate: to deem as just and
consequently assoil from guilt, and so it is the part of a Judge. As also in
private carriages, men are said to justify others when they plead for them and
avow their integrity and honesty against those that question it.

According to this usual sense and notion of the word when applied to God as
Judge in justifying of men, it signifies his approbation of such as are just in
their Cause that is before him, to be so; his adjudging them to be righteous in
the sense of that Lawby which they are tried. Thus for instance, we have it in
King. 8.31, 32. If any man trespass against his neighbor, and an oath be laid
upon him to cause him to swear, and the oath come before the altar in this
house: then hear thou in heaven and do, and judge thy servants concerning the
wicked, to bring his way upon his head, and justifying the righteous, to give
him according to his righteousness. Where to justify the righteous, does not
signify to make them righteous, but to appear for them in Judgment as those
that are so, and to determine for them accordingly. To justify the wicked, in
Scripture Phrase, does not signify to make them just, but to approve of them
and appear for them, as if they were just. Prove. 17.15. Exodus 23.7. Isa. 5.23.
And thus again (to give some instances in the New Testament) S. Paul says, I
know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified, but he that judges me
is the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.4. Where to be justified, and to have God to judge for
him, signifies the same. So likewise Romans 2.13. Not the hearers of the law are
just before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified. The meaning
whereof is, that not the hearers but the doers of the law, shall be approved of
by God as just. So that to be justified by God and to be approved of by him as
just, and so adjudged, is all one. Wisdom is justified of her children, that
is, approved of and defended against the accusations and quarrels of her
adversaries. Lu. 7.29. The Publican went down to his house justified, that is,
approved, rather than the Pharisee. Luke 18.14. Ye see then how that by works a
man is justified, that is, approved of by God as a good and righteous man, as
Abraham was, and not by faith only, Jam. 2.24. By thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned. By these as well as by
other things persons are and will be adjudged by God to be good and righteous,
or wicked and ungodly men, Matthew. 12.37. Again Romans 8.33, 34. It is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? Where Gods approbation of his people, is
opposed to others disapprobation of them; he approves of them as good, while
their adversaries condemn them as bad: they charge them as bad, but God
absolves and discharges them as good. And in this judicial sense is the word
justification generally taken throughout the Scripture. By Sanctification men
are constituted and made evangelically righteous: but in Justification they are
approved of by God as such, and adjudged to be so: which is the proper
difference between Sanctification and Justification.

If then we make our estimate of evangelical Justification according to the
usual signification of the word, as that implies in it the Cause of the party
tried, the Act of God as Judge, and the law and rule on which the trial
proceeds and by which the cause is determined for him that is justified; then
Justification may be thus described. It is that whereby God for the sake and
upon the account of the Righteousness of Christ, does approve of a true
believer, as one that has perfermed the condition on which God in the Gospel,
has promised pardon of sin and eternal life, and does impute that performance
to him for righteousness, and accordingly adjudgeth him to be righteous in the
sense and according to the tenor of the law of Grace, and such an one as has a
Covenant, right and title to the blessings promised in that Covenant, pardon of
Sin and eternal life. This description of Justification, as it best agrees with
the use and signification of the word and phrase, so it does also with the
doctrine of the Gospel, as we shall afterward see. Which that we may the
better do, I shall open the whole to you by opening it in its several parts,
and so shall show,

1. How the Righteousness of Christ does operate to our Justification.

2. How the Covenant of Grace does it.

3. How Faith does it; and

4. How God himself does it.

And thus to open the whole nature of Justification, by showing the operation
of the several causes of it, is I conceive, the best and most likeliest way to
come to the clearest knowledge and best insight into it that we can attain
unto. The want of which distinctness in proceeding, has been, I conceive, an
occasion in great part, of obscuring the doctrine of Justification, while the
parts have been confounded, and the operation proper to one cause, has been
attributed to another.

The whole of the description which I have given of Justification, is the
result of the operation of the righteousness of our Blessed Savior, of the
Covenant of Grace, of faith, and of the whole action of Gods dijudication in
justifying true believers; to the opening of which I shall now proceed. And I
shall begin with the righteousness of our Redeemer Christ Jesus, and shall
enquire into the nature and operation of it in reference to our justification.

CHAP. II. Of the nature of the righteousness of Christ, and how it operates to
our Justification.
IN showing what influence our Saviors righteousness has into our
Justification, two things will come under consideration.

1. What we are to understand by the Righteousness of our Savior.

2. How it operates to our Justification. First of the former, what we are to
understand by the righteousness of Christ. Righteousness is the conformity of a
person to some Law or Rule. And therefore when we speak of the righteousness of
Christ, it supposes some Law, in his conformity whereunto this righteousness
of his whereof we speak, does consist. Which Law, is the Law of his Mediation,
which he received from his Father, and which he voluntarily and most willingly
undertook to observe and fulfill. The mutual agreement between the Father and
the Son about this Law of Mediation between God and man, and the Sons
undertaking to fulfill it in order to our Redemption, Divines are wont to call
the Covenant of Redemption. And as the great office of Mediator is peculiar to
him alone, (for there is but one Mediator between God and man, even the man
Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5.) So the Law of this Mediation was peculiar to him.
And as the law and office of Mediation were peculiar to our Savior, so is his
righteousness which consists in his conformity to that law: it is a Mediatory
Righteousness. The benefit of it belongs to believers, as I shall afterward
show, but the righteousness it self which is Mediatorial, can be no more
transferred to any other, than his office of Mediation can: for his
righteousness consists in those acts of conformity to the Law of Mediation by
which he does execute his office of Mediation.

Now that there was such a Law of Mediation between God and man, given by God
the Father to Christ his Son, and which he did most readily accept of, execute
and obey, is plainly made known to us by our Savior himself, by many of his
sayings. As in John 6.38. when he says, I came down from heaven, not to do my
own will, but the will of him that sent me. And again, the Father which sent
me, he gave me commandment what I should say and what I should speak.
Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak, John
12.49.50. Our Savior speaking of his laying down his life for his sheep,
says, No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to
lay it down, and I have power to take it again: this commandment have I
received of my Father (mark that) John 10.18. To fulfill this Law was the design
of our Saviors coming into the world. Heb. 10.7. Then said I, Lo, I come (in
the volume of thy book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God, And of the
fulfilling of this law, our Savior spoke, when in his prayer to his Father he
said, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. John 17.4.

These with other like Scriptures acquaint us with these two things. First,
that there was a Law given by the Father and chosen by the Son, to be observed
in managing the office and work of Mediator between God and man, which we call
the Law of Mediation. Secondly, that our Savior did exactly observe, obey and
fulfill this Law. And if so, we may know what that Law was by what he has done,
spoken and suffered in the execution of his Mediatorial office.

Now what he did, spoke and suffered in conformity to this Law, is that which
we call his Righteousness, his Mediatorial Righteousness. His coming into the
world and his taking our nature upon him, was an act of obedience to this Law.
I am not, says he, come of myself, but he that sent me, etc. John 7.28. A body
have thou prepared me, Heb. 10.5. What he did and preached here in the world,
was in obedience to this Law. I can (says he) of mine own self do nothing: as
I hear I judge, and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but
the will of him that sent me, John 5.30. Lo I come to do thy will, yea thy law
is in my heart, Heb. 10.7. with Psalm. 40.8. His conformity and obedience to the
natural Law as a man, and to the Law of Moses as a Jew, was part of his
Mediatorial obedience. For he was made under the Law to redeem them that were
under the Law. Gal. 4.4, 5. His preaching the Gospel was an act of obedience to
this Law. I do nothing of my self, but as my father has taught me, I speak
these things, John 8.28. I have not spoke of my self, but the Father which sent
me, he gave me a commandment what I should say and what I should speak.
Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak, John
12.49, 50. His laying down his life was another eminent act of obedience to
this law. He humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the cross. Phil. 2.8. I lay down my life and I take it again, this commandment
have I received of my Father. John 10.18. By these and other like acts of
obedience and conformity to this law of Mediation, did our Savior fulfill all
righteousness. And by this righteousness of his we are made righteous and so
justified. Romans 5.19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so by
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. By these things we may know
what we are to understand by the righteousness of Christ, which was the first
thing I was to enquire into about it.

2. The next thing I am to enquire into is, how this Righteousness of Christ
does operate to our Justification. In doing of which I shall enquire into two
things, by the understanding of which we may come to know how the righteousness
of our Savior operates to our Justification.

1. The reason and end of this law of Mediation, and of the acts of our
Mediator in conformity to it, from which this righteousness of Christ does
result.

2. Upon what the efficacy and operative virtue of this righteousness does
depend, in reference to this end.

For the first of these. The end in general of the law of Mediation and of our
Saviors obedience to it, was to deliver us from the wrath to come, and to
bring us to everlasting life. The subordinate end was Reconciliation between
God and men: And as a means to this end, the obtaining and granting a
Conditional pardon for all the world: and a new Covenant containing that
condition, and the promise made upon it.

1. The first and last end next to Gods glory, of the law of Mediation and of
the obedience of the Mediator to it, was to recover us from the doleful
condition into which our sin had brought us, and to restore us to a capacity of
enjoying everlasting life. When our Savior had said, I have not spoken of my
self, but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment what I should say
and what I should speak, (this we see was one part of the Law given to the
Mediator) he presently adds this; and I know that his commandment is
everlasting Life: meaning, that to that end it was designed, and to that end it
does directly tend, John 12.49.50. And again, I am come, says our Savior,
that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly; this
was the great end of his coming, John 10.10.

2. The next end of it in subordination and subserviency to the former, was to
Reconcile us to God, by altering our nature, by altering the frame and temper
of the mind and heart, and so of a man's ways and life, from carnal to
Spiritual, without which there is no reconciliation wrought in us to God, nor
consequently of God to us. For S. Paul says, that the carnal mind is enmity
against God, because it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be
Romans 8.7. And he that is at enmity against God, is far from being reconciled to
him, and from a capacity of being made happy by him. For except a man be born
again he cannot see the Kingdom of God, nor without holiness shall see God,
till then he is no capable subject of such happiness. And therefore to effect
this to make us capable of the former end, our Savior in obedience to the
Mediatorial Law, gave himself for us to redeem us from all iniquity, and to
purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Tit. 2.14. He
suffered for us the Just for the unjust, that he might bring us unto God, by
way of return from our revolt. 1 Pet. 3.18. He loved his Church and gave
himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, that he might present
it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. Ephesians. 5.25, 26.

3. The next end of our Saviors Mediatorial obedience or Righteousness, and as
a means to accomplish and bring about the former end last mentioned, was the
obtaining, the forming and granting of a Conditional pardon for all mankind, In
him we have Redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of Sins. Ephesians.
1.7. He is the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the world, John 1.29.
The propitiation for the Sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. He gave his flesh
for the life of the world, John 6. and himself a Ransom for all, 1. Tim. 2.6. I
will not deny but that this giving himself a Ransom for all, and tasting death
for every man, may in one respect be said to be absolute and unconditional, and
did extend as far and to as many as ever the sin of Adam, did in its effects;
and that is, in Redeeming all men from obnoxiousness, to eternal misery, merely
upon the account of Adams sin, or the sin of any other, save their own personal
sins. The soul that sins it shall die: the son shall not bear the iniquity
of the father in this respect, Ezekiel. 18.20. In respect of the extent and
universality of this effect, of Christ's death, Adam might be said to be the
figure of him that was to come, Romans 5. But otherwise and in reference to such
as have contracted ill habits by their own actual sin, the pardon obtained by
our Savior for the whole world, or which he came to obtain, was but
Conditional, it was upon condition of their being prevailed withal to be
reconciled unto God. Otherwise, and if this were not so, all would have been
saved, whether they believed and repented or no. Whereas our Savior has said
it, he that believes not shall be damned, and that repents not shall perish.
Though God so loved the world as to give his only begotten Son, yet he loved it
but so as to promise salvation by him, only to those that believe, John 3.16.
Now this pardon thus obtained and granted, upon account of our Saviors
obedience unto death, but upon condition of men's being persuaded to be
reconciled to God, and yet certain to be conferred upon that condition, is a
most powerful motive and means to persuade men to be reconciled to God, when it
comes to be divulged and made known, and when it is believed that pardon is
certainly to be obtained this way and no way without it. And therefore the
Scripture speaks of it as the Method used by God to reconcile the world to
himself, 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,
not imputing their trespasses: that is provided they would not wilfully persist
in them.

4. Another end of the Mediatorial obedience of our Savior subordinate to the
former, (that last mentioned) and as a means to effect it, was the obtaining
and founding of a new Law of Grace, the new Covenant, promising both pardon and
eternal life upon condition, and stating and declaring that condition, to be
published to the world as Gods great instrument of prevailing with men to be
reconciled to God in order to their obtaining pardon and Salvation. Upon which
account the Gospel which is this new Law of Grace, is said to be the power of
God to Salvation to every one that believes it. Romans 1.16. Now all having
sinned, no flesh living could be justified, but in a way of grace and mercy.

And therefore there was a kind of necessity of a new Law, a Law of Grace, by
virtue of which men should be justified, if justified at all. But it did not
seem meet to the divine wisdom to make such a Law of Grace, but upon condition
that some such thing should be undergone and suffered by our blessed Savior on
our bebehalf, as would as well answer the end of the penalty of the original
Law transgressed, as if that penalty had been inflicted on the transgressors of
it themselves. But this being done by the sufferings of our Savior, as I shall
show afterward, a fair way was thereby prepared for the Constituting a new
Covenant, promising pardon and eternal life upon new terms and conditions, such
as are not only possible, but also feisable as well as reasonable in our state
and condition. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us, that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles through
Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through Faith,
that is, that we might receive the blessing and benefits of a new Covenant,
Gal. 3.13, 14. And accordingly the Scripture frequently represents to us, that
the new Covenant is made with mankind upon account of what Christ did and
suffered for us. It was not only ratified and confirmed by the Sacrifice of his
death, but also thereby procured. This I say, says S. Paul, that the Covenant
that was confirmed before of God in Christ, etc. Gal. 3.17. And all the
promises of God are in him, Yea, and in him, Amen. 2 Cor. 1.20. And the New
Testament is called the New Testament in his blood, Mat. 26.28. and his blood
the blood of the Everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. And when the Scriptures
speak of Gods promising eternal life before the world began, Tit. 1.2. and of
Gods purpose and grace which was given us in Christ before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.9. they seem to refer to what God the Father promised Christ on the
behalf of mankind upon his Mediatory undertaking for them, even then when this
was resolved on and concluded by the Father and the Son, before the world
began. For a conclusion of this matter, and to show that the Covenant of Grace
was granted upon the account of the righteousness of Christ, hear what S. Peter
says, 2 Pet. 1.1. To them says he, that have obtained like precious Faith
with us through the Righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ. Whether
you take Faith here for the act of believing the Gospel, or the Gospel it self
as the object of Faith, which seems most likely, or for both, yet this is given
through or upon account of the righteousness of him who is both God and our
Savior.

If you ask how the Mediatory righteousness of our Savior in this
subordination of ends does operate to our Justification? I answer, Our
reconciliation to God by being renewed in heart and life, is the matter of our
Evangelical Righteousness, upon which we are justified. For God justifies none
that are not reconciled to him, nor which are not Evangelically righteous. But
then our reconciliation to God, and our becoming Evangelically righteous
thereby, and our being justified thereupon, as I shall after show we are, are
all owing to the Mediatory obedience or Righteousness of Christ; for from that
it is that they are what they are. And so far as these operate to our
Justification, they do it in Virtue of Christ's Mediatory performance. And so do
those two great motives, the hopes of the forgiveness of sin and eternal life,
by which we are persuaded to be reconciled to God and to become Evangelically
righteous; for these also are founded in the Mediatorial obedience of our
Savior, without which we could have had no such hopes; and therefore Christ is
well and worthily said to be our hope, 1 Timothy 1.1. And then for the new
Covenant, as that operates to our Justification, as it is a new Law
constituting a new Righteousness, and as it is the rule according to which we
are approved as righteous, and adjudged to be righteous, when God justifies us,
so this operation receives its life, and being, and virtue from another
operation, and that is from the operation of the Mediatorial obedience and
righteousness of our Savior, by which the Covenant it self was obtained.
Indeed all that any ways operates to our Justification and Salvation, depends
upon our Saviors Mediatorial performance, except what God himself does: and
yet what he himself does in relation thereto, is still done with reference to
the undertaking and performance of his Son Jesus Christ for us. Christ is the
foundation which God himself has laid, which bears up the whole fabric of our
Redemption and Salvation, which indeed is built upon it. Isa. 28.16. Behold, I
lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious cornerstone,
a sure foundateon, says God concerning Christ. All manner of spiritual
blessings are in Scripture said to be conferred on us through Jesus Christ, or
by Christ, or in Christ. God reconciles us to himself by Jesus Christ:
preaches peace to us by Jesus Christ. The riches of his grace in his kindness
toward us, is through Christ Jesus; we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ. The promise of life is said to be in Christ Jesus. And eternal
life the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, The adoption of Children
is by Christ Jesus; with many more the like in Scripture. All which betokens
that Spiritual benefits of all sorts are vouchsafed us upon the account of his
Mediatorial performance: The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, has
blessed us with all Spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3.
But these things I shall more fully open in that which follows, to which I
shall now proceed.

The second thing then which I proposed to be enquired into, is, upon what the
efficacy and operative virtue of this Mediatorial righteousness of our Savior
does depend in reference to our Justification, and indeed of all other saving
benefits. And it seems to me to depend partly upon Gods Ordination and
appointment to the end he and our Savior designed it for: and partly upon the
Aptitude of it, as a means to such an end.

1. It depends upon Divine Ordination and appointment. For our Lord Christ is
made to us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor.
1.30. He is made Righteousness to us by God, in the effects of his
righteousness: God ordering and appointing that so it should be. For this way
of making us righteous by virtue of the righteousness of another, is wholly of
Divine institution, and is supernatural, a way which the Law natural knows
nothing of, nor we by it. When the Apostle had said, speaking in the person of
Christ, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, Heb. 10.7. he presently adds, ver.
10. by the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ once for all. It appears to be of Divine institution that the
Mediatorial righteousness of Christ should operate to our Justification and
other Spiritual benefits, because the effect of it in the event is limited by
God unto certain conditions: otherwise when Christ gave himself a Ransom for
all, and tasted death for every man, all would have been justified and saved
thereby as well as some. For the price of Redemption was sufficient for all as
well as for some, if it had been as agreeable to the wisdom of God, that all
should have been justified by his blood, as it is that those only shall who
shall be persuaded to be reconciled to him. And the obedience of Christ is in
it self as sufficient to deliver those who are reconciled to God, from temporal
death which is the less evil, as it is to deliver them from eternal death,
which is the greater, had not the wisdom of the Divine will made the
difference. And we may well conceive that it is by virtue of the divine will,
that Abel, Enoch, and other good men who lived toward the beginning of the
world, should be justified and saved by virtue of this obedience of our Savior
to the Law of Mediation, thousands of years before he actuated that obedience
in the humane nature. The giving of Christ for us and the appointing him to the
office and work of a Mediator, was an act of pure Grace. And in all donations
it belongs to the doner to determine and appoint how far and to what ends the
benefit of them shall extend, and upon what terms they shall be conferred and
enjoyed. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God
that shows mercy, Romans 9.16. That is, the terms on which the mercies are to
be received, are not of the ordering and appointment of any other, but of God,
whose the mercy is to bestow. The wisdom of God governs in all acts of his
Grace. For he works all things after the counsel of his own will. Ephesians. 1.11.

2. The Operative virtue of the Mediatorial righteousness of our Blessed
Savior in reference to our Justification, depends in great part at least, upon
the Aptitude of it as a means to such an end. There is a blessed aptitude in
what our Savior has done and suffered, to reconcile God and men, and so to
procure men's Justification. The proper business of a Mediator, is to reconcile
parties at difference. And the Mediatorial acts of our Savior conformable to
the Law of Mediation, in which his righteousness does consist, were most apt
and proper to procure Reconciliation between God offended and men offending:
Some of them having in them a great fitness to reconcile God to men; to atone
him and to take off his displeasure against sinners for what is past, provided
they can be prevailed withal to lay down their arms of rebellion, humble
themselves, beg forgiveness, and return to their duty: And some of them have on
the other hand a great aptitude in them to reconcile men to God. And by such
acts of our Saviors Mediatorial obedience as these two sorts consist of, is
the great and happy business of reconciliation between God and men brought
about, and men's justification and pardon obtained. God never thought it fit to
be reconciled to men, till they could be persuaded to be reconciled to him. And
men will never be persuaded to be reconciled to God, till they have some good
assurance that God will be reconciled to them upon their repentance,
submission, and return. Now the acts of our Savior's Mediatorial obedience
serve very happily to both these ends.

1. They have an excellent aptness in them to reconcile God to men, upon
supposition of their compliance with those reasonable and easy terms upon
which he has declared himself willing to be reconciled to them. Our Saviors
putting himself in our stead, and being content to suffer for us, to die for
us, that we might not die eternally, and thereby to make reparation for the
affront we have put upon God, his law and government, is called making
reconciliation for the sins of the people, by the Apostle, Heb. 2.17. and the
making reconciliation for iniquity, by the Prophet, Dan. 9.24.

And the reason of the aptness of this act of our Savior's obedience, to
reconcile God unto us upon supposition still that we be brought thereby, and by
other means, to be reconciled to God, is twofold.

1. From the value of the ransom laid down; not silver and gold, but the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.19. the Blood of one who is God as
well as man: the Church of God is said to be purchased with his own Blood, Acts
20.28. which according to the Scripture account, is a valuable consideration
for that which is designed to be obtained by it. Hence it is called a price, a
price paid: ye are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20. a purchase; that by which
the purchase was bought and paid for: purchased with his own blood: A ransom,
that which is satisfactory to God, as being content to release and discharge
the ransomed upon that account, provided they continue not in their rebellion:
He gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. These metaphors being borrowed
phrases from what is customary among men, still signify a valuable
consideration given for what is obtained thereby. When we consider that all
Nations are but as the drop of the bucket or small dust of the balance in
comparison of God, and that that person who has given himself a ransom for us,
is, God blessed for evermore, as well as man; we must needs conclude, that the
dignity of his person, must needs add an infinite value to his suffering for
us, and be in the sight of God of great price.

2. The other reason of the aptness of our Saviors suffering for us to
reconcile God unto us, is taken from the congruity, analogy, or proportion that
is in our Savior's sufferings, to answer the end of God's punishing sinners
themselves. His suffering for us answers Gods end in punishing sinners, as
well, yea, better than if we our selves had suffered the demerit of our sins,
who come to be pardoned thereby. We are not to think, I conceive, that when God
makes sinners bear their iniquity themselves in suffering according to their
demerits, that it is for their suffering-sake that he does it, as if he were
pleased or gratified with their suffering, merely as such, as revengeful men
use to be in the suffering of them on whom they revenge themselves: or as the
Devil is, in the destruction of men for destruction sake: no certainly, God is
only pleased with such sufferings of sinners themselves, as they serve to
worthy ends and purposes. He has plainly told us, that he has no pleasure in
the death of him that dies, Ezekiel. 18.32. nay, has sworn as he lives, that he
has no pleasure, no not in the death of the wicked, but that he turn from his
way and live, Ezekiel. 33.11. If he had taken pleasure in the suffering as such of
the sinners themselves, we cannot imagine that ever he would have given a
command to his dear Son as he has done, to suffer death to redeem guilty
sinners themselves from eternal death, when they were all justly obnoxious to
the judgment of God. God seeks reconciliation with us, 2 Cor. 5.19. which is an
argument, that revenge dwells not in him; only as governor of the universe, he
renders vengeance where the ends of Government call for it. Otherwise God
says, Fury is not in me, Isa. 27. God doubtless is only pleased with the
suffering of wicked men themselves, as those sufferings tend to worthy ends,
and a public good. For God, as a wise and good governor of his whole Creation
of rational beings, designs the good of the whole by those punishments which he
inflicts upon some that are contumacious. To punish such, is as necessary no
doubt for the good of the Creation in general, as the cutting off delinquents
by the hand of public Justice, is necessary to good order and government in a
Commonwealth.

Now the ends of punishments in reference to the public good of Gods Creation
in general, are such as these.

1. To awaken and beget a sense in Gods Creation, of the turpitude of sin, how
contrary it is to the holy nature of God, how hateful and displeasing to him,
and of how malignant a nature in reference to his creatures; that, wherever it
fastens, it causes great disorders and disturbances, setting men against God
their maker, and one man against another, yea, every sinner against himself;
and that it is it which has brought in all the misery and confusion that is in
the visible and invisible world.

2. To maintain and keep up the Authority of God, and the honor of his Laws,
by which he governs his Creatures. For punishments are the sanction of Divine
as well as they are of Humane Laws. If it were not for them the Laws of God
would lose much of their strength, and of that awe and reverence which by means
of them, is kept up in the minds of intelligent beings, to whom they are made
known.

3. Another end of punishing some offenders for the good of the whole, is to
deter others from falling into such a hardened state of rebellion against God,
as for which final execution of Divine Justice passes upon them. One great use
of Gods visible Judgments here in this world upon notorious offenders, is for
caution to the rest. Thus Gods Judgments upon the Israelites thousands of years
before, were for examples unto us, and for our admonition, upon whom the ends
of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10.6, 11. Sodom and Gomorrah in what befell them,
are set forth for examples to the rest of the world, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire, Jude 7. And we do not know of what use to the invisible world of
Gods Creation, the execution of Divine Justice upon incorrigible offenders is
now or will be hereafter amongst them. We see what is befallen the Apostate
Angels in the invisible world, is made use of for admonition to those of this
visible, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. And it is evident that the wise method of Gods
proceeding in the matter of our Redemption, was designed as of good use to the
invisible world; it was to the intent that now unto principalities and powers
in heavenly places, might be known by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God,
Ephesians. 3.10. And it is not incredible, but that on the other hand, the punishment
of obstinate transgressors in another world for what they have done in this,
may be of good use among them of the invisible world.

4. This punishing of sinners in another world for impenitency in sin in this,
is, when it is made known, as it is now, of great use, to bring men to
repentance, when hope is given them, as there is, that they shall escape the
like punishment upon their repentance, and not otherwise.

These and such like being the reason and ends of Gods inflicting punishment
upon sinners themselves that are impenitent, I am now to show that these ends
are as well, yea in some respect much better, provided for, and secured by the
sufferings of our Savior for us, though we that are saved by his sufferings,
do not suffer, than they would have been in case every sinner without
redemption, had born his own iniquity, and suffered for himself the desert of
his sin.

For in that, first, God would not spare his own Son when he espoused the cause
of sinful men, not to justify or defend them in it, but to suffer for them,
rather than they should have no terms granted them of escaping suffering
themselves what they had deserved: I say, when in this case God would not spare
his own dear Son, notwithstanding the dignity and transcendent worthiness of
his person, and the exceeding great interest he had in his Fathers love, he did
thereby sufficiently declare and manifest as well as by inflicting punishment
on sinners themselves, how odious a thing sin is in his sight, how contrary to
his nature, and how irreconcilable he is to it. Sin was condemned for as vile a
thing as it is, as well by our Savior's suffering in the flesh for it in our
stead, as it would have been by our suffering for it our selves, Romans 8.3. he
condemned sin in the flesh by being a Sacrifice for it.

2. By the Son of God's thus suffering in the sinners stead for their
transgressing the righteous Law of God, the authority of this Law is as
sufficiently maintained, and the goodness of it as sufficiently vindicated, as
it would have been by punishing those sinners themselves, that are now saved by
his sufferings. For when God would not so much as give any hopes of pardon to
such as have transgressed that law of his, no not upon condition of their
repentance, without the suffering of such an one as his own dear Son; no
creature that knows this, can have any occasion or place left to despise or
slight that Law, or the authority of the Lawgiver, and not to be awed by it,
nor to expect or hope for impunity in contemning of it.

3. No creature can take any encouragement to commit sin, or to continue in
sin, who considers how severely the Son of God himself was dealt with by his
merciful and most loving Father, in delivering him up to be crucified by wicked
hands, besides his other sufferings, when he put himself in the sinners place
to undergo whatever his Father would please to inflict upon him, so that he
might but thereby obtain a pardon for them, and that too but upon condition of
their reformation, and reconciliation to God.

4. As the end of inflicting punishment is either for the reformation of the
persons themselves that suffer, or of others by their example of suffering, so
this end of sinners suffering, was much better attained by our Savior's
suffering for our sins, than if we our selves, that are saved by his death, had
suffered for them what we had deserved. And the reason hereof is, because those
that are saved by our Saviors death, are by his death first reconciled to God
in their nature and life; they are reformed, and of rebels made loyal subjects,
which they never would have been, if they had suffered themselves the desert of
their sin. And is it not much better that disloyal and disobedient subjects be
made dutiful, loyal, obedient, and useful, than to be cut off for obstinacy in
rebellion? God had said concerning wicked men, that he had much rather that
they should return and live, than that they should die in and for their
iniquities: and our Lord his Son has answered him in the joy of his heart, in
that by his suffering for them in conjunction with other his performances on
their behalf, he has fulfilled his Fathers wish, and brought his desire to
pass in reference to many such sinners. And most certain it is, that this is
infinitely more pleasing and satisfactory to God, than if all mankind had
suffered the pains of eternal death for their iniquities. This has occasioned,
and will still cause infinitely more joy in Heaven, and on Earth, and more
triumphant thanksgigiving unto God, than there would have been if every sinner
had born his own burden. On this account, our Savior's giving himself for us,
was indeed emphatically an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
unto God, as St. Paul calls it, Ephesians. 5.1.

All these things considered and put together, it appears upon a very rational
account, that there was a very great aptitude in this act of our Savior's
mediatorial obedience, to reconcile God to men, when he delivered up himself to
suffer for them on the terms he did, and so to operate to our Justification.

2. As there is an aptitude in our Blessed Savior's Mediatorial Righteousness
to reconcile God to men in order to their Justification; so there is in another
respect an aptitude in it likewise to reconcile men to God in order to the same
end. And that act of Obedience to the law of Mediation which has an aptitude
in it this way, consists at least very much in a faithful discharge of his
Prophetical Office as Mediator. For by a faithful discharge of this trust, and
in obedience to this Law, he persuades men by the great arguments and motives
of the Gospel, to be reconciled to God.

To this end he published the Gospel, which he brought down from Heaven,
Prophetically called his declaring the decree, Psalm. 2.7. And this was done in
obedience to the Law of Mediation, given by his Father, as I have showed from
John 12.49. I have not spoken of my self, says he, but the Father which sent
me, he gave me a Commandment what I should say, and what I should speak. As the
Law was given in the hand of a Mediator, Moses, so was the Gospel by Christ,
the Mediator of a better Testament. And he confirmed it to be from God, by many
signs and wonders, and mighty deeds which accompanied the publication of it by
him and his Apostles, having sealed it with his own Blood. For after he had set
it on foot himself, while he was on earth, and then sealed to it by his death,
he afterward, when he left the world and ascended up on high, left behind him
by way of gift to the world, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and
Teachers, to Minister the things of the Gospel in his name; which Ministry is
called the Ministry of Reconciliation, and the Gospel committed to their trust,
the Word of Reconciliation, and that which they were to do by it as his
Ambassadors, was, to pray, beseech, persuade men in Christ's stead, to be
reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. This first done by our Savior in his
Ministry, is continued by his Ministers in his name, by persuading men to
repentance, and amendment of life, and to become sincerely obedient unto God,
in which their being reconciled to him does consist. And the way and means used
by our Savior, and his Ambassadors, to persuade men to be thus reconciled to
God, was by possessing them with a strong and vigorous Belief of three things
especially, as great parts of the Gospel our Savior brought from Heaven with
him.

1. That God would certainly be reconciled to all sinners, provided they would
but be reconciled to him, and not still persist in their rebellion: that he
will certainly pardon them, and treat them as friends, if they would desist
from carrying it any longer as enemies to him. He has sent them word by his
Messengers, that he is not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. that he would have all men to be saved and come
to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. And because guilt makes men full of
fears, and jealousies of the avenger, and not apt to believe that such as they
have highly affronted, injured, and provoked, can be reconciled to them, until
they have avenged themselves on them, if they have power to do it: therefore
our Savior to assure sinners of the reality of God's desire and intention of
being reconciled to them, and to pardon them, if they will but be reconciled to
him, has not only given them his word for it, but a wonderful and great proof
of it in what he has done toward such a thing before ever any such favor was
desired or sought for on their parts. God, he so loved the world, and was so
unwilling to avenge himself on them, as that he has given his only begotten
Son, not only to tell them so, but also to suffer for them, to prepare the way
of reconciliation between them.

All this has been done on God and his holy Sons part toward this
reconciliation, before there was ever any inclination on man's part of being
reconciled to God. God has commended his love toward us, in that while we
were yet sinners, Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. In this was manifested the love
of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world,
that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that
he loved us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4.9,
10. And doubtless this way of proceeding with enemies, if any, will make them
willing to be reconciled to God: and it is indeed that which does take with all
but desperate contumacious wretches. We love him, says St. John, because he
first loved us, 1 John 4.19. Our thoughts and inclinations of returning to God,
and of being reconciled to him, of any love or good will toward him, take
their first rise from intimations, yea, more than so, from manifestations of
Gods love to us first, and especially of such love as the giving of his Son for
us bespeaks him to have to us. Hence the preaching of the Cross, the
declaration not only that Christ has suffered, but upon what account he has
suffered, is said to be the power of God to them that are saved, that is, it is
Gods powerful motive by which he persuades men of his willingness to be
reconciled to them, and by that means prevails with them to be willing to be
reconciled to him. The preaching of the Cross is to them that perish,
foolishness; but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.18.
All things, says St. Paul, are of God, who has reconciled us unto himself by
Jesus Christ, and has given unto us the ministry of reconciliation (what is
that?) to wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them; and has committed to us the word of
reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. This is, we see, Gods way and method of
reconciling the world unto himself, by making known to them, that upon account
of his Son's undertaking and suffering for them, he is freely willing to pardon
them, and not to impute their trespasses, but to be reconciled to them,
provided they will be reconciled to him.

Hence it is that our reconciliation to God (and not only God's reconciliation
to us) is so frequently as it is, attributed in Scripture to the death of
Christ. If when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life, Romans 5.10. And
that he might reconcile both (Jews and Gentiles) unto God in one body by the
Cross, having slain the enmity thereby, and came and preached peace, etc. Ephesians.
2.16, 17. And again, having made peace by the Blood of his Cross, it pleased
the Father by him to reconcile all things to himself. And you that were
sometime alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, Col. 1.19, 20, 21, 22. By
these and other like Scriptures we see, that one of God's great designs in
giving his Son to die for us, was the reconciling us to himself, by assuring
us, that upon condition of our being reconciled, we should not have any the
least cause to question his willingness to be reconciled to us, and that it is
by this, that he procures a willingness in us to be reconciled to him.

This great transaction between the Father and the Son in behalf of the world,
the Father's giving, and the Son's undertaking to die for the world in order to
this great work of reconciliation, is the great and certain security unto men,
that what was said in the Gospel touching Gods being reconcilable to sinners,
and his forgiving them, provided they will be reconciled to him, shall be
really performed and made good to them. Hence it is, that in regard that Christ
was made Priest by the Oath of God to offer himself in Sacrifice to expiate
sin, and then in virtue of that Sacrifice to make intercession for us, that he
is said to be made surety of the better Testament: that is, he by that means
becomes a surety for God unto men, of the reality of his proffers and promises
in the Gospel to them, and of the performance of them upon the condition of
their being reconciled to him, Heb. 7.20, 22. The Apostles inference is very
natural and strongly conclusive when he says, He that spared not his own Son,
but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us all
things, Romans 8.32. Gods giving his Son to die for us, is more than the
bestowing a pardon and eternal life upon us. And therefore he having done the
greater already to procure our reconciliation to him, it is an earnest, and a
pledge that he will not stick to pardon and to save us, which is a less matter
for him to give, if we become reconciled to him indeed. If when we were enemies
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled,
we shall be saved by his life, Romans 5.10.

This assurance which God has given to the world of his willingness to pardon
and save sinners by the death of his Son, as an earnest and a pledge of it, if
they wilfully refuse not to become reconciled to him, is that which in the
first times in which this was divulged to the wrrld, brought in a considerable
part of it to Christ, who by him yielded up themselves to God. In prospect of
which success of this gracious design of God upon the world by the death of his
Son, it was that our Savior said, John 12.32. And I, if I he lifted up from
the earth, will draw all men unto me. So powerful a motive to reconcile sinners
to God, is God's declaration by giving his Son to die for them, of his
willingness to be reconciled to them, if they will but answer him in their
willingness to be reconciled to him. This is the first of the three things I
mentioned, which have a great aptness in them to persuade men to be reconciled
to God, for which end, our Savior does by the Gospel, as he is Mediator of the
New Testament, not only reveal this, but labors to possess men with a strong
belief of it, without which it will not operate on them at all toward such an
end as the reconciling them to God is.

2. Another of those motives by which our Savior by setting the Gospel on
foot, seeks to reconcile men to God, is by giving them great assurance that God
is so far from desiring to revenge himself on them, notwithstanding all their
provocations, if they were but as willing as he is to be reconciled, as that in
case they will be but persuaded to be reconciled to God by repentance for their
former rebellion, and by becoming really obedient to their power for the
future, as that then he will bestow upon them everlasting life, advance them to
such a state of happiness, as that greater than which the heart of man cannot
wish for or desire. And surely this, if it be thoroughly believed, will, if any
thing will, persuade men to be reconciled to God. To this end, our Savior has
brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. And by this
motive he does almost every where in the Gospel persuade to Faith, Love,
Repentance, Obedience, and Holiness, which is the same, with persuading men to
be reconciled to God; for in such things as these, does our reconciliation to
God consist. St. John speaks of this in a magnifying way, as the great motive
to man to entertain and obey the Gospel: This, says he, is the promise which
he has promised us, even eternal life, 1 John 2.25. And indeed it was this
that did invite men to receive the Gospel, to profess the Christian Religion at
first, and which did animate them to suffer any thing rather than to renounce
and forsake it, and the hope of eternal life, which they had received by it.
They took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves, that
they had in Heaven, a better, and an enduring substance, Heb. 10.34.

3. There is a great aptitude in our Saviors setting the Gospel on foot, to
reconcile men to God, because he thereby convinces them, that if, after God's
gracious offer of being reconciled to them in case they will be reconciled to
him: and if after all that has been done by God, and suffered by his Son, to
prepare the way for a mutual reconciliation between them, they shall yet
obstinately refuse to be reconciled to God, and persist still in their
rebellion and disobedience, That then God will be so far from being reconciled
to them, and from pardoning them, notwithstanding all the willingness he has
declared to be reconciled to them, upon condition of their reconciliation to
him: and notwithstanding all that Christ has done and suffered to bring this
about, as that this offer of God, and undertaking of Christ, shall turn but to
their heavier doom, and greater condemnation in the next world. This is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness more
than light, John 3.19. How shall we escpe if we neglect so great salvation,
which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord himself, and was confirmed to
us by them that heard him, Heb. 2.3. It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrah, and for Tire and Sydon, in the day of Judgment, than for them that
have refused to be reconciled to God, when by the Gospel sent to them, he has
offered to be reconciled to them, on condition that they would be reconciled
unto him.

And lest any should flatter themselves with vain hopes of being saved, from
the goodness of the nature of God, and the death of Jesus Christ for sinners,
who yet take a liberty to live in known sin without reconciling themselves to
God, by leaving it off, and returning to their duty, as too many alas do: there
are two or three things revealed by Christ, to take from them such vain hopes,
and to put them upon a necessity of choosing either to reconcile themselves to
God, or to be eternally miserable.

1. The first is taken from the nature of God. The nature of God is so pure and
holy, and so contrary to sin, that it is as impossible for him to be reconciled
to sin, or to sinners, while by it they are in open rebellion against him, as
it is for him to change his nature, and cease to be God. This is the message
(says St. John) which we have heard of him (that is, of Christ) and declare
unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we say, that
we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the
truth, 1 John 1.5. So that, according to this message which Christ has sent to
sinners by his Messengers, it is as possible to reconcile light and darkness,
as God and such as walk in darkness, that is in wilful sin. And St. Paul would
make men themselves judges in the case, and appeals to their own reason,
saying, What communion has light with darkness, and what concord has Christ
with Belial? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. and plainly intimates, that if light and darkness
are irreconcilable, and can have no communion, so is Christ and Belial, or a
lawless man.

2. He has taken away such vain hopes from sinners, by declaring by his
Gospel, That God without respect of persons, judges according to every man's
work: that is, he will judge every man according to the right of his cause,
without favoring or dis-favouring the persons of men against the nature and
right of their cause: He that has done good shall come forth to the
resurrection of life, and he that has done evil unto the resurrection of
damnation. Even there where the Lord has declared from heaven, that he is
merciful and gracious, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin; even there
he has declared also, to the end men might not mistake, that he will by no
means clear the guilty; no, by no means, not upon any account whatsoever will
he clear such as are finally guilty, by persisting in rebellion, Exodus 34.6, 7.
All such persons therefore as will not be persuaded to be reconciled to God, by
becoming obedient to his government by his laws, have no more reason to hope
that they shall be saved upon the account of God's merciful nature, or the
merits of Christ's death, than they have to hope that God for their sakes will
go contrary to all his declarations in his word, and contrary to the whole
fixed frame of his government, by which he rules, and will judge the world. And
what sinner is there that can but give himself the liberty to consider things,
that is or can be so vain in his expectation, as to promise himself any such
thing, since our Savior has said, Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my
word shall not pass away, Mat. 24.35. Those are the Unbelievers which shall
certainly perish, who will not believe God, who will not believe the Son of
God, when they have spoken their mind fully and plainly, but will needs flatter
themselves with hopes that they will be better than their words.

3. Our Savior, to take away from men such vain hopes, and to convince them of
the necessity of their being reconciled to God, has told them, that if they
will not be reconciled to him, they cannot be reconciled to happiness; that
their nature cannot be capable of the happiness of the next world, unless they
are reconciled to God in this. Except a man be born again, says he, he cannot
see the kingdom of God, John 3.3. Except such as have contracted ill habits by
bad living, be born again, they are not capable of the happiness of that state.
That is, in other words, except they put off the old man, and put on the new,
Col. 3.10. or which is yet more plainly expressed, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. except
they put off concerning their former conversation, the old man, which is
corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of
their minds, and do put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness: except this be done, they cannot see the
kingdom of God, i. e. they cannot enjoy it. He does not say, they shall not,
but that they cannot see it. And the reason is, because the happiness of the
heavenly state is of such a nature, as between which and the nature of man, as
viciated and corrupt, there is no congruity. And that which has a contrariety
in it to the nature of a creature, is not matter of pleasure, but of torment to
it. The holy God, the holy Jesus, the holy Angels, and holy Men are the
inhabitants of Heaven: And what felicity can unholy men take in such company?
Solomon says, the upright are an abomination to the wicked, Prove. 29.27. And
if they be so here, where they are but in part holy; how much more will they be
so in the other world, when they are altogether so. What Communion, says St.
Paul, has righteousness with unrighteousness? no more than light with
darkness, 2 Cor. 6.14. They do not love God here as he is holy; nor is it
pleasure to them to think of him as such; and therefore, unless they be
sanctified and made so here, they are not capable of enjoying God in the next
world; in the enjoyment of whom, the happiness of Heaven does consist. Without
holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. And they are such as are pure
in heart, which shall see God, Mat. 5.8. Besides, those sinful lusts which
wicked men carry along with them into the next world, will keep them from being
happy in what place soever they are, when they shall be deprived of those
carnal objects to satisfy them, which they found in this world.

And lest any should think that God will be so merciful to them, as so to alter
and change their nature, when they come into the other world, as that they
shall be capable of the happiness of Heaven, though they are not changed in
this; our Lord has told them aforehand to prevent such a conceit, that though
many shall say unto him in that day, Lord, Lord, open unto us, for we have
heard thee preach in our streets, have eat and drunk in thy presence, have
prophesied and cast out devils in thy name, and done many wonderful works, yet
they having lived and died unreformed, he will then say unto them, depart from
me, ye workers of iniquity, I know you not, Mat. 7.22. Luke 13.25, 26. And St.
Paul his Apostle has told us also, that we must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive according to that he has
done in the body, whether it be good or bad. We must receive we see according
to what is done in the body here in this life, before the separation of soul
and body by death, 2 Cor. 5.10. Now is the accepted time, now the day of
Salvation, and those that out-stand this, it will be said unto them, as our
Savior does in Rev. 22.11. He that is unjust let him be unjust still, and he
that is filthy let him be filthy still.

By all these Revelations made by our Savior, he has (as any that will
consider them may easily see) put men upon a necessity of being reconciled to
God, unless they had rather choose to be everlastingly miserable. And in this
with the forementioned Motives, there is a very great aptitude to reconciel men
to God, as the reason of the thing shows, and the event has declared.

And thus we have now seen how the Mediatory Righteousness of our Savior, his
obedience in executing the Law of Mediation, does operate to our Justification,
in reference both to God and men. By his sufferings he reconciled God to
penitent sinners, by making satisfaction to his governing Justice, and by
securing the ends of his inflicting punishment upon impenitent offenders, while
he spares the penitent. And by the Gospel which he has set on foot, the Holy
Spirit concurring, he reconciles men to God; that is, he reconciles their minds
and wills, their lives and actions to Gods Holy Nature, Government and Laws,
which is their Evangelical Righteousness, in which capacity, he delivers them
up to God to be Justified and Pardoned, according to the tenor of the Covenant
of Grace, which he likewise obtained for us, it being founded on his Mediatory
obedience; of which Covenant I am now in the next place to speak.

CHAP. III. How and in what respect the Covenant of Grace operates to our
Justification.
THE Covenant of Grace operates to our Justification in several respects. But
however it does this or in what respect soever; yet all that operation is owing
to the Mediatorial Righteousness or Obedience of our Savior. For I have showed
in what goes before, that the Covenant it self was obtained by and founded in
the Mediatorial Righteousness of our Savior; the obtaining of which, was one
of the ends of the Office and Work of Christ as Mediator. And as it is one of
the effects of our Saviors death, it is called a Testament, though in other
respects it is called a Covenant, yea a Law. As its promises are made by God on
condition of duty to be performed by us, so it is a pact or Covenant. As it
absolutely enjoins that as duty, which is also the condition of our happiness,
so it is a Law. But as it comes out of the hands of Jesus Christ, and is the
Fruit of his death, so it is a Testament, because by that it receives its vigor
and strength. A Testament, says the Apostle, is of force when men are dead;
otherwise it is of no strength at all while the Testator lives, Heb. 9.17.
This being premised, I come now to show in what respects this Covenant operates
to our Justification. And this it does,

1. By reconciling the Natural Law to the terms of the Law of Grace in the
behalf of Repentant sinners, in virtue of the death of Christ for them; whose
Justification and Pardon the Natural Law was against, while they remained
impenitent. By the Natural Law I mean, that eternal reason or wisdom by which
Almighty God does always that which is fit and becoming him toward his
creatures; and that by which his creatures do or ought to do what is fit and
becoming them toward God, toward themselves and one another. And this is said
to be the Natural Law, because its determinations and awards are suited to the
nature of things. As when innocent creatures are used as such, and obstinate
sinners dealt with as such, and repentant sinners treated as such; and when
creatures are more or less punished or rewarded according as they have been and
done more or less wickedly or worthily: or as when God does render to every one
according to his works without respect of persons, as the Scripture speaks. Now
to do according to the nature of things is to do according to right reason, and
to do so is always well becoming the Agent, whether it be God or man, and
cannot be otherwise. To this Law that of St. Paul refers when he says,
Whatsoever things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, of good report, if
there be any virtue and praise, think on these things. Phil. 4.8.

This then being the Natural Law, it must needs be always against the
Justification and Pardon of impenitent obstinate sinners and irreconcilable
enemies; for it would not be according to the nature of things, not according
to right reason, and so not becoming the Agent, if the bad should be treated as
well as the good.

But then on the other hand, the Natural Law cannot be against the justifying
and pardoning of such repentant sinners for whom Christ died; Because the case
of such is quite different from theirs who continue in their rebellion, and who
have no share in the satisfaction which Christ has made in the behalf of
repentant sinners. Now the case of such being thus different, it would not be
according to the nature and reason of things, and so not according to the
Natural Law, if they should be no more pardoned than the impenitent.
Considering what our blessed Savior has done and suffered to atone God and to
obtain pardon and happiness for repentant sinners; such as are greatly
displeased with themselves for having displeased God; and that judge and condemn
themselves as guilty of folly and worthy of death; that deprecate Gods
displeasure, beg forgiveness and return to their duty; it cannot but be
agreeable to the nature and reason of the thing, and very well becoming so good
a being as God is, for him, for Christ's sake to pardon such, and to reward
their future Faithfulness, and sincere obedience with everlasting happiness.

And so much the rather it is so, because by the death of Christ for such as
return to God after their apostasy from him, the great and wise ends of Gods
Government over all intelligent beings, which center in the public good, are
secured as well, yea better, as I have showed before, than they would been by
punishing repentant sinners themselves for their Offenses. By the securing of
which ends of Gods Government, the reason of the Natural Law is fully answered
and satisfied. The public good in Gods Dominions, is a great end of his
Government: and this public good is promoted by Gods justifying and pardoning
repentant sinners, for Christ's sake, because by his doing so, sinners are
prevailed with and persuaded to repent, amend, and reform, and of bad to become
good, and of unprofitable and disserviceable, to become useful and profitable
members in Gods Kingdom, to the increasing and multiplying of such in it, to
the great joy and satisfaction of the whole. For which cause it is said, There
is joy in heaven over every one sinner that repents, Luke 15.

Again, it must needs be agreeable to the Natural Law, for God, for Christ's
sake to justify and pardon repentant and reformed sinners, because it is
agreeable to his own nature. For that which is agreeable to the nature of God,
must needs agree to the Natural Law, because the Natural Law is founded in the
Nature of God. Now for God to show mercy to his creatures in all compassionable
cases, is as natural to him as to do justly; mercy being as essential to God as
justice or any other attribute of his is. And there is no opportunity for mercy
to show it self but in compassionable cases. And if the case of repenting and
reformed sinners, for whom Christ died, being at first made but fallible, be
not a compassionable case, I know not what is or where any will be found for
God to exercise his mercy in.

Furthermore, the Law of Grace does not, nor indeed can, Cancel or Relax the
Natural Law in any part (though I confess I with others have some time thought
otherwise) and the reason is, because the Natural Law is naturally what it is
and cannot be otherwise. That which is in it self fitest to be done, can never
be otherwise under the same circumstances in which it is so. The change or
alteration is not in the Law when it favors the same persons at one time whom
it disfavoured, yea condemned, before: but the change is made in the persons
themselves, and in the change of the circumstances of their Case, by reason of
their interest in Christ's performance for them, and of their interest in the
promise of the Law of Grace, they having performed the condition on which their
interest in the benefit of Christ's death and in the promises of the Gospel,
were suspended.

The Law curses all transgressors of it as such: and they remain under it
until they are redeemed from it, and removed from under it by Christ's having
born it for them. So that the Sanction of the Law is not Cancelled, but
undergon by our Redeemer for us. He has redeemed us from the curse of the Law
by being made a curse for us, not by altering the Law for us, Gal. 3.13. Our
Savior has told us, that he which believes not is condemned already, because
he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God: because he
has not received the remedy by which he might have been delivered from that
condemnation into which he was fallen. John 3.18. He was under the condemnation
of the Law Natural, before as a transgressor of that, and is now under the
condemnation of the Gospel, as a rejecter of the Grace offered by that. But
when such an one comes to believe, he is no longer under the condemnation of
either Law or Gospel, but both are reconciled to him through Christ, because by
his believing he is reconciled to them: not because they are in the least
altered, but because the man himself is altered, and the circumstances of his
case are altered upon the account of Christ's performance for him.

We cannot say that the Natural Law was ever against the justification and
pardoning of such repentant sinners for whom Christ undertook to suffer: for if
it had, it would be so still now he has suffered: for that Law is entirely
unalterable and inflexible. Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle
shall in no wise pass from the Law, says our Savior until all be fulfilled,
Mat. 5.18. Now if the Law were never against the justification and pardon of
such penitents as aforesaid, then there needed no alteration to be made in it
to make way for their justification and pardon.

And as all this appears as we see from reasons taken from the nature of God,
and from the nature of the Law it self as reconciled by the death of Christ to
penitent sinners: So it appears also by express Testimony of Scripture. St.
Paul speaking of such repentant sinners as in whom were found the fruits of the
Spirit, says, that against such there is no Law. Gal. 5.23. and if no Law,
then not the Natural Law. And when in another place the question is put,
whether it may be said that the Law is against the promise of God? He rejects
it with a kind of indignation, saying, God forbid. Gal. 3.21.

To conclude then, for God to justify, pardon, and make men happy, when in
vouchsafing this favor to repentant persons, upon account of the death of his
Son, his Authority, Law, and Government, is not left unvindicated, nor the ends
of his Government unsecured, nor any creature hurt by it, it is doubtless
agreeable to the highest reason, and therefore congruous to the Law Natural,
and infinitely becoming so good a being as God is. And it may very well be,
that upon this account God is said to be just in justifying him that believes
in Jesus, Romans 3.26. and faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1.9.

And this doubtless is the satisfaction which God the Father receives by the
suffering of his Son for our sins, about which there have been so many disputes
in the world. It is doubtless infinitely satisfactory and well pleasing to
Almighty God, that by means of his Sons suffering, he can now show Mercy to
repentant sinners in justifying, pardoning, and saving them, without suffering
the least dishonor or suspicion of dishonor in reference either to his Nature,
Law, or Government, and in full compliance with the immutable Law of
Righteousness and Reason.

Nor will it follow from what has been discoursed (as some perhaps may object)
that the Natural Law, and the Law of Grace are all one. For although the
Natural Law is not against the favor exhibited by the Law of Grace, upon the
reason and the terms on which it is done: yet the Revelation of that reason
which is the Mediatorial performance of Christ, is not made by the Natural Law,
but by the Gospel or Law of Grace. For no man can merely by any natural light
know it, but is knowable only by the Gospel Revelation or Law of Grace. The
natural man cannot know the things of the spirit of God, because they are
spiritually discerned: that is by means purely spiritual or supernatural. 1
Cor. 2.14. For this reason and by reason of all the honor which redounds to the
Eternal Father and to our Lord Jesus Christ, and all the benefit which accrues
to men, by this Revelation, which is exceeding great, it was necessary that
this Law of Grace should be constituted and published, as a Law distinct from
the Natural Law.

But whereas the Scripture in some places seems to represent the Law and the
Promise as inconsistent, so that if one take place upon a person, the other
must in some sort give way, according as I my self have sometimes thought; I
shall now look a little more narrowly into those Texts. In Romans 4.14. i'ts
said, If they which are of the Law be heirs, faith is made void and the promise
made of none effect. And again, Gal. 3.18. If the inheritance be of the Law, it
is no more of Promise: but God gave it unto Abraham by promise. For a right
understandnig of these and such like Scriptures, we must consider that the
Apostle does not in them represent the inconsistency of the Law and the Promise
as they are in themselves, and in their proper use, and rightly understood; but
he therein represents the erroneousness of their opinion against whom he
disputes, upon the account of the absurd consequence of it, as rendering the Law
and the Promise inconsistent. For otherwise when St. Paul speaks his own sense
of the Law and Promise, he with great vehemence denies the Law to be against
the Promises, when he says, Is the Law then against the Promises? God forbid.
Gal. 3.21.

The case was this; the Pharisaical Jews, held Righteousness or Justification
to be by the Law, in opposition to its being by Grace. I do not frustrate the
grace of God, says St. Paul (meaning that he did not do it by his doctrine, as
they did by theirs) for if righteousness come by the Law, says he, then Christ
is dead in vain. Gal. 2.21. They held their legal performances were of
themselves a Righteousness that would of themselves Justify them before God.
But St. Paul taught that it was merely by grace and by virtue of Christ's death,
that the faith and sincere though otherwise imperfect obedience of such as have
been once sinners, is imputed or counted to them for Righteousness. So that
their opinion of Righteousness coming by the Law, if admitted, would have
rendered the death of Christ to be in vain, and the Promise of none effect or
useless, which yet proceeded from Grace, and was in it self an act of Gods
Grace. And if righteousness had been by works in their sense, then it would not
have been of Grace, otherwise Grrace would have no more Grace, as St. Paul
reasons. But if it was of Grace, as the Apostle affirmed that it was, then it
could not be of works in their sense, otherwise work would be no more work.
Romans 11.6.

So that the drift of St. Paul in his writings was to show, that their opinion
of Justification by the Law, was pernicious, for that it opposed the Law to the
Promise, as rendering the Promise useless: But that his doctrine of
Justification by Grace through Faith, did not evacuate the Law nor make it
useless in the matter of our Justification, but rendered both very well
consistent. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? says he, God forbid:
yea we establish the Law. Romans 3.31. The good men among the Jews under the Law,
were Justified by Grace, even then when they were approved of for Righteous
upon the account of their sincere obedience to the Law of Moses, and
accordingly they depended upon the Grace and Mercy of God for acceptance and
approbation in their sincere observation of all his Laws. And therefore they
from time to time styled him a God keeping Covenant and Mercy with them that
love him and keep his Commandments, or that walk before with all their hearts.
And though the hearers of the Law were not just before God, yet the doers of
Law were justified, when they depended upon the Grace and Mercy of God for
acceptance in doing their duty. Romans 2.13.

Conclude we then, that there is nothing in these Scriptures to prove the
Natural Law and the Law of Grace, not to consist without the one being altered
by the other.

And thus we see how the Law of Grace operates to our Justification, by
reconciling the Original Law to us upon our repentance that was against us; it
is reconciled to us, because we are reconciled to it by the Law of Grace.

By the way then it is remarkable, how greatly it conduces to the consolation
of all truly repentant sinners, and of how great a ground of their confidence
toward God it is, that the Natural Law as well as the Law of Grace, is now on
their side: it is not only not against them, but is made to be for them by the
blessed undertaking and performance of our Savior for them, when once they are
persuaded to be sincerely for it.

2. The Covenant of Grace operates to our Justification, as it is an act of
Grace by which God does institute and ordain, that Faith as it is an operative
principle of sincerity of repentance, of love to God and man, and of all holy
obedience, shall be accepted and accounted for Righteousness, upon the account
of our Saviors Mediatory Righteousness. And for our better understanding and
satisfaction in this matter, I shall endeavor these three things.

1. To show that there is a Righteousness found among men, which the Scripture
calls so, and calls those Righteous that have it, their having sinned
notwithstanding.

2. To show what it is and in what it consists.

3. How it comes to be such.

1. That there is a Righteousness found among men which the Scripture calls so,
and calls those Righteous which have it, notwithstanding all the world stand
guilty before God of unrighteousness, and are concluded under sin, according to
the first Law we were under. This is a thing so well known to those that read
the Scriptures or hear them read, that it is needless to cite particular Texts
to prove it. We shall find that good men such as are justified, are called the
Righteous or the Just, no less I think than fourscore times in the Books of
Psalms and Proverbs, besides so many other places, as are not easily to be
numbered.

2. That which is more necessary is to show what this Righteousness is, and
wherein it does consist. In general it consists in our conformity to the
terms of the Gospel, the new Covenant or Law of Grace. As man's Natural and
Original Righteousness stood in a conformity in his nature and actions to the
Original Law of Righteousness, from which we are fallen: And as the Mediatorial
Righteousness of Christ consists in his conformity to the Law of Mediation;
so does the Evangelical Righteousness of a Christian stand in his conformity to
the terms of the new Law of Grace. And therefore as the Gospel it self is
frequently called the Faith, and sometimes the Law of Faith, as being both the
Object and the Rule of the Christian Faith; so is a Christians conformity to
it, frequently styled likewise, the Righteousness of Faith and the
Righteousness by Faith, and the obedience of Faith. Romans 3.22. and 4.11, 13.
and 9.30. and 10.6. Gal. 5.5. Phil. 3.9. Romans 16.26.

Now this conformity to the Gospel which God counts to us for Righteousness,
does consist in a hearty belief or firm persuasion that God upon the account of
what Christ our Mediator has suffered and done for sinners, will receive such
into his favor, pardon and save them, as upon such a belief do truly repent
them of their sins, and seriously resolve and sincerely endeavor to please God
for the future, in the whole course of their lives; and in actual resolutions
and endeavors suitable to this belief. This belief or persuasion when it
becomes thus practical in operations proper to the nature of such a persuasion;
as it is then the true Christian Faith, so it is then also the Christians
Righteousness; for it is imputed, reckoned and counted to them for
Righteousness, as the Scripture shows.

It Is true, Abraham is said to have had this Righteousness (Romans 4.11.) and
Noah to be an heir of it, Heb. 11.7. And yet we cannot say that they had any
such explicit Faith in reference to Christ the Mediator, as the meanest
Christian has under the Gospel Revelation. And yet their Faith in the general
nature of it, was the same then with the Christians now. For they had such
Revelations made by God one way or other, by which they did believe him to be
reconcilable and propitious to all such as fear and love him, and sincerely
endeavor to please him. And upon this Principle doubtless it was, that they
and other good men in those elder times, lived such holy and virtuous lives, as
has procured them upon public Record, honor and renown for Righteous men,
unto all Generations. For so says that sacred Author speaking of them Heb.
11.39. These all received a good report through Faith. Thus Abel obtained
witness even from God himself that he was Righteous, by reason of his Faith in
God, in conjunction with what he did by virtue of his Faith, Heb. 11.4. And
when the Scripture says (Jam. 2.) of some of these that they were justified
not only by their Faith but also by their Works: the meaning I doubt not is,
that they were approved of by God as Righteous men upon the account of both.

It Is true indeed Righteous and Holy men are frequently described by their fear
of God, and by their love and obedience to him, without mentioning their Faith;
as at other times they are described by their Faith, without mentioning their
fear, love or obedience. And the reason seems to be this, because where any one
of these is in truth, there are the other also. No man truly fears God or loves
and obeys him, but he that has first Faith toward God that he is Gracious,
Merciful and ready to forgive the repenting and reforming sinner: without which
Faith, it is impossible to love him or reverence him with an awful love. There
is forgiveness with him that he may be feared: feared with a fear mixed with
love, as the right fear of God always is. Psalm. 130.4.

Now this their fear of God, love to him and care to please him which grows out
of their Faith, is as I say their Righteousness as well as their Faith it self
more strictly considered; because their conformity to the Law of Grace, which
is their Righteousness, consists in these as well as in that, and the same
promises are made to these as to that. He that does Righteousness is Righteoas.
1 John 3.7. All his transgressions which he has committed, they shall not be
mentioned unto him: in his Righteousness which he has done, he shall live,
Ezekiel. 18.22.

And when I say that our conformity to the terms of the Law of Grace is our
Righteousness, it is to be understood of such a conformity as is hearty and
sincere, and in the inward man as well as the outward, though otherwise it be
not indefective in respect of extent and degree. For therein lies the
difference between the perfect Legal Righteousness, and the Evangelical. The
Legal Righteousness stood in a perfect and indefective conformity to whatever
God commanded or the Law of Nature required of man. But the Evangelical
Righteousness stands in a hearty and sincere desire, resolution and endeavor
in a man to conform to all that God requires, in conjunction with repentance
for defects, and in affiance in Gods Mercy through Christ for forgiveness.
Although the best man living does not perhaps keep any one of Gods Commandments
in a Legal sense, yet the meanest sincere Christian keeps them all in an
Evangelical sense; that is, in sincerity of resolution and endeavor. He
prepares him self to do his Masters will, as our Savior speaks, Luke 12.47.
by resolving and endeavoring to do it as well as he can, and by making use of
all due means and helps to that end. And in this sense good men are in
Scripture said to keep Gods Charge, his Commandments, his Statutes and his
Laws, Genesis 26.5. 2 Samuel 22.22. 1 Kings 14.8. 2 Kings 18.6. Job 23.11. Psalm.
119.22, 55, 56, 67, 68. Luke 1.6. Not that they did so in the Legal sense: For
so, there is not a just man upon earth that does good and sins not, Eccles.
7.10. But they are said to keep the Commandments in respect of the sincerity of
their endeavor, doing as well as they can. They follow after Righteousness,
and by this good men are described in Scripture, and God is said to love such
as do so. Pro. 15.9. and 21.21. Isa. 51.1. They still labor to do and to grow
better and better: and this sincerity of endeavor proceeding from a Principle
of Faith, is it by which men in Scripture are denominated Righteous: for more
than this I cannot-say is found in any man, and less than this I cannot say
will denominate any man to be a good tnd Righteous man.

Our endeavors do not indeed of themselves and without the assistance of Gods
Holy Spirit, make us of unrighteous to become Righteous. But when ever men are
persuaded in their own minds to begin with honest endeavors to do their duty
as well as they can, and to make use of Gods appointed means to help them
therein, they will be sure of the assistance of Gods Holy Spirit to carry the
work through. For God will give the Holy Spirit to those that ask him. Luke
11.13. and will work in them to will and to do well, while they are working out
their own Salvation by their endeavors, Phil. 2.12, 13. To him that has a
heart thus to begin well in using his first Talents which he has from God, to
him more shall be given by the Spirit of God, and he shall have abundance, Mat.
25.29.

This kind of Righteousness which we call Evangelical, is mentioned in
Scripture under several forms of speech, yet all signifying the same thing in
the main, to wit, the truth and reality of Grace in the sight of God. It is
called unfeigned Faith, godly Sincerity, holiness of Truth, a laboring to have
always a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward men, uprightness of
Heart, truth in the inward parts, integrity, perfectness of heart, and the
like. And when we find in Scripture the promises of Pardon and Salvation made
to Faith, repentance and obedience indefinitely, I think we may safely
conclude, they are made to such in whom these are realy and indeed, though but
in the lowest degree of sincerity; and consequently sequently that such are in
the number of Righteous persons.

But then though the truth and sincerity of Grace in the lowest degree, will
denominate those that have it, Righteous men, yet that which is truly such, how
weak soever it be in the beginning, is of a growing nature. And the reason
hereof is evident, because where men do their best endeavors from time to
time; use and exercise will make them more and more perfect in their way; the
repetition of acts first begetting and then increasing habits, and both
together tending to more and more perfection in the Christian course. Just as
it is with persons in their learning any Art or Trade: though the beginning be
but small, yet the latter end will greatly increase; to allude to that in Job.
The Divine Principle of Grace, which is the seed of God in the Soul, which
brings forth the Harvest of a good Life, being in the nature of it contrary to
fleshly lusts, will be still heaving at them to extirpate and drive them out,
and aspiring after a perfect state in holiness, hungering and thirsting after
Righteousness, upon which account the way of the Just is as the shining light,
which shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18.

By the way then let it be observed how easy the Yoke of Christ our Savior
is, and how light his Burden, when he has made the condition of obtaining the
pardon of sin and Eternal Life, no harder than to repent, that we have been in
Rebellion against our Maker to our own undoing, and seriously to resolve and
sincerely to endeavor to desist from all acts of disobedience for the future,
and to do the best we can to please him in observing those reasonable Laws of
his Kingdom and Government, that are ordained for our own good, for the peace
and satisfaction of our own minds, for the preservation of the health of our
bodies, and for the innocent enjoyments of other the comforts of this life: for
the peace likewise, order and concord of public Communities of men both in
Church and State, while every one is thereby ordered to keep his own rank and
to act in his own Sphere; and to prepare us by observing them, for the
enjoyment of a blessed immortality after all this: And likewise observe how
unreasonable and void of all judgment and discretion it is for men to deprive
themselves of all these advantages, and wilfully and desperately to run upon
their own ruin, when all might so easily be prevented, as by subjecting to the
easy Yoke and gentle Government of Christ, who reckons our hearty and sincere
endeavors in obeying him, for obedience.

3. How this Righteousness comes to be such; to be accounted and accepted for
Righteousness: and it is so upon a double account at least.

1. It is of the Grace of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ that it is so, it is
by way of donation or free gift, without consideration had of any thing in us
that should render us worthy of such a favor but the contrary. It does not
make the benefit the less of Grace to us, in that it is bestowed on us through
Christ, or for his sake; nor the less of Grace in God, because the
Righteousness of Christ his obedient suffering upon account whereof this gift
or grant is made us, was the effect of Gods gracious design of benefit unto us:
It was by the grace of God that he tasted death for every man, as we are told,
Heb. 2.9. and consequently all the good that does accrue to us by it, must be
of Grace.

That the introduction of this Evangelical Righteousness we speak of, was of
mere Grace and free gift, appears Romans 5.17. where this effect of Gods Grace is
called the gift of Righteousness. And in that Verse and in the Verse before and
after, it is called the gift or free gift no less than four times. Not as it
was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the judgment was by one unto
condemnation; but the free gift was of many offenses unto justification. For if
by one man's offense death reigned by one; much more they that receive abundance
of Grace and of the gift of Righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus
Christ. Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; even so by the Righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men unto the justification of life. And in verse. 21. Grace is said to reign
through Righteousness to life, as sin had reigned unto death. In these Verses
St. Paul shows, that if the offense of Adam were of force to involve his whole
Race in condemnation, that then the Grace of God and the gift by Grace through
Christ the second Adam and upon account of his Righteousness, will be much more
available to the justification and pardon of all men, upon supposition they
receive this gift of being Righteous with that Righteousness. And let it be
noted, that the free gift here mentioned, and the Righteousness of one Jesus
Christ, are not the same, but the one the effect of the other: it is by the
Righteousness of one Christ Jesus, that the free gift of Righteousness came
upon all men unto justification of life. That is as I conceive, this free gift
of accounting men Righteous, if they receive it upon the terms of the giver, is
granted unto all men otherwise sinners, upon the account of the Righteousness
of Christ, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his Grace through the
Redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Here also we see that it is of free Grace
that God approves of men as Just and does adjudg them Righteous, which is his
Justifying of them: it is freely of Grace though it be through the Redemption
that is in Christ Jesus or for the sake of his Mediatory obedience, Tit. 3.6.
Being justified by his Grace, etc.

And when this Righteousness of Faith is said as it is, to be a Righteousness
imputed or a Righteousness that is accounted for such, it implies, nay argues,
that it is so in a way of grace and favor, and not in stirctness of justice.
As on the contrary not to impute sin when sin has been committed, signifies to
deal with such persons in a way of grace and favor, and not according to the
rigor of strict justice. 2 Samuel 19.19. 2 Cor. 5.19. As not to impute our
trespasses to us when we repent of them and strive against them, though
otherwise we are not without all sin, is purely an act of grace and of high
favor in God: even so for him to impute Righteousness to us when we sincerely
endeavor to be Righteous, though otherwise we be not without all sin, is an
act of the same grace likewise. This Righteousness of Faith, it is not a
natural Righteousness as Adams was while he kept his integrity, but it is so
merely in the account of grace and favor. It is a Righteousness by Divine
institution, not otherwise of it self so: its being so depends upon the grace
and good will of God that has appointed it so to be, and to be accepted and to
pass in account for such. For which reason I conceive it is frequently called
the Righteousness of God, Romans 1.17. and 3.21. 2 Cor. 5.21. The Righteousness
of God which is by Faith, Romans 3.22. Phil. 3.9. as noting it to be a
Righteousness of his ordaining, proceeding from his Grace, in opposition to
men's own Righteousness, which is or is conceited to be a Righteousness
Naturally and of it self, as the Pharisaical Jews fancied their Righteousness
of the Law to be. By grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. That is, it is by Grace, and by virtue
of the donation of God, that we are saved by Faith or the Righteousness of
Faith, and that we have such a Faith or Righteousness of Faith to be saved by.

2. It is by the Gospel or Covenant of Grace, that this Righteousness of Faith
is revealed and conveyed to us for such, and stated and settled for such as by
a Law. This way of accounting men that have been and are sinners, to be
Righteous upon their believing, is not known by any Natural Light, because it
is not a Natural Righteousness, but is purely matter of supernatural
Revelation, as it is in it self supernatural Grace. I am not ashamed of the
Gospel, says St. Paul, For therein is the Righteousness of God revealed from
Faith to Faith, as it is written the just shall live by Faith, Romans 1.17, And
again, Now is the Righteousness of God manifested without the Law, to wit, by
the Gospel, Romans 3.21. It is by this Gospel or Covenant, that Faith is ordained
to be our Righteousness, and settled for such as by a Law, which therefore is
called the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27. And the Gospel which conveys this Grace to
us, is frequently called the Grace of God, the word of his Grace, and the
Gospel of the Grace of God. Tit. 2.11. Acts 14.3. and 20.24.

The Messiah according to what was Prophesied, has brought in everlasting
Righteousness, by the everlasting Covenant, the everlasting Gospel; which was
not in the world after the fall, but by his bringing in, Dan. 9.24.

By all this it appears; that the Covenant operates to our Justification, as it
gives being from God and our Lord Jesus Christ, unto that Covenant
Righteousness, which is the matter of our Justification: it is that by which
God does institute this Righteousness: for it is a Righteousness by institution
and not naturally such, as I have showed. What it does in this kind, it does it
by virtue of Gods designation of it to that Office, and not by its own innate
virtue and intrinsic worth or merit.

When I say this Righteousness of Faith is not naturally and of it self such; I
do not mean that those fruits of the Spirit of which it does consist, have not
in them the true nature of goodness and holiness, for that they have; but that
these are not in Righteous men themselves (that yet are Evangelically
Righteous) without all mixture of that which deserves not the name of holiness
and goodness, nor they without unrighteousness, antecedent to this, and before
they had repented: and therefore is not such a complete Righteousness as would
hold measure according to the standard of the Law of innocence, if we were to
be tried by that, to be Justified, or Condemned by that. In this regard the
best of us have cause with the Psalmist to cry out and say, If thou Lord
should work iniquity, O Lord who shall stand? Psalm. 130.3. It is indeed a
growing Righteousness, that is by degrees growing up toward a perfect state:
such in whom it is, are perfecting holiness in the fear of God. But before it
is grown to this perfect state, it is in the account of grace and by way of
favor and for Christ's sake, accepted and approved by God for such
Righteousness, as unto which he has promised the pardon of all past offenses,
and of all such after infirmities as are consistent with this
Covenant-Righteousness in its lower degree, and also eternal Life it self. So
that in a word this thing we call everlasting Righteousness by which we are
Justified, owes it self its very being such a Righteousness as it is, unto the
Covenant of Grace, or that Grace of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is
put into a Covenant for us.

3. The Covenant operates to our Justification, as being the rule by which
those are justified in judgment to be Righteous persons, such as to whom the
promise of pardon and eternal life is made, that are justified at all.
Righteousness as I have formerly showed, receives its denomination as it does
its nature, from its conformity to some Law. And this Covenant-Righteousness
the Righteousness of Faith, receives its denomination from its Conformity to
the Covenant of Grace, as being that qualification in the person, on condition
of which the promises of the Covenant are made, and therefore every man that is
Justified, is Justified by this Law to be such a person as to whom the promises
are made. It is by this Law that such a person is Justified in his cause: if a
man be not a Just and Righteous person in the sense of this Law, he will not be
Justified by God; for he judges of men and their cause by this Law. Jam. 2.12.
So speak ye and so do as they that shall be judged by the Law of liberty: that
is the Gospel or Covenant of Grace. And our Savior says, The word that I have
spoken, the same shall judge you in the last day, John 12.48.

4. The Covenant operates to our Justification, as an instrument of making us
to become Righteous, and so capable subjects of Justification. And this it does
by way of motive or persuasion. The great and precious promises made to men in
this Covenant, of pardon of sin and eternal Life, on condition of the
Righteousness of Faith, Sobriety, Righteousness and Godliness and not
otherwise; they out of a desire and love to the benefits promised, are
persuaded to embrace the condition without which they cannot enjoy them, that
is, to become Righteous. The Gospel ministration is called the ministration of
Righteousness, 2 Cor. 3.9. And it is so both as it ministers to us the knowledge
that there is another Righteousness than that which is of the Law, and also as
it ministers to us powerful motives and assistances to follow after
Righteousness, by which they become Righteous and so to be Justified. St. Paul
says, The Gospel is the power of God to Salvation, in as much as therein the
Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith, Romans 1.16, 17. the terms
on which God will account them Righteous, and the motives to make them so,
these are revealed by the Gospel, by which it becomes the power of God to
Salvation to those that believe it. The Gospel is a ministration of
Righteousness and of Justification, as it is the ministration of
Reconciliation, of reconciling us to God, of reconciling our nature to the holy
nature of God, and to his holy Laws, by making us partakers of a Divine Nature,
a God-like Nature, in Holiness and Goodness, which is done by the great and
precious promises of the Gospel, of pardon and eternal Life, as powerful
motives persuading men to become new creatures in order to the obtaining these
great benefits promised and attainable only upon condition of such our
reconciliation to God, which puts us into a perfect capacity of Justification,
that is, of being approved of as those who have performed the condition of the
foresaid promised benefits. Thus the Gospel is called the word of
reconciliation, which was committed to the Apostles and others, and their
Ministry the ministry of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18.19. And by a practical
knowledge and belief of these things revealed by the Gospel, men come to be
justified, that is, approved of as those that have known, believed and obeyed
the Gospel. By his knowledge, says God concerning Christ, shall my righteous
servant justify many, Isa. 53.11. That is, by the knowledge of him in what he
is, has done and suffered, revealed and taught.

What the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, as to free
us from the Law of sin, and to bring us to that Righteousness which it did
design but could not effect, that is now done by the Law of the spirit of Life
which is in Christ Jesus, to wit, the Gospel. The Law without the Gospel, could
not give us that assurance of Gods willingness to be reconciled to us, and of
pardon upon repentance, which the Gospel does; much less of a glorious reward
of new obedience. For the promise of pardon for Christ's sake upon our
repentance, the promise of the Resurrection of the Body, and of the Celestial
Glory, are brought to light by the Gospel, being matters of supernatural
Revelation. Now it is the great assurance which the Gospel gives us of these
things upon the account of Christ's death, that is the powerful motive of
prevailing with men to be reconciled to God and to become Evangelically
Righteous that they may be Justified. And therefore the preaching of the Cross,
is said to be to them that are saved, the power of God and for wisdom of God. 1
Cor. 1.18, 24. That is, it contains and lays open Gods most wise contrivance of
reconciling sinners to himself, and by that means becomes his powerful motive
of drawing men to it, that so they may be Justified, Pardoned and Glorified:
The Law made nothing perfect, it is the bringing in of this better hope by the
Gospel that does it. Heb. 7.19. The Law which laid a burden of strict obedience
upon men, backed with severe threatenings in case of transgression, prevailed
little upon men, but to keep them under a spirit of bondage to fear, while they
were unacquainted with the rich grace and indulgence of the Gospel, by which
the Yoke of Christ is rendered easy and his burden light. The Gospel prevails
much more upon men when they heartily believe it, by proclaiming pardon to all
repentant sinners, and immense rewards to such as shall with honest minds give
up themselves to Christ to be his Disciples to learn of him by his Doctrine and
Example, how to live a sober, righteous and a godly Life: And by promising
Divine assistance as well as vast rewards, and acceptance of honest and sincere
endeavors; and by making allowances for such frailties and defects both in
knowledge and practice, as will consist with uprightness of heart toward God.
And thus I have shown how the Gospel operates to our Justification, as a great
and effectual means of bringing us to become Evangelically Righteous, without
which we cannot be Justified by having that Righteousness imputed to us, and by
being approved of as Righteous upon the account of it.

CHAP. IV. Of Faith and how that operates to our Justification.
THat Faith does operate to our Justification, we are perfectly assured by the
frequent and express notice thereof we have from the Scriptures, such as Romans
3.30. and 5.1. Gal. 2.16. and others. And Faith operates to our Justification
as it is the performance of that condition upon which the great and precious
promises of the Gospel Covenant are made. For the Covenant consists chiefly of
two parts, to wit, the promises which God makes of bestowing benefits on us
through Christ, and of the condition upon which these promises are made; which
condition is summarily comprised in Faith or believing.

But before I proceed further to speak of Faith, I think it not inconvenient
here to premise to what is to be said about Faith, as the condition of the
Gospel Covenant, somewhat to show that the promises of pardon and eternal Life,
are conditional. The Gospel Covenant is directly suited to that Mediatory
undertaking of Christ, by which the Covenant it self was obtained, and on which
it was founded. Now I have showed formerly, that Christ died for all men
indeed, but yet it was but to obtain a conditional pardon for all men, and
other benefits consequent upon it. He did not die to procure that God should be
reconciled to them that should always refuse to be reconciled to him, but to
obtain their pardon and restoration to the favor of God, upon condition of
their being persuaded to be reconciled to him. And truly the Covenant of Grace
holds an exact proportion to the Covenant of Redemption or Law of Mediation, by
the fulfilling of which by Christ, the Gospel Covenant, as I said, was
obtained. As our Savior died for all, to put all into a capacity of being
pardoned and saved, in case they should not persist finally in rebellion
against God, so the Covenant of Grace promises pardon and salvation, just upon
the same terms and not otherwise. For the Gospel denounces a being punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of
his power, against all those that know not God and which obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ. So that when we compare the general promise, and
threatenings in the Gospel together, we are put upon a necessity of
understanding the promise in a conditional sense, otherwise the promise and
threatening would be inconsistent.

And indeed the promise of those great benefits, seldom if ever are found
without the condition annexed, either expressly or by plain intimation. The
gracious declaration of the Gospel runs thus. And you that were sometime
alienated and enemies in your minds by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled
in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblamable and
unreproveable in his sight, [if] ye continue in the Faith grounded and settled;
and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel. Col. 1.21, 22, 23. If ye
live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through spirit do mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8.13. If ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will forgive you: but if ye forgive not men
their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive your trespasses.
Mat. 6.14, 15. If we walk in the light as he is in the light, then have we
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all sin, 1 John 1.7. These conditional particles [if] plainly express the
conditional nature of the promises, yea, and of the threatenings too. The
promises are not made to such or such men by name, but to all men under such or
such a qualification; as to those that believe, to those that repent, to those
that obey the truth. Which qualification specifies the condition on which, and
so the persons to which such promises belong. This is a thing so plain
throughout the Scripture from end to end, that more need not be said of it.

Having premised thus much, I shall now proceed to show how Faith operates to
our Justification: and in order to our better understanding what influence
Faith has in our Justification, we will enquire into these particulars.

1. How it appears that Faith is the condition of the promise of pardon and
eternal Life.

2. What that Faith is.

3. Why it is made the condition of the promises.

4. In what capacity men are to perform that condition.

5. How more particularly it operates to our Justification.

1. That Faith is the condition on which pardon of sin and eternal Life are
promised in the Gospel, is so plain that nothing more need to be said to make
it evident, than only to point to the express letter of the Scripture in this
case. For pardon of sin; this is promised on condition of believing, Acts
10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. And so is eternal Life
promised on the same terms, John 3.16. God so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish but have
everlastiug Life. If these promises are made to believers as such, as we see
they are, then believing must needs be the condition on which they are made.
This is past contradiction, Jo. 3.36. Acts 16.31.

2. Consider we next then, what that Faith or believing is which is the
condition on which the promised benefits, remission of sin and eternal Life are
suspended. And without all doubt it is not only a speculative, but a practical
belief: It is a hearty assent of the mind to the truth of the Gospel, and a
sincere consent in the will to live according to the Laws and Precepts of it.
The same thing, the same Faith for substance, is in Scripture described by
different Phrases. Sometimes it is described by a believing the record of God
concerning his Son Christ Jesus, 1 John 5.10, 11. Sometimes by a believing Jesus
to be the Christ the Son of God, John 20.31. 1 John 5.1.5. And sometimes by a
believing of the Gospel, a believing of the truth, a believing of the testimony
of the Apostles of our Savior, Mark 16.15, 16. 2 These. 1.10. and 2.13.

And it is no marvail the same Faith should be thus diversely expressed, since a
believing of any one of these, includes in it a belief of them all, and so does
a belief of the Resurrection of Christ, by which this Faith is also sometimes
described, Romans 10.9. For he that believes the Record of God concerning Christ,
cannot but believe him to be the Son of God, because that is the thing which
the Father Almighty has more than once testified by a voice from Heaven Mat.
3.17. and 17.5. And he who believes Christ to be the Son of God, must needs
believe his doctrine, which is the Gospel, to be true. As on the other hand,
whoever believes the Gospel, must needs believe Christ to be the Son of God,
because it testifies so much of him; and likewise because it sets forth those
many stupendous Miracles which he wrought, and how the ancient predictions of
the Prophets concerning the Messiah were fulfilled in him, and also his
Miraculous Resurrection from the dead: by all which he is demonstrated to be
the Son of God.

Now then whosoever rightly believes the doctrine of our Savior contained in
the Gospel, and of his Apostles concerning him, do believe that he died for our
sins and rose again, and that repentance or amend meant of life and obedience to
the Precepts of our Savior, are indispensibly necessary to the obtaining of
remission of sin and eternal Life by his Death, Resurrection and Intercession.
And the reason hereof is, because these things are declared to be so in that
Gospel which is so believed. And therefore whosoever does believe he shall be
saved by Christ's death from the wrath to come, though he does not truly and
sincerely make it his business to amend his life according to the Precepts of
our Savior, believes not the Gospel, but believes that which is a flat
contradiction to it, and is like those of whom the Apostle says, they profess
that they know God, but in works they deny him. Tit. 1.16.

Or if any man should believe this amendment of life to be necessary to the
obtaining Remission of sin and Salvation by the death of Christ: Yet what would
this belief avail him, if he himself should not by this belief become a new man
in holiness, righteousness, and sobriety of living? It is not any man's
believing the most important and concerning truth, that will avail him before
God, further than it tends to make him better, to make him a good man. The
Devils we find confessed Christ, saying, thou art Christ the Son of God, Luke
4.41. the same form of words almost verbatim, in which the Apostles of our
Savior made confession of their Faith, John 6.69. And St. James says, the
Devils believe and tremble, Chap. 2.19. But what are they the better for it, so
long as they retain the same devilish nature which they had before? Nor can we
say that men's Faith will any more save them than the Devils Faith saves Devils,
whatever it is which is believed, unless that belief makes them better men in
heart and Life. If a man believe aright and understands what it is he believes,
he can hardly be any more careless of acting according to his belief, than he
is careless of obtaining the pardon of his sin and the Salvation of his Soul.

A right saving belief of the Gospel then, has in it the spirit and seed of a
good life: it has in it virtually and potentially, all pious and virtuous
actions. And all pious and virtuous actions that proceed from Faith, are as I
may so say, but Faith diversified in several acts, and are a part of Faith, as
the fruit that grows upon a Tree, is part of the Tree. And to make this appear
in some instances; all those noble and generous acts of the Patriarchs and
other Worthies mentioned in Hebrews the 11th. Chapter, did all grow out of
their Faith, for by Faith they did them all. All the good report which they
obtained upon account of their Heroic actions, is attributed to their Faith by
which they did atchieve them: these all having obtained a good report through
Faith, etc. Ver. 39.

More particularly, the Author of this Epistle to the Hebrews in Ver. 5. of
this 11th. Chapter proves that it was by Faith that Enoch was translated,
because he had this testimony, that before he was translated he pleased God (or
walked with God, as his History relates it, Genesis 5.) which as he shows was
impossible for him to have done, if he had not had Faith: for says he, without
Faith it is impossible to please God. So that we see the same thing is
attributed to the Righteousness of his life in walking with God, as is to his
Faith which produced that effect, viz. that thereby he pleased God. And so it
is said of Noah, Ver. 7. that by faith he being warned of God of things not
seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark to the saving of his house, by
which action of his in conjunction with his Faith, he became heir of the
Righteousness which is by Faith. It is said of Abraham also, Ver. 17. that by
Faith he offered up Isaac. And it is said by St. James that by this good work
of his, the fruit of his Faith among others, he was Justified, Jam. 2.21. And
not only so, but that therein the Scripture was fulfilled which says, Abraham
believed God and it was counted to him for Righteousness, Ver. 23. which shows
that when the Scripture says, Genesis 15.6. that Abraham's believing God was
counted to him for Righteousness, it was meant of his Faith as it was a vital
principle of sincere obedience to God in whatever he commanded him, else that
Scripture would not have been fulfilled in Abraham's offering up Isaac, and in
his being justified thereby as well as by his Faith. The like is said of Rahab,
that by faith she perished not with them that believed not, when she had
received the spies in peace, Heb. 11.31. And St. James says, that she was
Justified by this work which was the fruit of her Faith, Jam. 2.25. So that we
see in the Scripture-notion of Faith, to have Faith counted to us for
Righteousness, and to have acts of obedience proceeding from Faith to be
counted for Righteousness in conjunction with the Faith it self, is the same
thing. And to be Justified by Faith, and to be Justified by those acts of
obedience which are the issue of Faith in conjunction with the Faith it self,
is still the same thing in the sense of holy Scripture. All this is to show
what and what manner of Faith it is that is the condition on the which pardon
of sin and eternal Life are promised in the Gospel Covenant, and by which we
are Justified, and which is counted for Righteousness.

And for our greater confirmation in this, and to show further that no Faith
can entitle us to the promises of the Covenant, the promise of pardon and the
promise of eternal Life, but such a practical Faith as I have described,
consider these following particulars.

1. If none can be pardoned but such as repent, nor see the Kingdom of God,
except they be born again, as the Scripture assures us they cannot: then no
Faith can entitle us to Pardon and Salvation, as it is a fulfilling the
condition of the promises of the Covenant, but such as is a penitential
regenerating Faith, such as works repentance and regeneration in men, nor till
it has wrought these effects at least as begun. I cannot imagine what can be
said with any show of reason against this argument.

2. St. James argues, that Faith which has not works cannot save, Ver. 12. and
concludes his reasoning, Ver. 24. with saying, Ye see then how that by Works a
man is Justified, and not by Faith only,

3. Faith and Obedience are so much the same, or at least so inseparable when
saving, as that the same Greek word is indifferently translated to believe or
to obey: and so on the contrary the same word is translated unbelief or
disobedience. Instances of this nature you have in Acts 5.36. Romans 11.30, 31.
Ephesians. 5.6. Heb. 4.11. and 11.31. in all which you have the same word
translated one way in the line reading, and another in the margin. And belief
and disobedience are likewise opposed to each other as contraries, as well as
faith and unbelief are, and as well as obedience and disobedience are, as you
may see for instance, in Romans 10.16. 1 Pet. 2.7. 2 These. 2.12. By all which we
may reasonably judge, that when Faith only is mentioned as the condition on
which pardon and eternal Life are promised, yet then it is to be understood of
a practical obediential Faith.

4. The same benefits, pardon of sin and eternal Life, are promised upon the
condition of obedience in some Scriptures, which are promised on condition of
believing in others. As for instance, If we walk in the light as he is in the
light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. Here assurance is given us of being
purged from the guilt of sin by the blood of Christ, in case we walk in the
light as God is in the light, laboring to be holy as God is holy, in all
manner of conversation. And Christ is the Author of eternal Salvation to all
them that obey him. Heb. 5.9. And blessed are they that do his Commandments,
that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter through the gates
into the City, Revel. 22.14. Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in
Heaven, Mat. 7.21. Now if holy obedience be made the condition of the promise
of Pardon and Life, as well as Faith, as we see it is, then none but an
obediential Faith, can be a performance of the condition of that promise. By an
obediential Faith, I mean such a Faith as by which a man is moved and inclined,
and in some sort enabled to do what is his present duty, so far as he
understands it to be so. And in this sense a man's Faith and his obedience are
of the same date, and commence together. And therefore it is no marvel that the
same promise of the same benefits is made to the one which is made to the
other, and that both are joined in the condition.

5. In Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. where we have the tenor of the new Covenant
declared, God promises to be a God only to such, and to forgive the iniquities
only of such as have his Law put into their minds and written in their hearts.
Where Faith is not at all mentioned as the condition of receiving those
benefits, but the having the Law written in the heart. Though the having the
Law written in the heart supposes Faith, I grant, as a productive cause of it,
yet we see it is not the condition of the promised benefits, otherwise than as
it produces such an effect, which effect is only here mentioned, and not Faith
which is the cause.

6. When saving Faith is described by the nature of its operation upon a man
himself, and not only as it acts upon its object without him, then we are
told it purifieth the heart, Act. 15.9. works by love, Gal. 5.6. overcomes
the world, 1 John 5.4. and sanctifies the whole man, Acts 26.18. And therefore
we have no good reason to think Faith is a fulfilling the condition of the
promise only as it acts upon its object by way of credence or assent, or
affiance either, without its transforming operation upon the Soul.

3. The next thing to be enquired into, is the reason why Faith is made the
condition of the promises of the Gospel Covenant. And the reasons hereof seem
to be such as these.

1. Faith is made the condition of the promise, that it might appear to be of
grace that such promise is made, and made upon such a condition as faith is.
St. Paul having spoken of the promise being made through the Righteousness of
Faith, and not through the Righteousness of the Law, Romans 4.13. He gives the
reason of it, Verse 16. when he says, It is therefore of Faith that it might be
by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed, not to that
only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the Faith of Abraham. In
which words we have a general reason why Faith is made the condition of the
Promise, and that is, that it might be by Grace. And another is given in a
particular instance, viz. that the promise might be sure to all the seed.

There is a double reason why it must needs be of Grace that the great Promises
of the Gospel are made to men's believing the Gospel. The one is taken from the
nature of the thing, that is, of Faith it self in reference and relation to its
object. For he that believes the Gospel, believes that the great blessings and
benefits promised therein, are promised not for any merit of his to whom they
are promised, but for the sake of another, to wit, Christ Jesus, whom God has
set forth for a propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. And he that
believes the Gospel according to what it reveals, believes also that it was of
Grace that he was thus made a propitiation: for it was by the Grace of God that
he tasted death for every man. Heb. 2.9. Not by works of Righteousness which we
have done, but according to his mercy he saved us. Tit. 3.5. And whoever
believes all this, exalts the grace of God in so believing. St. Paul, who
believed and taught this in opposition to the misbelieving Jews, who thought to
be justified by the works of the Law, without the death of the Messiah to
obtain that and all other benefits, said, I do not frustrate the grace of God;
for if righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. Gal. 2.21.
Thus he by his Faith and Doctrine, according to it, in believing and teaching
Justification by the death of Jesus Christ, did not frustrate but exalt the
grace of God. Faith then in the very nature of it, does own the promise of all
benefits to be of Grace, when made to such as by sin had forfeited all.

The other reason why it must needs be of Grace that the Promise is made upon
condition of Faith, is this; because our believing that another, to wit,
Christ, has by his own suffering, and intercession for us, obtained pardon and
life upon condition of our being reconciled to God, cannot without believing a
contradiction be thought to merit these benefits; but that the Promise and the
benefits promised, and their being promised on such a condition as an
obediential Faith is, must needs be all of Grace, and cuts off all occasion of
boasting; For Christ is made to us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, to the end that he that glories may glory in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31. And it is by grace that we are saved through faith;
and not of works, lest any man should boast, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Where is boasting
then? It is excluded, by what Law? Of works? Nay but by the Law of faith, Romans
3.27.

Again, the Promise is therefore of Faith that it might be by Grace, to the end
that the promise might be sure to all the seed, as well of the Uncircumcision
as of the Circumcision. The Promise of Pardon and Life to the Gentiles the
greatest sinners, upon condition of repentance, is secured and made sure to
them by their believing, because the Promise so believed, is founded in the
death of Jesus Christ, in whom all the promises are Yea and Amen. For no man
can with the least appearance of reason imagine that the great God would ever
expose one so great and so greatly beloved by him as his holy Son is, to such
sufferings as he underwent to procure Pardon and Life for repentant sinners,
were he not fully and perfectly resolved to Pardon and save them upon their
repentance, notwithstanding all their sins they were guilty of before, how
heinous soever they may have been. Upon which account our Savior thus given by
the Father to such an end, is said to be surety of the new Covenant, Heb. 7.22.
that is, he is the great security which the great God has given to the world
of performing whatever he has promised us upon his Sons account in that
Covenant. God that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him freely give us all things? Romans 8.31. And now who sees
not but that this is an act of exceeding rich Grace in God, not only to resolve
to bestow upon the children of men such great things as he has promised, but
also to give them such a security for it as he has done, by giving his Son to
prepare the way for it?

Now the sense and comfort of all this Grace, and so our ascribing the glory of
it unto God and our Lord Jesus Christ, depends upon our believing these things.
And therefore God has entailed the Promise of benefits upon that Faith as a
condition, without which we can have no sense of all that grace of God expressed
in the Promise. And therefore well might the Apostle say, It is therefore of
Faith, that it might be by Grace.

Besides, the Promise appears to be of grace in reference to the condition on
which it is made, whether we consider the vast disproportion between the things
promised and the condition on which they are promised; or the easiness of the
condition it self. Considering what by sin we have deserved; it would have been
matter of Grace in God and great Grace too, if he had promised us no more but a
deliverance from the wrath to come, and that upon any possible condition,
though otherwise never so rigorous or hard to have been performed; as suppose
it had been the greatest severity the nature of man could undergo, to be
exercised by us on our own bodies. If this had been the case, yet herein there
would have been as much grace and favor showed us, as such temporary
severities would come short of eternal torments in Hell. And if this would have
been matter of grace, as most certain it would; how much more does it appear to
be so, when God has promised not only exemption from the vengeance of eternal
fire, but also to exalt our nature and to prefer us to an immortal happiness
and glory, far greater probably, than the happiness of an earthly Paradise
would have been, in case we had never sinned at all; and yet all this too upon
so easy a condition as Faith is. For easy it is in the attaining to it, if we
consider what provision God has made, and what assistances he is ready to
afford, to enable us to believe. And it is easy in its exercise and work, if we
consider what we are to do by virtue of it, which besides affiance in God and
our Savior, is but to abstain from that we had better be without than have,
though we should not be concerned in a future state in another world; and to do
no more, but what tends to the perfecting of our nature and the comfort of our
lives, besides the future glory; except in the case of persecution for
Righteousness sake. In such respects as these I have mentioned, it plainly
appears that Gods making of Faith to be the condition upon which his great
benefits are promised us, tends greatly to manifest the grace of God and our
Lord Jesus Christ, and to fill us with a sense of it, for which cause we see he
has chosen it to that office of being the condition of pardon of sin and
eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And one reason why God would have his own grace so manifest in all these his
proceedings and dealings with us, and why he would have us possessed with so
great a sense of it, is I conceive, because he knows this is the direct way of
reconciling us to himself, of making us to have good and honorable thoughts of
him, such as incline and dispose us to be reconciled to him. And this brings me
to another reason why Faith is made the condition of the great and precious
promises aforesaid, which is this.

2. Such a Faith as I have described, does best accommodate Gods design of
Grace toward us in reconciling us to himself by Jesus Christ, in order to our
happiness; which may be another reason why Faith is made the condition of the
promised benefits. There is a certain aptitude in Faith to reconcile us to God
and to produce that in us which is the matter of our Justification, as well as
of our reconciliation to God. And the reason hereof is, because the motives by
which men come to be persuaded to be reconciled to God, receive their strength
from Faith in one respect, as they do from the goodness of the nature of God
and his veracity in another.

I have intimated before that it is from an apprehension which men have of Gods
willingness to be reconciled to them, that inclines them to be reconciled to
him. While men look upon God as a resolved irreconcilable enemy to them; well
they may dread him as the Devils do, but cannot love him nor be reconciled to
him, no more perhaps than the Devils can. All the good thoughts of God, as of
one that delights not in our destruction, but concerns himself for our
salvation, and which any way incline us to be reconciled to him, take their
rise from those declarations which God has made to us of his willingness and
desire to be reconciled to us upon supposition of our willingness to be
reconciled to him. Hence it is that we are said to love God, because he first
loved us (1 John 4.19.) and to be reconciled to God by the death of his Son,
because God thereby commended his love to us while we were yet sinners, and
gave us an ample and full proof of his willingness to be reconciled to us, as
making way thereby for it, Romans 5.8, 9, 10. And thus God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself by assuring us of a readiness in him to be
reconciled to us, and not to impute to us our trespasses; supposing still that
we refuse not to be reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5.19. By this declared
willingness in God to be reconciled to us, and by his declared resolution not
only to pardon us, but also to exalt us in immortal glory, provided we refuse
not to be reconciled to him, but to punish us as obstinate rebels and
irreconcilable enemies, if we do: I say it is by these motives that men are
persuaded and prevailed withal to be reconciled to God; or to his nature, as
when they become pleased with the same things which please him, and displeased
with what is displeasing to him: and to his Law and Government, as when they
consent to the wisdom and goodness thereof, and accordingly submit to it as
best.

But then it is by means of Faith that these motives do affect us and operate
to our reconciliation to God. There is no other way to affect the soul with all
the great things which God and Christ have done for us, and conditionally
promised to us, but by means of this Faith. For we do not know that Christ is
the Son of God, or for what end he died, nor that God will both pardon and give
eternal Life to sinners upon condition of their being reconciled to him, but by
Divine Revelation: which Divine Revelation does not affect us or operate upon
us, further than it is believed. These motives not being sensible objects, have
no being in the soul and so no operation, till Faith give them a being there,
by giving credit to that doctrine by which they are Revealed. For Faith is the
substance or confidence of things hoped for, and the evidence or conviction of
things not seen, Heb. 11.1. We know and believe the love that God has to us, 1
John 4.16.

Faith, it is the great instrument of reconciling us to God, both as it acts
upon its object, and as it acts upon its subject. Divine Revelation is its
object, and by crediting that, the foresaid motives are received into the soul
as real things. And then Faith acts upon its subject, the soul it self in which
Faith dwells, by fixing the foresaid motives in the mind and working them into
the will, by which the work of reconciliation and conversion unto God is
wrought and brought about. In this way or in this respect, love to God,
obedience to his Precepts, and all divine virtues and holiness of Life, flow
from Faith. And therefore it is no marvel that Faith is mentioned in Scripture
as the summary condition on which the Promises of the Gospel are made. Hence we
may see the reason why sanctification is attributed to Faith, as it is, Acts
26.18. and more particularly the purity of the heart, love to God and men, and
victory over the world, Acts 15.9. Gal. 5.6. 1 John 5.4. Yea the whole of
Evangelical Righteousness of Godly sincerity both in heart and life, so often
styled the Righteousness of God, is said to be by Faith, as the next and
immediate productive cause of it, under the operation of the Spirit of God,
Phil. 3.9. Romans 3.22. This Faith therefore having such an aptitude in it as I
have showed, to reconcile us unto God by renewing our nature and conforming us
to him, without which Faith we could not by the great and precious promises
themselves, be made partakers of a divine nature, we may see reason enough why
it is made the condition of the promises of the Gospel.

3. By affiance in God and in our Lord Jesus Christ, which is one special act
of Faith, we give and ascribe unto God, as much as in us lies, the glory of his
attributes and the perfections of his nature, his truth and faithfulness,
power, wisdom and goodness: which may be another reason why this honor is by
God put upon Faith, so as to be accounted to us for Righteousness, and to be
made the condition of Gods making good to us the great promises of the Gospel,
forgiveness of sin and eternal Life. By this affiance we venture our selves
soul and body, and our whole concern for all eternity, upon the truth of Gods
word and promise, upon his faithfulness and power to perform it, and upon the
all sufficiency of Christ Jesus to be our Savior and Redeemer, when we commit
our selves and the conduct of our lives wholly to his Rule and Government, out
of a confident expectation of having Gods promise made good to us, and of the
sufficiency and prevalency of our Saviors performance for us. This trust and
confidence, God is pleased to take as such a piece of honor done to him, as
that the Scripture calls our receiving Gods testimony, a setting to our seal
that God is true, John 3.33. a justifying of God against the jealousies and
suspicions of men, and the reproach which their unbelief casts upon God, Luke
7.29. For he that believes not the record which God has given of his Son,
has made him a lier, 1 John 5.10. Thus Abraham gave glory to God when he
staggered not at his promise through unbelief, but was fully persuaded that
what he had promised he was able also to perform, Romans 4.20, 21. And in that he
did thus give glory to God in believing, this in the next words is given as the
reason why his Faith was imputed to him for Righteousness. Therefore, says he,
it was imputed to him for Righteousness, Ver. 22. And thus we see that God is
pleased to honor that most in men, to wit, their Faith, by which they most
honor him.

4. In what capacity those under the Gospel are, to perform the condition of
the promise by believing. For Faith is man's act, what ever the assistances are
by which he is enabled to perform it. With the heart man believes unto
Righteousness, says St. Paul, Romans 10.10. For our better understanding in what
capacity men are of believing, it will be necessary to consider, 1. What God
has done toward the working of Faith in men, antedecent to the act of
believing. 2. What man himself can do through the antecedent Grace of God,
toward his believing. 3. What subsequent Grace God does and will vouchsafe for
the perfecting the work of Faith, and carrying it quite through, unto such as
do not grossly neglect to do what they may and well can do, toward their own
believing, by using and improving the antecedent Grace of God.

1. That which God has done toward the raising of Faith in men antecedent to
any act of Faith in them, or of any endeavors of theirs toward such a thing,
is his vouchsafing unto them the Gospel, and the evidence of its Divinity, and
by it to reveal to them the things which are to be believed. And this we call
the objective Grace of God as well as the antecedent; and is that also which we
call preventive Grace. And in these respects the Gospel is sometimes styled the
Grace of God, and sometimes the Faith: for it is both the object of Faith, and a
means to raise it in men: For Faith comes by hearing it, Romans 10.17. In respect
of this preventive antecedent Grace, God is said to have offered Faith to all
men (so it is in the margent) in that he has raised Christ from the dead; that
is, to all to whom this is revealed by the Gospel, Acts 17.31. By this
Revelation God has vouchsafed unto all such as to whom it comes, means by
which they may come to believe, if they be not greatly wanting to themselves.

2. Consider we next what men themselves can do toward the raising of this
Faith in them by means of this antecedent objective Grace of God. 1. They can
hear this Gospel as well as any other subject of discourse which is offered to
their consideration, and this is one step toward their believing of it; for
Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. 2. They can consider the things they hear
from it, and that is another step toward believing. Thus the Bereans by
considering of and searching into the things they heard, came to believe, Acts
17.11, 12. They can consider whether they have not immortal souls to take care
of as well as mortal bodies, and whether there be not a future state after this
life: for of such things as these the Gospel treats. They can consider of such
reasons when they hear them, as tend to satisfy the mind and reason of man,
that there is such a future state. For Heathens by the Light of Nature without
the Revelation of the Gospel, came so far as to be persuaded of such a thing.
And when by considering they come to be persuaded either that there is such a
future state, or that it is far more probable that there is than that there is
not, then they can hardly forbear to consider and think more or less, what is
like to become of them in that future state. And upon supposition that they are
persuaded in their own minds that there is such a future state, they can no
more put off a desire of being happy in it, than they can put off nature it
self and cease to be men. They can discern a difference between moral good, and
evil in very many things, and the different tendency of them to their happiness
or misery in the future state. They cannot, though they would, think that evil
tends to the happiness, and good to the misery of that future state, but the
contrary. They can consider and think on such things as by which the Holy
Scripture directs to this happiness, as well as they can the Contents of other
Books. Before men have debauched their natures by a custom of sinning, there is
hardly any but have some such thoughts as these spring up more or less in their
minds. And to what degree they do so, they have a tendency to bring men to a
belief of the Gospel, and a good life, as I shall further show afterward,

3. The subsequent Grace of God and work of the Holy Spirit, is that by which
the former considerations which had some tendency to Faith, are heightened,
improved and carried on until such a Faith is produced in the soul, as is a
believing unto Righteousness. And this seems to be done chiefly in some such
way as this. First by presenting the objective Grace of God (the Gospel) more
frequently to their consideration, and by holding their thoughts more intently
upon the great and concerning matters contained therein, Secondly, by assisting
the intellective faculties of the soul by more frequent and repeated
considerations, to understand and discern the nature and import of the great
doctrines of the Gospel, as containing Gods design of wisdom and goodness for
the recovery of lost men from sin and destruction for sin, by Jesus Christ.

And by this means a greater light breaks into the soul, by which the evidence
of the truth of what the Gospel reports, is better discerned than it was
before, and so are a man's own great concerns for eternity, which are therein
laid open. And thereby also is the mind prevailed upon to assent to the truth
of our Saviors doctrine in the Gospel, and the will to consent to act
according to the great concerns of a man's soul. And therefore men's conversion
is in Scripture, described by their being turned from darkness to light, by
their being enlightened, and having the eyes of their understanding opened, and
the like.

And sometimes this work of Faith or Grace in the soul, is ascribed to the
former work of God upon the mind, viz. the holding the mind and thoughts unto a
more close, serious and intent consideration of the great things of the Gospel,
and a man's own great concerns therein. Thus in Jam. 1.25. Whosoever looks into
the perfect Law of liberty and continues therein (i.e. continues looking into
it) he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be
blessed in his deed. Here we see one that continues his looking into the
doctrine of the Gospel (which is meant by the Law of Liberty) and a forgetful
hearer are opposed to each other, and so is a forgetful hearer and a doer of
the work. By which it plainly appears, that the reason why the ones hearing
ends in the doing of the work, and in being blessed in his deed, and the other
does not, is for that the one considers and continues from time to time
seriously to consider the weight and importance of what he hears, and of his
own great concern in it; but the other does not, but is a forgetful hearer; as
little minds it, as if he were not concerned in it.

The same thing is doubtless meant by another Metaphor which the same Apostle
had used, Verse 21. Where he calls the word which is able to save the soul, an
ingrafted word. For if the word be able to save the soul but as it is an
ingrafted word, then it becomes an effectual means of salvation, as it is
fastened upon and let into the soul by serious consideration. on. For
consideration answers the Metaphor of ingrafting here used. If the juice of a
Cyon the Branch of a good Tree, turn the Sap of a Crab Tree Stock into it is own
nature, and cause it to bring forth better fruit than before, it is by means of
being let into it and bound fast upon it, that it does so. In like manner if
the word turn the temper of the soul into its own nature by mingling with it,
it is by means of consideration, which unites the word and the mind, and binds
it upon the soul. For the word does not work after the manner of a Charm or
Spell, but operates in a way of rational consideration. For this is the way of
the Spirits working by the word. When men with open Face behold as in a Glass
the glory of the Lord, they are changed into the same image as it were by the
Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. The Holy Spirit works this change indeed, but
it is by the Gospel, and by the Gospel looked into, beheld and well considered.

This considering temper of mind, seems to be signified by the good ground in
the Parable, by which those are resembled, who when they have heard the word,
keep it, to wit, in their minds and under consideration; in opposition to those
other hearers of the Gospel, who for a total want of consideration, immediately
lose all they hear, as those do who are resembled by the highway on which some
seed fell, where it had no covering at all: And in opposition to those who for
want of much consideration, wither when persecution comes, like those resembled
by the rocky ground on which some of the seed was sown, where there was not
much earth to give it sufficient rooting and nourishment: And also in
opposition to those who through an insufficient degree of consideration, have
the word driven out of their minds, or weakened in its operation, by the
over-powering thoughts, cares, and pleasures of this present life, as those
resembled by the thorny ground have; and so bring forth no fruit to perfection,
but only the ear without the full corn in the ear, Luke 8.

In this thing, then which we call Consideration, seems to lie the difference
between those who hear the Gospel so as effectually to believe it, and those
other several sorts of hearers, who though they hear it, yet do not believe it
to the saving of their souls. For which cause it may well be that the Author to
the Hebrews, presses the Christians who were in danger of withering like the
Corn which had not much earth, through heat of persecution, to give the more
earnest heed to the things which they had heard, lest at any time they should
let them slip, viz. out of their minds, Heb. 2.1. David, no doubt, well knew of
how great concernment it is to have good things kept warm upon the mind by
often repeated consideration, when he prayed thus unto God: Keep this for ever
in the imagination of the thoughts of the hearts of thy people, and prepare
their heart unto thee. 1 Chro. 29.18.

We have seen now in part what men (by advantage of the Gospel which is the
preventive Grace of God, antecedent to all endeavors of ours) can do toward
their own believing: And likewise what that subsequent Grace is by which we are
enabled to believe thoroughly and effectually unto Righteousness and Salvation.
There is yet one thing more to be taken into consideration, before we can so
well be resolved as then we may, in what capacity men are of performing the
condition of the promise of pardon and Life: And therefore I shall add that one
thing more, which is this.

4. We have assurance given us of having the subsequent Grace of God conferred
upon us to enable us to believe unto Righteousness, if we do not grossly neglect
to do what we can do toward our believing, in using and improving the
antecedent Grace of God. See this clearly proved by that of our Savior, Mark
4.24, 25. Where he speaks to his followers and hearers thus. Take heed what you
hear: with what ineasure ye mete, it shall be measured unto you: and unto you
that hear shall more be given. For he that has, to him shall be given: and he
that has not, from him shall be taken even that which he has. By which our
Savior seems to mean, that men shall receive benefit by the Gospel, according
as they attend to and consider their own great concerns handled in it: And that
if by thus doing they do not neglect but use and improve this antecedent Grace,
that then more shall be given; to wit, more means and more help to believe;
which is the subsequent Grace I have been speaking of, by which men are
thoroughly enabled to believe unto Righteousness, and so unto Pardon and Life.

These words of our Savior, which according to our translation we read, Take
heed what you hear, are rendered by Dr. Hammond, Consider what you hear. So that
it seems, Take heed what you hear, does in this place signify, Take heed to
what you hear, or to give heed to it as those do who consider of it and weigh
the import of it, as whether they are concerned in it, and if yea, then how
far. And the reason which our Savior adds to enforce this Precept and
direction of his, shows this to be the sense of it. For he says, With what
measure we mete, it shall be measured to us, to wit, in the blessing and
benefit designed us by sending the Gospel to us, which is to bring us to
believe unto Righteousness, that so we may be saved. And he adds again, that to
those that hear, viz. that thus hear, more shall be given, and backs this also
with that general rule mentioned five times in three of the Evangelists: for he
that has, to him shall be given, and he that has not, from him shall be taken
even that which he has. Now what can the measure be which is meted in hearing
the Gospel, to which the promise of receiving more is made? but an attentive
consideration who it is that speaks, what he speaks, and of what concernment it
is. And what can that measure be which is meted in hearing, which is threatened
with a remanding of what had been deposited in their hands, but a not minding,
regarding, or considering the weight of what is spoken, nor how they are
concerned in it?

If this then be the meaning of our Savior, as I doubt not but it is; then we
see the promise of Divine assistance is made to such endeavors of ours, as we
are capable of using, through that providence of God by which man's faculties
are sustained and assisted to operate according to what is proper to the nature
of them. So that if any man who enjoys the Gospel, perish, it is through his
own neglect to do what he was able to have done toward his own believing: It
is indeed for his not believing, but then the reason of his not believing and
the fault of it, is imputable only unto him and lies wholly at his door.
Because he might have believed and would certainly have been enabled to
believe, if he had not grossly neglected to do what he could and might have done
toward it.

If this were not so, that men might as certainly believe, repent and make
themselves new hearts (if they can but be persuaded to do what they can do
toward it) as if they had all the power requisite thereto in their own hands;
then to what purpose are they required by God in Scripture as they are, to
believe, to make themselves new hearts, and to repent and turn themselves from
all their transgressions, to circumcise their hearts, to wash their hearts from
wickedness, to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit? or
why and in what respect else can men be said to save themselves? Which yet they
are, 1 John 3.23. Ezekiel. 18.30, 31, 32. and 14.6. Deuteronomy. 10.16. Jer. 4.14. 2 Cor.
7.1. 1 Timothy 4.16. It is from the certainty of Gods cooperating with men's
endeavors to the producing of these effects, if men fail not to do what they
well may do, that these effects are ascribed to men as well as unto God; though
God be indeed the principal Agent beyond all comparison, and men but in a very
inferior degree the subordinate. Though salvation be of the Lord, and that
besides him there is no Savior, in a sense proper to him, yet in a sense
proper to men's endeavors, St. Paul disdained not to assure Timothy, that if he
took heed to himself and to his doctrine, and continued therein, that then in
so doing he should both save himself and those that heard him. 1 Timothy 4.16.

It is a common thing in Scripture where several free Agents concur to the
producing of the same effect, to attribute the effect to both, though the
Agency of the one of them be never so inferior to the other. Thus though God
is said to give a new heart and a new spirit, and to circumcise the heart (
Ezekiel. 36.26. Deuteronomy. 30.6.) yet men are still supposed to be in some capacity to
make themselves new hearts, and to circumcise their own hearts, in as much as
they are required to do it, as I have showed: That is, they are supposed to be
in a capacity to do something toward it, though very little in comparison of
what is done by God therein, when it is done indeed. Thus again men are
required to work out their own salvation, when yet it is God that works in
them both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.12, 13. Which is not
so to be understood as if God did work in them to will and to do exclusive of
all endeavors of theirs: for if that had been his meaning, he would thereby
have rendered his own exhortation and the reason of it useless, in persuading
them to work out their own salvation for that reason, because it is God which
works in them both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Nor yet is it so
to be understood on the other hand as if men could do all of themselves which
is necessary for the working out or carrying the business of their salvation
quite through, without supernatural assistance. But his meaning then seems to
be, that it is the good will and pleasure of God to work in such men both to
will and to do to the saving of their souls, who do endeavor through the
preventive and concomitant Grace of God, to do what they can do toward it.
When the work of Grace in man is ascribed to God and Christ, it is not to be
understood exclusively of all endeavors of men. When our Savior speaking of
his Disciples bringing forth fruit, says, without me ye can do nothing; he
does not say nor mean, that with him they could do nothing. When it was said to
the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 8. it is God that gives you power to get wealth, their
own endeavors in that acquisition, were not excluded, but the meaning was, I
suppose, that the means, the opportunities and advantages on that behalf, were
of God, and the ordering of his good providence toward them. Though Solomon
says in one place, The blessing of the Lord makes rich, yet he says in
another, The diligent hand makes rich. Though it be but very little which man
does toward his believing in comparison of what God does, yet the effect of
that doing, the act of believing, is still from place to place ascribed unto
men; for it is they are ascribed unto men; for it is they that are said to
believe. How much soever God does in producing Faith in men, yet therein still
man's faculties are preserved in such a free use and exercise, as is proper to
such a creature as God has made man to be, and from thence it is denominated
his act, as I have said.

Now then if this were not so, that God has by advantage of the Gospel where
it comes, given so much power unto men of acting toward their own believing,
and so much assurance of his further assistance to enable them to believe unto
Righteousness, if they grossly neglect not to do what they can do toward it: I
say if this were not so, how can it possibly stand with the infinite goodness
of the nature of God, for him to damn men for not believing, or with the
sincerity of such sayings of his in which he has declared, That he is not
willing that any man should perish, and that he would have all men to be saved,
(2 Pet. 3.9. 1 Timothy 2.4.) How will God be justified in this in the sight of
Angels and men, and in the consciences of condemned sinners themselves, if
their unbelief and perishing for it, were not through their own neglect? And
how else could men's destruction be said, as it is, to be of themselves? Hos.
13.9.

We see then from the nature of the thing and the honor of God, as concerned in
it, as well as from the evidence of Scripture, what reason we have to hold that
all men under the Gospel, are in such a capacity of performing the condition of
the promise of Pardon and Life by believing, as that if they do it not, it is
through their own gross and wilful neglect to do what they might have done
toward it. And for any to make God so the Author of men's destruction, as to
affirm that he never put them into a capacity of preventing it by believing, is
a daring undertaking, whoever ventures upon it, and tends to tempt men to think
dishonorably of the goodness of God, and of the truth and sincerity of his
declarations in his word.

To say, God did give such men power in Adam, will not salve the business. For
we cannot say that any such power was given to Adam himself before his fall,
much less that all his Posterity had such a power in him. We cannot say that
Adam had power to do more than what was necessary to continue him in that state
in which God created him, and consequently we cannot say that God gave him
power to repent when he had no occasion for it, or power to believe the Gospel,
when there was no Revelation of it, nor occasion for such a Revelation. No,
this power depends upon an after-work of Grace through our Blessed Redeemer.

Nor is this doctrine touching the power which God has given unto men of
acting toward their own believing, at all contrary to that where men are said
to have believed through grace, Acts 18.27. or to that where Faith is said to
be the gift of God. For it is through the preventive and antecedent Grace of
God, as I have said, that they are enabled to act toward their believing. For
though what they do toward their own believing, is by a free use of their
natural faculties, yet it is by means of the preventive and antecedent Grace of
God, to wit, the Gospel, that those faculties act any thing toward their
believing the Gospel. For without such an object of Faith as the Gospel is,
men's faculties could act nothing toward the believing of it. And then further,
though men do exercise their natural faculties upon the objective Grace of God,
and thereby act something toward their own believing; Yet in that hereupon more
power is given them to believe h^^^lie, effectually and fully to Righteousness
and Salvation, this power is from the subsequent Grace of God. So that the
whole business of believing from the beginning to the end of it, is of Grace;
first of Grace antecedent, and then of Grace subsequent.

There is only so much of man in raising Faith in him, as belongs to the free
use of his natural powers and faculties. The Grace of God in working Faith,
does not put new faculties into man, nor destroy that freedom which is proper
to the will as such: It only rectifies and regulates the motions and operations
of the will in reference to its objects. So that the change is not natural, but
moral. And this moral change in rectifying and regulating the acts and motions
of the will, is made partly by opening the understanding and enlightening the
mind better to discern the nature of things, and whereto they tend. And this is
done partly by holding the thoughts more frequen^^y and more intently upon
things that concern the soul and another life: and partly by assisting and
strengthening the understanding in making a right judgment of things. And then
the will is prevailed upon to choose the right end, and the way to it, by having
the great motives of the Gospel kept upon it, by a more frequent and constant
consideration. For by that more frequent consideration, and by the illumination
of the mind about the great motives of the Gospel, the power and force of those
motives is better felt by the Will. So that as a man comes to have other
apprehensions of things by illumination of the mind, so he comes to have other
affections for them in the acts and motions of his will. This change thus made
in the mnid and will, is called the renewing of the Holy Ghost, because it is
his work upon and by both, Tit. 3.5. and a being renewed in the spirit of the
mind, Ephesians. 4.23. It is a restoring the natural faculties that were depraved in
their operations, to their right use and exercise for which they were made,
which was to act for the honor of their maker and for their own happiness, and
not contrariwise as they do, when perverted by the power of sin. This
renovation in the natural faculties therefore tends to the perfecting of our
nature. For which cause perhaps men thus renewed, are in Scripture styled
perfect in the favorable sense of Grace. This one thing is further to be
noted, That whatever is done upon the natural faculties of mind and will by the
Gospel, or by the Spirit of God, to change and renew them, is also done by
those faculties. Men are not made to understand or believe the Gospel which
they did not before, otherwise than by exercising their mind and will about it.

By all this then it appears, I hope, that what is ascribed unto man in acting
toward his own believing, is no ways contrary to Grace, unless you will say an
effect cannot be of Grace, if the natural faculties have any thing to do in the
producing of it, as they must, if it be man's act.

I might show how that the Gospel by the giving of which God has been
aforehand with us and prevented all endeavors of ours, is of it self and in
the very nature of it, so apt to work upon the human faculties, and to incline
men to embrace it, if they would but a little attend to it and consider it,
(which one would think they might easily do, if they would, before their
natures are debauched by a custom of sinning) I say, it is so apt to gain upon
them, that it hardly fails to do so more or less, but where it meets with such
as wilfully call off their natural faculties from attending to it and the
things it treats of, and that employ them about objects of another nature, as
those did who in the Parable of our Savior are said to be invited to the
Supper which a King made for his Son, when they made their several excuses.
This is well represented by our Savior when he says of such, that they closed
their eyes, lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and should understand with their hearts, and should be converted
and I should heal them, Mat. 13.15. These are words which seem to signify more
than a bare omission or neglect, and denote a kind of opposition, a striving
with themselves not to think upon or to be affected with things of that nature,
as those of a spiritual concern are. And such people do not only not incline
their ears to hear, nor give ear to hear, as the Scripture speaks, but they
turn away their ear from hearing: they reject the word of the Lord, and the
counsel of God against themselves.

We do not therefore attribute any such great matter unto men, when we say that
they by the advantage of the Gospel, may do so much toward their own
believing, if they will, as would through the help of Gods Holy Spirit (who is
always ready to assist men's honest and good endeavors) issue and end in an
effectual believing. Nay, there is so much of the Grace of God vouchsafed
toward the calling of men by the very sending of the Gospel to them, as will
in all probability prevail upon them, if they do not much oppose, resist and
strive against its prevailing upon them, as I have showed: For the Gospel is
the power of God to Salvation.

Now then if this be true, that God by means of his antecedent Grace, has
given such power unto men, of acting toward their believing unto
Righteousness, as has been said there is; then there is very great reason this
should be made known to them, and that they should not be made believe that
they have no more power of acting toward their own Salvation, than there is in
a dead man to raise himself to life. I say there is great reason for this,
because their Salvation or Damnation are much concerned in it. For to persuade
men that they have no power to act toward their believing, is the direct way
to take them off from the use of means tending thereto. For what greater
discouragement can be given unto men to attempt a thing, than to persuade them
that they have no power of accomplishing it if they do. As good never a whit as
never the better, as the Proverb runs.

The quite contrary is doubtless to be done by such as would not betray men's
souls to destruction, nor lay a stumbling block in their way, nor cramp their
endeavors in seeking to be saved. They should be thoroughly acquainted with
what power God has put into their hands of being saved if they will, by having
given them his Gospel and power to hear and consider the terms of Salvation
that are therein offered to them, and the powerful motives that tend to
persuade them to believe and obey it. They should be brought to a great sense
that God is not nor will be wanting to them in his Grace and assistance, nor in
the matter of their salvation, if they be not greatly wanting to themselves in
not doing what they may and can do toward it. That God has set life and death
before them and persuaded them to choose life, and that he has given them power
to do so much toward it, by the helps wherewith he has prevented them, as
that he will not fail to give them so much more as shall put them into an
immediate capacity of salvation, if they will but make such use as they may and
can, of that which he has already given them: And that therefore if they
perish, it is of their own choice, because they judge themselves unworthy of
everlasting life. And that for this cause they will be left without all excuse
if they perish, and that God will be justified in their condemnation, in that
he has done that which was sufficient on his part to have prevented it.

It was not the manner of our Savior to persuade men that they could do
nothing toward their own salvation, but complains of them saying, ye will not
come to me that ye might have life: how often would I have gathered you as a Hen
gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not; and expostulates the
matter with them, saying, yea and why even of your selves judge ye not what is
right: And from time to time cried to them in his doctrine with an extended
voice, saying, whosoever has ears to hear let them hear: meaning, that if they
would make use of their teachable and considerative faculties in any thing,
then about those things he preached among them. And upbraided those that would
not, when they had eyes to see, and ears to hear, other things wherein they
were nothing so much concerned as they were in his doctrine, saying, they
seeing, see not, and hearing, hear not, neither do they understand. And can any
man that thinks well of our Savior, wisely think also that he upbraided them
for not doing that which they had no power to do.

Nevertheless although it be Gods ordinary declared method of proceeding with
men in reference to their salvation, to add a subsequent power to enable such
to believe unto Righteousness, who had not grossly neglected to use and improve
the antecedent power and Grace which had been vouchsafed them before: yet
doubtless God always reserves unto himself a liberty of acting extraordinarily
in a way of Grace toward men, where and when and to what degree he pleases,
though they have not improved, but grossly neglected their first talents.
Several instances of this nature there have been in men whose natures and lives
have been debauched with a custom of sinning, who yet have been surprised as it
were on a sudden, and their consciences awakened and let loose upon them,
either by a Sermon, or some great affliction, or some other providence, and
such a change presently wrought, that they have afterward become very good men.
And so God has been found of those that sought him not, as the Prophet speaks;
as he was by the extraordinary Conversion of those of the Gentile Nations upon
the first going out of the Gospel among them, many of whom till then had lived
without God in the world, as the Apostle speaks.

Now this liberty of showing more Grace and favor to some than to othres, God
may well make use of, and yet no man have cause to complain that he does so, so
long as he is not wanting to the rest in that which is sufficient unto their
Salvation, but puts it within their own power to be saved, if they will. So
that if they perish, it is through their own wilful neglect to do what they
might have done. Indeed God can no more wrong one creature than another,
because he cannot but do right to all: But in dispensing favors, it is nowise
unbecoming his wisdom and goodness, to do more for one creature than for
anotheer; no more than it was in the work of Creation, when he did not make all
Men Angels, nor all Brutes Men. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with
mine own? Is thy eye evil because I am good? says the Householder in the
Parable, to him that murmured for that he that labored but one hour in the
Vineyard, had as much as the hire of another for a whole day came to, Mat.
20.15.

Since then it is but Gods unusual and extraordinary way to convert some such
men by surprising them with the mighty operations of his Grace, as had in a
manner wholly neglected the improvement of their first Talents, the antecedent
Grace of God: And since he has made no promise of doing so for any man, but
rather on the contrary threatened to take away from such that which they had
received before; It remains then that no man presume or take any encouragement
to neglect Gods ordinary and prescribed way and means of attaining to Grace and
Salvation, in hope that God should go out of his usual way to meet with them
and to convert them in a way and manner that is unusual and extraordinary. No
man in his wits will act by such measures in things pertaining to this present
life and the outward man. Some men we now and then see have strange and
fortunate hits in the world, Estates conferred on them unexpectedly without any
labor or industry of theirs. But will any man in hopes it may so fall out with
him, neglect to labor in his calling for a livelihood? To be sure no man
worthy the name of a man will. What folly then is to be compared with that
which such men commit, that despise their own souls in taking less care for
them, though of eternal duration, than for this short and transitory life?

But yet although God has not promised that any shall have, but those that
ask, nor find except they seek, nor have it opened to them, unless they knock;
to the end that none might promise themselves an obtaining without so doing:
And although God vouchsafes unto men the Gospel as a means sufficient of it
self to persuade them to consider their eternal concerns, and to look after
them more than any thing that concerns only this present life, and to learn
them without all excuse if they do not: Yet when I consider the exceeding
riches of the goodness of God, and how full of compassion he is, and how
unwilling he is that any should perish; I cannot, I confess, but think that he
does more to prevent the destruction even of those that do perish, than what is
absolutely necessary and barely sufficient to prevent it, if men did not
through their own obstinacy and wilfulness receive such Grace of God in vain. I
cannot but think that God does more to bring men to repentance, both those that
do and those that do not actually and eventually repent, than what he ever
promised or engaged himself to do, by his spirits striving with them by many
inward and secret motions and operations upon their minds and consciences,
until by long and obstinate resistance, the good spirit is caused to withdraw
his applications; by which withdrawing that which they before had, is taken
from them, according to what is threatened to such as will not improve their
Talent, and they delivered up to a reprobate mind to be hardened. Why should we
not think but that God is as ready by his Holy Spirit to excite and stir up men
to that which tends to their happiness, as evil spirits are to tempt them to
that which tends to their destruction? When all the methods whereby God seeks
to bring men to repentance are thwarted and withstood, the Holy Ghost is in
Scripture then said to be resisted: Which shows, that the Holy Ghost is much
concerned in those methods.

I doubt not but that when the Scripture says that God would have all men to
be saved, we may safely conclude, that he uses all means both internal and
external to effect it, so far as is agreeable to his perfect and unerring
wisdom, when all circumstances in the case are weighed and considered; and that
it is really better and will appear so one day, that such men should perish
which do perish, rather than any more should be done by God to prevent it, than
he has done before destruction befall them. And it is better, not because God
takes more pleasure in the damnation than in the salvation of such as perish,
simply and in it self considered: For he himself has told us, and sworn it,
lest we should not firmly believe it, That he has no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live, Ezekiel. 33.11. But it
is better in reference to the public good of his Creation in general, the
peace and good order whereof is thereby secured, which otherwise was and still
would be disquieted and put into confusion by them, as it is now by the Devils,
while they are not shut up in Prison, as hereafter they will be. This reason of
the punishment of such as have neglected their own Salvation, as it refers to
this public good, is employed in those words of our Savior, Mat. 13.41. Where
he says, The Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out
of his Kingdom all things that offend, and in those likewise, Ver. 49. where he
says, so shall it be at the end of the world: the Angels shall come forth, and
sever the wicked from among the just. And another reason among others of such
men's punishment referring to the public good, is, That virtue and goodness on
the one hand, and wickedness and vice on the other, might the better appear to
be what they are in their own nature, by their sensible effects, and so be
loved or hated accordingly; which we cannot conceive they would ever be so
effectually as now they are and will be, if they were not attended with rewards
and punishments by the wise ordering of the Author and Governor of all beings.
It was by the sensible effects of eating of the forbidden Tree, that Adam had
that knowledge of evil as differing from good, which he had not before. Now such
knowledge of the the difference between good and evil by rewards and
punishments, is of great use in the universal Kingdom and Government of God.
And if it were not better in reference to the general good, that men should
perish for their wilful neglect and refusal to make use of such means to
prevent their destruction, as God has vouchsafed them, and by the use whereof
they might have prevented it if they would, we could not well conceive how
there should be any such thing as the destruction of wicked men, other than
what lies in the very nature of their sin it self, (it putting the course of
nature into disorder, confusion and torture) so long as God takes no pleasure
in their destruction for their destruction sake.

So much may suffice to show in what capacity men are of performing the
condition on which the pardon of sin and eternal life are promised; which
performance is of absolute and indispensible necessity to their justification.
And if in doing this I have said more than was barely necessary to this end,
yet perhaps not more than was necessary to prevent men's misunderstanding
misinterpretation and misimprovement of what was necessarily said on that head
of discourse; considering how apt some of weak minds are, to suspect, if not to
cry out Pelagianism, where any ability in men to work out their own salvation,
is mentioned, though there be not the least ground for it.

5. The last thing I proposed to inquire into concerning Faith, is how we may
conceive that Faith does more immediately operate to our justification. And
what has been said already touching Faith in the forementioned particulars,
may with a little reflection upon them, satisfy us in this enquiry. For such a
Faith as I have described, a Faith that is a vital and vigorous principle of
Regeneration and of a holy life, does Operate to our Justification as it is our
Covenant-Righteousness, as it is the performance of the condition on which
pardon of sin and eternal Life are promised. For as it is such and as it
comprehends in it its proper effects, it does constitute those in whomsoever it
is found, Righteous persons according to the tenor of the Gospel Covenant, and
so qualifies them to be so adjudged by God against all accusations to the
contrary by what or by whomsoever. It is that which makes their cause good when
they come to be tried and judged by the Law of Liberty, because it is all which
that Law requires to denominate them Righteous, and to entitle them to the
benefit of that Law. This Righteousness of Faith is the essential matter or
material cause of our Justification, without which no such thing could be, and
supposing which, it cannot but be, so long as the Gospel Covenant stands in
force. It makes those that have it, the proper subjects of Justification: for
as God will condemn the wicked, so he will most certainly Justify the
Righteous, such as are made so by his own Grace: without respect of persons he
judges acocrding to every man's work and the nature of his cause. In these and
the like respects does the Righteousness of Faith operate to our Justification.
These things stand proved in what has been said before in opening the nature
of the Covenant of Grace, and the nature of Faith and the reason of its
designation by God to its Office and work. And may be yet further confirmed by
those Scriptures where Faith is said to be counted and imputed to us for
Righteousness, as it was to Abraham, Romans 4.3, 6, 11, 22, 24. Gal. 3.6. Genesis
15.6. Jam. 2.23. For if God count it to us for Righteousness, then it is our
Righteousness: for God accounts of things but as they are when they are what
they are of his own making, as this Righteousness of Faith is. And if this
Faith be our Righteousness in Gods account, then they must needs be Righteous
in his account that are Righteous with this Righteousness, and be approved of
and adjudged such by him. And thus Faith operates to our Justification as it is
the essential and intrinsical matter of our Justification.

CHAP. V. How God himself operates to our Justification.
I Come now in the last place to enquire in what respects Justification is
attributed to God, and what his operation is in producing this great effect of
Justifying such as have been sinners. That he does Justify believers by some
acts proper to him, is no Christians doubt. It is one God which shall Justify
the Circumcision by Faith, and the Uncircumcision through Faith, Romans 3.30. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies,
Romans 8.33.

Now God may be said to Justify in several respects, some more remote, and
some more proximate and immediate. God is the Author, Spring and Fountain, and
principal efficient cause of all other causes that any way concur or cooperate
to our Justification. Christ himself which is the foundation stone in this
building, by virtue of whose Mediatorial Righteousness we are Justified, he is
made to us of God, Wisdom and Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. It is also God which
has given being to the new Covenant which is the Covenant of his Grace, by
virtue of which also we are Justified. And the Righteousness of Faith which is
the matter of our Justification, is of Gods working in us by his Spirit. Whence
it is that both our Sanctification and Justification, are attributed to the
Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the
name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our God.

But that which we have now principally to consider, is, what that last act is
or those last acts are by which God Justifies us. And his operation herein is
judicial; for he Justifies as a Judge, and therein proceeds by his own Law of
Grace, as the rule of judging of men and their cause. And Gods judicial
Justification of men, does stand I conceive in these two things principally.

1. God in justifying of men approves of them for such as have performed the
condition, on which he in the Covenant of Grace promised pardon of sin and
eternal Life: That is, he approves of them for true believers and such as have
given up themselves to obey the Gospel, to live according to the doctrine of
their Savior, and adjudgeth them to be such.

2. Those whom God approves of as true and sincere observers of the new Law,
the Gospel or Covenant of Grace, those he adjudgeth to be Righteous persons,
and that Faith of theirs by which they have fulfilled it, to be their
Righteousness. True believers and such as have given up themselves to obey the
Gospel, they are Justified by the Gospel; that is, they are Righteous in the
sense and meaning of that Law. For that practical obediential Faith of theirs,
is their conformity to this Law of Christ the Gospel, and therefore it must
needs be their Evangelical Righteousness. But there is this difference between
being justified by the Gospel, as it is the new Law of Grace, and by being
justified by God: The Gospel Covenant pronounces all true believers in General
to be Righteous persons, but does not determine whether this or that person in
particular be a true believer, and so a Righteous man or woman. But God in
justifying men determines and adjudgeth this and that man in special to be a
true believer, and therefore a Righteous man in the sense of the Law of Grace.
It is the work of a Judge to apply the Law as a general rule, to the special
cases of particular men, and to justify or condemn men in particular in
reference to their particular cases, by and according to the general rule of
the Law. And so does God the Judge of all, in the case before us. He knows and
considers every man in particular, whether he be a true believer or not: And
those whom he finds to be so, those he adjudgeth to be Righteous according to
the tenor of the Gospel, which is his justifying of them.

Now that God justifies men this way and after this manner, does I conceive
plainly and fully appear by those Scriptures which tell us, that God does
justify us by Faith, and that he does impute or account Faith to us for
Righteousness. One vein of Scriptures acquaints us that God justifies us by
Faith and through Faith, Romans 3.28, 30. and 5.1. Gal. 2.16. and 3.8. By another
vein of Texts we are told, that God imputes, accounts and reckons Faith to us
for Righteousness. Genesis 15.6. Romans 4.3, 5, 11, 22, 24. Gal. 3.6. Jam. 2.23. Now
these two veins of Scripture put together, the sense that results out of them
is I think plainly this, That God justifies us by accounting our Faith to us
for Righteousness. This is so plain, as that I know not what can well be
plainer. In the one vein it is said that God justifies us by Faith: in the
other that he imputes and reckons Faith to us for Righteousness. And for God to
account Faith to us for Righteousness, and to reckon and adjudg us to be
Righteous upon the account of our Faith, signifies I think, the same thing.

That God justifies men by approving and adjudging them to be Righteous by
being true believers, and therein conformable to the terms of the Gospel, on
which the promises of it are made, will further appear, if we consider
Justification in a notion opposite to condemnation. In condemnation or when men
are condemned by God, they are convicted of a double guilt. First, of a
guiltiness of fault; that they are guilty of such transgression of the Law by
which they are tried, as is damnable in the sense of that Law. Secondly, of the
guilt of penalty, upon which they are adjuged and sentenced to suffer that
penalty: The guilt of fault of which they are convicted and for which they are
condemned to suffer the penalty, is final infidelity, impenitence and wilful
disobedience to the Gospel.

Now God in justifying men, does as Judge vindicate and defend them against all
accusations, from being guilty of such unbelief, impenitency and disobedience;
which vindication and defense, is the same thing with his adjudging them to be
true believers, penitent, and such as have delivered up themselves sincerely to
obey the Laws of their Savior, which is his justifying of them.

And now having thus endeavored to open and explain the doctrine, the nature
and notion of Justification in its several causes; I shall now recapitulate or
rehearse in a few words, the sum and substance of what has been more largely
discoursed about it; to the end the whole of it may come under our view at once.

The obedience of Christ to the Law of Mediation in dying for us does operate
to our Justification, by obtaining terms of Gods being reconciled to us: and
his obedience to the same Law in publishing the Gospel, does operate to the
same end, by persuading us by it to be reconciled to God in observing those
terms, upon the observation of which, we become justified by God as well as
reconciled to him, and justified because reconciled.

The new Covenant operates to our Justification, by virtue of the death of
Christ by which it was obtained, as it is a new Law of Grace, stating, settling,
and setting forth the benefits therein promised; pardon of sin and eternal
Life, and also the terms on which these benefits are to be conferred and
received, to wit, a vigorous and operative Faith: and this Covenant further
operates to our Justification, as by the promise of the foresaid benefits, it
is Gods great instrument to persuade men to observe and perform those terms or
that condition in believing, on which they are promised, which performance is
that which qualifies us for the blessing of being Justified.

Faith operates to our Justification as it is the performance of the condition
on which the promise of the Pardon of sin and eternal Life is made through
Christ: and as that Faith is the new Covenant-Righteousness, and so the matter
of our Justification.

Almighty God himself operates to our Justification, as he reckons, imputes,
and counts this Faith to us for Righteousness, and as he does approve each one
that has this Faith as a Righteous person according to the tenor of his own
Law of Grace, and as he does adjudg him to be so.

Having as I conceive now competently proved that Gods judicial Justifying of
us, stands in his adjudging us to have performed the condition on which he has
promised Pardon of sin and eternal Life, in that we have believed the Gospel
and delivered up ourselves to the conduct of it; and likewise in accounting
this Faith to us for Righteousness, and in approving of us as Righteous
hereupon: I shall now proceed to show somewhat of the difference that is
between Justification and Remission of Sins, at least as I apprehend it.

CHAP. VI. Of the difference between Justification and Remission of sin.
THere is doubtless such a thing as a real difference between Justification and
Remission of sin. For when St. Paul says that Christ is made to us of God
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. he certainly means
something else by Redemption than he does by Righteousness. That by
Righteousness in this place he means Justification, I think none will deny. By
Redemption doubtless he means a deliverance first and last from all the evils
and miseries we suffer or have deserved by reason of sin: deliverance and
exemption from which, is properly pardon in act. And indeed St. Paul in another
place explains Redemption by Pardon, when he says, in whom we have Redemption
through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, Col. 1.14. We see then that
St. Paul did reckon Justification and Remission of sins to be two distinct
things, benefits of a different nature. I shall now name to you some of those
things wherein they differ.

1. Justification is Gods adjudging us to have performed the condition in
believing, on which he has made promise of Pardon. But Pardon it self is his
conferring that benefit upon us which he conditionally had promised. By the one
God approves of us as having done our part and duty in keeping Covenant with
him: By the other he keeps Covenant with us in performing what he promised. And
therefore Justification and Remission of sin seem to differ as much as Gods
adjudging us to have performed the condition on which he promised Pardon,
differs from actual Pardon it self; and as much as his adjudging us to have
kept Covenant with him, differs from his keeping Covenant with us.

2. By Justification we are acquitted and absolved from being guilty of
infidelity, impenitency and insincerity of obedience: But we are not thereby
acquitted and absolved from being guilty of all other sins, but come to be
discharged from them by way of Pardon, whether they be sins against the Law or
against the Gospel, whether wilful and presumptuous sins before conversion, yea
former infidelity and impenitency, or of human frailty and infirmity after,
together with all defects and imperfections of duty toward God and toward
man. A pardon of all these is promised on condition of that Faith with its
effects, by which God Justifies us and approves of us as Righteous and good
men, according to the tenor of the Gospel or new Covenant. But then Gods
pardoning these sins, and his Justifying us as not guilty of present
infidelity, impenitency, and insincerity of obedience, on which he promised
Pardon, are things greatly different.

Some because they cannot understand how we can be justified by any
Righteousness but such as is commensurate and adequate to the demands of the
Law: and because there is none to be found in any man but in our Savior
himself; therefore they think we cannot be Justified any other way than by
having his personal numerical Righteousness transferred to us and so made ours,
as that we by it may be accounted to have fulfilled the whole Law and answered
all the demands of it. But such should consider that we do not come off from
the charge that lies against us for not answering the demands of the Law, by
our fulfilling it by another, but by being Pardoned by virtue of Christ's
atonement, and by virtue of the new Law of Grace which he has obtained by his
obedience, we performing the condition, on which Pardon is procured and
promised; which performance, God according to his Grace in the Gospel, counts
to us for Righteousness.

3. That Righteousness of Faith by which we are Justified, qualifies us for the
positive happiness and glory of the next world: but so does not Remission of
sin as such. That operative Faith by which God Justifies us, renews our nature
and makes us inherently Righteous, without which we cannot suppose that God
would adjudg us Righteous; without which neither can we so much as see the
Kingdom of God or be capable of enjoying the heavenly state. But now this
renovation in our nature, is not made by Remission of sin. That makes a change
in a man's state indeed, but the change which is made in our nature by which we
are made capable of the heavenly glory, is by that Faith and the Righteousness
of it, by which we are Justified. And therefore there is a great difference
between the Righteousness of Justification and Remission of sin in this respect
also.

By reason of which difference, I cannot understand how it can be truly said,
That Justification by Remission of sin (as some phrase it) will stand us in as
much stead before the Tribunal of God, as Justification upon a perfect justice
would do. For if it could be suppposed (as it cannot upon good ground) that
Remission of sin might be had without any inherent Righteousness in our nature,
yet we could not thereby be so much as capable of being partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, for which they are made meet by that change
which is made in their nature through Faith, which God in Justifying of us,
reckons to us for Righteousness.

4. Pardon of sin, as it does not qualify our nature for the heavenly glory,
so neither does it at all entitle men to it, as the Righteousness of
Justification by Faith does. We that forfeited the first right which man had to
happiness, by our Apostasy from God, can now have no right or title to it but
what God of his own Grace through Christ is pleased to give us, or by gift or
grant to make over to us. And this right which he has given us, depends partly
upon a conditional promise of his; and partly upon Gods adjudging us to have
performed that condition mentioned in that promise. Now God in his new Law of
Grace, upon account of what our Savior has done and suffered to obtain it,
has made promise of eternal Life to us upon condition of our believing and
obeying the Gospel. Which condition being performed by us, our initial right to
eternal Life accrues to us from this promise of God founded in our Saviors
Mediatory performance. But then our complete right to it accrues to us from a
judicial act of God, which is his adjudging us to have performed that condition
on which eternal Life is promised. The one is as a right in Law, the other as a
right by act of judgment grounded on Law. Which judicial act of God, is that by
which he Justifies us, as that Judge to whom it belongs to judge, whether the
terms of his own Law of Grace be performed or no, before he confers the benefit
promised therein. And whenever he does adjudg us to have performed those terms;
that judgment and determination of his for us, gives us an immediate and
complete right and title to the heavenly happiness.

But now Remission of sin or impunity, was never made the condition of the
promise of heavenly glory, nor is it man's act but Gods, and so not capable of
being made a condition of such a thing: And therefore it cannot in virtue of
any promise, give us that which I call our initial right to the heavenly glory,
which right accrues to us by virtue of Gods promise, upon our performance of
the condition of it. Nor can this Remission give us that immediate and complete
Right to the heavenly glory, which flows to us from Gods adjudging us to have
performed the condition on which he has promised it; because this Remission is
no condition of Gods promise to us, nor act of our performing. Here then is a
manifest difference between Remission of sin and Justification, in respect of
the right we have by the one which we have not by the other, to the heavenly
glory.

Some have indeed argued that Pardon of sin will stand us in as much stead as
to our restoration to happiness, as a perfect legal Righteousness would have
done to have continued us in it. Because as they reason, the punishment of loss
is by Pardon taken off, as well as the punishment of sense: and that as by
Pardon we are delivered from the one, so by it we are also restored to our
title to the other, to what we lost and so to a title to eternal Life. The
force of which arguing depends upon a supposition which will not be granted,
nor as I conceive ever be proved. And that is, that if Adam and so his
posterity had continued in their integrity, they would thereby have had a right
and title to the Celestial happiness and glory of the upper world. Whereas St.
Paul tells us, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, and that
the first man was of the earth earththy, 1 Cor. 15.47, 50. So that Adam himself
should he have continued in that perfect state in which he was created, yet
would not for all that have been capable of the Celestial glory, unless he had
put off flesh and blood, or else should have had his body transformed from
natural into spiritual. Which whosoever affirms that he should, will doubtless
be wanting in his proofs. It is far more probable that the design of Christ's
undertaking as Mediator, was to advance the nature of man to a more glorious
perfection and happiness than that which was natural to him in pure nature. He
was made a little lower than the Angels, though he was crowned with glory and
honor. Psalm. 8.5. But they that shall be accounted worthy to that other world
and the resurrection from the dead, are equal to the Angels: Which cannot be
meant in respect of immortality only; for Adam who was made lower than they,
would have been equal to them in that, had he never sinned. Luke 20.35, 36. But
our blessed Savior came that we should have life; and that we should have it
more abundantly; a life surpassing that which was lost by the fall, John 10.10.
And he has taught his Disciples and followers in hope of this Celestial glory,
to set more light by this world, than perhaps Adam would have been obliged to,
had he never fallen, and has given several other precepts, which perhaps
transcend the natural Law it self, as to what Adam was obliged to by it before
his fall, and all to qualify them for a higher state.

I might further show how that our title to the heavenly inheritance arises
out of our adoption to it as joint-heirs with Christ, and from Gods free and
bounteous donation, as eternal Life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our
Lord, and from our performance of the condition on which it is promised:
Blessed are they that do his Commandments that they may have right to the Tree
of Life. From all which Remission of sin differs and is another thing.

5. Our right and title to Remission of sin it self, depends upon the same
terms as our right to glory does, and yet that depends upon our Justification:
For God first Justifies whom he after glorifies. Romans 8.30. And if our right to
Remission of sin depends upon the same terms as right to glory does, then
Remission of sin can be no more the same thing with Justification, than
glorification is, but depends upon it as an effect upon a cause without which
none can receive it.

Our right to Remission of sin depends upon our believing, as the condition on
which God has promised it, as well as our right to glory does. To him give all
the Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him shall
receive Remission of sins, Acts 10.43. And this right to Remission of sins,
depends as much also upon Gods adjudging us to have performed the condition on
which he has promised Pardon, as our right to glory does. For God does no more
actually Pardon any, then he glorifies them, until he first adjudgeth them to
have performed the condition on which he promised Pardon, which dijudication of
his, is his Justifying of them. And therefore Remission of sin does as really
differ from Justification as Glorification does, and is as certainly subsequent
to it, as Glorification is, and therefore cannot be the same thing properly and
strictly considered.

6. God does not forgive all a man's sins at once nor before they are committed
and repented of, but multiplies Pardons as his servants multiply sins of
infirmity and their repentances and petitions for Pardon. And if so, and if God
do not multiply as many Justifications as he does Pardons to the same person,
then here is another difference between Justification and Remission of sin.

7. Justification is Gods imputing Righteousness to us or our Faith for
Righteousness. But Pardon of sin is his non-imputation of sin to us. God by not
imputing sin to us, does not reckon us not to have sinned, nor not to have
deserved eternal destruction: but he then does not impute sin, when he does not
inflict the punishment deserved by and due for sin. But when he imputes
Righteousness or Faith for Righteousness to us, he adjudgeth us to have
answered the terms of his new Law of Grace by believing, by which Law that
Faith becomes our Righteousness. Now there is a great difference between Gods
adjudging us to have answered the terms of his new Law, and his not inflicting
the deserved penalty of the Old; between his awarding us a recompense of our
sincere conformity to the one, and his not exacting of us what we had deserved
to suffer for transgressing the other. And yet so much difference there is
between Justification and Remission of sin.

As for those who place Justification in Gods pardoning of sin, they may please
to consider, that the benefit of Remission of sin, does not signify the less
by being called only by its proper name, Pardon or Forgiveness, and not
Justification, if by Justification be meant only Remission of sin, as they hold
it is who limit Justification only to that. And if Remission of sin signify no
more when we call it Justification, then it does when we call it Pardon or
Forgiveness. I see little reason why two or three or some small number of Texts
of Scripture which speak of Justification fomwhat obscurely, should be so much
strained as they are, to make them seem to mean only Remission of sin, when
they may be fairly understood in another sense, and that too perhaps with more
congruity to the signification of the word Justification, and to the nature of
the thing, and to the Scriptures themselves elsewhere. Nor can I discern what
would be gained by it, if it should be granted that Remission of sin were
Justification, and Justification Remission of sin. For yet then the same thing,
the same benefit would signify no more when we call it Justification, than it
does when we call it only Remission of sins, as we all agree the Scriptures do.

Nor does the placing of Justification in Gods Judicial act in approving and
adjudging men to be Righteous in a Gospel sense, who have performed the
condition on which Pardon of sin and eternal Life are promised, make the
privilege of having our sins forgiven, the less beneficial to us, or the less
of Grace from God and our Lord Jesus Christ. For Gods approving us to be
Righteous in a Gospel sense, does not suppose or imply that we stand in no need
of Pardon, nor of that mercy of God and merit of Christ from which Pardon
flows: it only supposes us to be Righteous with such a Righteousness of Faith,
on condition of which the promise of Pardon of all our sins is made through the
blood of Christ. But Gods Justifying of us or his approving of us to be
Righteous in such a sense, does not make our sins to become no sins, nor is it
I conceive Gods Pardoning act; but yet it is that which does judicially
qualify us for Pardon, and which as it were opens the door and lets us into
the possession of it. For Pardon is the next and immediate act, that in order
follows Gods adjudging us to have performed the condition on which he promised
us Pardon.

Having said this much of the difference between judicial Justification and
Remission of sin, it seems requisite to make some enquiry into the sense and
meaning of those Scriptures on which some ground an assertion limiting
Justification to Remission of sin only. And those Scriptures which above all
others seem most to countenance such an assertion, and which are most relied on
by those of that persuasion are, Acts 13.39. Romans 5.16. and 4.6, 7. To an
enquiry into the meaning of which I will only premise this: That if we should
find cause to think that it may be proved from these or any other Scriptures,
That we are pardoned by being Justified; yet we can have no good reason thence
to conclude that we are Justified only by being. Pardoned; no nor yet in the
properest sense neither, when we consider how express the Scriptures are
elsewhere for a judicial Justification, to wit, Gods Justifying us by Faith and
by accounting or adjudging Faith to us for Righteousness or for a performance
of the terms of the Gospel; our conformity whereto is as truly our Evangelical
Righteousness, as our conformity to the terms of the Law would have been a
legal Righteousness, if it had been found in us.

To begin now with Acts 13.39. the words are these, And by him all that believe
are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law
of Moses.

To be Justified from sin, sometimes signifies to be freed from the power and
dominion of it. Thus in Romans 6.7. St. Paul having said in Verse 6. Knowing this
that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin, adds in Verse 7. for he
that is dead is Justified from sin. For so it is according to the marginal
reading; and so the Dutch Translation Englished reads it; though in our
Translation it is rendered freed, instead of Justified from sin. And in this
sense St. Austin understood this Acts 13.39. as I find him quoted. And to this
sense of the word Justify, agrees the reading of Revel. 22.11. which some upon
occasion use. Let him that is filthy be filthy still: and he that is Righteous,
let him be Justified still. To the same sense of the word Justify, some alledg
Romans 8.30. Tit. 3.5. compared with Verse 7. and 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, but ye are Justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and
by the spirit of our God. Where Justification seems to be ascribed unto the
Spirit of God in one respect, as to the Lord Jesus in another. And doubtless
Justification is the effect of the operation of all the Blessed Trinity, though
the manner of their operation be different.

Now that to be Justified from all things from which ye could not be Justified
by the Law of Moses, may be understood in this sense, there are two things to
be said to render it probable. The one is the good agreement which this sense
has with other places of Scripture, which show that men are freed from sin
through Christ by his Gospel, so as they could not be freed from it by the Law
of Moses. Thus Heb. 7.18, 19. There is verily a disannulling of the Commandment
going before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof. For the Law made
nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did. And again Romans 8.2,
3, 4. For the Law of the Spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus, has made me
free from the Law of sin and of death. For what the Law could not do in that it
was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh that the Righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
So likewise Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not
under the Law, but under grace. By all which we see that the Law of Moses could
not Justify men from sin, as Christ by the Gospel Dispensation does, if by
being Justified from sin we understand a being freed from sin it self as to its
dominion.

The other thing which may incline us to understand the words under
consideration in this sense, is what may be observed from the context. St. Paul
had said in Verse 38. the words immediately before, Be it known to you men and
brethren, that through this man (Christ) is preached unto you the forgiveness
of sins. Now then if in Verse 39. he should mean no more by being Justified,
than a being Pardoned, he would seem but to say over the same thing again in
other words, which he had said before, which is not usual with him.

But if this should not be the meaning of those words: and should we suppose
that by being Justified from all things from which they could not be Justified
by the Law of Moses, should be meant a being Justified from the guilt of sin,
as that signifies a being freed from the punishment deserved by it; yet let us
consider whether it will necessarily follow that the Apostle in those words,
defines Justification by Remission of sin; or whether rather he does not
thereby only set forth the subsequent benefits that would accrue to them by
being Justified by believing, which could not be obtained by their observing
the Law of Moses. And if so, then the meaning would be only this, That by their
being Justified by their believing, they should be delivered from or secured
against the evil effects of their sin, from which they could be not secured by
observing the Law of Moses. Now that to be Justified by believing by virtue of
the blood of Christ, and to be freed from the punishment of sin, which is
Pardon, are two different things, seems to be very plain from those words of
St. Paul, Romans 5.9. where he says, much more than being now justified by his
blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. He infers the certainty of
their being Pardoned or saved from wrath, from their being Justified: and the
inference and that from which it is made, are doubtless two things. We see then
that men may be Pardoned by virtue of their being Justified, and so be
Justified from sin, and yet not Justified by their being Pardoned. It will no
more follow that because by Justification we are Pardoned, that therefore
Pardon is our Justification, than it will follow, that because by believing we
are Pardoned, that therefore our Pardon is our believing and our believing our
Pardon.

And now if we should understand the words Justified from all things from which
ye could not be Justified by the Law of Moses, in both the forementioned
senses, for a being delivered both from the guilt of sin, and from the power
and pollution of it, I know no inconvenience in it, both being true. But if we
do so, yet we do not thereby necessarily conclude Pardon of sin to be
Justification, but only that Pardon of sin is by Justification, as depending
upon it. For Gods adjudging of us to have performed the condition in believing
on which he promised Pardon, which is his Justifying of us, together with his
imputing that Faith to us for Righteousness, intervenes, comes between our
believing and our being actually Pardoned, and is that which gives the
immediate right to it, as I showed before.

What has been said then may suffice, I suppose, to show that in all
probability no such thing can be concluded from those words in Acts 13. as that
we are Justified by being Pardoned.

The next Scripture I shall enquire into, is Romans 5.16. the words these. Not as
it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the judgment was by one or by
one offense to condemnation; but the free gift is of many offenses unto
Justification. That which is first necessary to be done here, is to consider
the Translation; because these words, the free gift of many offenses unto
Justification, seem as we have them in our Translation, a little uncouth and
somewhat unintelligible. I have seen the matter in this part of the Verse
Translated from the Original thus. But the free gift is unto Justification from
many offenses, not of many offenses. Dr. Hammond renders it thus: But the mercy
was by occasion of many offenses unto Justification. Agreeable to this reading
is that note of Grotius upon the place in these words: Occasion being taken
from many sins: and so is that of Piscator and Simplicius, in these words:
Occasion being taken not only from the sin of Adam, but also from the proper
sins of all believers. So that the sense of the place according to this
rendering of the words, seems to be to this effect. That from the sad condition
into which men were fallen, not only by the one offense of Adam, but also by
their own many personal offenses, God took occasion to manifest his own Grace
and Mercy through Christ, to miserable men, in giving and granting them new
terms, by which they might attain unto Justification, or a being approved of by
God as Righteous, their many offenses notwithstanding. And this in Verse 17. is
called the gift of Righteousness; and in Verse 18. the free gift unto
Justification of life, through the Righteousness of one, to wit, Christ. And
accordingly the grant which God has made us of being saved by Faith in Jesus
Christ, is said to be of Grace and to be the gift of God. By Grace are ye
saved, through Faith, and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God. Ephesians.
2.8. Now according to this rendering of the words by all these great men of
Learning, there is not the least appearance of any such thing as that
Justification is by Remission of sin.

None of those worthy persons abovementioned do say the free gift is of many
offenses, but all of them say it is from many offenses. So that if we read it
thus according to the Translation I first mentioned, the free gift is unto
Justification from many offenses; the sense will be this, I conceive: That
through the free gift, we are by Justification secured from suffering the
desert of our many offenses; and is the same in sense with the interpretation
of Acts 13.39. last suggested. Where was showed that though Remission of sin is
by Justification; that is, a benefit accruing to us thereby; yet we cannot
therefore say that Justification is by Remission of sin. The terms are not
convertible: we cannot so well say that Justification is by Remission of sin,
as we can that Remission of sin is by Justification.

The other Scripture which is much insisted on to prove Remission of sin is
Justification, or that Justification stands in Remission of sin, is Romans 4.6,
7. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God
imputes Righteousness without works, saying, blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. In which words, as it is argued,
Justification is described by Gods forgiving iniquity. But then it is
counter-argued, that this description by David, seems not to be a description
of the Justification of the man to whom God imputes Righteousness without
works, but a description of his happy state and condition in having his sins
Pardoned. St. Paul does not say even as David describes the Justification of
the man to whom God imputes Righteousness, but the Blessedness of the man. Now
the blessedness of having sin Pardoned, is a benefit consequent upon a man's
believing, and so of his being Justified by that belief: for Pardon is promised
but on that condition, Acts 10.43. And the promise and the condition of the
promise cannot be the same. Which very consideration, if there were no more,
were enough to show that Justification is not described by Forgiveness of sin.

It appears at first sight that these words of the Psalmist were brought to
prove somewhat said by St. Paul a little before. And if they should be brought
to prove that Faith is counted to a man for Righteousness, which was the thing
St. Paul had asserted in the next precedent Verse, then they could not be
brought to prove that Forgiveness of sin is counted to him for Righteousness;
for Faith and Forgiveness of sin, are two different things. By this it appears
already, that these words of David were not alleged to prove Justification to
be by Remission of sin, as it will further appear by and by.

To the end then we may the better understand for what purpose these words of
David are here recited by St. Paul, we will consider his words in the two next
precedent Verses. Now to him that works (says he) is the reward not reckoned
of Grace but of Debt, Verse 4. In which words St. Paul seems to have stated the
opinion of the Pharisaical Jews, against whom he disputed. They held, as it
seems, that the reward, to wit, all the benefit, all the happiness they
expected from God, to be due to them as a debt for their observing the Law of
Moses. They did not expect that their obedience should be accepted or counted
to them for Righteousness for the sake of another and upon the account of the
Death and Sacrifice of the Messiah: for they held that he, when he should come,
should never die, John 12.34. and that therefore their sin was not to be
expiated by the Sacrifice of his death, but by their own legal Sacrifices, and
that the blood of Bulls and Goats did take away sin, Heb. 10.4. and that those
Sacrifices with their other legal observances were of themselves their
Righteousness, and that upon account hereof, Justification and Life were due to
them in the nature of a debt in opposition to Grace; and that the Gentiles were
ungodly and incapable of Righteousness and Justification, until they were
Proselytes to their way of worship. This is that St. Paul calls their own
Righteousness in opposition to that which is of God by Faith of Jesus Christ,
Phil. 3.9. By all which they rendered the death of Christ of none effect, and
Justification to be of Works and not of Grace, as appears by Gal. 2.21. and
5.4. In Verse 5. St. Paul asserts the contrary, to wit, That to him that
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is
counted to him for Righteousness. Which assertion of St. Paul if true, proves
the reward to be of Grace and not of Debt, whether by Reward you understand
only Justification, or also the benefits subsequent to it. For if God count
such men's Faith for Righteousness which work not, which have no such works as
by which to reckon the reward to be of Debt and not of Grace, yea such men's
Faith for Righteousness, which had been ungodly; then the reward must needs be
of Grace and not of Debt. This being a self-evident truth, That after a man by
sin has once made a forfeiture of all to God, whatever good he after receives
from him, must needs be of Grace. Which made St. Paul say, All have sinned and
come short of the glory of God, being Justified freely by his Grace, and that
too through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3.23.24.

These words of David then in Verse. 6, 7. seem to be alleged by St. Paul by
way of confirmation of his aforesaid doctrine, and to prove out of one of the
sacred Books owned by his adversaries, that their worthy Ancestors, such as
David, whom they could not deny to be Justified men, acknowledged themselves
sinners, such as stood in need of Pardon, and such as counted it their great
happiness to be Pardoned; and that therefore they could not be looked upon as
receiving the reward of Debt, but of Grace. For when he says, even as David
also describes the blessedness of the man to whom God imputes Righteousness
without Works, saying, blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, etc. it
thereby appears that he looked upon those words of David to be fully agreeable
to his own doctrine asserted in Verse 5. in opposition to his adversaries
conceit and opinion touching the rewards being reckoned of Debt and not of
Grace. And indeed how could St. Paul think better to convince them of their
error, and to shame them out of their conceit of meriting the reward by
observing the Law of Moses, then by showing them that their famous Ancestors
who observed the Law of Moses as well as any, were yet so far from claiming the
reward of their obedience as a Debt by way of Merit, that they acknowledged
themselves sinners, and therefore undeserving, and counted it their great
felicity to be Pardoned through the great mercy and favor of God.

We will yet consider this matter a little more particularly and distinctly.
The thing St. Paul asserts against his misbelieving adversaries, is as I have
said, that the reward is of Grace and not of Debt, which he makes out two ways.
1. From the nature of that Righteousness which is rewarded. 2. From the nature
of that reward it self. First, from the nature of the Righteousness that is
rewarded; and this is described by the condition or quality of the person in
whom this Righteousness is found, he that works not; that is, though it be
one that has not observed the Law of Moses in being Circumcised and the like.
And that he means such an one by him that works not and yet may be Righteous,
appears by the instance he gives in Abraham's case, who was Righteous with the
Righteousness of Faith, before ever he was Circumcised, Verse 9, 10. 2. It is
described by the nature and property of that Faith which is the Christians
Righteousness; it is a believing in him, that Justifies the ungodly upon his
repentance and belief in the Lord Jesus. Which very belief contains in the
nature of it, a firm persuasion that Gods Justifying of such a person must
needs be of Grace and not of Debt. 3. It is described by that act of God by
which such a Faith becomes a man's Righteousness, and that is by way of
imputation or account: his Faith is counted to him for Righteousness, which
argues it to be of Grace and Favor, because he to whom it is so imputed, is
otherwise a sinner ungodly and upon that account cannot merit it. Now then if
the Righteousness it self which is rewarded, be of Grace, then the reward of
that Righteousness must needs be of Grace. This we see is one way by which St.
Paul makes out the reward to be of Grace and not of Debt.

Secondly, the other way is from the nature of the reward of that
Righteousness. And this I call another way of proving the reward to be of Grace
and not of Debt. For when St. Paul says Verse 6. even as David also
describes, etc. that word also, seems to signify an addition of proof of his
assertion, by another medium. And this medium is taken from the nature of the
reward of that Righteousness which God imputes to men in Justifying them, as
his former was from the nature of the Righteousness it self. And the Apostles
argument or proof is to this effect. The reward of that Righteousness by which
God Justifies men, must needs be of Grace and not of Debt, because in great
part it consists in Remission of sins, and Remission of sin is an act of Grace
in the natural notion of it and in the common sense of mankind.

And that St. Paul's design in alleging this saying of David, was not to show
that Remission of sin is the Righteousness by which men are Justified, but the
reward of it, appears by the very tenor and purport of his words. For he does
not say that David describes the Righteousness or Justification of the man to
whom God imputes Righteousness, as we have cause to think he would have done
if he had known or thought that Remission of sin had been men's Righteousness or
Justification; but he says, he describes the blessedness of that man to whom
God imputes Righteousness. Now what does blessedness in Scripture import, when
applied to men, but some happiness vouchsafed them as an effect of Gods Grace,
yet so as by way of reward also of the performance of their duty? Thus, Blessed
is the man that fears the Lord. Blessed are they that hear the word of God
and keep it. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have
right to the Tree of Life, and the like. So here, the blessedness of that man
to whom God imputes Faith for Righteousness, seems to signify the happiness
that does accrue to such a man as a reward of that Faith which is imputed for
Righteousness, or of that Righteousness which is imputed: and the happiness
here specified which does accrue to such a man, is the having his sins Pardoned.

Now to understand St. Paul here in this sense, does fully agree with his scope
and design in hand, which was to prove the reward to be of Grace and not of
Debt. After he had opposed the Righteousness of Faith to the Pharisaical Jews
Righteousness by works of the Law; then he shows the reward of this
Righteousness to be of Grace and not of Debt, because it stands in Remission of
sin. And whereas he does not use the word reward here, but the word
blessedness, which yet signifies the same thing, it was probably but to
accommodate his speech to David's dialect, whose words he recites. And as the
sense I have insisted on, corresponds fully with the Apostles scope and design
here. So it does also with the tenor of the Covenant of Grace and the
Scriptures elsewhere, which promise Pardon of sin on condition of that Faith
which is imputed for Righteousness, as a reward of it and motive to it.

And if this sense now represented be the sense of St. Paul in these Verses, or
much what the same (and you see what reason there is to think it is) then his
intent here was not to show that we are Justified by being Pardoned: he does
not say it is Pardon of sin which is imputed for Righteousness, but Faith: Nor
does he say that David describes the Righteousness of the Justified man in
saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are Forgiven, but the blessedness of
that man, or the reward of his Righteousness.

And by this time I am thinking, much more need not be said touching the
difference between Justification and Remission of sin, nor to show that
Justification does not stand only in Remission of sin. For whatever is the
right in this matter, there is the less need of contending about it, since
those who place Justification in Remission of sin, do hold an effectual
operative Faith, the necessary condition of obtaining it, as well as they do,
who place Justification in the Righteousness of Faith. The one places the
matter of our Justification in the performance of the same condition necessary
to Justification; upon which performance the greatest stress is to be laid in
this matter: because those who perform the condition of the promise of the
Gospel, shall be sure to be Justified, whether their judgment about the nature
of Justification be right or no: whereas without this performance they cannot,
though their notion of the nature of Justification should be never so orthodox
and sound. But although the difference seems to be of no great moment, yet in
as much as there is Divine Wisdom in fitting means to ends, and in appointing
such or such a thing to such an use and not to another or rather than to
another; and that those which he has pitched upon, are in some respect or
other better for the purpose than any we can substitute in their room; it
follows then that if God has placed the matter of our Justification in the
Righteousness which is by Faith, rather than in Remission of sin, that then we
should not confine it to Remission of sin only.

And to speak plainly, I cannot think it a matter of such indifferency whether
we hold Remission of sin our only Justification, or Gods adjudging us Righteous
upon the account of the Righteousness of Faith, but that it is well worthy our
best endeavors to find out which of these opinions has the Holy Scripture on
its side, if it were but for this reason, if there were no more.

1. The notion of Justification by the Righteousness of Faith, is a more ready
and more effectual way to detect the opinion of error and mistake, which
places Justification in the imputation of the Righteousness of Christ to us in
it self and not only in its effects, than the notion of Justification by
Remission of sin is. For so long as the Scripture does so plentifully and
expressly testify as it does, that it is a Righteousness by which we are
Justified, it is nothing so easy to satisfy the reason of men's minds, either
from the Scripture or from the nature of the thing it self, why Remission of
sin should be styled our Righteousness rather than the Righteousness of Christ
imputed to us; as it is to convince them that neither the one nor the other is
in Scripture styled our Righteousness in their sense, but that it is the
Righteousness of Faith that is so styled there. While the question is only,
which is counted to us for Righteousness, whether the Righteousness of Christ
imputed, in the sense usually opposed, or Remission of sin; the competition is
nothing so unequal in respect of evidence from Scripture and from the nature of
the thing, as it is when the question is, whether the Righteousness of Christ
imputed, or the Righteousness of Faith by virtue of his Righteousness, is
counted to us for Righteousness; because the Scripture is express for this, but
not for either of the other. Let this then be but once well proved, that it is
Faith it self, as the principle of Evangelical Righteousness, that is the thing
which is imputed to us for Righteousness, and that it is by it that God
Justifies us; and the opinion of being Justified by the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness in the sense usually impugned, will soon fall to the ground. If
the former notion be but well seated in the mind, the later will of it self
fall out of it.

Considering then the dubiousness of both the foresaid opinions, there is the
less reason to wonder that the controversy should continue so long as it has
done, between those who place Justification in the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, and those who place it only in Remission of sin. For although
the reasonings are (as I think) unanswerable which the one use against placing
Justification in the imputation of Christ's Righteousness in the sense in which
they oppose it: yet while their arguings have not perhaps been so irrefragable
for placing it in Remission of sin, it has doubtless made the other the more
tenacious in their opinion, unless they could see better ground for that
opinion which has been offered them in exchange for theirs, than has been
tendered them. Whereas had Justification been placed in the Righteousness of
Faith and sincerity, instead of being placed in Remission of sin: and had those
Scriptures been duly opened and applied, by which it may with great strength
and clear evidence be proved, that it is Faith or the obedience of Faith which
is imputed to us for Righteousness, and by which we are Justified by God; the
controversy would have been managed with greater advantage for the convincing
of those of opposite opinion, than it has been by asserting that we are
Justified by being Pardoned; and would sooner have inclined them in all
probability, to have exchanged their own notion of the Righteousness of
Justification, for this. And the reason hereof is this; because the Scripture
is express and plain for this, whereas so far as I can find, there is no one
Text in all the Bible, that does expressly affirm that Pardon of sin is our
Righteousness, or that it is counted to us for such, no more than there is that
the Righteousness of Christ is in it self imputed to us for Righteousness, and
formally and not only vertually made ours.

2. Besides all this, it is to be considered, whether the doctrine touching the
imputation of the Righteousness of Faith to Justification, does not tend more
and more directly to work in men's minds a sense of the necessity of a personal
inherent Righteousness in order to their being approved of as Righteous, than
that does which teaches that men are made or accounted Righteous when
Justified, by having their Unrighteousness forgiven. For there seems to be more
occasion and room left by the one notion than by the other, for such as have a
mind to be happy without being truly Righteous, to hope that they may be so.
For when they apprehend that they may become Righteous by having their
Unrighteousness Pardoned, they will probably be more apt and prone to presume
through the abundant mercy of God to be made or accounted Righteous this way
upon their speculative Faith, though not truly inherently Righteous, then they
would or could be, were they but convinced that nothing less will pass for
Righteousness in the account of God in Justifying of men, then that which is
real personal inherent Righteousness indeed.

We find in Scripture how apt and ready men have been, to hope to be Justified
and Saved by Faith without works or inherent Righteousness, upon the account of
a speculative or notional Faith, Jam. 2. Aagainst which deceitful notion St.
John also warned the Christians, when he said, Little children, let no man
deceive you: he that does righteousness is righteous, 1 John 3.7. as if he
should have said, you will be deceived if you suffer yourselves to be persuaded
to think you may be Righteous any other way, without doing Righteousness. Those
deluded people it is probable, were willing to interpret the doctrine concerning
Faith when but generally and indefinitely expressed, to a sense which would
indulge them in a life not truly holy; as alas too many do at this day, who
upon a general inoperate belief of the Articles of the Christian Faith, doubt
not but they shall be Justified by being Pardoned, or by having Christ's
Righteousness so imputed to them as to be Righteous with his Righteousness. And
although they be told that such a Faith as works by love, is necessary to their
Justification as a condition of it, yet so long as Justification is defined by
that which is esteemed intrinsically essential to Justification, without such a
Righteousness of Faith; and so long as they apprehend there is a way of being
accounted Righteous by being Pardoned; they will not so easily, as otherwise
they would, be brought to a due sense of the necessity of a personal inherent
Righteousness unto Justification. Whereas were they but convinced that God will
account none Righteous upon any account whatsoever, nor Pardon their
Unrighteousness, who are not Righteous indeed with a personal inherent
Righteousness, they would be left without all hope of being Righteous or of
being accepted as Righteous any way, without this inherent Righteousness. And
by this means they would come under a more sensible obligation of becoming
inherently Righteous indeed, as ever they hope to be Justified as Righteous in
one respect, or Pardoned as sinners in another. And it is a good rule, that in
all controversies about points of Christian doctrine which have an influence on
practice, as all generally have, it is still safest to adhere to that sense
which most obliges men to their duty, and most directly and indubitably tends
to their happiness; as this touching Justification by the Righteousness of
Faith, rather then by Remission of sin, I conceive does.

3. Moreover to place Justification in Pardon, disagrees to the natural notion
which men have both of Pardon and Justification. Pardon in the natural notion
of it supposes guilt: as on the contrary, Justification in the natural notion
of it, supposes Guiltlesness or Righteousness in reference to the matter or
cause wherein a person is Justified; unless when the word Justification is used
in an abusive seuse to signify the perverting of justice by Justifying the
wicked. To say a person is Justified when we thereby only mean that he is
Pardoned, gives an uncertain sound in common sense, and Ministers occasion for
the notion of Justification to lie uneven and to remain unfixt in the mind.
What I recited out of Mr. Gataker in my first Chapter, may here again be
remembered; who says, To Justify is not to Pardon; for the word is never found
so used, either in the Hebrew or Greek writers, sacred or profane, nor in our
common speech. And if so, why should it be made use of to signify Pardon,
contrary to the use not only of Profane but of Sacred Authors, and common
speech? Nor can I conceive upon supposition of the truth of Mr. Gataker's
assertion, but to use the word Justification to signify Pardon, or the word
Pardon to signify that thing which is Justification, must needs convey the
true notion of Justification to the minds of men with disadvantage, as tending
to obscure it, if not to drown the proper notion of it.

4. Furthermore, to place Justification in Remission of sin, is to confound
things of quite a different nature, for so Justification and Remission of sin,
I conceive, are. The subject matter of a man's Justification, is his
Righteousness; but the subject matter of his Pardon, is his Unrighteousness.
The subject matter of a man's Justification, is his present conformity to the
terms of the Law of Grace; but the subject matter of his Pardon, is his past
nonconformity to that Law and what other Law of God soever he has
transgressed. It also confounds Gods Justifying act and his Pardoning act, as
if they were both one. Nay more then so, it excludes that which is most
properly Gods Justifying act, and introduces his Pardoning act in the room of
it. For it supposes God to account or to make a man Righteous by pardoning his
Unrighteousness, instead of his adjudging him Righteous in that he has
performed the terms of the Gospel, on condition of which he promised him Pardon.

5. Lastly, the notion of Justification by Remission of sin, does not, so far
as I can see upon the most serious consideration, at all agree with St. Paul's
stated notion of Evangelical Justification, in opposition to the Jewish notion
of Justification by the Law or works of the Law. For he does not represent the
difference of the notion of Justification which he asserts, and that which he
opposes, to lie in this, that the one stands in a pretended Righteousness, and
the other in the Pardon of men's Unrighteousness, but in the different kinds of
Righteousness, the one standing in the Righteousness of Faith or by Faith, the
other in the Righteousness of the Law or by the works of the Law. The Gentiles,
says he, which followed not after Righteousness, have attained unto
Righteousness, even the Righteousness which is of Faith. There is the Christian
Justification. But Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness, has
not attained to the Law of Righteousness, wherefore? because they sought it not
by Faith, but as it were by the works of the Law: and there is the Jewish
Justification, Romans 9.30, 31, 32. Not having mine own Righteousness, which is
of the Law, but the Righteousness which is by Faith, Phil. 3.9. Knowing that a
man is not Justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ,
Gal. 2.16. The formal difference we see which St. Paul makes between the two
notions of Justification, lies in the different kinds of Righteousness. The
Christian or Evangelical Righteousness consisting in a belief of and obedience
to the doctrine and precepts of the Gospel, but the Jewish Righteousness as
they conceited in their conformity to the Law of Moses. But St. Paul and the
Jews both held Justification to be by a Righteousness. Now to say we are
Justified by being Pardoned, does not at all agree with St. Paul's notion of
being Justified by an Evangelical Righteousness of Faith: because Pardon of sin
is no such Righteousness: it is neither a believing of the Gospel, nor act of
obedience to it; but is part of the reward promised to such a Righteousness.
And as such it is sometime alleged indeed to prove Justification by Faith to be
of Grace and not of debt, as I have showed from Romans 4. but never throughout
the whole Scripture, styled Righteousness, that ever I could find. And if any
think it is employed in such Scriptures where the reward of Righteousness is
styled Righteousness by a Figure; yet if it should be so, it would no more
prove Remission of sin to be Justification, than it will prove Glorification to
be Justification; which yet in St. Paul's account is quite different from it.
For he says, Whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8.30.

And now for these reasons I hope it will not be thought unnecessary nor
unprofitable to have endeavored to show that there is a difference between
Justification and Remission of sin: however what has been done herein is
submitted to the consideration and judgment of the judicious Reader.

But there is another opinion which I but now mentioned of worse consequence,
as I apprehend it, of which I have said but little. And that is the opinion of
those who place our Justification in the imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ to us; not only in its effects as we all hold, but in it self, as if it
were so transferred to us, that we were Righteous with the very same personal
and numerical Righteousness wherewith he himself is Righteous, and that it is
so reckoned ours, as if we had wrought it in our own persons; yea that indeed
we have wrought it in and by him. The nakedness of which opinion has been
plentifully exposed by others; and I shall not concern my self with it now
further than what I have already done in these papers. Wherein I have showed
that the Righteousness of Christ operates to our Justification, in quite
another way: And likewise that it is the Christian Faith as operative and
practical, that is imputed to us for Righteousness, and that by virtue of
Christ's Righteousness and Gods act of Grace upon the account of it. But then
this, which yet is the plain doctrine of the Holy Scripture, is quite another
thing than the transferring of Christ's Righteousness it self to us.

Indeed, this opinion excludes and shoulders out the Christian Evangelical
Righteousness, from the office and use to which God has designed it, and is
attended with several dangerous consequences and absurdities otherwise, as has
been set forth at large in several Books which treat of this subject, which I
shall forbear to repeat. For my design in these papers, was not to treat of
Justification in a way of controversy, nor so much to detect what is to be
avoided, as what is to be embraced and held fast in this matter. For I reckon,
that if that which is the truth be received into the mind upon satisfactory
grounds, that which is its contrary, will fall off of it self.

The Conclusion.
WE have now seen how much has been done by the Eternal Father and his Holy
Son our Blessed Savior, that we might be Justified, Pardoned and Glorified:
all things on their part are prepared and made ready. The Father has made and
the Son has fulfilled the Law of Mediation, to bring about a Reconciliation
between an offended God and us Rebel-Creatures. Christ has now no more sorrows
nor pains, nor deaths to undergo and suffer for us. There are no terms of Grace
and Mercy, of Pardon and Peace, of deliverance from Hell and of obtaining the
Glory of Heaven, which are not already obtained for us, and by the Gospel
plainly made known and freely offered to us.

For it is, as I have showed, of Grace in God and obtained by the Mediatorial
Righteousness of Christ, that Faith or the Righteousness by Faith is made the
condition of Pardon of sin and eternal Life, as well as the conferring of
Pardon and Life is, on that condition.

Since then such terms of happiness are obtained for us; it remains on our part
that we receive not this Grace of God in vain, but that we be as careful to
observe those terms, as we are desirous to enjoy the benefits annexed to them;
because we cannot enjoy the one without observing the other. We cannot enjoy
the benefits of the new Covenant, but by becoming new creatures and by living
new lives. For this is the new Righteousness by Faith, on condition of which
the great promises of the new Covenant are made. Whoever will come to the
Wedding Supper of the Lamb, must come in his Wedding garment, or else he will
be excluded. And the Wedding garment in which the Bride the Lambs Wife is said
to be arrayed, is said to be the Righteousness of Saints, Revel. 19.8. And now
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, we must keep the Feast on this
Sacrifice, not with the old leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, which is the Evangelical Righteousness
I have been speaking so much of. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.

Old things are past away now, and behold all things are become new. Our old
Righteousness in which man was first made, is lost, and a new Righteousness
instituted. In the room of the old terms of happiness, perfect innocence, now
the new ones of Faith and godly Sincerity are introduced. This new and living
way into Heaven is now consecrated for us through the flesh and blood of Jesus
Christ. Nothing but a new man, a new heart, a new spirit and newness of life,
will correspond or suit with the new Covenant, nor with the new Jerusalem which
is above. These are all of one piece, there is no parting of them, nor having
an interest in the one, without having the other.

And now considering that all this happiness of Pardon of sin and the Glory to
come, and the terms of obtaining both, is brought about only by the Grace of
our God and the Mediatorial Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ; what can we
do less than to join with those Redeemed of the Lord mentioned in Rev. 5. who
are said to have sung a new song to the everlasting honor of our Redeemer,
saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book and to open the Seals thereof: for
thou wast slain, and have Redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; and have made us unto our God
kings and priests. How much more cause have we to sound forth the praises of
the Redeemer of the World, than those Myriads of Holy Angels, which have no
such need of a Savior as we have? Who yet out of a grateful sense of it,
celebrate the memory of his most wonderful and worthy undertaking and
performance for the Redemption of us poor miserable and lost men; Saying with a
loud voice, worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches,
and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.

And well may we with those blessed spirits sing aloud of the riches, wisdom,
and strength of the Lamb that was slain, as most worthy to receive these,
because he uses them to so worthy a purpose as to lift up a miserable world
that was cast down and laid very low indeed. He certainly is most worthy of his
unsearchable riches, since such is his goodness as that he was not content to
be happy alone, nor to see us lie in poverty and misery, so long as he was able
to relieve us and make us happy with his riches, but rather than he would be
wanting in this, he chose for some time in some sort to empty himself to fill
us. Ye know, says St. Paul, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might
be made rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. This is not the manner of men indeed, nor was it in
the power of Angels: and therefore his Glory is to be exalted above the earth
and heavens, and both made to ring with joyful acclamations and praises of and
to our blessed Redeemer.

And it is very observable that those in Revel. 14. who are said to have sung a
new song before the throne, are described by the Virginity of their
Christianity, as not being prevailed upon by any temptations whatsoever, to be
unfaithful to Christ, but are said to be such as do follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, and in whose mouths is found no guile; still denoting
that sincerity by which the Evangelical Righteousness has been described. And
it is further observable also, that it is said there, that no man could learn
this new song, but those which are Redeemed from the earth. And the reason is
evident, because those who mostly and chiefly mind earthly things, and set
their affections upon them (as those which are not Redeemed from the earth do)
neither have nor can have such a grateful sense of that stupendous ravishing
and transporting love and goodness of our blessed Redeemer, in what he has
done and suffered for us, as is requisite to qualify them to sound forth his
praises with that feeling and affection, which the Redeemed of the Lord do. Our
Savior has told us, that the cares of this world, the deceitfulness of riches
and the lusts and pleasures of other things; choke the word of the Kingdom, and
so hinder its operation. Though men hear it and profess it, yet the great sense
which too many such have of these present things, stifles their sense of
Spiritual, invisible and absent things, so that they prevail not upon them to
work any such deep sense in them of the unparalled love and goodness of our
Savior, in procuring these things for us, as they do upon them who have
learned to sing that new song. These that are Unredeemed from the earth, they
savor the things of the flesh and of the world, more than the things which be
of God, and therefore they cannot sing this new Song with Grace in their hearts
to him.

None then we see but new Covenant men, such as are renewed in the spirit of
their minds, can learn this new song: they are a peculiar sort of men and
women, a choice or chosen generation that can show forth the praises of him who
has called them out of darkness into his marvelous light. Those whom the Lamb
that was slain has Redeemed from Hell by his own blood, are such who are first
Redeemed from the earth; both from the earthly minds, and evil manners of men
of the earth whose portion is only in this life.

This blessed Redeemer whose high praises should be in our mouths, is the Lord
from Heaven, and his Kingdom is not of this world, as he himself said: and they
must be of a Heavenly extraction and born from above, that can skill of the
manner of his Kingdom and Government, and of the nature of the work and
business of that people. The discourse of things proper to that spiritual
state, is to mere natural men almost like speaking to them in a language they
do not understand. Hence when Nicodemus heard our Savior discourse of the
necessity of being born again or from above, his thoughts ran of a man's
entering a second time into his mothers womb to be born again. The things of
the Spirit of God to the natural man, are foolishness; so far is he alienated
from the life of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. And the Scripture speaks of the sons of God,
such as are born from above, as of persons whom the world knows not, 1 John
3.1. All this still shows how absolutely necessary it is in order to our
learning the new song which is sung before the throne to the honor of the Lamb
of God that takes away the sins of the world, that we become new men, endued
with new principles of living, and with a new Righteousness.

And by being so, we shall not only be qualified to offer spiritual Sacrifices
of thanksgiving, acceptable to our Savior and to the Father by him, but we
shall thereby also recommend him to the world as altogether lovely; which is
the greatest honor we can do him. For the new man is created after his
likeness, in purity, humility and charity; in universal Righteousness,
Gentleness, and Goodness, in which respect the followers of Christ are said to
be partakers of a Divine nature, and to have put on Christ. And when men see
that his Disciples become such by following his doctrine and example; this
redounds to the honor of their master from whom they learned it, and greatly
tends to reconcile men's thoughts and affections to him and to his Religion. And
thus they help forward his great design (on which he set his heart) of
recovering those that were run from God and goodness and from their own
happiness; than in doing which we cannot gratify him more or please him
better. By becoming such and by being in the world as he was in the world, we
shall show forth the virtues of our Lord, and what is venerable and
praiseworthy in him: In respect whereof, his followers are said to be the
glory of Christ.

And if we have any mind to make our blessed Savior any other return of that
stupendous Love which he has expressed toward us, besides songs of praise and
thanksgiving to the honor of his name, he has told us how we may do it to his
great satisfaction, when he said, If ye love me, keep my Commandments, John
14.15. As if he should have said, if ye would express the grateful sense of my
love to you by expressions of yours to me, then keep my Commandments. For says
he again, Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you (John 15.14.) He
that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me (Ver. 21.)
Our doing his Commandments tends to the full accomplishment of his design of
reconciling God and us, and so of making us happy. For unless we keep his
Commandments, we cannot be reconciled to God, and consequently God will not be
reconciled to us. So that if we will not keep his Commandments, we frustrate
and disappoint him of his design of good toward us, and render all his sore
sufferings to bring this to pass, to be in vain and of none effect in reference
to us, which must needs much displease him. But on the contrary, if we do keep
his Commandments, then he has the end of his Mediatorial undertaking, which is
the reconciling God to us and us to God, which cannot but be matter of high
satisfaction and pleasure to him, then in contributing toward which, we can no
way better gratify him for all the love he has showed us.

And among all the things which he has Commanded us, there is one which he
has signalized for his Commandment in special, as that on which he has much
set his heart, which he expresses in these words: A new Commandment give I
unto you, that ye love one another as I have loved you, that ye also love one
another, John 13.34. In doing of which we shall write after his copy, and show
the world whose Disciples we are, and by whom we have been taught. For by this,
says he, shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to
another, Ver. 35.

And we do in some poor measure love one another as he has loved us, when we
put on bowels of mercy and kindness toward one another; for so did he toward
us when he put on our nature and suffered for us in it. And so we do also when
we bear one another burdens and so fulfill this Law of Christ. For he was
touched with the feeling of our infirmities: he himself took on him our
infirmities and bore our sicknesses, as the Scripture speaks. And so we do
likewise when we prefer the public good the good of many, before our own ease
and private convenience, like St. Paul who sought not his own profit, as he
says, but the profit of many that they might be saved. For thus our Savior
loved us, when he exposed himself to the sorest sufferings for the public good
of mankind. And because he thus laid down his life for us, therefore we also
ought to lay down our lives for the brethren, when the interest and public
concern of the Church of God calls for it. And so we do in like manner love one
another as he has loved us, when we use our wisdom, riches, and power to make
others happy as well as our selves. For so has our blessed Savior used his to
make us happy: Yea he made himself poor that we through his poverty might be
made rich. Indeed there is so much of that in this love which enabled our
blessed Savior to do and suffer so wonderfully for us, for our good and
benefit as he did, that in nothing we draw more near him, nor in any thing make
our selves more like him; nor can we in any thing more please him, than in
loving another, as he has loved us. In so much as St. John says, He that
dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16.

And if we love one another as he has loved us, we shall not only resemble him
in the act of love and doing good, but also in the pleasure and satisfaction
which he took and does take in loving us and doing us good as he has done; and
so shall in some sort enter into our masters joy, now for the present, by
sharing with him in the joy of doing good. As for our blessed Savior, the
prospect which he had of how much good he should procure and do for a poor
miserable undone world, by the shame and pain which he suffered for us, and the
satisfaction and joy that would accrue to him thereby, was that which in a
great measure carried him through those unparalled sufferings which he
underwent for us. He for the joy that was set before him endured the Cross and
despised the shame, Heb. 12.2. The joy that was set before him, was not only
his own glorious exaltation, as the reward of his sufferings, but also the
deliverance and exaltation which he should procure for all the Redeemed of the
Lord. Touching this joy and pleasure, and the high content and satisfaction
which does accrue to our Lord and Savior upon the account of the good the
world receives by what he has done, suffered and does do for it, the Prophet
spoke by way of prediction, when he said, He shall see of the travel of his
soul and shall be satisfied, Isa. 53.11. What other motive do we think has the
Almighty God and Father of all, to fill Heaven and Earth with his goodness, and
to commiserate a lost world, and to raise up the Tabernacle of Adam that was
fallen, but the pleasure he takes in his love, and in doing good? He pardons
iniquity and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage, and
why? But because he delights in mercy. He exercises loving kindness,
Judgment and Righteousness in the earth, and why? For in these things I
delight, says the Lord, Jer. 9.24.

And most certain it is that if we love one another as Christ has loved us, if
we are thus partakers of a Divine nature, and are of the spirit and temper of
Christ, and in that sense have put on Christ; if we do good to others by easing
them of their burdens and supplying their needs both spiritual and temporal,
refreshing and comforting them both in body and mind; and the like, we shall
not fail of great pleasure and satisfaction of mind in doing thus, but shall
share with our blessed Redeemer in our measure, in that joy and satisfaction
which accrues to him in loving us and doing good to us. St. John the loving and
beloved Disciple of our Lord, when once he was sensible that he had been an
instrument of Converting men to Christianity, and of bad to persuade them to
become good, professes that he had no greater joy than to see his children
walking in truth, 3 John 4. The Scripture supposes it as a known and
experienced truth, that there is great consolation in love, when it says, if
there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, etc.
Phil. 2.1. Col. 2.2. There is doubtless no such solid satisfaction in any, no
nor in all worldy enjoyments, as there is in what does spring up to a man from
a sense of having done good in his life. I know, says Solomon, there is no
good in them, but for a man to rejoice and do good in his life. Eccles. 3.12.
The same Solomon says in another place, that a good man is satisfied from
himself. Prove. 14.14. And how comes it to pass that it is so? but from his
sense of being good and doing good. It is a more blessed thing, said our
Savior, to give than to receive. (Act. 20.35.) and it is so, as for other
reasons, so for this, because the pleasure of doing good in a good man, is
greater than the pleasure that comes in to another by receiving relief from him.

If then we would be glad to do somewhat that might be grateful to our blessed
Savior that has done so much for us: if we would at once both please him and
pleasure our selves with a Christ-like, with a God-like pleasure; then it
behooves us to be loving one another and doing good to one another, as he has
loved us and done good to us.

To conclude all then in a word; as the new Covenant it self is the fruit of
our Saviors love to us, so the Righteousness of this Covenant on condition of
which the blessings of it, Pardon of sin and eternal Life, are promised,
consists in such a Faith as works by love to God and our Savior, and in
loving one another as he has loved us, and by this Righteousness of Faith
through our Lord Jesus Christ, shall we be sure to be Justified by God, if it
be found in us.

THE END.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the signification and use of the word Justification, and a
description of Justification it self, Page 1 The description of Justification,
p. 7
CHAP. II. Of the nature of the Righteousness of Christ, and how it operates to
our Justification, p. 9 This Righteousness consists in his conformity to the
Law of Mediation, p. 10 The reason and end of that Law, and of our Saviors
conformity to it, p. 15 The Operative virtue of this Righteousness in reference
to our Justification, depends in part upon Divine Ordination, p. 27 And partly
upon its aptitude to such an end, p. 30 There is an aptitude in it to Reconcile
God to men in order to their Justification, p. 31 And so there is to Reconcile
men to God in order to the same end, p. 43
CHAP. III. How and in what respects the Covenant of Grace operates to our
Justification, p. 65 It does it by reconciling the Natural Law to penitent
sinners, p. 66 It does it also by instituting a new Righteousness, p. 82 What
that Righteousness is and wherein it does consist, p. 82 How this Righteousness
comes to be such, p. 94 The Covenant Operates toward our Justification, as it
is an instrument of making us Righteous, p. 104
CHAP. IV. Of Faith and how that operates to our Justification, p. 110 The
Covenant promises are conditional, p. 111 Faith the condition of those
promises, p. 115 What that Faith is which is the condition, ibid. Reasons why
Faith is made the condition, p. 128 In what capacity men are to perform that
condition, p. 144 How Faith more particularly and immediately operates to our
Justification, p. 186
CHAP. V. How God himself operates to our Justification, p. 189 Gods is said to
Justify in some respects more remote, p. 190 And in some respects more
immediate and appropriate, p. 191
CHAP. VI. Of the difference between Justification and Remission of sin, p. 199
That there is such a difference, is endeavored to be proved, ibid. This
difference illustrated by several instances, p. 200 Enquiry made whether
Justification can be proved to be by Remission of sin, from Acts 13.39. p. 217
Or from Romans 5.16. p. 223 Or from Romans 4.6, 7. p. 226 Reasons why the
difference between Justification and Remission of sin is to be taken notice of
and carefully observed, p. 240
The Conclusion, p. 255
ERRATA.
PAge 69. line 27. read have. p. 90. l. 11. r. and. p. 102. l. 15. for work r.
mark. p. 163. l. 18, 19 blot out for it is they are ascribed unto men. p. 180.
l. 26. for learn r. leave. p. 221. l. 12. r. not be.

Imprimatur.

Aug. 13. 1677 Guil. Jane, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris domest.

BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
DR. More's Reply to a late Answer to his Antidote against Idolatry, with the
Appendix. Oct.

H. Mori Opera Theologica. Fol.

Spenceri dissertatio de Vrim and Thummim. Oct.

Frederici Lossii Observationes Medicae. Oct.

Speed's Epigrammata Juvenilia, in 4 Parts divisa, Encomia, Seria, Satyras and
Jocosa. Oct.

Dr. William Smith's Unjust Man's Doom. Oct.

Two Sermons at the Assizes in Suffolk. Oct.

Two Sermon at Norwich: May 3. and May 29. 1676. Quar.

Account of Familism, as it is revived and propagated by the Quakers. Oct.

Mr. Hallywell's Discourse of the Excellency of Christianity. Oct.

Some Opinions of Mr. Hobbes considered, in a second Dialogue between Philautus
and Timothy. Oct.

Brerewood's Enquiries into the Diversities of Languages. Oct.

Mr. Lamb's Stop to the Course of Separation. Oct.

Sherlocks Discourse of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ. Oct.

Defense and Continuation of the Discourse, etc. Oct.

Answer to a scandalous Pamphlet entitled a Dialogue between Satan and
Sherlock. Quar.

Dr. Worthington's Great Duty of Self-resignation to the Divine Will. Oct.

Mr. Hotchkis Discourse of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to Us, and
our Sins to Him. Oct.

Gage's Survey of the West Indies. Oct.

Dr. Goodall's Vindication of the College of Physicians. Oct.

Smith's Pourtract of old Age. Oct.

Webster's History of Metals. Quar.

Dr. More's Remarques upon two late Ingenious Discourses, the one an Essay of
the Gravitation and Nongravitation of fluid Bodies, the other Observations
touching the Torricellian experiment. Oct.

Sydenham's Observationes Medicae.

An Account of Mr. Ferguson's Common-Place-Book, in two Letters between Mr.
Sherlock and Mr. Glanvil. Quar.

Dr. Grew's Comparative Anatomy of Trunks, together with an Account of their
Vegetation grounded thereupon. Oct.

Mr. Hallywell's Sacred Method of Saving Human Souls by Jesus Christ. Oct.

Mr. Sharp's two Sermons before the Lord Mayor. Quar.

Amyraldus Discourse of Divine Dreams, mentioned in Scripture: With Mr. Lowd's
Preface. Oct.

Comenii Janua Ling. Lat. Eng. with Cuts. Oct.

Allens Mystery of Iniquity unfoldded. Oct.

Animadversions on that part of Mr. Robert Fergusons Book of Justification. Oct.

A serious and friendly Address to the Non-Conformists, beginning with the
Anabaptists. Oct.

A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of
London, at Guild Hall Chapel: By George Thorp, B.D. Fellow of Gonvil and Caius
College in Cambridg, and Rector of St. Antholins, and St. John Baptist, London.
Quar.

A Fresh Suit against Independency: or the National Church way vindicated, the
Independent Church way Condemned: By the Author of the Stop to the Course of
Separation. Oct.

The History of the Donatists, by Thomas Long. B. D. and Prebendary of St.
Peter's Exon. Oct.

The Character of a Separatist, or sensuality the ground of Separation, to
which is added the Pharisees Lesson on Mat. 9.13. And an examination of Mr.
Hales Treatise of Schism. By Thomas Long, B. D. And Prebendary of St. Peter's
Exon. Oct.

A Course of Chemistry containing the easiest manner of performing those
Operations that are in use of Physic, Illustrated with many Curious Remarks,
and useful Discourses upon each Operation, Writ in French by Monsieur Nicolas
Lemery: Translated by Walter Harris Doctor of Physic. Oct.

A Postscript containing the Authors vindication of himself and Doctrine from
the imputations of Dr. John Owen. In his late Book styled, The Doctrine of
Justification by Faith through the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ.
By Thomas Hotchkis Rector of Stanton by Highworth in the County of Wilts.

THE END.

