A DISCOURSE of the Nature, Ends, and Difference OF THE Two Covenants. Evincing
in special, That FAITH as Justifying, is not opposed to WORKS of Evangelical
Obedience. WITH An APPENDIX of the Nature and Difference of saving and
ineffectual Faith, and the reason of that difference To which is prefixed a
PREFACE, by Mr. Rich. Baxter.

2 Pet. 1. 5. Add to your Faith, Virtue. Jam. 2. 22. And by Works was Faith
made perfect. LONDON Printed by I. Darby, for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1673.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THeology is the Doctrine of the Kingdom of God: A Kingdom is a State of
Government: Government is by Laws: He therefore that will understand any thing
in Divinity, must understand the Laws of God: And though there be many
inferior Particles, distinguished from the weighty things of the Law, which
few do clearly understand, yet is it necessary that we know in general, what
kind of Law, it is that we are under, and also that we know the most important
parts: If we understand not the Law of Tything Mint and Cummin, we must not be
ignorant of Judgment, Mercy and Faith, Matthew. 23. 23.

They that tell us we are now under no Laws, do tell us thereby that we are
under no Government, and consequently that God, and out Redeemer Jesus Christ,
is not the Governor of Believers. And he that knows that the Name [GOD] does
signify the Divine Relation to Man, as well as the Divine Nature, will know
that this is to deny a God, and to deny Jesus Christ; and rather to be called
Atheism, and Infidelity, than Antinomianism: Even they that had not the written
Law of Moses, had a Law of Nature, partly written out upon their hearts: And
Christians have both the Law of Nature Extrinsick, and the written Law of
Christ, and both (acccording to the various measures of Grace) written out upon
their hearts, that is, received by knowledge, Faith, Love, and readiness to
obey.

But they that know that we are under a Law (as those in Heaven, even Angels
are) yet do not all well understand what Law it is, and on what terms the
World, or the Church are governed, and must be judged. That the first Law of
Natural Innocence, as alone, or as to the Promissory part, or as to threatening
without mercies or remedy, is it that any part of the Earth is now governed by,
or under, is an intolerable Error: God promises not sinners everlasting life
on condition they be no sinners: That Promise ceased by a Cessation of the
Subjects capacity without any more ado, or possibility of reviving it. Nor does
God deal with any people according to the sole threatening of that Law, without
mercy, dispensation, or remedy. The Law of Grace was as truly made with all men
in Adam, Genesis 3. 15. as the Law of Innocence was. Though the Serpents Seed be
mentioned in it, that intimates not that any were such as then in the Loins of
lapsed Adam, but as consequently they would become such by rejecting and
abusing Grace, and so contracting a further Malignity. If Man, as in Adam's
loins, then was the Serpents Seed, then all God's Elect should be such, and so
be bruised, and not saved by Jesus Christ: For all then were really alike in
Adam. And to say, that God's mere Election and Reprobation, without any real
inherent difference existent, or foreseen, is the reason of denominating, some
the Seed of the Woman, and some the Seed of the Serpent, is an unproved fancy,
and irrational corrupting the Word of God.

All men therefore in lapsed Adam were at once under the guilt of Sin, and also
under a remedying Law of Grace, so far as that it is enacted and offered, to
save those that receive it. It saved not Adam himself merely by the making of
it, till by Faith he had received it. And no doubt but as the Covenant of Grace
to us extends to the faithful and their Seed, so did the Covenant of Grace to
Adam; for it was the same as was made to all the faithful before Christ^s
Incarnation. The case of Infants being obscure, clearer Truths are not to be
reduced to it: And whether Cain and Abel as they were both born in Original
Sin, so were both pardoned upon their Covenant-Dedication to God by their
Parents, and Cain after lost his Infant-state of Grace (as Davenant, Ward, etc.
think Infant Grace may now be lost) or whether Adam and Eve neglected that
Dedication of Cain to God which was needful to his Sanctification, or whether
God past him by, and denied him Infant-Grace of his mere will, I leave to Men's
enquiry, and various judgments; (The controversy concerns Children now, as
well as then, and the difficulties every way are not small) But of these things
I am past doubt:

1. That Cain was not the Serpents Seed merely for Original Sin, and as born of
Adam (as Abel was also) nor did God make him the Serpents Seed by Reprobation;
but that he made himself so by superadded Sin against the Redeemer and Law of
Grace.

2. That all Mankind are still under this Law of Grace, further than they
forfeit the benefits of it by sins against it.

3. That most Writers, if not most Christians, do greatly darken the Sacred
Doctrine, by overlooking the Interest of Children in the actions of their mere
Parents, and think that they participate of no guilt, and suffer for no
Original Sin, but Adams only; and bring the Doctrine of Original Sin it self
into doubt, by laying all upon Covenant Relation, and denying, or overlooking
the Natural Proofs: Doubtless, through Scripture it is remarkable that God
usually judges the posterity of new sinners to new punishments, and promises
and threatenings are made (since the Covenant of Innocence ceased) to the
believers, and unbelievers, or wicked, with their Seed: For we may well say
that the Seed of Cain, Cham, Nimrod, Ishmael, Esau, Saul, Ahab, etc. had more
Original Sin than what they had from Adam. And Matthew. 23. 35. Expounds the
matter. It was not in vain that Ezra, Daniel, etc. confessed their forefathers
sin, nor does our Liturgy pray for the dead, but the living, when it says [
Remember not Lord, our offenses, nor the offenses of our Forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our Sins.

The Author of this Treatise beginning at the Promise made to Abraham, does it
to comport with the Apostle Paul, who thought meet to call the Jews to no
higher Observations than the Case in hand (about the Non-obligation of Moses's
Law to the Gentiles) did require. But this denies not, but supposes the same
Law of Grace in the main to have been made to all men in Adam, and Noah, and to
have been in force to all Mankind before it was renewed to Abraham; saving that
to him and his Seed there were many great privileges added, above the rest of
Mankind, upon his extraordinary obediential Faith.

Of how great importance it is to have a right understanding of the difference
between the Law of Innocence, and the Law of Grace, and in it, the Promise made
to Adam, and Noah, and that to Abraham, and the peculiar Mosaical Law and
Covenant, and the perfecter Edition of the Law, or Covenant of Grace by Christ
Incarnate, a true Student of Theology may easily discern: Wherein I hope the
Reader, will find that (among the many late Treatises on this Subject) the
Author here has done considerable service to the Church of God. Of which
Subject I have written long ago so much my self, and am attempting to make it
yet more plain, that I need not here tell you what is my judgment; only, lest
any who know not how to stop in Mediocrity, should be tempted by Socinians or
Papists, to think that we countenance any of their Errors, or that our
Differences in the Point of Justification by Faith or Works, are greater than
indeed they are; and lest any weak Opiniative persons, should clamor
unpeaceably against their Brethren, and think to raise a name to themselves for
their differing Notions; I shall here give the Reader such evidences of our
real Concord, as shall silence that Calumny.

Though some few Lutherans did upon peevish suspiciousness against George Major
long ago, assert, that [ good Works are not necessary to Salvation] And though
some few good men, whose zeal without judgment does better serve their own turn
than the Churches, are jealous, lest all the good that is ascribed to Man, be a
dishonor to God; and therefore speak as if God were honored most by saying
the worst words of our selves; and many have uncomely and irregular Notions
about these matters; and though some that are addicted to sidings, do take it
to be their godly zeal to censure and reproach the more understanding Sort,
when they most grossly err themselves: And though too many of the people are
carried about through injudiciousness and temptations, to false Doctrines and
evil lives; yet is the Argument of Protestants thus manifested:

1. They all affirm that Christ's Sacrifice, with his Holiness and perfect
Obedience, are the Meritorious Cause of the forgiving Covenants, and of our
Pardon and Justification thereby, and of our right to Life Eternal, which it
gives us. And that this price was not paid or given in it self immediately to
us, but to God for us; and so that our foresaid benefits are its effects.

2. They agree that Christ's Person and ours were not really the same, and
therefore that the same Righteousness which is an Accident of one, cannot
possibly be an Accident of the other.

3. They all detest the conceit that God should aver, and repute a Man to have
done that which he never did.

4. They all agree that Christ's Sacrifice and Merits are really so effectual
to procure our Pardon, Justification, Adoption, and right to the sealing gift
of the Holy Ghost, and to Glory, upon our Faith and Repentance; that God gives
us all these benefits of the New Covenant, as certainly for the sake of Christ
and his Righteousness, as if we had satisfied him, and merited them our selves:
And that thus far Christ's Righteousness is ours in its effects, and imputed to
us, in that we are thus used for it, and shall be judged accordingly.

5. They all agree that we are Justified by none but a Practical or working
Faith.

6. And that this Faith is the Condition of the Promise or Gift of
Justification, and Adoption.

7. And that Repentance is a Condition also; though (as it is not the same with
Faith, as Repentance of unbelief is) on another aptitudinal account; even as a
willingness to be cured, and a willingness to take one for my Physician, and to
trust him in the use of his Remedies, are on several accounts the Conditions on
which that Physician will undertake the Cure, or as willingness to return to
subjection and thankful acceptance of a purchased parden, and of the Purchasers
love and future Authority, are the Conditions of a Rebels pardon.

8. And they all agree that in the first instant of a Man's Conversion or
Believing, he is entered into a state of Justification before he has done any
outward works: And that so it is true that good Works follow the justified, and
go not before his initial Justification: As also in the sense that Austin spoke
it, who took Justification for that which we call Sanctification, or Conversion.

9. And they all agree, that justifying Faith is such a receiving affiance, as
is both in the Intellect and the Will, and therefore as in the Will
participateth of some kind of love to the justifying Object, as well as to
Justification.

10. And that no Man can choose or use Christ as a means (so called in respect
to his own intention) to bring him to God the Father, who has not so much love
to God, as to take him for his End^n the use of that means.

11. And they agree that we shall be all judged according to our Works, by the
Rule of the Covenant of Grace, though not for our Works by way of Commutative,
or Legal proper Merit. And Judging is the Genus, whose Species is Justifying
and Condemning: And to be judged according to our Works, is nothing but to be
Justified or Condemned according to them.

12. They all agree, that no Man can possibly merit of God in point of
Commutative Justice, nor yet in point of Distributive, or Governing Justice,
according to the Law of Nature or Innocence, as Adam might have done, nor by
the Works of the Mosaical Law.

13. They all agree, that no Works of Man's are to be trusted in, or pleaded,
but all excluded, and the conceit of them abhorred.

1. As they are feigned to be against, or in stead of the free Mercy of God.

2. As they are against, or feigned, instead of the Sacrifice, Obedience,
Merit, or Intercession of Christ.

3. Or as supposed to be done of our selves without the Grace of the Holy Ghost.

4. Or as supposed falsely to be perfect.

5. Or as supposed to have any of the aforedisclaimed merit.

6. Or as materially consisting in Mosaical observances.

7. Much more in any Superstitious Inventions.

8. Or in any evil mistaken to be good.

9. Or as any way inconsistent with the tenor of the freely pardoning Covenant.
In all these senses, Justification by Works is disclaimed by all Protestants at
least.

14. Yet all agree that we are Created to good Works in Christ Jesus, which God
has ordained that we should walk therein, and that he that names the Name of
Christ must depart from iniquity, or else he has not the Seal of God; and that
he that is born of God sins not, that is, predominantly. And that all
Christ's Members are holy, purified, zealous of good Works, cleansing
themselves from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, that they might perfect
holiness in God's fear, doing good to all Men, as loving their Neighbors as
themselves: And that if any Man have not the Sanctifying Spirit of Christ, he
is none of his, nor without holiness can see God.

15. They all judge reverently, and charitably of the Ancients that used the
word [Merit of good Works] because they meant but a moral aptitude for the
promised Reward, according to the Law of Grace through Christ.

16. They confess the thing thus described themselves, however they like not
the name of Merit, lest it should countenance proud and carnal conceits.

17. They judge no Man to be Heretical for the bare use of that word, who
agrees with them in the sense.

18. In this sense they agree, that our Gospel-obedience is such a necessary
aptitude to our Glorification, as that glory (though a free gift) is yet truly
a Reward of this Obedience.

19. And they agree that our final Justification by sentence at the day of
Judgment, does pass upon the same Causes, Reasons, and Conditions as our
Glorification does

20. They all agree that all faithful Ministers must bend the labor of their
Ministry in public and private, for promoting of Holiness and good Works, and
that they must diifference by discipline between the obedient and the
disobedient. And O! that the Papists would as zealously promote Holiness and
good Works in the World, as the true serious Protestants do, whom they
factiously and peevishly accuse as enemies to them; and that the Opinion,
Disputing and name of good Works, did not cheat many wicked persons into
self-flattery and perdition, while they are void of that which they dispute
for. Then would not the Mahometans and Heathens be deterred from Christianity,
by the wickedness of these nominal Christians that are near them: Nor would the
serious practice of that Christianity which themselves in general profess, be
hated, scorned, and persecuted by so many, both Protestants and Papists; nor
would so many contend that they are of the true Religion, while they are really
of no Religion at all, any further than the Hypocrites Picture and Carcass may
be called Religion. Were Men but resolved to be serious Learners, serious
Lovers, and serious Practisers, according to their knowledge, and did not live
like mockers of God, and such as look toward the life to come in jest or
unbelief, God would vouchsafe them better acquaintance with the true Religion,
than most Men have.

Having prefaced this much, for the rest I refer thee to the perusal of this
Treatise, which will give thee much light into the nature of the Gospel, and
especially help thee to the right understanding of the meaning of the Apostle
Paul in all his Epistles, about the Law, the Gospel, and the Justification of a
sinner. O pray, and labor for A CONFIRMED PRACTICAL FAITH, as daily does

Your fellow Disciple, Ri. Baxter.
June 4th 1672.
The chief Heads of Discourse.
1. THe nature of the Promise to Abraham.

2. Why the Law was added to the Promise.

3. How those under the Law were saved.

4. The nature of the Legal Covenant.

5. The mistakes of Jews about the Law and Promise, and how St. Paul
counter-argues those mistakes.

6. How St. Paul's Doctrine of Justification by Faith, and not by Works, was
then mistaken by some.

7. That the Doctrine of St. Paul, and of St. James, about Faith and Works, do
not differ.

8. With an APPENDIX touching the difference, and the reason of the difference,
between saving and ineffectual Faith.

A DISCOURSE Of the Nature, Ends, and Difference OF THE TWO COVENANTS.
THe mistake of the unbelieving Jews, about the true import of Gods Promise to
Abraham, and of the Law of Moses, was a principal cause of their rejecting
Christ and his Gospel, and their own salvation thereby. To rectify which
mistake, the Apostle St. Paul used various reasonings, according to the various
Errors contained in it. In which reasonings of his, there being some things
hard to be understood; there were others again which probably mistaking the
Apostles reasonings against the Jew-Jewish Notion of Justification by Works,
ran into a contrary extreme, thinking they might be saved by Faith without
Works; as on the contrary the incredulous Jews thought they might be saved by
Works without Faith. And if many in our days had not run into somewhat alike
extreme through a misunderstanding also of the Apostles writings, labor, and
pains would not have been so necessary, as now they are, to rectify their
mistake, and to prevent it in others. To the end therefore that the plain Truth
may the better appear, touching Gods promise to Abraham, touching the Law of
Moses, and the Apostles arguings about these; I shall very briefly endeavor
these seven things.

1. To open the Nature and Design of Gods promise to Abraham. And to show

2. For what ends the Law was added to the promise.

3. By what Faith and Practice, the Jews under the Law were saved.

4. That the Law contained a Covenant, different from that with Abraham.

5. The grand mistakes of the unbelieving Jews, and St. Paul's counter
arguings, touching both the Law and the Promise.

6. The mistake of some pretended Christians in the Apostles days, touching the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith without Works.

7. That the Doctrine of St. Paul, and St James about Faith and Works, in
reference to Justification, do not differ. I shall begin with the first of
these.

CHAP. I.
The Nature and Design of Gods Promise to Abraham.
I Shall endeavor to open the Nature and Design of Gods Promise to Abraham:
Which Promise is also called the Covenant, Act. 3. 25. Gal. 3. 17. In doing of
which, these eight things will come under consideration. 1. What the nature of
this Promise is in general. 2. What the design of it is. 3. What are the
special benefits promised. 4. What the extent of it is. 5. The security given
by God for the performance of it. 6. That this Promise was conditional. 7. What
the condition of it was. 8. What we are to understand by Gods accounting
Abraham's Faith to him for Righteousness.

Sect. 1.
Of the nature of it in general. This Promise I take to be of the same nature
with that which in the Gospel is called the New Covenant. It Is true indeed they
greatly differ in the Administration, the one being but general, implicit, and
obscure; and the other more particular, express, and perspicuous. But though in
this they differ, yet in their general nature they agree in one, and are the
same. For, 1. This Covenant, as delivered to Abraham, was confirmed in Christ
as well as the Gospel afterward, Gal. 3. 17. and that is a Character of the New
Covenant, Mat. 26. 28. 2. The Gospel is said to have been preached to Abraham
in the Promise that was made him, Gal. 3. 8. 3. He was justified by Faith;
which he could not have been, but by virtue of a New Covenant: And it was by
Faith in the Promise made to him by God, by which he was justified: Which two
things supposed, it necessarily follows that that Promise was of the nature of
the New Covenant. 4. St. Paul argues against the erroneous Jews in his Epistles
to the Romans and Galatians, the necessity of Evangelical Faith unto
justification now under the Gospel, from Abraham's being justified by Faith,
and from God's setting him forth for a pattern and example to all after-ages,
of his justifying both Jews and Gentiles upon the condition of believing. The
strengh of which arguing seems to depend upon this supposition; That the
Promise, by the belief of which Abraham was then justified, and the Promise in
the Gospel, by the belief of which men are now justified, do both agree, and
are one in the general nature of them. And upon these grounds, and under this
notion of the Promise to Abraham, I intend to discourse of it.

But when I consider for what reason he that is least in the Kingdom of God, is
said to be greater than John the Baptist (though not Abraham himself, nor any
of the Prophets were greater than he) and when I consider likewise how ignorant
the Apostles were for a time, touching the necessity of the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, notwithstanding the many plainer Revelations thereof in
the Prophets, than we find Abraham had; I cannot I confess think that Abraham
had or could have a distinct notion of all that was contained and employed in
the Promise, as now it is opened and unfolded in the Writings of the New
Testament, it does appear was wrapped up in it. And therefore though I think I
may well found a Discourse of the New Covenant upon the Promise made to
Abraham, as it is now explained in the New Testament, yet I would not be
understood to suppose Abraham's apprehension or Faith to have then been
commensurate to the Promise as it is so explained.

Supposing then the Promise to Abraham, to be the New Covenant it self in a
more imperfect Edition of it than afterward came forth. I shall now a little
further consider what it was, and what the New Covenant is, and ever has been,
in the general nature of it, since it first commenced. And it is a new Law or
Covenant, made by way of remedy against the rigor and extremity of the Law of
Nature, under which Man was created. For the Law of Nature, the Law of Gods
Creation, as well as his instituted Law in Paradise, being violated, and
impossible to be kept inviolable by Man in his lapsed state, by reason of his
moral impotency, and the pravity of his Nature derived from Adam; he must
inevitably have sunk and perished under the condemnation of it, unless there
had been a new Law instituted to supercede the procedure of this Law against
him, in its natural and proper course. If Salvation had been attainable by Man
in his lapsed state, without this remedying Law of Grace, there would have been
no need of a New Covenant. If there had been a Law given which could have given
life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law, Gal. 3. 21. But there
was no such Law given besides this new Law. Nor could the Original Law be
repealed for the relief of fallen Man, it being founded in the Nature of God, and
the nature of Man, as he was created after Gods own Image; and is no more
changeable, than the Nature of good and evil are changable. And therefore, as I
said, there was a necessity that Man must have perished under the condemnation
of the Law of his Creation, as the lapsed Angels did under theirs, unless a Law
of Indemnity had been Enacted. But God whose tender mercies are over all his
works, to the end so great and considerable a part of his Creation, as Man is,
might not be wholly lost and undone to all eternity, out of his infinite
compassion, mercy, and love, did constitute a new Law or Covenant for man's
relief (which well may be called the Covenant of Grace) against the rigor and
extremity of the first Law.

Which new Law was in some degree, though but obscurely, made known to Man not
long after Adams fall, or else there would have been no ground for that Faith
which we are assured was in Abel, Enoch, etc. Heb. 11. But it was doubtless
somewhat more fully declared to Abraham than to any before, and at last
completely established and published by Jesus Christ the Mediator of it, who
was given for a Covenant to the people. And this new Law in the last edition of
it under the Gospel, is variously denominated; being called the Promise, the
New Covenant, the Law of Faith, the Law of Liberty, the Gospel, the Grace of
God, or the Word of his Grace. And so we come

Sect. 2.
To consider what the design of God was in this New Covenant or Promise unto
Abraham. Next to his own glory, it was to recover the Humane Nature from its
degenerate state, to a state of holiness, to that likeness to God in which Man
was at the first made, and therein and thereby to a state of happiness, both
which were lost by the fall. Holiness, love, and goodness, as they were once
the glory and happiness of Man before he lost them, so are still perfective of
his nature. And therefore it is impossible in the nature of the thing to
recover Man to happiness, without recovering his nature to a conformity to God
in these; or for Man to be perfectly happy, whose nature is not perfected in
them. Sin is the disease and sickness of the Soul; and it is as possible for a
sick man to enjoy the pleasure of health, as it is for the sinful and corrupt
nature of man, while such, to enjoy the pleasure, which the humane nature did
naturally enjoy, or was capable of enjoying in its innocence and purity. But
when the nature of Man is once recovered to perfection in knowledge, holiness,
love, and goodness, it will then be matter of unspeakable delight to him to
love God, Angels and Men, and to do the will of God in every thing. It is so to
the holy Angels: And it was so to our blessed Savior, who counted it as his
meat and drink, to be doing the will of his heavenly Father. And to what degree
the nature of man is here in this world, restored toward its proper
perfection, to the same degree it is matter of pleasure and delight to him to
act holily and righteously, and to be doing good* It i^ joy to the Just to do
judgment, Prove. 21. 15. It is a pain to a man to act contrary to the bent and
inclination of his nature, by compulsion or fear. And therefore unless the
corrupt* nature of Man were changed, Heaven would not be Heaven to him, in case
he were there. Those Divine and Heavenly exercises which are there the
unspeakable delight of Saints and Angels, would be his pain and torment, as
being contrary to his nature; And the pleasures of that state, as having not
what will satisfy the unsatiable lusts of man's corrupt nature, would not be
such to him, but add rather to his anguish. For, as it would be a torment to a
Man to be in extremity of hunger and thirst, and to be without Meat and Drink,
and all hopes of any to satisfy him: So will it be a grievous torment to the
corrupt nature of Men in another morld, to retain their lusts and the violent
cravings of them, and yet to be without all hope of having wherewith to
satisfy them (which yet is like to be the condition of men in Hell.) Here men's
unnatural lusts are not such a torment to them, because they can make provision
to satisfy them, or live in hopes so to do; and in the mean while drown the
noise of them by diversion. But in Hell it will be quite otherwise. And
therefore its easy to imagine that the torment which will arise from the
corruption of men's natures there, will be unspeakably great, besides the
piercing sense of the happiness they have lost, and the other intolerable
pains which they must endure; and therefore as whoever has not his nature
renewed in this World, is never like to have it renewed in another; so without
renewing of it, it is impossible he should be happy there. Except a man be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 3. That is, he cannot enjoy
it, and why? It is not only from Gods Decree, or established Law to the
contrary that he cannot, but also from the utter incapacity of his Nature, as
corrupt. Wherefore all the Vessels of Mercy are such as God aforehand prepares
unto glory, Romans 9. 23. They are such as are made meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1. 12. Such as God has wrought for
the self same thing, 2. Cor. 5. 5. So that, as I said, there is a necessity in
the nature of the thing, that if God would design the Restoration of the Nature
of Man to happiness, that in order thereto he should design a Restoration of it
to holiness, as indeed he has. He has chosen us to salvation, through
sanctification of the Spirit, 2 These. 2. 13. And therefore the end of Christ's
great undertaking for the Redemption and Restoration of Man, is described, by
his saving his people from their sins: By his redeeming them from all ^niquity,
and purifying to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. By his
washing and sanctifying of them, that he might present them to himself a
glorious Church not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing.

That this was the design of Gods promise to Abraham, appears, in that at the
very first it was propounded to him by way of Motive, to quit the Idolatry of
his Fathers, and the evil customs of his Country (for they served other Gods,
Josh. 24. 2.) Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy Kindred, and from thy
Fathers house; and I will make of thee a great Nation, and thou shall be a
blessing, and in thee shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed, Genesis 12.
1, 2, 3. In which God had a farther design than to reform Abraham only: His
design in him, and by him, was to set on foot the Reformation of the World, and
the recovering the Nations thereof from the dregs of Idolatry into which they
were sunk. And therefore God said unto him, Thou shall be a blessing. And this
he designed, not only in giving him a numerous Issue, and making them a great
Nation, whose Education in the worship of the true God was founded in Abraham,
but also in making both him and them eminent examples of his special favor in
the ^ight of the Nations, by which they might see how much better it was to
serve the God of Abraham, than the Gods of the Nations: And thereby to invite
and draw them from their Idolatry, Superstition, and Ungodliness, to worship
and serve the true God. And God in promising to Abraham, both the Messiah in
his Seed, and also that he would bless them that should bless him, and curse
them that should curse him, and that his Seed should possess the gate of his
enemies; had, it should seem, this in design, viz. to encourage and quicken
them to a holy life, Luke 1. 72, 73, 74, 75. To perform the mercy promised to
our Fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant: The Oath which he swear to our
Father Abraham, that he would grant unto us; that we being delivered out of the
hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him, all the days of our life.

But besides all this, considering that the Promise made to Abraham, was the
New Covenant as it was then exhibited, (as I have showed before) the benefits
therein promised had a proper tendency in them, to restore Man again to a
likeness to God in the Moral perfections of his Nature. For the great and
precious Promises contained in the New Covenant as such, are given for this
very end, that by them we might be partakers of a Divine Nature, the glory
whereof is knowledge, purity and charity, 2 Pet. 1. 4. And for God by such
promises to make overtures unto Man of love and good will, and of desires of
reconciliation, is the direct way and method of recovering fallen Man from a
state of enmity against God, to a mind reconciled to him, to think well of him,
to love him, and delight in him. For we love him because he first loved us, 1 John 4. 19. And God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, and how? by
not imputing their trespasses to them; but being willing, upon their repentance
and returning to their duty, to forgive them, 2 Cor. 5. 19. God uses the same
way of overcoming man's enmity against him, which he has taught us to use to
overcome man's enmity against us; and that is, by overcoming their evil with our
good, Romans 12. 21. David dealing so with Saul, though a bitter enemy, melted
him into tears, and made him cry, Is this thy voice, my son David? 1 Samuel 24.
16. And, to whom much is forgiven, the same person loves much, Luke 7. 42, --
47. And if God by these methods do once recover Man's love to him, he will
quickly recover him to his loyalty and duty, of which, Love is the proper
Source and Spring. If a man love me, he will keep my words, Joh. 14. 23. Now
that God's promise to Abraham, did contain expressions of wonderful grace and
love, and consequently what is most apt to beget in Man a love to God again,
and all the desirable effects of it, will appear, if we consider the special
benefits comprehended in that Promise; Which is the third thing now to be
considered.

Sect. 3.
The special benefits contained in the Promise made to Abraham, were such as
these.

1. It contained a Promise of the Messiah, a promise of sending Christ into the
world, and that he should come of his Seed: In thy Seed shall all the Nations
of the Earth be blessed, Genesis 12. 3. and 18. 18. and 22. 18. which Seed is
Christ, as is said, Gal. 3. 16. And in this promise of sending Christ, were
employed the things he was sent for, the things by which he should bless the
world, as his Death and Resurrection, and what else pertained to his Mediatory
Office; because these are the things by which the Nations of the Earth became
blessed in him, which was the thing expressly promised. That such things were
employed in the promise, appears not only by the reason of the thing, but also
from St. Paul's testimony, Acts 13. 32, 33. We declare unto you glad tidings,
how that the Promise which was made unto the Fathers, God has fulfilled the
same unto us their Children, in that he has raised up Jesus again. I do not
say that Abraham, from a Promise that was but so generally expressed as that
was, could apprehend in particular what the Messiah should both do and suffer,
though they were wrapped up in it. He apprehended so much by it in general, that
God would send the Messiah into the World, and that he would send him upon such
terms, as that his coming should be matter of great benefit to the world.
Abraham had such a prospect of this, though at that distance, as made him
rejoice and be glad: So says our Savior himself, John 8. 56. Your Father
Abraham rojoyced to see my day; and he saw it, and was glad. And the promise to
Abraham, as it was a Promise of sending Christ to be the Savior of the world,
was expressive of the greatest love. For in this was the love of God manifested
toward us, because God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we
might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he
loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4. 9,
10. A Propitiation for our sins: That is, one that by his Death has procured
favor, having taken off that sore displeasure which God by his Law had
declared against all the transgressors of it. For the wise and just God, did
not think the righteousness of his Government, and the honor and reputation of
his Law would be sufficiently salved, and his great hatred of sin sufficiently
manifested, without some considerable satisfaction given for the dishonor done
to Him and his Law by Man's transgression. And yet that this might not be
exacted at the hands of the guilty, in executing the curse of the Law on them
themselves; he was most graciously pleased to accept of the sufferings of his
own dear Son, instead of what the sinners themselves were to have undergone. He
has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.
13. Christ suffered for sins, the Just for the unjust, or in their stead, 1
Pet. 3. 18. Upon account of which undertaking of Christ for us, all the
benefits of the Covenant do accrue to Man. What ever is required of Man by way
of condition of his acceptance with God, becomes accepted to that end, upon
account of Christ's suffering. And His Intercession in Heaven, through which
all our sincere (though otherwise imperfect) performances, become acceptable to
God, and rewardable by him, is made in the virtue of it. For the whole Covenant
it self is founded in the Blood of Christ which he shed for the remission of
sins. Therefore it is called the New Testament in his Blood, Mat. 26. 28. And
his blood, the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, Hebr. 13. 20.

2. It contained a Promise of Justification or remission of sin through Christ,
unto all that should so believe, as thereupon to repent of their former folly,
and become sincerely obedient for the future. For that is necessarily employed
in the Promise of blessed^ess to the Nations in Abraham's Seed; it being
impossible men should be blessed without Remission of sin, which consists in
removing the curse of the Law, in remitting the penalty. Blessed is the man
whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered, Psalm. 32. 1. St. Paul
acquaints us that this blessing of the New Covenant, was declared to Abraham in
the Promise, Gal. 3. 8. The Scripture foreseeeing that God would justify the
Heathen, through Faith, preached the Gospel before unto Abraham, saying, In
thee shall all Nations be blessed.

3. It contained in it tacitly, a Promise of Divine assistance unto men in
their endeavors to fulfill the condition of the Promise. For God in promising
blessedness to the Nations through Abraham's Seed, therein promised all that was
absolutely necessary for him to vouchsafe to make them blessed, and without
which they could not be blessed. And if so, then he therein implicitly promised
to assist the endeavors of men to perform the condition of the Promise,
without the assistance of whose grace they cannot savingly believe, repent, and
obey. And so it should seem the Old Testament-Church understood Gods subduing
of sin, as well as his pardoning of sin, to be comprised in the Promise to
Abraham, Mich. 7. 19, 20. He will subdue our iniquities; and thou will cast all
their sins into the depths of the Sea: Thou will perform the truth to Jacob,
and the mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn to our Fathers, from the days
of old. And Christ his turning men from their iniquities, which he does
accomplish by appointing them means, and by assisting them in the use of them
to that end, is part of the blessing contained in the Promise made to Abraham,
and was so reckoned by St. Peter, Acts 3. 25, 26. Ye are the children of the
Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers, saying unto
Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. Unto
you first God having raised up his Son Jesus Christ, sent him to bless you, in
turning every one of you from his iniquities.

4. It implicitly, or somewhat obscurely contained in it a Promise of eternal
Life. I say, implicitly; For I do not find that eternal Life was expressly
promised to Abraham. But yet that was expressly promised him, from which the
hope of eternal Life might well be inferred: As first, Blessedness through his
Seed, the Messiah: And secondly, That God would be a God to him and his Seed.
For blessedness is a happiness that runs parallel with the duration of Man's
immortal Soul. And God's Promise of being a God to Abraham, carried in it a
Promise of a happiness worthy of God to bestow, such as everlasting Life or
happiness is. And therefore he was not ashamed to be called their God (meaning
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) because he had prepared for them a City; meaning
that in so doing, he had answered that title of relation of being their God,
and done like himsel, Heb. 11. 16. And upon these and the like Revelatio^s of
of God's mind to him, Abraham looked for a City which has foundations, whose
Builder and Maker is God, and a heavenly Country, Heb. 11. 10, 16. If Abraham
did but use his reason about these Promises, as he did about reconciling God's
Promise, that in Isaac his Seed should be called, with his command to sacrifice
him, ( Heb. 11. 17, 18, 19.) he might discern eternal Life in them, though but
very obscurely, in comparison of what is now revealed in the Gospel, by which
Life and Immortality is brought to light, 2 Timothy 1. 10. But how obscurely
soever a future happiness was promised to Abraham, yet promised it was, for
which we have the testimony of St. Paul, Gal. 3. 18. If the inheritance be of
the Law, it is no more of Promise: But God gave it to Abraham by Promise. He
was here proving against the Pharisaical Jews, and Judaizing Christians, that
Justification unto Life, was to be had by the Promise, and not by the Law; by
Faith, and not by works of the Law; that the Just should live by Faith, as
verse. 12. And therefore by Inheritance here, which he says God gave to Abraham
by Promise, he doubtless means eternal Life, which elsewhere he calls the
Promise of eternal Inheritance, Heb. 9. 15.

Consider now, how God carried on his design of restoring Man by the promise of
those benefits. For if expressions of the greatest Grace and Love in God to
Men, is the way to beget in them a love to God again, and in begetting that, to
beget all the desirable effects of Love; (which are no less than a sincere
conformity in Man's Nature and Life to the Divine Law) And if the giving of
great and precious Promises, is the way of recovering Man again to a
participation of the Divine Nature, (as I have showed it is) then the Promise
of God to Abraham which was expressive of the greatest Grace and Love, and
contained in it Promises, than which there are not materially greater, nor more
precious, was a wise and gracious contrivance of God, to recover Man to a
likeness to himself, wherein the glory and perfection of his Nature did first
consist.

Sect. 4.
The next thing to be considered, is, the extent of the Promise of God to
Abraham. [The greatness of God's love and good will, was not expressed only in
the greatness of the bene^its promised to Abraham, but also in the extent of
the Promise; reaching not only to the Jewish people and their Proselytes (to
which another Covenant was restrained) but even to all Nations of the Earth,
Genesis 12. 3. and 22. 18. which shows it to be of the same nature with the
general Promise in the Gospel, though it was not so intelligible then, as it is
since made by the Gospel. But God we see, so loved the world, as first to
promise, and after to give his only begotten Son, that whosoever should believe
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Joh. 3. 16. Christ gave
his life for the life of the world, Joh. 6. 8. He is the propitiation for the
sins of the whole world, 1 John 2. 2 He gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy
2. 6. And tasted death for every man, Heb. 2. 9

Sect. 5.
Consider we in the next place, the security given by God, for the performance
of his Promise to Abraham and his Seed. For because men knowing how ill they
have deserved from God, having made themselves enemies to him, would be apt to
question whether there were indeed so much love and good will in God to them as
the greatness of his Promise did import; Therefore God, to remove all jealousy
of this nature, and to give them the greatest security and assurance he could,
of the reality of his intentions, and of his heart and good will toward them,
he confirmed his Promise by an Oath, swearing by himself, because he could
swear by no greater. And this he did, that they to whom the Promise did extend,
might have strong consolation from God, such as might work in them strong and
vigorous affections to him, such as were in Abraham, through which he was
wrought to an entire resignation of himself to God, and to his will, and by
which he was denominated the friend of God, Heb. 6. 17, 28. Wherein God willing
more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise the immutability of his
Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath: That by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation, who have fled for
refuge, to lay hold of the hope set before us.

Sect. 6.
The next thing I have to show, is, That this Promise of God to Abraham, was
conditional. If the Promise of sending Christ was absolute, yet the actual
collation of the great benefit of Remission of Sin, and eternal Life by him,
was not promised but upon condition of Faith and Repentance, as appears by the
Scriptures frequent explanation of the the general Promise. Abraham believed in
the Lord, and it was counted unto him for righteousness, Genesis 15. 6. If Abraham
had not believed God, he had not been justified notwithstanding the Promise. So
that this Justification depended as well upon his performing the condition of
the Promise, as upon the Promise itself. And when God said to Abraham, Walk
before me, and be thou upright, and I will make a Covenant with thee, Genesis 17.
1. The Lord made Abraham's upright walking before him, the condition of his
keeping, as well as making Covenant with him. Besides, it is apparent that God
made Circumcision to be the Covenant to be kept on Abraham's and his Seeds
part, as the condition of what God had promised on his part, Genesis 17. 4, 7, 10.
As for me, my Covenant is with thee, etc. Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore, thou and thy Seed after thee in their generations. And this is the
Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, every Man-child among you
shall be circumcised. By which is to be understood, not so much Circumcision in
the flesh, as in the Spirit; as I shall show anon.

And the truth is, it would not suit with God's end and design in his Covenant,
of restoring Man to the rectitude of his Nature (mentioned before) to do it
without Man's endeavors in the use and exercise of his natural faculties of
Understanding and Will, as he is a rational Creature and free Agent. For God
works that change in Man's nature, designed in his New Law or Covenant, not
merely Physically, but Morally also. 1. By proposing great and important Truths
to his mind and understanding, and in assisting this natural faculty, in
considering how his happiness is concerned in that which is proposed, in case
it should prove true, and in considering likewise what reason there is to
believe that it is true, and in discerning the truth of it upon consideration.
And 2. By proposing Motives to the Will to incline it to follow the dictates of
the enlightened mind, and by assisting the Will to be governed thereby. So that
Man himself is not wholly passive in this change, or what goes to the making of
it; but is so far active in it, as to denominate what he does by God's
assistance, to be his own act. So that the Man is said to believe, to repent,
to obey, when he does believe, repent, and obey: For so he is every where in
Scripture said to do. God does not repent in Man, but Man repents through his
grace and assistance. And therefore God's grace, and Man's endeavors in
working this change, are very consistent. Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God which works in you both to
will and to do of his good pleasure. If Man do but what he can do, through the
assistance of God's common Providence (in whom we live, and move, and have our
being) God is most ready, through his good pleasure, or out of the goodness of
his will and pleasure, to work in him both to will and to do savingly, to carry
the work quite through. Otherwise if there were nothing that Man could do in a
way of common Providence toward his salvation, why should he be exhorted and
persuaded to do that, which yet will not be done to effect and quite through,
without the assistance of God's Grace and good Spirit. The cooperation of
God's grace with Man's endeavors, in this change in the nature of Man, which
is necessary to his salvation, is a Doctrine that lies very fair and plain in
the Scriptures. And therefore men are called upon to make themselves new
hearts, Ezekiel. 18. 31. Make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit, for why will ye
dye, O house of Israel? And God is said to make them new hearts also, Ezekiel. 36.
26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you.
Men are called upon to circumcise their own hearts, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. And God is
said to circumcise the heart, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Men are required to cleanse
themselves from all filthiness of the flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. And they
are also said to be washed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
Men are commanded to repent, Acts 17. 30. And God is said to give them
repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 35. Acts 5. 31. It is by reason of this cooperation of
God's assistance, and Man's endeavors, that St. Paul expresses himself as he
does once and again, Gal. 2. 20 I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I
live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I labored more
abundantly than they all: Yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. He
does not by these last words so deny what he had said in the former, as if he
had not spoke true, for he speaks the same thing in effect in another place,
without any such correcting himself, as here he uses, 1 Cor. 3. 9. For we are
laborers together with God. And therefore by his so correcting himself,
saying, Not I, but the grace of God which was with me, he only intends to
magnify Gods grace, as having the principal stroke in the work. It is a phrase
of like import with that, 2 Cor. 3. 10. For even that which was made glorious,
had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excels. So man's
endeavor though it be somewhat in it self considered, yet comparatively, and
in respect of the work of Gods grace by his Spirit which excels, it is nothing.
Therefore in fine, as men are said through the Spirit to mortify the deeds of
the body, Romans 8. 13. So they may be said through the same Spirit, to believe,
repent, obey; that is, through the assistance of the Spirit, who is said to
help our infirmities, Romans 8. 26.

Considering then that there is promise of Divine assistance to Man, using his
endeavors in doing what he may, and can do toward the performing the
condition of the Covenant, we may well conclude, that there is no Man under the
Gospel, does perish, but through his own fault and neglect. It is true, God
does sometimes for special reasons meet with, and convert sinners with a high
hand of grace, whilst they are pursuing their sins in a full career, and using
no endeavors at all toward their own salvation, as he did Saul before he was
Paul. But such extraordinary instances, are no Rules to us by which to judge of
God's ordinary proceedings in converting men: Nor has the Lord put men in
expectation by any promise of his, of their being converted after that manner,
and upon such terms. And therefore it will in no wise be safe for any man to
expect to be converted by such extraordinary workings of grace, and to neglect
to do what he can do, and what God requires he should do, toward his own
conversion.

There are many things which men may, and can believe and do, without any
supernatural grace, and by virtue of God's common grace. It is no Supernatural
Act to believe the Being of God, and the Immortality of the Soul or future
state: Or to know that we are ^inners against God, and consequently that we
stand in need of his mercy: Nor is it a Supernatural Act for a man to desire
the future happiness of his own Nature or Being; or to hear the Word of God
which directs the way to that happiness; no more than it is to hear any other
Doctrine that only pretends to do so. Nor is it a Supernatural Act to consider
the Doctrine of the Scriptures with as much seriousness, as men do or may, the
contents of any other Books. Nor is it a Supernatural Act to consider how we
are concerned in the Doctrine of the Scriptures, in case it should prove true:
No more is it a Supernatural Act seriously to consider the strength and force
of those Reasons that tend to persuade men to believe that Doctrine to be true:
Nor, under the natural desires which men have to be happy in another world, is
it a Supernatural Act for them to pray to God to direct and assist them in the
use of means, that they may be happy. These I take to be no Supernatural Acts
in men, For though the depraved will of Man needs special or Supernatural grace
to do these so seriously and effectually, as is needful to true Sanctification,
yet in some sort and measure they may be done by common help. And if men would
but go thus far (as they can) out of a real desire to be happy, I should make
no question but that the Spirit of God would yield them his assistance to carry
them quite through in the work of conversion. And whether our Savior does not
by the hearers, resembled by the good ground, mean such men as before their
conversion have some such working of heart about their future state, as does
incline them to hear and consider what with any fair probability may be said
about the way to be happy in that state, and not to hear out of curiosity, or
for fashion-sake, or to carp; I submit to consideration.

It is doubtless then men's inconsideration, carelessness and negligence in those
things which they do believe, and which they can do, that undoes them. It is
because seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not, which is the reason why
more is not given, but rather that taken away from them which they had. That
is, The reason why God withholds his special grace, and many times withdraws
common grace and assistance from men, is, because though they have
understanding and considering faculties, which they could if they would use and
employ about their being happy in another world, as well as they do about their
happiness in this, yet they will not, though they are frequently called upon,
and excited thereto: Whereas those that take heed or consider what they hear,
and how they are concerned in it; to them more shall be given: God will come
into such with supernatural aid, Mark 4. 24. And therefore God, to put men upon
a holy necessity of complying with his grace, in acting diligently toward the
working out their own salvation, has wisely made the obtaining of the great
benefits of the Covenant, remission of Sin, and eteternal Life, conditional, so
that men can have no farther assurance of pardon of sin and Salvation, than
they are sure they sincerely indeavo^r to perform the condition on their part,
upon which they are promised. Wherefore we are greatly concerned to be awakened
by such sayings as these; Strive to enter in at the strait gate: So run that ye
may obtain: Use all diligence to make your calling and election sure: Work out
your salvation with fear and trembling: Let us therefore fear, lest a promise
being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of
it.

Sect. 7.
I come now in the next place to show, What the condition of the Promise to
Abraham was. In short it was a practical Faith. And under this Head, I shall
endeavor, 1. To give some account of the nature of Abraham's Faith in general.
2. To describe Faith. And 3. To show reason why Faith is made the condition of
the Covenant.

1. The condition of the Promise to Abraham, was Faith, and (as I shall after
show) a practical Faith. For that was it upon which the great blessing of the
Covenant, Justification, was conferred upon him, with the consequent benefits.
In Genesis 15. 6. it is said of Abraham, that he believed in the Lord, and he
counted it to him for righteousness. But St. Paul reciting this Scripture,
says, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness, Romans
4. 3. Gal. 3. 6. If there be any difference between believing God, and
believing in God, it seems to be this. To believe God, is to believe him upon
his Word, to believe all that to be true, which he says when he has once
spoken it. But to believe in God, is first, to believe him to be such an one,
of such a Nature, as neither will, nor can at any time speak any thing but what
is true: It is to believe him to be a God that cannot lie. For all true Faith,
as Abraham's was, is founded in the Nature of God. Abraham did primarily
believe in God, and consequently believed his sayings, of what nature soever
they were. And secondly, to believe in God, is to believe that he can, and will
perform whatever he promised, how unlikely soever the thing in its own nature
otherwise be. And this was the nature of Abraham's Faith, as appears by St.
Paul's Comment upon it, Romans 4. 20, 21. He staggered not at the Promise of God
through unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving glory to God; and being fully
persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able also to perform. He gave to
God the glory of his Nature and Being, of his truth and faithfulness in his
Promises, and of his power and ability to perform what he had promised,
notwithstanding its utmost improbability in nature. And therefore, or for this
reason, his Faith was imputed to him for righteousness, as we are told in ver.
22. of Romans 4. And so it should seem it is not the believing of any one
particular or single Promise, that is counted for righteousness, otherwise than
as it is an instance of Faith in God in general, in reference to whatever he
does say or shall declare. Which may be the reason why Faith is said to be
counted to Abraham for righteousness, as well when he had not the Messiah in
the Promise as the immediate Object of his Faith, but somewhat else, as when he
had. The Promise, the believing of which was counted to Abraham for
righteousness, in Genesis 15. 6. was a Promise of a numerous issue, [ So shall thy
Seed be] viz. as numberless as the Stars. But that which produced a belief of
this particular Promise, would, and doubtless did produce in him a belief of
the Promise of the Messiah, and of every other Promise and Word of God, and
declaration of his mind, so far as understood by him, and that was a habitual
belief of God's Truth, and Faithfulness, Wi^dom, Power, and Goodness; his fixed
belief in God. And so a believing God's threatenings so as to use means to
escape them, is (it should seem) counted to one for righteousness, as well as
the belief of the Promises, as growing upon the same Root. Thus Noah's believing
God's threatening to bring a Deluge upon the World, and his obedience to God's
command in the preparing an Ark for the saving of his house, was that, or at
least one instance of that Faith, by which he became Heir of the Righteousness
which is by Faith, Heb. 11. 7. It was this general Faith in God that made
Abraham so complyant with every intimation of his will and pleasure. By it he
forsook his own Country and Kindred at God's command, to go he knew not
whither, but depended on God's after-direction in that case, Heb. 11. 8. By it
he was ready to offer his son Isaac, in whom the Promises were made: And he had
such a firm belief in God's Promise, that in Isaac his Seed should be called,
that he concluded that God would raise him from the dead when he had sacrificed
him, rather than fail in the least of making good his Promise, Heb. 11. 17, 18,
19. He had such a confidence in God, that is to say, in his Wisdom, Goodness,
Truth, and Power, as wrought him to an entire resignation of himself to God's
will and pleasure. He believed God to be so good and so wise, as not to put him
upon any thing but what should be for his good in the issue: And so true and
powerful, as to promise nothing but what he could and would perform. In a word;
this his belief in God, made him believe all his Promises, and obey all his
Precepts.

2. Come we next to some description of that Faith, which is the condition of
the Promise, or Covenant of Salvation: Wherein I shall have respect to the
nature of saving Faith in general, in reference to all Ages of the Church, and
also to the Christian Evangelical Faith in special. Faith strictly taken, is an
assent unto the truth of any Proposition upon the credit of the Speaker. But
saving Faith is of a more comprehensive nature than is a mere assent unto the
truth of any one Proposition. And although saving Faith is sometimes described
by an assenting to the truth of one single Proposition, yet then it implies the
belief of many more, and such a belief as draws in the Will to act according to
the import and concernment of the thing believed. As for instance: The belief
of this Proposition [ That Christ Jesus is the Son of God] by which Faith is
sometimes described, does include in it a belief of the truth of his whole
Doctrine, both concerning God's Grace, and Man's Duty, and the Will's
concurrence as to its concernment in it. For, if he be the Son of God, then he
cannot lie or deceive in any thing he has said. And again, the belief of this
Proposition [ That God raised Christ from the Dead] by which Faith is also
described, Romans 10. 9. includes in it a belief that all that Doctrine which he
taught, is undoubtedly true: For if it had not, God would never have wrought
such a Miracle as to raise Christ from the dead to confirm it. The belief then
of such single Propositions, include a belief of the whole Doctrine of the
Gospel, which is the Proper Object of the Christian Faith, and for that cause
is frequently styled Faith, or the Faith, in the New Testament.

But if we respect the nature of Faith in general, as answering the different
degrees of God's Revelation of his Will in several Ages of the World, both
under the Gospel, and before; I do not know how better to define it than thus:
Faith is such a hearty belief of God's Declaration concerning his own Grace,
and Man's Duty, as does effectually cause a man to expect from God, and to act
in a way of sincere Obedience, according to the Tenor and Import of such a
Declaration. Or, if you will take in the belief of God's threatenings against
sinners, into the definition; then it will be thus: Faith is such a hearty
belief of God's Declaration concerning his own Grace and Displeasure, and Man's
Duty, as does effectually cause a man to expect from God, and to act in a way
of sincere Obedience, according to the Tenor and Import of such a Declaration.
Faith thus defined, we have already seen exemplified in Abraham, who is the
great Exemplar of believing, and the Father of Believers. And that it was his
belief of God's Promise, or Declaration of grace and favor to him, as it was
practical in producing Repentance, Self-denial, and sincere Obedience, by which
he was justified and made happy, appears farther, not only in that it is said by
St. James, that his Faith wrought with his Works, and was made perfect by them,
and that he was justified by Works, as well as by Faith (of which more anon)
but also in that it is said, that he received the sign of Circumcision (which
was the Condition upon which God covenanted with him to be his God, and upon
the same terms to be the God of his Seed) a Seal of the Righteousness of the
Faith which he had while he was yet uncircumcised. For supposing (which is not
denied) Circumcision to be an outward Sign of inward Grace, of the Circumcision
of the Heart, consisting in Mortification, or a Penitential change of the
Heart, which is the effect of Faith, his Circumcision as such, was a Seal of
confirmation to Abraham, that it was upon his former so believing God upon his
Promise, as thereby to be induced to leave the evil Customs of his Country,
and his Country it self, with his Kindred, and his Fathers house; that God
would be his God indeed: In which Promise was implicitly promised, all that
would make him eternally happy. And God's further design of giving to Abraham
this Covenant of Circumcision, as a Seal to assure him the enjoyment of the
benefit wrapped up in that Promise upon the terms aforesaid, was, that he might
be the Father of all them that believe, whether literally circumcised or not;
that is, that he might be a great Example and Pattern to all others, of
obtaining the same benefits in the same way, and so might be a means of
begetting others to believe in God, and to obey him, as he had done; to be a
great Instrument to propagate the kind of new Creatures, of Men renewed to God,
to the end they might be blessed as he was. This, or somewhat to this effect,
is doubtless the meaning of Romans 4. 11, 12. And he received the sign of
Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith which he had, being yet
uncircumcised: That he might be the Father of all them that believe, though
they be not circumcised; that Righteousness might be imputed to them also: And
the Father of Circumcision to them who are not of the Circumcision only, but
also walk in the steps of that Faith of our Father Abraham, which he had being
yet uncircumcised; and it is not unlikely, but that as Heart-Circumcision under
the figure of Literal-Circumcision, was together with Faith, made the condition
of the Covenant then; so Spiritual Baptism, which is a death unto sin, and a
living unto God, is under the Figure of Water Baptism, joined with believing,
as the condition of the Promise of Salvation: now, Mark 16. 16. He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. According to which St. Peter having
spoken of Noah's Ark, says; The like figure whereunto Baptism now saves us;
not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Now as it was in Abraham, such a belief
of God's Declaration of Grace and Favor, as did effectually induce him to love
and obey God, by which he was justified, so (I shall show afterward) it was
the very same kind of Faith, working after the same manner, by which the Saints
under the Law of Moses, were saved.

But Faith, as Evangelical and Christian, is such a hearty assent and consent
unto God's Declartion in the Gospel by his Son, concerning Christ himself, and
his Grace and Favor toward Men by him, and concerning their own duty, as
causes a man to expect from God, and to act in a way of duty, according to the
Tenor of such a Declaration, and his own concerns in it. And Faith, thus
defined, is fully agreeable to the Tenor of the Gospel: Mark 16. 15, 16. Go ye
into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every Creature: He that believes,
and is Baptized, shall be saved. He that believes What? Why, he that believes
that Gospel which was to be preached to every Creature. Which Gospel contains a
Declaration of God's Grace, and Man's Duty, and of his Wrath against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men. For, 1. It declares from God that he
has given his Son Jesus Christ to be the Savior of the World, by being a
Propitiation for the sin of it, in becoming a Sacrifice to expiate sin. 2. It
declares that God upon account of his Sons giving himself a Ransom for all,
has made, and does establish a New Covenant with the World, to pardon, and
eternally to save as many as shall believe in his Son, and repent of their
sinfulness, in changing their Minds, and reforming their Lives, and becoming
new men, in yielding sincere obedience to the Precepts of the Gospel. 3. It
declares that those that believe not, shall be damned, and such as repent not
shall perish, and that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
This summarily is that which the Gospel declares concerning God's grace and
displeasure, and Man's duty.

Now it is the Practical belief of all this, that is the saving Faith. It is
not the bare belief that God has given his Son to be the Savior of the World,
and a Propitiation for the sin of it: Nor is it a bare belief that he will for
Christ's sake pardon and save as many as truly repent and amend their lives,
and become new Creatures; unless they so believe all this as seriously and
heartily to Repent themselves of their former folly, and to return to their
duty in new Evangelial Obedience. For otherwise, for a Man barely to believe
all this, and not to act according to his own concerns in it, will be so far
from being a believing to the saving of the Soul, as that it will rather plunge
him the deeper in destruction for living and acting contrary to his own light
and belief, as holding the truth in unrighteousness; the wrath of God being
revealed from heaven against all such, Romans 1. 18.

A man of this practical Faith which I have described, eyes as well the
condition upon which the saving Benefits are Promised through Christ, as the
Promise it self of those benefits; and expects the enjoyment of those benefits
upon God's Promise and Christ's purchase, no otherwise than as he with the
assistance of God's grace, is careful to perform the condition. Which belief of
his, makes him as careful to perform the condition in discharge of his own duty
therein, as ever he hopes to enjoy the promised pardon of Salvation by Christ,
and to escape the damnation threatened against those who perform not the
condition. So that a Man by this Practical Faith, belives one part of God's
Declaration in the Gospel as well as the other, and his own duty to be as well
necessary to his Justification as the condition appointed by God, as the Grace
of God, through Christ, it self is upon another account: And by this belief he
is effectually moved, as well to act in a way of duty to God, as to expect
mercy from him; considering how his happiness is concerned in both, when he
has the whole of God's Declaration in all the parts taken together, in
prospect, as the Object of his Faith.

When he hears that God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
When he hears that God has set forth Christ to be a Propitiation through Faith
in his Blood: And when he hears again, that God was in Christ reconciling the
World unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; he believes all
this to be true, as coming from God that cannot lie, and accordingly is
encouraged to hope in God's mercy, and is comforted thereby. But then when he
hears again, that except we repent, we shall all perish; that except a man be
born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God: That without holiness, no man
shall see the Lord; and that the pure in heart shall see God: That not every
one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that
does the will of the Father which is in Heaven: That the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, to render
vengeance to all those that know not God, and which obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ: But that he is the Author of eternal Salvation to all those
that obey him. I say, when he hears all this, he as verily believes this part
of Gods Declaration in the Gospel, to be the faithful and true sayings of God,
as he accounted the other to be. And accordingly, does as seriously, and
sincerely set upon the work of Repentance, and as carefully uses God's
appointed means for the changing of his Heart, and renewing of his Nature, for
the purifying of himself as God is pure; and does as carefully obey all the
Precepts of the Gospel; as he hopes upon the account of Christ's sufferings and
God's Promise, to be pardoned and saved; as believing that those Benefits are
neither promised, nor can be obtained, but in this way of performing the
Condition. And I doubt not to say, this practical Faith, as it respects God's
Declaration touching Man's duty, in conjunction with his own Grace in Christ,
is, where the Gospel comes, the only saving justifying Faith.

3. Come we now to show Reason why Faith is made the Condition of the Promise.

1. It is of Faith that it might be of Grace, says the Apostle, Romans 4. 16. It
is that the Grace of God to miserable Men, might the more show it self. For so
it does, not only in promising unspeakably great things through Christ to Man,
who is not only un-deserving, but ill-deserving also; but also in that these
are promised upon such a possible practicable easy condition as Faith is,
considering the means and assistance promised by God to work it: And
considering also that the Promise is made to the truth, unfeignedness and
sincerity, and not to perfection of Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience in
their utmost degree. So that Christ might well say, my Yoke is easy, and my
Burden light, Matthew. 11. 30. Whereas the old way of promising the Inheritance
on the Law terms, would have been to have promised it upon impossible
conditions, as the case now is with fallen Man. And if God should Promise never
so great things to Man, in his impotent and miserable state, upon an impossible
condition, he would have been so far from manifesting abundance of Grace,
Compassion, and Love to him in that condition, as that he would rather have
seemed to insult over him in it. And therefore if the Promise should have run
upon the Law-terms and not of Faith, it would utterly have frustrated God's
design of manifesting his grace to Man, and of recovering Man's Love and
Loyalty to him thereby. Romans 4. 14. If they which are of the Law be Heirs,
Faith is made void, and the Promise made of none effect. But it is of Faith,
that it might be by grace, to the end the Promise might be sure to all the
Seed, not to that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the
Faith of Abraham, ver. 16.

2. This may be another reason why such a Faith as I have described, is made
the condition of the Covenant of Salvation, viz. Because it best answers God's
design in this Covenant, of renewing the nature of Man in Holiness and
Righteousness, and by that means restoring it to happiness. For, by Faith Men
are born of God, or made the Children of God. Gal. 3. 26. Ye are all the
Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. Joh. 1. 12, 13. As many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to those that
believe on his Name. Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Now to be born of God, or, which is
the same, to be made the Child of God, is to have ones Nature restored to the
likeness of God, in which Man was first made, and is the same thing with that
which is called Regeneration, and a being born again, and a new Creature. Which
new Creature, or the nature of Man renewed by Faith, is also called the new
Man, which after God, is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.
24. To be born again, is to have the faculties of Man's Nature restored to a
rectitude in their motions and operations in reference both to God and Man, to
be restored to their proper moral use for which they were made. It is in a
word, that which is called a being made partakers of a Divine Nature. For those
which are begotten of God, are begotten in, or to his likeness. Men can adopt
those which are not their natural Children to inherit their Estates, but they
cannot adopt them to a participation of their Moral Endowments. But God adopts
his Children to a participation with him in the Inheritance, by adopting them
to a participation of the Moral perfections of his Nature; that is, to a
consimilitude to him in them.

And this we say is done by Faith; that is, by Faith in God, and by Faith in
his Word. For, in order of Nature, God is first believed to be a God of Truth,
before his Word is believed to be the Word of Truth. And the creditableness of
his Word depends upon the knowledge or belief of the fidelity of his Nature.
And this Truth of God and of his Word, is the immediate Object of Faith. By
Faith, a Man believes that to be true which God reveals or declares as his Mind
and Will, let the Import of it be what it will. But then this Faith operates
upon the Will and Affections, according to the Tenor and Import of that which
is revealed. If it be matter of sad import, it works a hatred to him that
threatens it, and a fear of the thing threatened, if it be apprehended to
proceed from an enemy. And this is the effect of the Faith of Devils, who
believe, and hate God, who believe and tremble, Iam. 2. 19. But if that which
is revealed by God, and believed by Man, betoken unspeakable love and good will
in God to Man, and matter of the greatest benefit to him, as a proof of such
love, then it works love to him that expresses such love ( for Faith works
by Love, Gal. 5. 6.) and a longing desire after the promised benefit. And as
the Soul grows more and more in love with God, because of his love; in love
with his blessed Nature and Divine Perfections; such as are his Love, and
Goodness, Truth, and Faithfulness, Purity and Patience, Mercifulness, and
readiness to forgive, which render him altogether lovely; so it contracts a
likeness to God in these upon the Soul, and so changes and renews the Moral
habit and constitution of the Soul, and consequently of the whole Life. There
is an aptness and promptness in men to imitate that in others (and so in God)
for which they love them. And frequent imitating Acts, beget habits, Custom
changing Nature. And hence it is, that through Faith we are made partakers of a
Divine Nature. We all with open face, beholding as in a Glass the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. This beholding the glory of the Lord, is by Faith, (
For we walk by Faith, and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7. and by it Moses saw him
who is invisible, Heb. 11. 27.) And the medium by which this Prospect is taken,
is the Gospel, by which the Lord in his lovely Perfections is now openly
revealed: And Faith being from time to time busied in beholding of, and
conversing with these Perfections, it transforms the Soul into the same Image
or likeness, from glory to glory (that is gradually) as by the Spirit of the
Lord; that is, through the cooperation of God's Spirit with Man's Faith. To
comprehend the breadth, length, depth, and height, and to know the love of
Christ which passes knowledge, is the way to be filled with all the fullness of
God, by transcribing all his imitable perfections upon the Soul, Ephesians. 3. 18,
19.

And it is by virtue of their Relation to Christ, and being thus begotten and
born of God, and made partakers of a new Nature conformable to God's, that Men
can with confidence call God Father: This blessed effect of God's Spirit, is
the Spirit of Adoption, by which they cry, Abba, Father. And it is this new
Nature that is the Spring and Fountain of a good Life, of all Pious and
Virtuous Actions. As it is said of God, Thou art good, and do good; so it is
true of all those that are born of him. A good Man out of the good treasure of
his heart (thus renewed) brings forth good fruit: The Tree being good, the
Fruit will be good. And as this new Creature grows up to strength and
maturity, so doing of good, and acting worthily, will become natural and
pleasant to him in whom it is. To such an one the Commandments of God are not
grievous, but he will be able in some good measure to say, I delight to do thy
will, O God, yea thy Law is in my heart. And for sin, it being contrary to this
new Nature, there is a kind of Moral Impotency in him in whom it is, to commit
sin: He cannot sin, because he is born of God, 1 John 3. 9. Or if such an one
be overtaken in a fault, it will work a disturbance in the Soul, just as that
will in the stomach, which a Man has eaten, against which he has an antipathy
in Nature. But as for such as perform Religious Duties, and do things
materially good, only by the strength of Extrinsecal Motives, and not froman
inward Principle of this new Nature, or love to the things themselves; to such
those actions, being unnatural, become grievous and burdensome, and will be
continued in no longer, than those Motives continue in their strength.

Sect. 8.
The last thing I proposed to consider about God's Promise to Abraham, is, What
we are to understand by God's counting Abraham's Faith to him for righteousness.
And I take it to signify thus much: That God in a way of special grace, or by
virtue of a new Law of grace and favor which was established by God in Christ,
( Gal. 3. 17.) that is, in reference to what Christ was to do and suffer in
time then to come, did reckon his Practical Faith to him for Righteousness;
that is, that which in the eye of that new Law should pass in his estimation
for Righteousness, subordinate to Christ's Righteousness, which procured this
Grant, or Law. For otherwise Faith, neither as it is the condition of the
Promise of Remission of Sin through Christ, nor as it works Repentance for sins
past, or sincere Obedience for time to come, is Righteousness in the Eye of the
Original Law. For that accounts no Man that has, though but once transgressed
it, to be Righteous either upon the account of another suffering for his sin,
or his own Repentance or sincere imperfect Obedience; but curses every Man
that from first to last continues not in all things which are contained in
that Law. But it is as I said, an Act of God's special Favor, and by virtue of
his new Law of Grace, and as it is established in Christ, that such a Faith as
I have described, comes to be reckoned, or imputed to a man for Righteousness,
and through God's imputing it for Righteousness, to stand a man in the same, if
not in a better stead, as to his eternal concerns, as a perfect fulfilling of
the Original Law from first to last would have done: Christ's Righteousness
being presupposed the only Meritorious Cause of this Grant or Covenant.

And thus indeed the Faith which I have described, is a Man's Righteousness in
the Eye of this new Law, because it is Summarily all that is required of him
himself to make him capable of the Benefits promised by it, which as it is now
revealed, is the Gospel. Justification is a Law-term: And no Man shall be
justified in Judgment, or upon Trial, but he that is just in the Eye of this
new Law of Grace, as every one that rightly believes, repents, and sincerely
obeys, is, because that is all that it requires of a Man himself to his
Justification and Salvation. And yet every Believers Justification will be all
of Grace, because the Law by which they are Justified, is wholly of Grace, is
wholly a Law of Grace, and was Enacted in mere Grace and Favor to undone Man,
that was utterly undone by the fall.

There are two things which I conceive do constitute and make up the
Righteousness of the Law of Grace (presupposing all to be procured by the
purchase which Christ has made) first, the Righteousness which consists in
the forgiveness of sins; and secondly, the Righteousness of sincere Obedience.
And in reference to both these, Faith is imputed for Righteousness, by virtue
of the Law of Grace.

First, Faith as practical is imputed to a Man for Righteousness, as it is
that, and all that which is required of him himself by the Law of Grace, to
entitle him to the Righteousness which consists in the remission of sins
through Christ. Now that remission of Sins is part of the Righteousness which
is by Faith, is evident from Romans 4. 5, 6, 7, 8. Where the Apostle to prove
that a Man's Faith in God who justifyeth the ungodly, is counted to him for
Righteousness, he cites a passage out of Psalm the 32d, Even as David also
(says he) describes the blessedness of the man to whom God imputes
Righteousness without Works, saying, blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will
not impute sin. The Righteousness imputed in this sense, does consist in the
non-imputation of sin. Not to impute sin, is not to reckon a Man not to have
sinned; but it is to deal with him not according to the demerit of his sin, it
is to pardon him for Christ's sake upon his penitential Faith, and not to
punish him for his sin; and this by virtue of a new Law, or Act of Indemnity,
or Covenant of Grace. For although pardon of sin is obtained for Man by Christ
his suffering for sin, ( In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveneess of sins, Ephesians. 1. 7. and though God, for Christ's sake does
forgive us, Epes. 4. 32.) yet the actual collation of this great Benefit, is
not promised, but upon condition of Man's Faith. Him has God set forth to be a
Propitiation; but it is through Faith in his blood, Romans 3. 25. By him all that
believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by
the Law of Moses, Acts 13. 39. and 10. 43. Although Christ is the Propitiation
for the sins of the whole World, (1 Ioh. 2. 2.) yet that saying of Christ must
and will will take place; If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your
sins, Joh. 8. 24. and that also, Mark 16. 16. He that believes not, shall be
damned. So that Faith is imputed for Righteousness, partly as it is the
Condition upon which pardon of sin is granted.

Secondly, That Faith is imputed for Righteousness, which is practical, or
productive of sincere Obedience, without which property it is not a fulfilling
of the Law of Grace as a condition of the promised Benefits, and consequently
cannot justify a Man in the Eye of that Law. For

First, Repentance, and likewise forgiving men their injuries (for instance)
are such Acts of Obedience, as without which a Man cannot be pardoned; and if
not pardoned, then not justified. And therefore Faith is not imputed for
Righteousness, unless it be productive of Obedience.

Secondly, No Faith is available to justification, but such as works by Love,
Gal. 5. 6. Which to say is all one, as to say, no Faith is imputed for
Righteousness, but such as works by keeping the Commandments of God, and
fulfilling the Law; for that is the interpretation of love, both to God and
Men, 1 Ioh. 5. 3. Romans 13. 10.

Thirdly, Abraham who was set forth by God for a Pattern of his justifying Men
by Faith, was Justified by such works as were the fruits of his Faith, and not
only by his Faith which was the Root of them: And therefore his Faith as
practical, was imputed to him for Righteousnss: And such must be the Faith of
all others that shall obtain Justification upon their believing as he did, Iam.
2. 21, 22, 23. Was not Abraham our Father justified by Works when he had
offered Isaac his Son upon the Altar? See thou how Faith wrought with his
Works; and by Works was Faith made perfect. And the Scripture was fulfilled
which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness.
Where note these four things. 1. That Abraham's Faith wrought with his Works
about the same end, as a Condition of obtaining it, to wit, his Justification.
2. That by his Works his Faith was made perfect, to wit, in its aptitude by
God's Institution, to justify him, without which it would not have reached
that end. 3. Note further, that it was his Faith as it wrought with his Works,
and as it was completed and made perfect by them, that was imputed to him for
Righteousness. 4. Note, that in the Imputation of his Faith for Righteousness,
as it was thus accompanied with, and perfected by Works, was the Scripture
ful^illed which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness. And if so, then the Justification by Works, together with Faith,
of which St. James speaks here, is a Justification before God, and not before
Men only, and to a Man's own Conscience: For of such a Justification does the
Scripture in Genesis 15. 6. speak, which is here cited by St. James.

Nor does this, that Faith accompanied with Obedience is imputed for
Righteousness, at all derogate from the Obedience and Sufferings of Christ in
reference to the ends for which they serve. Because the whole Covenant, and all
the parts and terms of it, both Promises of Benefits, and the Condition on
which they are Promised, are all founded in Christ his undertaking for us, and
all the Benefits of it accrue to us upon our Believing and Obeying, upon his
account, and for his sake. We are in him, who of God is made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. For which cause
also he is called the Lord our Righteousness. Not as if his personal Obedience
to the Law, was so formally imputed to us, as that we should be reckoned to
have kept the Law in his keeping of it, (which has been the Opinion of some)
for if that had been so, there would have been no more need that Christ should
have suffered for us, than there was that he shoud have suffered for himself
who had no sin, for neither should we, if we had perfectly kept the Law in him,
or in his keeping of it.

CHAP. II.
For what Ends the Law was added to the Promise.
I Now come to show in the next place, for what end the Law of Mo^es was added
to the Promise. And before I do this in particular, I shall note only in
general, that it was not added to cross or confront the Promise, or God's
Design in it, but to be subservient to it, Gal. 3. 21. Is the Law then against
the Promises? God forbid. For it is not to be thought that God would
prevaricate in his Design, so that when he had once made a new Law of Grace for
the saving of fallen Man, he would yet afterward give any Law but what should
one way or other subserve to the same end, if Men do not deprive themselves of
the intended benefit by perverting it. And therefore to be sure, God did not
intend to revive the Old Covenant of Works made with Adam in Paradise, in the
after promulgation of the Law of Nature (which we call the Moral Law) already
broken. He did not therein come to demand his full debt of Innocence in Man's
broken and bankrupt condition, or to let him know that he would without any
other condition than perfect incency, cast him into prison, until he had paid
the utmost farthing. For if he had, then the Law indeed would have been against
the Promise, which declares quite otherwise. It is true, the Law of Nature as
it is a perfect Rule of Natural Righteousness, founded in God's Nature and
Man's Nature, does of it self require perfect innocence, and can require no
less, being suited to the Nature of Man in its perfect state. But when God
brings this Law forth, and sets it before Men that are now fallen from that
state, as he does in the promulgation of it, it is to let them know indeed what
they once were, and from whence they are fallen, and how unhappy their
condition now is, according to the Tenor and Terms of that Law, and that it
would have continued so for ever, if God had not made a new Law of Grace, to
overruled that Law; and to let all know that they shall still remain in that
condition that wilfully exclude themselves from the benefit of the Law of
grace, by not performing the Condition of it: and not to let them know, they
should have no better terms from him than that Law affords them, nor to make
their perfect keeping of it the condition of their Justification. But the Law
of Moses entirely taken in all its parts, was rather given as an Appendix to
the Promise, both as a Rule of the material part of that Obedience, which God
would now require of the Israelites in conjunction with their Faith in the
Promise, and as a Motive to that Obedience: This in general.

The Question is put, Gal. 3. 19. Wherefore then serves the Law? And the
Answer there is, That it was added because of transgression, until the Seed
should come. And it was added because of transgression in more respects than
one.

1. It was added to discover Sin, to make that known to be Sin, which was so of
it self, and in its own nature before the promulgation of the Law. For by
reason of that grievous Wound which Man got in his Understanding by the Fall,
and by reason also of a Progressive Degeneration in Mankind, the Natural Sense
of Moral Good and Evil, was to a great degree worn out of the minds of Men. For
the repairing of which decay, a promulgate Law (the ten Commandments)
answerable to the Law of pure Nature in the Spirituality of it, was set on foot
in the World. And by this Law came Sin and Duty to be more clearly known than
they were before, Romans 3. 20. By the Law is the knwoledge of Sin, Romans 7. 7. I
had not known Sin but by the Law: For I had not known Lust, except the Law had
said, Thou shall not covet.

2. The Law was added, not only barely to make known that to be Sin, which was
so^of it self before, but to set it out in it is Colors, to make it known in
the horrid nature and consequence of it, that Men might be the more afraid to
have to do with it. The Law entered that the offense might abound: That is, that
by that means it might be rendered the more Criminous and Demeritorious: That
Sin by the Commandment, might become exceeding sinful, Romans 5. 20. and 7. 13.

3. The Law as it discovered Sin, and made it more criminous, and the people
the more sensible of guilt, and more apprehensive of their obnoxiousness to
punishment, was given to set off so much the more, the Glory, Beauty, and
Desirableness of God's Grace in the Promise of pardon and Salvation, Romans 5.
20. The Law entered that the offense might abound: But where Sin abounded,
Grace did much more abound. By how much the more Sin appeared Sin, and was
enhanced, and aggravated, and rendered manifestly mischievous by a Promulgate
Law; by so much the more grace appeared to be Grace, in all its Glory, that
brought deliverance from it, Romans 5. 21. That like as Sin has reigned unto
death (viz. by the Law, that being the strength of Sin, 1 Cor. 15. 56.) Even so
Grace might reign through Righteousness unto eternal life through Ie^us Christ
our Lord. After Christ came, the rest which he gave, was so much the more sweet
to these Jews who received him, by how much they had been weary and heavy laden
under a Spirit of bondage before.

4. The Law (says St. Paul) was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that
we might be justified by Faith, Gal. 3. 24. That is, It was a lower sort of
Institution accommodated to the weak and more imperfect state of the Church^,
until afterward it should deliver them over to a more perfect Institution under
Christ. Parents first teach their Children to speak, and after put them to
School to learn Letters, Syllables, Words, and Sentences, the use and design of
all which they do not understand while they are Children, as they do when they
come to be Men. In proportion to this has God dealt with his Church in the
World, beginning with a lower and more imperfect sort of Instruction, Precepts
and promises, and so proceeding to those that are higher and more perfect, and
so by certain gradations, to lead on, and build up his Church to a more perfect
Spiritual and complete state of Faith and Holiness; To all the riches of
fullness of understanding of the Mystery of God, of the Father, and of Christ,
Col. 2. 2. And thus the Law as a Schoolmaster, had a double end and use: The
one respecting the time then present: The other that which was then future and
to come.

The then present use of it was twofold also.

1. To reclaim and restrain them from the Superstitious Customs of the Heathen,
to which they were addicted, in which respect also it was added because of
transgression. The Heathen Worship, stood in diverse Superstitious Rites or
Ceremonies: And because the Israelites were adicted to a bodily Worship like
theirs, (for they said, let us make us Gods to go before us, Exodus 32. 1.) and
were in danger thereby of being drawn to Worship their Gods, therefore to
prevent this (as Parents put their Childeren to School, partly to keep them out
of harms way) the Lord by way of condescension to their childish humor, did
ordain a Worship consisting much in bodily exercise, and Instituted diverse
Laws, which stood in Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings, and carnal
Ordinances, until the time of Reformation; till he should by sending his Son,
appoint more excellent Laws for reforming both them and the rest of the World.
Lev. 18. 3, 4, 5. After the doings of the Law of Egypt wherein ye dwelt shall
ye not do; and after the doings of the Land of Canaan whither I bring you shall
ye not do; neither shall ye walk in their Ordinances. Ye shall therefore keep
my Statutes and my Judgments: Which if a Man do, ^e shall live in them, Ezekiel.
20. 6. -- 11.

2. The Lord did Institute diverse Temporary Laws for trial and exercise of
their Obedience in those lesser things for a time, as being such as they were
as yet best capable to receive, thereby to lead them on to higher instances of
Obedience afterward. These many Ceremonies which they were obliged to observe,
were not things of any Natural or Intrinsic goodness, but only made use of by
God for a present turn, which when that was served, they (as to practice) were
of no value, but became beggarly Elements. But yet while they continued
commanded of God, their obedience in the use of them, was rewardable, as well
as their obedience to any other Laws.

The other end and use of the Law as it was a Schoolmaster, respected the time
then to come. For the high Priesthood, and Sacrifices of the Law, as they were
Types of what Christ should be, do, and suffer as Mediator, were of great use
to the Jews after Christ had suffered, and was risen again, and ascended into
Heaven, to facilitate both the knowledge and belief of the Mystery of
Redemption by Christ.

1. To facilitate the knowledge thereof, and to beget in them a right Notion of
these things in Christ, by which forgiveness of sins, and acceptance with God,
is obtained on our behalf. For those who had long seen and known the effect of
Legal Sacrifices, as how they did procure Legal impunity for offenses
committed, God accepting the life of a Beast that had not sinned, instead of
the life of a Man that had, might soon come to understand from that by parity
of reason, that God would much more accept of his own Sons offering himself in
Sacrifice for us, so as to excuse us from suffering eternal punishment for our
sin. For if the blood of Bulls, and of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh; how much
more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself
without spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead works to serve the living
God, Heb. 9. 13, 14. And so the High Priests entering into the Holy of Holies in
the behalf of the people, with the blood of the Sacrifice, and burning Incense
there, does greatly assist the mind in understanding the Nature of Christ's
Intercession for us in Heaven, in virtue of his Bloodshed for us on Earth, Heb.
9.

2. The Law in the Typical Nature of it, was of great use to the Jews, to
facilitate and strengthen their belief in Christ; and so were the Predictions
of the Prophets in conjunction with it: for these and the accomplishment of
them in Christ, did so answer each other, as in Water Face answers to Face,
that those who believed the Law and the Prophets, had a great advantage by
means thereof, to believe in Christ. And therefore our blessed Savior when he
would satisfy his Disciples touching himself, that he was indeed the Christ,
and of the necessity of his death, (which death occasioned at first a
staggering in their Faith) beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he
Expounded to them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself, Luke
24. 27. And St. Paul when he labored the conversion of the Jews at Rome, to
Christianity, as the chiefest way to effect it; he Expounded to them, and
testified the Kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the
Law of Moses, and of the Prophets, from morning to evening, Acts 28. 23. Had ye
believed Moses (Says our Savior to them) ye would have believed me; for he
wrote of me: But if ye believe not his Writings, how shall ye believe my words,
Joh. 5. 46, 47. And thus in both the forementioned respects, the Law was a
Schoolmaster indeed to bring them to Christ, that they might be justified by
Faith.

5. The Law was given to the Jewish Nation, not only for their behoof and
benefit, but also for a general good to the World: That the Nations round
about, hearing of such excellent Laws, and perceiving how happy and prosperous
those people were, so long as they observed them; might thereby be invited to
quit their Idol Gods, and to take hold of the Covenant, and to join themselves
to the people of the God of Abraham, even as it came to pass in such as were
Proselited. And upon this account it seems to be, that the Psalmist prayed
thus: God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause thy Face to shine upon
us: That thy way may be known on Earth, thy saving health unto all Nations,
Psalm. 67. 1, 2. and concludes, ver. 7. that if God should so do, his fear would
be propagated through the World: God shall bless us, and all the ends of the
Earth shall fear him, Deuteronomy, 4. 6, 7, 8. Keep therefore and do them, for this is
your Wisdom, and your Understanding in the sight of the Nations, who shall hear
all these Statutes, and say, surely this great Nation is a Wise and an
Understanding people. For what Nation is there so great, that has God so nigh
unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for? And
what Nation is there so great, that has Statutes and Judgments so righteous,
as all this Law which I set before you this day? To them were committed the
Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. They were committed in trust to them as Feoffees for
the World, to communicate the knowledge of God and of his Laws to the Nations;
to carry on further the Reformation of the World begun in their Father Abraham,
and which was Promised to be more completely effected by the Messiah, in that
all Nations of the Earth should be blessed in him. And as God's Judgments on
the Jews for breaking his Laws, was Admonitory to the Nations about them, Deuteronomy.
29. 24, -- 28. So his famous Deliverances wrought for them upon their
Repentance for breaking his Laws, made God known abroad to be a great favourer
of such as repent of their worshipping and serving other Gods, and such a one
as could and would save, deliver and bless them that turned to him to serve him
only. Which seems to be his meaning when he says he will be sanctified before
the Heathen, when he should gather them from among the people where they were
Captives, and that the Heathen should know that he was the Lord, Ezekiel. 20. 41.
and 36. 23. And by this means be brought them to fear and worship the God of
Israel. Psalm. 102. 13, 15. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Zion; So the
Heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord; and all the Kings of the Earth thy
glory. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion, they said among the
Heathen, The Lord has done great things for them, Psalm. 126. 1, 2.

6. The whole Law was given to be a Political Instrument of governing the
Israelites (according to that state of their minority) as a peculiar Republic,
of which God himself was the Sovereign Legislator. But of this more afterward.

CHAP. III.
Showing by what Faith and Practice the Jews under the Law were saved.
I Come now to show by what Faith and Practice the Jews under the Law were
saved.

And doubtless what ever it was, it became available to that end, upon the
account of what Christ was to suffer, when he should come. For, as I showed
before, that God's Covenant with Abraham and his Seed (by virtue of which the
faithful then were saved) was confirmed in Christ; was established with them in
reference to what he was to do and suffer as Mediator afterward, Gal. 3. 17.
And by means of his death, there was Redemption for the transgressions that
were under the first Testament, Heb. 9. 15. And the Sacrifices and Priesthood,
were a Figure for the time then present, of what Christ should afterward do
and suffer, and for what end.

But when I say so, I do not say that all that were saved, did understand so
much. For we see the Apostles of Christ, though they did believe him to be the
Messiah, which the Jews expected, yet they did not understand or expect that he
should suffer death as a Sacrifice, till he told them so: Nay the thing was so
far from their thoughts, as that they did not understand him when he plainly
foretold them of his death, Luke 18. 32. And if the Doctrine touching the
resemblance that is between the Priesthood of Melchizedech and the Priesthood
of Christ, was not in the Apostles sense, Meat which Babes in Christanity could
well digest in their understandings, but was Meat for strong Men, Heb. 5. 10.
-- 14. we may well guess by that how little the Jews understood the Typical and
Spiritual sense of those Types about which they were frequently conversant; and
wherefore it is said that the least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than
John the Baptist, though he was so great, that there was none greater before
him. Hence we may see, that one Reason why those Jews were all their life time
under a spirit of bondage to fear, was the great Obscurity of the Declaration
of God's purpose of Grace to the World through Christ, and the Way and Method
of Salvation by him. Moses was but a servant for a Testimony of those things,
which were [after] to be spoken, and so declared afterward, as that the
Typical meaning of them might be understood, Heb. 3. 5. In the mean while, as
touching those things, they were shut up unto the Faith which should
[afterwards] be revealed, Gal. 3. 23. It is said of the Prophets, whereof Moses
was one, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the things
which are now reported unto us, by them that have preached the Gospel to us, 1
Pet. 1. 12. Add we to all this, Heb. 9. 8. where having spoken in ver. 7. of
the High Priests entering alone into the Holy of Holi^s with the blood of the
Sacrifice in behalf of the people once every year, he says, The Holy Ghost
this signifying, that the way into the Holiest of all, was not yet made
manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing. By the Holiest of
all, here is meant Heaven, signified of Old by the Holy of Holies, as appears,
ver. 12, 24. And the plain meaning seems to be this, That the peoples entering
into Heaven by the Sacrifice and Blood, and Intercession of Christ, was not
made manifest while the Tabernacle-Worship continued. For Christ is our way
into Heaven (to the place within the Vail) by his Blood shed as a Sacrifice,
Heb. 10. 19, 20. Having therefore Brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest
by the Blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he has consecrated for
us through the Vail, that is to say, his flesh. But this way he tells us was
not made manifest, while the first Tabernacle was standing.

But as obscure as this way was, as to what was to be done and suffered in
particular by the Messiah, yet they had some general Grounds of Faith and Hope,
that upon their Faith, Repentance, and sedulous endeavors to walk in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, they should obtain remission of their
sins, and a future happiness in another World. Among which Grounds these were
not the least:

1. They had the knowledge of the Promise of Blessedness to all Nations in
Abraham's Seed, and of the Promise of those other Benefits which were Promised
to Abraham and his Seed.

2. They had an addition of several other Predictions concerning the Messiah,
both by Moses and other Prophets, that perhaps were somewhat more express, such
as in Deuteronomy. 18. 16. Isa. 53. Dan. 9. and others. These Promises and
Predictions, put them in great expectations of Special Benefits by the Messiah,
and wrought in them a longing after his day. Upon which account our Savior
said to his Disciples: Blessed are your Eyes, for they see, and your Ears, for
they hear. For I say unto you, that many Prophets and Kings, and Righteous Men,
have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them, and to
hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them, Mat. 13. 16, 17. Luke
10. 23, 24.

3. They had large significations from God of his special favor to them above
all people, as in choosing them to be his peculiar people, and in declaring
himself to be their God; in giving visible Signs of his Presence among them,
and excellent Laws and Promises to them, and sending his Prophets amongst them,
and working many wonders for them, and casting out the Nations before them to
make room for them, and the like, Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7, 8. and 26. 18, 19. Psalm. 147.
19, 20. Romans 9. 4, 5.

4. They had express Declarations from God of the goodness of his Nature, and
of his compassion toward Sinners, and of his readiness to pardon such as
should repent and return to their duty in loving him, and keeping his
Commandments. As for instance, Exodus 34. 6, 7. The Lord passed before him, and
proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, trangression and sin. And when he delivered them his Law, with the
greatest terror and astonishment to them, yet even then he assured them that
he would show mercy to thousands of them that love him, and keep his
Commandments; as in the second Commandment. And in case of their miscarriage to
the drawing down of Gods Judgments upon them, he bespeaks them thus: When thou
art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter
days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shall be obedient to his voice:
(For the Lord thy God is a merciful God,) he will not forsake thee, nor forget
the Covenant of thy Fathers, Deuteronomy. 4. 31. and 30. 1, 2, 3. Levit. 26. 39, etc.

From all which Grounds, the faithful among them, had such a hope and
confidence of pardon of Sin, and of a future happiness in another life, upon
their Repentance and sincere Obedience, as did effectually induce them to have
good thoughts of God, to love him, and to endeavor to please him, by having
respect unto all his Commandments. This made him say, Psalm. 130. 4. There is
forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. And under this hope and
confidence, the twelve Tribes did instantly serve God day and night, and
grounded this Hope of theirs upon the Promise made of God unto their Fathers,
as St. Panl tells us, Acts 26. 6, 7.

And indeed it was the unanimous Faith of the most eminent among them from age
to age, that God had both made, and would keep a Covenant to show mercy to
those that love him, and keep his Commandments, or that walk before him with
all their heart: For that they looked upon as the Condition of God's Promise of
showing Mercy. This we may see in Moses, David, Solomon, and in Daniel, and
Nehemiah, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the
faithful God, which keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love him, and
keep his Commandments. So David, Psalm 103. 17, 18. The mercy of the Lord is
from everlasting to everlasting to such as keep his Covenant, and to those that
remember his Commandments to do them. And thus Solomon, 1 Kings 8. 23. And he
said, Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee, who keep Covenant and
mercy with thy servants, that walk before thee with all their heart. So Daniel
in his 9th Chap. 4th ver. O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the
Covenant and Mercy, to them that love him, and to them that keep his
Commandments. And Nehemiah likewise, Chapter 1. 5. I beseech thee, O Lord God of
Heaven, the great and terrible God, that keeps Covenant and mercy for them
that love him, and observe his Commandments. This we see was the serious and
constant Profession of the Faith of the servants of God in those times. And in
this Faith and Practice doubtless it was, that they lived, and dyed, and were
saved.

CHAP. IV.
That the Law contained a Covenant different from that with Abraham.
IN the next place I am to show, that the Law of Moses did contain a Covenant
distinct, and of a different nature from the Covenant which God made with
Abraham and his Spiritual Seed.

Besides the general Promise which God made to Abraham, respecting the Gentiles
as well as the Jews (In thee all Nations of the Earth shall be blessed) he made
a Special Covenant with him, as a reward of his Signal faithfulness, to give
unto his Natural Seed the Land of Canaan. Nehem. 9. 8. Thou foundest his heart
faithful before thee, and made a Covenant with him, to give the Land of the
Ca^aanites -- to his Seed. In order to the fulfilling of which Promise, after
he had brought them out of Egypt, he united them under himself as Head, in one
Political Body, by a Political Covenant, Exodus 19, etc. which is the Covenant I
am now to discourse of. In which discourse I would, 1. Show in what respect the
Law of Moses is said to contain a Covenant of a different nature from the
Covenant of Grace made with Abraham. 2. Prove that it did contain such a
different Covenant. 3. For farther Illustration, consider it in its parts, and
their relation one to another. 4. And in what respect this Covenant is called
the first Covenant, when as the Covenant of Grace was made before it.

1. In what respect the Law of Moses is said to contain a Covenant of a
different Nature from the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham. The Law of Moses
comes under a twofold consideration. 1. As in conjunction with the Promise to
Abraham, to which it was annexed, it made up one entire Law, by which the
Israelites were to be governed and directed in the way to eternal life: And in
this Conjunction, the Promise was the Life and Soul as it were of the Body of
the Mosaic Law properly taken. And in this sense as the word Law signifies the
Pentateuch, or five Books of Moses, (which contain the Promise as well as the
Law) it is sometimes used in the New Testament, Gal. 4. 21, 22. 1 Cor. 14. 34.
Luke 16. And in this sense doubtless we are to understand the Law upon which
David bestowed so many glorious Encomiums as he did, saying, The Law of the
Lord is perfect, converting the Soul, etc. Psalm. 19. 2. We are to consider the
Law of Moses as given at Sinai, in a stricter sense, as it was an Instrument or
Rule of Government in the Commonwealth of Israel. The Law, in the former sense
of it, promised eternal life (though but obscurely) to those that did believe
its Promises, and sincerely obey its Precepts. In the latter sense, it promised
only temporal Blessings to those that strictly observed it in all the parts of
it; and threatened those with temporal calamities that did not. The same Laws
materially, of this Political Covenant, related to both the Covenants. As
eternal Life was promised in the Covenant of Grace, upon condition of sincere
obedience to those Laws, as an effect of Faith in the Promise; So those Laws,
in Conjunction with the Promise, were, as I may so say, Evangelical. But as
temporal benefits only were promised in that Covenant upon condition of strict
obedience to those Laws; and as those Laws were enjoined under temporal
penalties as they were Commonwealth-Laws; so that Convenant, containing those
Laws, was Political, and in this Political respect, it was another Covenant. If
the Law of God, and the Law of Man command or forbid things materially the
same; yet if the one command or forbid them under pain of damnation, and the
other only under temporal penalties; these Laws are not formally the same. The
Commonwealth of Israel had no Commonwealth Laws, but what God himself gave
them, the which Laws they also covenanted with him to observe; by which
Covenant they were united under him as Head of that Political Body. And
therefore when they would needs choose them a King like other Nations, God told
Samuel, saying, They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I
should not reign over them, 1 Samuel 8. 7. Ye said unto me (said Samuel) nay, but
a King shall reign over us, when the Lord your God was your King, 1 Samuel 12.
12. I conclude then, that as the Law of Moses did serve to this Political end,
so it was a distinct Covenant, and different from the Covenant of grace.

2. Let us see how this may be proved to be a Covenant so distinct and
different, as I have said, from the Covenant of Grace declared to Abraham. And
to this purpose these things are considerable.

First, They are called the two Covenants, by St. Paul, Gal. 4. 24. And if they
are two, then there is a real difference between them, else they would be but
one and the same.

Secondly, They bear distinct denominations, the one is called the first and
the Old Covenant, and the other, the Second and the New, Heb. Chap. 8. and 9.

Thirdly, There were some sins pardonable by one of these Covenants, which were
not so by the other; and that shows that they were quite of a different nature.
The Murder and Adultery which David was guilty of, was not pardonable according
to the terms of the Political Covenant, if there had been any Superior Power
on Earth to have executed that Commonwealth-Law; and yet according to the terms
of the Covenant of Grace, they were pardonable upon repentance, and upon those
terms were pardoned unto him. The like might be said perhaps of Manasseh.

The unbelief of Moses and Aaron in not Sanctifying God in the eyes of the
Children of Israel, was according to the terms of the Covenant of Grace,
pardoned as to the eternal penalty, but yet was not wholly pardoned according
to the terms of the the Political Covenant as to temporal punishment: For the
Lord told them that for that cause they should not bring the Children of Israel
into the Land of Canaan, Numb. 20. 12. And in reference to this case, the
Psalmist says, thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest
vengeance of their inventions, Psalm. 99. 8.

Fourthly, The Covenant of Grace never cease, but it is of perpetual duration
throughout all Generations; and therefore is called the Everlasting Covenant,
Heb. 13. 20. But this Mosaical Political Covenant, is vanished long since, Heb.
8. 13. by which also it appears to be a Covenant effentially different from the
other.

3. For a farther Illustration of the nature of this Covenant, we will consider
it in its parts, and in the relation which those parts bear one toward
another. And in general, it did consist of two parts. 1. Of Laws; and 2. Of the
Sanction of those Laws: The Laws likewise were of two sorts. 1. Laws of Duty.
2. Laws of Indemnity.

1. Laws of Duty. And in them we may consider, 1. What those Laws were. 2. What
manner of obedience to those Laws it was which would free men from the
penalties of them, and entitle them to the Promises of reward annexed to them.

First, The Laws of Duty, of which this Covenant did in great part consist,
were those which pass under the various denomination of Moral, Ritual or
Ceremonial, and Judicial. Some of which Laws, ( viz. the Decalogue especially
and almost wholly) for the matter of them, were natural, that is, such as were
founded in the nature of Man, forbidding things which of themselves were evil,
and commanding things which in their own nature were good, and might be
discerned to be so, by Man in his pure Naturals, and in great part since the
degeneration of his nature, whether they had been expressly forbidden, or
commanded, or no. But these Laws became part of the Political Covenant, only as
they were expressly and externally declared to the Jews by a Promulgate Law. For
if this had not been so, the Gentiles could not have been said to be without
the Law, as they were, Romans 2. 14, 11. 1 Cor. 9. 21. For they had the force and
effect of the Law in their hearts, and were in that respect a Law unto
themselves, Romans 2. 14, 15. But because the Decalogue, as well as the other
Laws, was delivered to the Jews only, and to none else, from Mount Sinai,
therefore they only (and Proselytes that joined with them) were said to be under
the Law, and all the rest without Law. And therefore is the giving of the Law
reckoned to the Jews among their peculiar Privileges, Romans 9. 4. Psalm. 147.
19, 20. And in this sense only as the Decalogue was a part of the Political
Law, can the Ministration engraven in Stones, be said to be done away, as it
is, 2 Cor. 3. 7, to ver. 11. For so much of it as was a Copy of the Law of
Nature, or is by Christ incorporated into his Laws, remains in force to all men.

The other Laws of which this Covenant did consist, were Arbitrary, the force
of which did wholly depend upon Divine Institution: And such were the Laws
Ceremonial; and a great part of those we call Judicial.

Secondly, That obedience which would be sufficient to secure a Man from the
penalty of the Political Law, and to entitle him to the Promised Reward annexed
thereto, was no less than a strict Obedience to it in all the parts of it. For
it is written, Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law to do
them: And all the people shall say, Amen. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. And this extended to
Heart-obedience, and Heart-sinning, as well as to the outward act, commanding
love to God, forbidding to covet, as under the Heart-searching Political
Sovereign, who reserved to himself the final Judgment and Execution, even in
temporal respects, in many cases.

2. Laws of Indemnity (of which also this Covenant did consist) were partly
those which ordained Sacrifice and Offerings for the Expiation of many sins
made pardonable by those Laws, so far as to exempt the Delinquent person from
the temporal penalty threatened for breach of those other Laws, which for
distinction sake, I call Laws of Duty; for otherwise these also were Laws of
Duty as well as of Privilege. There were other Laws of Indemnity likewise for
the purification of persons legally unclean; which being observed, the persons
unclean became delivered from the penalties they suffered while their
uncleanness was upon them; such as was their separation from the Congregation.

Consider we next the Sanction of these Laws; and that did consist in Promises
annexed to the observing of them, and in a curse denounced against the
transgressors of them. And for our better understanding the Nature of the
Promises of this Covenant, we will consider them Negatively, and Affirmatively.

1. Negatively; The Promises of this Political-covenant as such, were not
Promise; of eternal life; And when I say so, I do not deny but that, first, the
Jews in Moses time, and before, had Promises of eternal life employed in the
Covenant made with Abraham and his Seed. And accordingly the faithful ones
among them, sought after the Heavenly Country, and looked for a City which
has Foundations, whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11. 10, 14, 16. Nor
secondly, will I deny but that there are some passages in the Law of Moses, if
you take the Law of Moses in a large sense, which look somewhat like a renewall
of the ancient Covenant with Abraham to his Seed. As when, for instance, God
made a conditional Promise to the Israelites in Moses his time, to be their
God, and that they should be his people, as in Levit 26. 12. Deuteronomy. 29. 13.
Which form of words is interpreted sometimes to imply a future happiness in
another World, Heb. 11. 16. Matthew. 21. 31, 32. And I do not deny but the Jews
had by Moses, as express a Promise of the Messiah, as Abraham had, Deuteronomy. 18.
15. -- 19. But St. Paul does not speak of the Law in this large sense, when he
opposes the Law and the Promise, the Law and Faith, one to another. But if we
understand by the Law of Mo^es, the Law as Political, the Law of the
Commonwealth; so the Promises of it were not Promises of Eternal Life; For
Promises of this nature did pertain to another Covenant, to wit, that made with
Abraham, and his Spiritual Seed as such.

First; Therefore St. Paul does down-rightly deny that the Promise of the
Inheritance, (which in Heb. 9. 15. is called the Eternal Inheritance) was by
the Law, which yet it would have been, if by Law he had meant the Law in that
large sense, in which the Law and Promise to Abraham are conjoined, and not in
that strict sense, by which he means the Political Law distinctly. And if the
Inheritance had been promised upon the same terms as temporal Blessings were in
the temporal Covenant, the Inheritance might have been obtained by the Law, as
well as temporal Blessings were. Romans 4. 13. For the Promise that he should be
Heir of the World, was not through the Law, but through the Righteousness of
Faith.

Secondly; St. Paul evinceth the badness of that Opinion, to think that Eternal
Life was Promised upon the Law-terms, from the absurd consequence of it;
showing that if it were, that then it would make void the Promise of God to
Abraham, and the way of saving men by Faith in that Promise, of none effect:
Gal. 3. 18. For if the inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of Promise: But
God gave it to Abraham by Promise. Romans 4. 14. For if they which are of the Law
be Heirs, Faith is made void, and the Promise made of none effect. It was
altogether unreasonable to think that the Inheritance should be promised upon
such distant and inconsistent terms, as are Faith in the Promise, and by Works
of the Law.

Thirdly; The Law, says the Apostle, is not of Faith, but the man that does
them shall live in them, Gal. 3. 12. meaning, that what the Law promised, it
did not promise it upon condition of believing, but upon condition of doing.
And Eternal Life is not since the fall promised upon condition of doing without
Faith, but upon condition of believing; For the Just shall live by Faith, Verse.
11. and therefore Eternal Life is not promised by the Law.

Fourthly; Wherefore else are the Promises of that better Covenant, Heb. 8. 6.
said to be better Promises? But because they are Promises of better things than
were promised in the first Covenant; which yet they could not be, if Eternal
Life had been promised in that Covenant, because that is the best of all
Promises.

To say they are better only in respect of Administration, and clearness of
Revelation, would not satisfy such as should well consider* That if the
betterness of the Covenant and Promises, lay only in that, the difference would
not be so great, as to denominate them two Covenants, and two so vastly distant
as the Scripture represents them to be. The difference then would be but only
gradual, as that is, which is found in the same Covenant of Grace in the
several Editions of it, to Adam, to Abraham, to David, and now to all Nations
since Christ's coming; and not Essential, as that between the two Covenants
seem to be, as it is represented in Gal. 4. 24. Besides, St. Paul represents
the Administration of the two Covenants, to differ as much as Righteousness and
Condemnation, Life and Death differ, which sure is more than a gradual
difference. The one is the Ministration of Death and Condemnation; the other,
the Ministration of Righteousness and Life. 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. The Law made
nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, Heb. 7. 19. By which
it appears again, that the hope of the Gospel (in which the things hoped for
upon the Promises of the Gospel are not the least) is better than what the Law
promised the observers of it. This is the Promise which he has promised us,
even Eternal Life, 1 John 2. 25.

2. And Affirmatively; It was then a long and Prosperous life in the Land of
Canaan, that was promised in the first Covenant, Deuteronomy. 28. 11. The Lord shall
make thee plenteous in Goods, in the fruit of thy Body, and in the fruit of thy
Cattle, and in the fruit of thy Ground, in the Land which the Lord swear unto
thy Fathers to give thee, Deuteronomy. 11. 21. That your days may be multiplied, and
the days of your Children as the days of Heaven upon Earth.

A great variety of outward blessings is promised, as the reward of keeping
that Covenant. And therefore Wisdom under that Dispensation is described, as
having length of days in her right hand, and in her left hand Riches and
Honor; whose ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace, Prove. 3.
17. And as this Covenant was National, so there were Promises of National
Blessings; such as was the setting them on high, above all the Nations of the
Earth; making them the Head and not the Tail: The giving them victory over
^nemies; multiplying the Nation, and bestowing on it Health, Peace, and Plenty,
Deuteronomy. 28. Lev. 26.

When it is said once by Moses, thrice by Ezekiel, and twice by St. Paul, that
the Man that does them, shall live in them, (Lev. 18. 5. Ezekiel. 20. 11, 13, 21.
Romans 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12.) thereby Epitomizing the first Covenant; I conceive
that by living, is meant a long and prosperous life in this World. As on the
contrary, the condition of one greatly afflicted, is in Scripture-Dialect, a
kind of Death, and such an one said to be free among the Dead, Psalm. 88. 5. And
that which inclines me so to think, is not only the Reasons already given to
prove that no other life was promised in the first Covenant, but also the
congruity of this sense with other passages in the Writings of Moses. As Deuteronomy.
30. 15. See, I have set before you this day, Life and Good, Death and Evil. If
you would know what is meant by Life here, the next verse will inform you: That
thou may live and multiply, and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in the
Land whither thou go to possess it. The contrary whereunto is the death he
had set before them; saying, I denounce unto you this day that ye shall surely
perish, and that ye shall not prolong your days upon the Land, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.
46, 47. Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this
day,; for it is not a vain thing for you, because it is your life; and through
this thing ye shall prolong your days in the Land wherein ye go. The latter
words are exegetical of the former: Through this thing ye shall prolong your
days, is the interpretation of those; it is your Life. And it may be
considered also, whether this Particle [ in] (which if a man do he shall even
live [ in] them) may not determine the nature and kind of that reward which was
promised in the first Covenant, as it was a present reward, a reward which was
received even while the work was doing, according to that, Psalm. 19. 11. In
keeping them there is great reward. And this is agreeable to what fell out in
the event. The Lord was with them to prosper them, while they were with him;
but when they forsook him, presently troubles overtook them. The pouring out of
God's fury on them to consume them in the Wilderness, being put in Ezekiel. 20.
13, 21. as the direct contrary to those words, which if a man do, he shall even
live in them, seems greatly to favor this Nation. But the house of Israel
rebelled against me in the Wilderness: They walked not in my Statutes, and they
d^spised my Judgments, which if a man do, he shall even live in them: Then I
said, I would pour out my fury upon them to consume them in the Wilderness.

And indeed one main difference between the two Covenants, (which I would have
here observed) lies in this, to wit, the presentness of the reward promised in
the first, and the futurity of that promised in the second. St. Paul in his
Allegorical description of the two Covenants, Gal. 4. 24, etc. represents those
that adhered to the first Covenant, by the children of Bond-servant, to whom
Abraham gave gifts in present, and sent them away, as in Genesis 25. 5. and those
that adhered to the second, by the Son of the Freewoman, Isaac, who was
Abraham's Heir, to whom he gave the whole Inheritance at last. And the Adoption
of Sons, as the Privilege of the New Covenant* is opposed to the condition of
Servants under the Old, Gal. 4. 7. And what are they adopted to, but to an
Inheritance for the future? for by Adoption they are made Heirs: If a Son, then
an Heir of God through Christ: an Heir of what? of an Inheritance for the
future; an Inheritance Incorruptible, undefiled, and which fades not away,
reserved in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 4. And therefore they are said to wait for the
Adoption, to wit the redemption of their Bodies, at the resurrection, Romans 8.
23. Sons and Heirs serve their Father with a free and ingenuous Spirit, though
they have but little for the present, in confidence of what he will do for them
hereafter in another world, when they shall come to age. But those under the
Old Covenant, were like Servants, who serve with a servile Spirit, because they
do it with expectation of present pay. The one walk by Faith, which is the
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; the other
were influenced in their obedience, by the expectation of present reward,
because that was it which the first Covenant promised to the observers of it.

These Promises now insisted on, were promises of reward to the observers of
this first Covenant: But besides these, there was another sort of Promises
exhibited in the first Covenant, and they were Promises of pardon, in many
cases, when the Laws of that Covenant were broken. There were (as I have
showed) Laws of Indemnity, which made many of the breaches of the Laws of duty,
pardonable upon certain conditions. And such were all sins of Ignorance and
Inadvertency, and some of those also which were committed wittingly. But
presumptuous sins, and such as carried in them a kind of contempt of the Law,
these were exempted from pardon: Heb. 10. 28. He that despised Moses Law, died
without mercy, under two or three witnesses. But for the other, there were
promises of pardon upon certain conditions; which conditions were not always
the same. In some cases the offering of a Sin-offering, or Trepass Offering,
was the Condition. In other Cases, that with confession of Sin, was the
Condition. And in some other Cases, Sacrificing, Restitution, and Satisfaction
were the Condition. And afflicting of the Soul, as well a the Sacrifice for
Atonement on the day of general Expiation, was always a Condition of
forgiveness. These things in the particularities of them, you have in the 4, 5,
6, 16, and 23d Chapters of Levit. And then the Condition of the Promises of
Purgation of Legal Uncleanness, and the penal effects of them, was the
observing the Rules prescribed for purifying the Unclean.

Now the forgiveness promised by these Laws of Indemnity, did not free the
Conscience from all Obligation to Eternal punishment, but only freed the Person
from suffering those temporal evils, which were threatened in this Covenant
against those which did not continue in all things written in the Book of it.
Neither Sacrifices, nor Legal Purifications, Sanctified, but unto the purifying
of the flesh, and to their temporal concerns only, Heb. 9. 9, 10, 13.

And here we may observe a five-fold difference in reference to Remission of
Sin, between the first Covenant, and the Covenant of Grace.

1. They differ in the nature of those Sacrifices by which Atonements were
made, and upon which forgiveness was promised. The blood of the Sacrifice of
the first Covenant, was but the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the like, Heb.
10. 4. But the Blood of the Sacrifice of the second Covenant, is the Blood of
Christ the Eternal Son of God. So that the nature of the Sacrifices of the two
Covenants, upon which the Promise of the pardon of Sins was granted, does
differ as much as the blood of Beasts and the Blood of the Son of God differ.

2. Those two sorts of Sacrifices pertaining to two kinds of Covenants, differ
in the proportion of Efficaty and Virtue to accomplish their respective ends
and effects. There is a greater richness of proportion in the Blood of Christ
to free the Cons^ience from the guilt of Sin, or obligation to Eternal
punishment, than there was in the blood of Beasts to free the Delinquent person
from temporal punishments. This is plainly intimated in Heb. 9. 13, 14. For if
the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the
unclean, sactifieth to the purifying of the flesh; [ how much more] shall the
Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to
God, purge your Conscience from dead works to serve the living God.

3. They differ in the nature of the pardon promised in each of the Covenants
respectively. The Redemption granted in the first Covenant, was but temporal,
as the Covenant it self was; it was but from evils temporal: But Christ Jesus
by his Atonement, has obtained Eternal Redemption for us, Hebr. 9. 12.

4. They differ in respect of the Sins made pardonable by each Covenant
respectively. There were many sins for which the first Covenant granted no
pardon upon any terms whatsoever. They that despised Moses Law, died without
mercy, Heb. 10. 28. But the Covenant of Grace makes promise of the pardon of
the greatest sins upon Repentance. All manner of Sin and Blasphemy, except the
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, are pardonable upon Repentance. This
difference is set down, Acts 13. 39. And by him all that believe are justified
from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. We
may well suppose that the first Covenant did finally condemn some, which the
Covenant of Mercy pardoned. David in the matter of Vriah, did that which was
unpardonable by the first Covenant; it was a Fact to have been punished with
death by the Law, but that there was none but God that could duly inflict it
upon him in his capacity; and yet upon his Repentance, it was pardoned as to
his Eternal concerns, as well as temporal, by virtue of God's Covenant of
Mercy. On the other hand, a man probably might be so righteous in the Eye of
the first Covenant, as not to be visibly blameable, and yet even then he
obnoxious to the curse of the Everlasting Covenant. Paul while he was Saul, and
in the state of unbelief, was even then as touching the righteousness which is
in the Law, blameless, as he himself says, Phil. 3. 6. So different were these
two Covenants, that him whom the one condemned the other might justify, and
likewise justify him whom the other condemned.

5. They differed in respect of the Condition to be performed on Man's part for
the obtaining of pardon. Pardon was promised i^ the first Covenant upon
condition of doing only without reference to Faith; but so are not the pardons
of the New Covenant, Gal. 3. 11, 12. But that no man is justified by the Law in
the sight of God, it is evident; for the Just shall live by Faith: And the Law
is not of Faith; but the man that does them shall live in them. So much
concerning the first Part of the Sanction of the first Covenant. Come we now to
the second.

The other part of the Sanction of this Covenant, did consist in the curse of
it denounced against the breakers of it. Though it is true that every Man is
under a condemnation that would be Eternal, until he comes to be absolved by
Virtue of the Law of Grace, yet more than temporal death was not expressly
threatened for breach of the Political Covenant as such.

1. For first, A violent death inflicted by the hand of the Magistrate, for
Capital Offenses, is called the Curse, Deuteronomy. 22. 23. He that is hanged, is
accursed of God, or is the Curse of God.

2. Christ who did not suffer Eternal punishment for Man's Sin, did yet suffer
the curse of the Law, in that he was hanged on a Tree, Gal. 3. 13. It is true
indeed, that by that temporary suffering of his, he redeemed us from Eternal
punishment, which we were obnoxious to.

3. Those who Apos^atize from Christ, and reject his Gospel, merit sorer
punishment than what was inflicted on them that despised Moses Law; and yet
sorer punishment for kind they cannot suffer, if Eternal punishment had been
the penalty of that Covenant as such, Heb. 10. 28, 29.

4. As the Promises of that Covenant when particularly expressed, did appear to
be but temporal, so the curses of it appear to be no other in the particular
enumeration of them. As for instance; a violent death inflicted by the hand of
the Magistrate, was the punishment threatened for many Capital Offenses; Such as
was Idolatry, Blasphemy, Witchcraft, working on the Sabbath, invading the
Priests Office, and for being a false Prophet; and also for Murder, Adultery,
Sodomy, Buggery, Manstealing, Cursing, or Smiting of Parents, or being
stubbornly rebllious against them, and some other. And a cutting off from among
the people (whether by God's hand immediately, or by Man's, I determine not) was
the penalty threatened for eating leavened Bread within the time prohibited, for
not purifying ones self when unclean, for profaning holy things, for ones
eating of the Sacrifice with his uncleanness upon him; for offering Sacrifice
any where but at the Tabernacle, for eating of Blood, and for eating of the fat
of the Sacrifice; for neglecting to keep the Passover, and for not afflicting
the Soul in the day of general Atonement; and for several other Offenses. And
those Offenses for which cutting off from among the people, is threatened, being
less criminous than the former, we have no reason to think the penalty of
cutting off from among the people, to signify more (if so much) than the
suffering of a temporal death. As we may observe how the Israelites various
punishments are expressed for their manifold crimes in the Wilderness, by God's
overthrowing them in the Wilderness by Pestilence, and otherwise. 1 Cor. 10.

In brief; The temporal evils threatened in this Covenant, were either Personal,
Domestic, or National. The Personal and Domestic evils, were no less, than
whatsoever tended to the infelicity of Man's life, as Diseases in Body,
Perplexity of Mind, unfruitfulness in Body, in Cattle, in Ground; Scarcity,
Poverty, Oppression, loss of Relations, fewness of days, and an untimely
cutting off from the Promised Land. The National were wild Beasts, Pestilence,
Sword, Famine, Captivity, and such like. These were inflicted when the breach
of the Covenant became National in the generality of the people: But especially
when those who had the management of public Affairs, Civil and Ecclesiastic,
did not restrain the people by a due Execution of Laws, but rather led them
into sin by their Example, and sometimes by their Commands; corrupting
Religion, and perverting Justice, Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. And the evils threatened
being National, as the Covenant it self was, they must needs be but temporal,
because there is no Judging, Condemning, and Executing Nations as Nations, but
in this World.

4. Come we now to show reason why this Covenant is called the first Covenant,
since there were others made before it; as that with Adam in Paradise, and that
Covenant of Salvation with Adam after his fall, and with Noah, and Abraham. And,

1. Negatively; It is not so called, as if it were the same for substance with
that which was first made with Adam in Paradise, as many have thought, or
because it was proposed upon the same term. For,

First, That Covenant was established upon the terms or condition of perfect
innocence; no provision being made in it for pardon in case of failure, upon
any condition whatsoever. But it was otherwise in this Mosaic Covenant, as I
have showed, in that it contained several Laws of Indemnity for the relief of
Delinquent persons, upon certain possible and practicable conditions.

Secondly, If this and the Paradisical-Covenant had been of the same Nature,
then it and the Promise made to Abraham and his Spiritual Seed, would have been
inconsistent, the one promising Eternal life upon believing, the other only
upon condition of sinless obedience. If this had been the case, the Law would
have been against the Promise, which God forbid it should, Gal. 3. 21. and the
one would have excluded the other, according to St. Pauls' reasoning, Romans 11.
6. If by grace, then it is no more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace.
But if it be of works, then is it no more grace; otherwise work is no more
work. But

2. Affirmatively. It is called the first Covenant, because it is the first of
the two under question and dispute between the Apostles and unbelieving Jews.
The Question and Controversy between them was, which of the two Covenants,
that by Moses, or that by Christ, was finally adhered to as the way of
Salvation. In the handling of which Controversy, that by Moses is called the
first, and the Gospel Covenant established by Christ, as was Prophesied by
Jeremiah, is called the second: Even as the one is called the Old Covenant, not
because it was the Oldest of all Covenants, but because opposed to that which
was Prophesied of under the name of a New Covenant. It is observable, that
where we meet with the first mention of the first Covenant under that
Denomination, it is not styled [ the] first Covenant absolutely, but [ that]
first Covenant, as pointing at that under dispute, Hebr. 8. 7. For if [ that]
first Covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for
the second.

CHAP. V.
The grand mistakes of the Jews about the Law and Promise; and how St. Paul
counter-argues these mistakes.
I Am now in the next place to show the fatal mistakes of the unbelieving Jews,
about God's Promise to Abraham, and about the Law of Moses; and how St. Paul
does counterargue these mistakes. A distinct understanding of which Errors, and
of St. Paul's arguings against them, sometimes severally, and sometimes
conjunctively, and in the gross, will be as a Key to open many passages in his
Epistles, which otherwise will be hard to be understood.

1. They held Circumcision in the flesh to be the condition in special, upon
which all the blessings of God's Covenant with Abraham were promised; but did
not understand tha^ Spiritual Circumcision, viz. the mortification of sinful
affections and lusts, was principally intended, when God made Circumcision the
Condition of his Covenant. For they were it seems grossly ignorant of the
necessity of Regeneration, and so of the Spiritual design of Circumcision;
which was the reason why Nicodemus, though a Ruler among the Jews, answered
Christ so aukardly when he Preached to him the necessity of being born again,
Joh. 3. An ignorance that some allowance possibly might have been made for, had
not the Circumcision of the Heart, and the making themselves a new Heart, been
expressly called for, as it was, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Ier. 4. 4. Ezekiel. 18. 31. Now this
ignorance of theirs in the Doctrine of the Circumcision of the Heart, and the
sense they put upon God's making Circumcision to be the Condition of his
Covenant of being their God, was doubtless the reason why they placed so very
much as they did in Literal Circumcision. For, although Circumcision first
given to Abraham by way of Covenant, was afterward incorporated with the body
of Moses's Law, yet it should seem these Jews considered it not so much as it
was a part of that Law, but chiefly as a Condition of God's Covenant with them
in Abraham, as they were his Seed. And therefore St. Paul where he reckons up
his Jewish Privileges whilst he was a Pharisee, puts Circumision in the Head
of them all, and as accounted by him while a Pharisee, a Privilege distinct
from his being blameless touching the Righteousness which was in the Law, Phil.
3. 5, 6. Whence also the Judaizers said, it was needful to Circumcise them, and
to command them to keep the Law of Moses, Acts 15. 5, 24. as if Circumcising
did import something different from, or at least something more, than keeping
of the Law did, though otherwise it was a part of the Law. Upon this account
doubtless it was that we find them more zealous for Circumcision, than for any
other Point of the Law besides.

Against this Erroneous Opinion of theirs touching Literal Circumcisions being
the Condition of the Spiritual Bene^its of the Covenant, St. Paul argues
several ways. First, By maintaining that the Covenant did chiefly respect
Circumcision in the Spirit, Romans 2. 28, 29. He is not a Jew which is one
outwardly; neither is that Circumcision, which is outward in the flesh (that
is, it was not that Circumcision which would savingly avail them, as they
thought it would) but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and Circumcision is
that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter; whose praise is not of
Men, but of God:

Again* By showing that Abraham could not have been justified before
Circumcision, if the great benefits of the Covenant (of which Justification was
one) were suspended upon that, as a necessary condition. And yet that h^ was
justified when not Circumcised, there is the express Authority of Scripture
for. This he asserts. Romans 4. 9, 10. For we say that Faith was reckoned to
Abraham for Righteousness. How was it then reckoned? when he was in
Circumcision, or in Uncircumcision? Not in Circumcision, but in Uncircumcision.

Afterward he proceeds to undeceive them in the apprehension they had, that
the benefits of the Covenant were entailed upon Abraham's Natural Seed as such;
or at least as such, with the addition of a literal observation of Circumcision
and the Law, without respect to the Spiritual and new Birth: Romans 9. 6, 7, 8.
They are not all Israel, which are of Israel (as they thought they were)
neither because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they all Children: But in
Isaac shall thy Seed be called: That is, those shall be called Abraham's Seed,
which are born as Isaac was, by Faith in the Promise, which are therefore
called Children of the Promise. For so the Apostle expounds it, saying, They
which are the Children of the flesh, these are not the Children of God; but the
Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed; to wit, such as are born
after the Spirit, as it is explained, Gal. 4. 28, 29. And this agrees to what
he had said before, Romans 2. 28. He is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, etc.
Against which corrupt Opinion, John the Baptist did oppose himself when he
admonished the Pharisees, to bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance, and think
not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father, Mat. 3. 7, 8.

The Apostle labors to cure this grand Error about Literal Circumcision as
disjoined from Spiritual, in many other places, and shows how that Circumcision
avails nothing, but a new creature, such as Spiritual Cir^umcision makes a
man to be, Gal 6. 15. Not Circumcision, but Faith, Gal. 5. 6. Not Circumcision,
but keeping the Commandments, is that which would only reach those great ends
which they sought after in Literal Circumcision, 1 Cor. 7. 19. But I shall have
occasion to improve these Scriptures further upon another Head of this
Discourse. And by the way, we may observe, that those who build their hopes of
future happiness upon their having been Baptized, and their being of the
Church, without the inward Grace signified by Baptism, which is the washing of
Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, they are much akin to those
miserable mistaken Jews.

2. They not understanding the Typical and Spiritual use of the Legal
Sacrifices, as they did prefigure the death and suffering of Christ, and the
general Atonement which was to be made thereby, nor yet the Predictions of the
Prophets touching his death, they ran into another gross Error, and that was,
That the promised Messiah should not by suffering death, become a Sacrifice for
sin. And therefore they said to him when he spoke to them of his death; We have
heard out of the Law, that Christ abides for ever; and how say thou the Son
of Man must be lift up? Joh. 12. 34. They did not dream of his dying, but of
his Reigning visibly as a mighty Monarch among them, and subduing all Nations
under them, Because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the Prophets which
are read every Sabbath day, they have fulfilled them in condemning him, Acts
13. 27. Their ignorance in the meaning of the Types and Predictions touching
the death of the Messiah, would have been the more excusable, if they had not
wilfully and obstinately persisted in that Error after those Types and
Prophecies were fulfilled and explained to them. Ignorance in this matter was
found in Christ's own Disciples a great while; but their slowness to believe
those Types and Prophecies after they were fulfilled, was a thing which our
Savior rebuked them for, saying, O fools, and slow of heart to believe all
that the Prophets have spoken. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things,
and to enter into his glory? Luke 24. 25, 26. But the unbelieving Jews were
tenacious of this Opinion, after they had sufficient means to have been
convinced of their Error in it. In opposition to which Opinion, the Author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, argues at large the necessity of Christ's suffering
by death. As first, he argues it from his Priesthood. For having proved him
according to Prophecy, to be a Priest not after the Order of Aaron, but of
Melchizedeck, and so a Priest of greater Dignity, Chap. 5. and 7. He infers,
Chap. 8. that as a Priest he must have something to offer in Sacrifice, and
that of greater value than what was offered by Priests under the Law, that were
but of an inferior Order; and that he shows to have been himself and his own
Blood, as the Antitype of all those Legal Sacrifices, Chap. 9. Secondly, He
proves his death necessary for the confirmation of the second and new Covenant,
as he was Mediator of it. As the first Testament was not dedicated without
Blood, so neither is the second: For where a Testament is (says he) there of
necessity must also be the death of the Testator, Chap. 9. 15, -- 23. Thirdly,
His death was necessary for the obtaining of Remission of Sins; a Benefit
promised in the new Covenant: For without shedding of Blood (says he) there is
no Remission of Sin, Chap. 9. 22. with Chap. 10. 5 -- 18.

And indeed it was a good part of the Apostle's work to beat down this Opinion,
that the Messiah was not to dye. Acts 17. 3. St. Paul, as his manner was, went
into them, and three Sabbath days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures,
opening and alleging that Christ must needs have suffered and risen again from
the dead. Yea, this Opinion had so generally obtained among them in our
Saviors time, that it seems the Apostles of Christ at first were not free from
it. For when our Savior told them, that at Jerusalem he should be delivered to
the Gentiles, and that they should scourge him, and put him to death, and that
the third day he should rise again; it is said, they understood none of these
things, and that this saying was ^id from them, neither knew they the things
which were spoken: Though they were spoken plainly and in no Parable, Luke 18.
32, 33, 34. Christ his being crucified, became a stumbling block to the Jews
through this Error of theirs, and that which they insisted upon as a Reason why
they would not receive him as the Christ of God, 1 Cor. 1. 23.

3. They held another Error which probably was Mother or Daughter of the
former, and that was, That the Legal Sacrifices did expiate and take away Sin,
not only so as to free them from Legal penalties, and temporal punishments, as
in many Cases they did, but so also as to free them from all Obligation to
Eternal punishment. And so they did attribute to those Sacrifices, the same
atoning virtue and purging efficacy, as is proper only to the Blood of Christ.
In opposition to this Opinion, it is maintained,

1. That those Legal Sacrifices, were but Figures of the great Sacrifice,
Christ Jesus, Heb. 9. 10, 11, 12. and 10. 1.

2. It was argued, that it was impossible that the blood of Bulls and of Goats
should take away Sin, because these were offered year after year, over and over
in the day of general Atonement for the same sins. And that if the former
Sacrifices which were first offered, had taken away sin, the latter could not
have been necessary to the same purpose, Heb. 10. 1, 2, 3, 11. The often
repetition of Sacrifices for the same sins, argues that the Worshippers had a
secret sense in their Conscience, that those Sacrifices were not of a competent
value, nor a sufficient price to redeem their Souls from Sin, as it exposes to
Eternal punishment; however they might sanctify as to the purifying of the
flesh, yet they could not make any perfect as pertaining to the Conscience;
Heb. 9. 9. and 10. 1, 2.

3. It was argued from a Prophetical passage in Psalm. 40. in which Christ is
brought in speaking thus; Sacrifice and Offering thou would' st not, but a Body
have thou prepared me: In burnt Offerings and Sacrifice for sin thou have had
no pleasure: Then said I, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. From whence he
infers, that the first sort of Sacrifices were taken away as insufficient, that
the second might be established. By the which will, says he, we are sanctified
through the offering of the Body of Jesus once for all, Heb. 10. 5. -- 10.

This Opinion of theirs, that Legal Sacrifices did expiate all their Sins, did
keep up in them a hope of impunity here and hereafter, under many immoralities
and great transgressions in the course of their lives. Though they multiplied
transgression, yet if they multiplied Sacrifices too, they thought they should
escape well enough. Amos 4. 4, 5. Come to Bethel and transgress, at Gilgal
multiply transgression, and bring your Sacrifice every morning, and your Tithes
after three years, and offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with Leaven, and
proclaim and publish your free-Offerings, for this likes you, O Children of
Israel, says the Lord God. And much after this rate do carnal Christians bear
up themselves in hopes that all their sins are done away by the Sacrifice of
Christ the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World, though they live
from day to day in ungodliness. Only indeed they sin at a cheaper rate for the
present than the wicked Jews did. The Jewish sinners were at the cost of many a
Sacrifice to stop the mouth of Conscience; but these are at cost only in making
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, and depend upon Christ to
pay all their scores.

4. Another of their Errors as consequent upon the former was this; That
without Circumcision and observing of the Law of Moses, the Gentiles could not
be saved. This Opinion the Judaizing Christians retained after their Conversion
to the Christian Profession. Acts 15. 1, 5, 24. Certain men which came down
from Judea taught the brethren, saying, Except ye be Circumcised after the
manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved. There rose up certain of the Sect of the
Pharisees which believed, saying, that it was needful to Circumcise them, and
to command them to keep the Law of Moses.

In opposition to which Opinion, St. Paul taught that the Righteousness of God
by Faith without the Law is manifested unto all, and upon all that believe,
whether Jews or Gentiles, and that there is no difference, Romans 3. 21, 22. And
that a Man is justified by Faith without the deeds of the Law, though never
Circumcised: And that God is the God of the Gentiles, as well as of the Jews,
and that he does justify the uncircumcision and the circumcision; those that
had observed the Law of Moses, and those that had not, upon the same terms,
viz. of Evangelical Faith, Romans 3. 28, 29, 30. Whereunto agrees the words of
St. Peter, Acts 15. 9, 11. He put no difference between us and them, purifying
their hearts by Faith; i. e. us Jews, and they Gentiles: But we believe that
through the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved even as they, and
upon no other terms, though we have observed the Law, and they have not, Gal.
2. 15, 16. Upon the same account St. Paul again affirms, Romans 4. 5. That to him
that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith
is counted for Righteousness. That is, the Idolatrous Gentiles that never had
observed the Law, but lived without God in the World; should yet have their
practical belief of the Gospel imputed even to them for Righteousness. And he
further exemplifies this in Abraham, Ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. whose Faith was
reckoned to him for Righteousness before he was Circumcised, that he might be
the Pattern and great Example of Gods justifying the Heathen upon their
believing and obeying as Abraham did, in leaving his Idolatry and his Country
upon God's Promise and Command, though he never had been Circumcised. And upon
the like account he says again, Gal. 3. 8, 9. That the Scripture foreseeing
that God would justify the Heathen through Faith, preached before the Gospel
unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed. And from thence he
concludes that those Gentiles that be of Faith, that believe as Abraham did,
are blessed as Abraham was, are blessed with faithful Abraham.

5. Another Error which was held by some Judaizing Christians was this; That
Faith in Christ and Literal Circumcision, with a Literal observation of the Law
of Moses, jointly, were the Condition of Justification. Though they were such
as believed, yet they taught that except men were Circumcised and kept the Law
of Moses, they could not be saved, Acts 15. 1, 5. They seem to have retained
the same false Opinion of Justification by the Law, as the unbelieving Jews
did, but held the Death of Christ necessary to be superadded.

To convince them of which Error, St. Paul sets before them the bad consequence
of it in two respects. 1. In that they hereby rendered the death of Christ
needless in it self. Gal. 2. 21. If righteousness come by the Law, than Christ
is dead in vain: There would then have been no need of Christ's death to
accomplish it, as the unbelieving Jews indeed did hold. 2. In that this Opinion
of their's made Christ and his death useless unto them, and cut them off from
receiving any benefit by him, Gal. 5. 2, 4. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that
if you be Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: Christ is become of
none effect unto you: whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen
from Grace. And hereto agrees that in Hebr. 13. 10. We have an Altar whereof
they have no right to eat which serve the Tabernacle: Those Judaizers who stand
for the necessity of Mosaic Observations* have no right to, nor shall receive
benefit by Christ, who is the only Christian Altar to which we bring all our
Sacrifices.

6. They held the Law of Moses to be unalterable, and of perpetual obligation.
In opposition to which, the Author to the Hebrews improves to great purpose
that Prophecy, Ier. 31. 31, 32. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I
will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah: Not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the day when I took
them by the hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt, etc. For in that he
says, a new Covenant, he has (says he) made the first old. Now that which
decays and waxes old, is ready (says he) to vanish away. And St. Paul shows
how that the Legal Ministration how glorious soever it was, was yet done away,
when that which was far more glorious did appear, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 11. And again,
that we are become dead to the Law by the Body of Christ, and delivered from
the Law, Romans 7. 4, 6.

7. The last of their Errors I shall insist on, was this: They held the first
Covenant as alone, or separated to be the Covenant of Salvation, only taking in
with it the Covenant of Literal Circumcision, which also was made a part of
their Law. That first Covenant which I have already described as a temporal
Covenant, and the Promises and the threatenings of it but temporal, they took to
be established for perpetuity, and the Promises of it to contain Promises of
Eternal Redemption, or Remission, as well as temporal, and Eternal Life and
Felicity as well as Temporal: And such a Literal observation of the Laws of it
to be the Condition of those Promises, as would render them inculpable in the
eye of the Magistracy; such a Righteousness sufficient to justify them before
God, as St. Paul says he had while he was a Pharisee, Phil. 3. 6. As touching
the Righteousness which is in the Law blameless; which then he accounted to be
his gain.

Now that they did peremptorily adhere to this first Covenant, and the terms of
it, for Justification and Eternal Life, it does plainly appear by the mighty
opposition which the Apostles made against them in it. For they did still
oppose another Covenant as the Covenant of Justification, and Eternal Life unto
this Mosaical Covenant; and Faith, as the Condition of that, in opposition to
Works as the condition of this, as will appear if we come to Instances.

1. St. Paul argues it with them, that the Promise of God to Abraham and his
Seed, was not through the Law, but through the righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.
13. Not through the Law, that is, not upon the terms upon which the benefits of
the first Covenant were promised to the Nation of the Jews, but upon quite
other terms, expressed by the Righteousness of Faith.

2. He argues it farther with them; That God's way of accounting men righteous
by Faith, and their way of seeking Righteousness npon the terms of the first
Covenant, were utterly inconsistent, and the one destructive of the other, and
that but one of these ways could possibly stand. For if they which are of the
Law be Heirs, Faith is made void, and the Promise made of none effect, Romans 4.
14. And again, If the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of Promise: But
God gave it to Abraham by Promise, Gal. 3. 18. And if by Grace, then it is no
more of Works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace, etc. Romans 11. 6.

3. And that the Law did not exclude the Promise to Abraham, he farther argues,
in that the Covenant with Abraham was confirmed, and unalterably settled and
established in the Messiah 430 years before the Law by Moses was given, and
that therefore for them to go about to introduce the Law in the room of the
Promise to Abraham so confirmed, would be as unreasonable and unjust, as for
one man to alter or make void another Covenant after he has confirmed it.
Gal. 3. 15, 17. Brethren, I speak after the manner of men: though it be but a
Man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no Man disanulleth or adds thereto.
And this I say, that the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ,
the Law which was 430 years after, cannot disanul, that it should make the
Promise of none effect.

4. St. Paul argues it impossible in the nature of the thing that they should
be justified by the Law, because one main end of God's promulging the Law of
Nature (which yet was a great part of the first Covenant) was to convince men
of their guilt, and of their obnoxiousness to wrath, and to stop their Mouths,
and to leave them without any plea of defense as from it, Romans 3. 19, 20. Now
we know that what things soever the Law says, it says to them who are under
the Law: That every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God. Therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be
jnstified in his sight: for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. And if the Law
does convict men, it cannot justify them: For the same Law cannot both condemn
and justify the same person in reference to the same charge. If all are cast
and condemned by the Original Law, as they are ( for he has concluded all
under sin, that he might have mercy upon all, Gal. 3.) then so many as come to
be justified after this, must needs be justified by another Law superceding
that, and that is none other than the Law of Grace. The Law of Nature curses
every one that has broken it, though but once, and therefore it cannot
justify them too: Out of the same mouth (in this case) does not proceed
blessing and cursing.

5. He argues this Opinion of theirs to be contrary to the Doctrine of the
Prophets many hundred years after, as well as contrary to the Promise to
Abraham long before the Law. That no man is justified by the Law in the sight
of God, it is evident; for the Just shall live by Faith: and the Law is not of
Faith; but, the man that does them, shall live in them, Gal. 3. 11, 12. from
Hab. 2. 4. The Law is not of Faith, that is, it does not promise pardon, or any
other blessing upon believing, but upon condition of doing the things therein
required: the man that does them, shall live in them, Levit. 18. 5.

6. The insufficiency of the first Covenant to make men eternally happy, and
the necessity and validity of the second to that end, is further argued in Heb.
8. from another famous Prophecy in Ier. 31. 31, etc. of God's making a new
Covenant with Israel and Judah in the latter days, not according to that he
made with their Fathers when he brought them out of Egypt. 1. It Is argued that
that first Covenant was but temporary, and being old, was ready to vanish, and
to give place to a New and Everlasting Covenant, Chap. 8. 13. 2. That the first
Covenant was faulty, or defective, or else there would have been no place
sought for a second, ver. 7. 3. That the Promises of that first Covenant were
not of such things as men stand in need of to make them everlastingly happy, as
those better Promises of the second Covenant are, ver. 6. 4. And yet more
particularly, that in this New Covenant there is promise of such a forgiveness
of sins, as that iniquity shall be remembered no more, ver. 12. whereas the
first Covenant did not promise any such pardons: All that it promised, was a
forgiveness only as to the concerns of this life, otherwise their sins were
still kept upon the File to be taken away (if ever taken away) by the Mediator
of the New Testament, by means of his death, for the redemption of the
transgressions that were under the first Testament, Chap. 9. 15. But in those
Sacrifices (which were but the Sacrifices of the first Covenant) there was a
remembrance again made of sins every year, Heb. 10. 3.

And now by all these reasonings of the Apostle put together, it sufficiently
appears that the unbelieving Jews did expect Justification and Eternal Life,
only upon the terms of the first Covenant, and that they held that Covenant, as
comprehending the Covenant of Circumcision, to be the Covenant of Eternal Life.
And indeed this last mentioned Error of theirs, in holding the first Covenant
to be the Covenant of Salvation, did in a manner contain in it all the rest
mentioned before, which did naturally grow out of it. For if that had been the
Covenant of Salvation, then it would have followed that the Sacrifices of that
Covenant had been sufficient, and the death of Christ needless; and that
Circumcision and keeping the Law of Moses would have been necessary to the
salvation of the Gentiles, etc.

And now after all this, considering what Erroneous Opinions the incredulous
Jews held about the Law, and about Circumcision, and considering in what sense
they asserted Justification by the Law, and by Circumcision, it will be no
difficult thing to understand exactly in what sense the Apostle does every
where deny Justification to be by the Law, or by the works of the Law.

For doubtless St. Paul's denial of Justification and Salvation to be by the
Law, or works of the Law, is to be understood in the very same sense in which
the incredulous Jews, against whom he disputed, did hold these to be attainable
thereby. For else his reasonings would have been beside the question under
debate between them. And therefore we must take our measure of St. Paul's sense
in the Negative part of the Question, by his Adversaries sense of it in the
Affirmative. And if so, then in his denying Justification and Salvation to be
by the Law, or by works of the Law, we must understand him to deny a freedom
from the Eternal Punishment to be attainable by Legal Sacrifices: And also to
deny that the Promise of Eternal Life was made upon condition of Literal
Circumcision, and a Literal Observation of the Mosaical Law, without being by
Faith renewed in the inward frame and Moral constitution of the Soul: And
likewise to deny Eternal Life to be attainable by the terms of their Political
Covenant, the Promises whereof were not made upon condition of believing, but
of doing. The Law is not of Faith, but the man that does those things, shall
live in them, Gal. 3. 12. For these and such like were the Opinions which those
J^ws did hold (as I have showed) and these were the things in which St. Paul
opposed them. They divided and separated Circumision and the Law in the letter
of them, from the Spirit of them both; claiming Justification by the Letter
alone. And they divided the Law from the Promise rightly understood, and looked
to be justified by Works of the Law, without Faith in the Promise rightly
understood. They looked for the M^ssias indeed, but not to become a
Propitiation for Sin, or to establish a New Covenant of Salvation, but to
further their Temporal and Eternal Felicity in the way of their Obedience to
the Political Law.

But then it does not in the least appear that St. Paul in denying
Justification to be by the Law in the sense thus explained, does also thereby
deny works of sincere Obedience to God, to concur with Faith in Man's
Justification in all respects.

And if any shall yet suppose that St. Paul in denying Justification by Works
in the Jews corrupt sense, does also, on the by, deny all Works of Evangelical
Obedience to bear any part of the Condition on which God promises to justify
Men through Christ; such a Supposition, if admitted, would make his Doctrine
herein, inconsistent not only with the Faith of the holy Men of Old, who were
wont to express the Condition of the Covenant of Merey, by loving God, and
keeping his Commandments; but it would also make him inconsistent with himself
and his own Doctrine, and the Doctrine of other Apostles, as I doubt not, but
plainly to make appear before I have done with this Discourse.

There is one Character of Works given, by which you may certainly know what
Works they were which St. Paul denied Men were justified by; and they were such
Works which were apt to occasion boasting, Ephesians. 2. 9. Not of Works, lest any
man should boast. Romans 4. 2. For if Abraham were justified by Works (to wit, in
the Jews sense, by Circumcision in the flesh, to which St. Paul alludes, ver.
1.) he has whereof to glory, but not before God, but only before Men who were
not Circumcised as he was. For the unbelieving Jews who sought and expected
Justification by Circumcision and other Legal Observations, did glory over the
poor Gentiles, that were destitute of those Works which consisted in the
outward Privileges which the Jews had; and looked down upon them with
contempt, though some of them were much better than themselves, such as
Cornelius, whom they looked upon as unclean. This boasting humor of the Jews
over the Gentiles, is described and reproved, Romans 2. from ver. 17. to 29. Now
the Doctrine of Justification by Faith; of obtaining pardon by another
undertaking for us, to wit, Christ Jesus, and of being accepted with God
through him, upon our sincere, though otherwise imperfect obedience, (which
sincere Obedience too, is not performed without his special Grace and
assistance) takes away all occasion of boasting, in reference both to God and
Men, and laid the Jews as low as the Gentiles, and made St. Peter a Jew to say:
But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be
saved even as they, Acts 15. 11. And therefore when St. Paul had said, that now
the righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, even the righteousness
of God which is by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that
believe, for there is no difference; meaning between Jews and Gentiles, Romans 3.
21, 22. he thereupon demands, in ver. 27. saying, where is boasting then? It
excluded. By what Law? Of Works? Nay, but by the Law of Faith. Therefore we
find the holy Men of Old among the Jews, who expected acceptance with God upon
other terms than the Pharisaical Jews did, who placed their confidence (called
trusting in the flesh, Phil. 3. 4.) in their External Privileges and
Performances alone; were so far from glorying in such a Righteousness as that,
that they cried out in reference to that; all our righteousnesses are as filthy
rags, Isa. 64. 6. Thus Regenerating Grace made David so far from boasting
either of Privileges, or of his Performances, that he says unto God, Who am
I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after
this sort? for all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee, 1
Chro. 29. 14. This made St. Paul to say, We are not sufficient of our selves,
as of our selves to think any thing, but our sufficiency is of God, 2 cor. 3.
5. And by the grace of God, I am what I am, 1 Cor. 15. 10. And of him are we in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, that he that glories, may glory in the Lord,
having nothing but what he has received from him gratis, and without all
desert, yea contrary to his demerits, 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. The good Works which
the Saints do, they do them by virtue of their being created in Christ Jesus in
order thereunto, Ephesians. 2. 10. and all that good is, is through Christ
strengthening them, Phil. 4. 13. From whence therefore we may well conclude,
that if the works which St. Paul wholly excludes in the matter of
Justification, were only such as were apt to occasion boasting, that then Acts
of Evangelical Obedience were none of those Works.

According to the sense explained then, I presume we may well understand that
Text, Romans 3. 28. which of all others seems in the Phrase and Expression to be
most Exclusive of Works in the point of Justification; the words are these,
Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by Faith without the deeds of
the Law. Which words (if you consider the context) seem to import no more but
this, viz. That a Man is justified in the Gospel-way, which in the verse before
is called the Law of Faith: And not by the deeds of the Law, or upon the terms
of the first Covenant, which in the verse before, likewise is called the Law of
Works. Which two, the Gospel terms, and the first Covenant terms, are still
opposed to each other in the point of Justification. Now although the
Conclusion here laid down is true, in reference to the Jews as well as to the
Gentiles, yet it seems to be written here with special reference to the
Gentiles. Intimating that upon their belief, they might be justified, without
turning Proselytes to the Jewish way, as appears by that Interrogation in the
very next words following, ver. 29. 30. Is he the God of the Jews only? is he
not also of the Gentiles? yes, of the Gentiles also: Seeing it is one God which
shall justify the Circumcision by Faith, and Uncircumcision through Faith. And
the words in the 31, ver. do intimate that the words in the 28th verse. are to
be understood in such a limited sense as I have assigned in my Explication,
viz. as excluding the deeds of the Law in the act of Justification, only in the
Jews corrupt sense of the Law: because St. Paul therein affirms his foresaid
Doctrine of Justification by Faith without the deeds of the Law, not to be at
all destructive of the Law, but contrariwise tending to establish the Law, if
we take the Law not in that distorted sense in which those Jews held it, but as
it was appointed by God to promote holiness in the World, which is the end and
scope of all his Laws. In which sense the Apostle was so far from excluding the
works of the Law from having any thing to do in the Justification of Men, as
that he had expressly affirmed before, That though the hearers of the Law were
not just before God, yet the doers of the Law should be justified, Romans 2. 13.
Meaning by doers, such as do sincerely obey that Law of God under which they
are, and not such as do perfectly fulfill it, as some would seem to understand
it. For I have showed before, that God never made Promise of Justification upon
naturally impossible conditions as that would be, and they are dishonorable
thoughts of God to think he has; and therefore the Apostle may not be
understood to promise Justification to the doers of the Law upon any such terms.

There is one vein of Texts mo^^ wherein the Opposition is made in such a form
of words between the Jews way of seeking Justification by the Law, and the
Gospel-way of seeking it by Faith: that being a little opened, will both
illustrate and confirm what I have been representing to you: And they are such
in which the Jews erroneous way is called their own Righteousness, and the true
Christianway of Justification, the Righteousness of God by Faith, and the
Righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3. For they being ignorant of God s
Righteousn^ss, and going about to establish their own Righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the Righteousness of God, Phil. 3. 9. And be found in
him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. This
Righteousness is called their own Righteousness in opposition to the
Righteousness of God, upon a threefold account, as I understand it.

1. Because they sought the pardon of their sins by that only which was their
own; their own Sacrifices, Sacrifices which they themselves brought to be
offered. Whereas the Christian Justification is called the Righteousness of
God, because the Sacrifice by which pardon of sin, and acceptance with God is
obtained, was from God, and given by God, to wit, Christ Jesus, whom God has
set forth to be a propitiation, Romans 3. 25. and Christ has given himself an
offering and a Sacrifice for us, Ephesians. 5. 2. And he is made unto us of God,
Wisdom, Righteousness, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 30.

2. It was called their own Righteousness, because they did not think
Regeneration, or Supernatural Grace necessary to the obtaining of it, but a
Literal observation of the Law and Circumcision, such as passed for a
Righteousness among Men, and such as they without Supernatural aid were able to
perform. As for those Precepts which commanded the loving of God with all the
heart, and the circumcising the heart; because these were not enjoined under
express penalties, as those things were of which the Rulers were to take
cognizance, therefore the Ph^risees counted them but Counsels only, and not
direct Precepts. But the Christians-Righteousness which is by Faith, may be
said to be of God, because by Grace they are saved through Faith in Christ
Jesus, and that not of themselves, it is the gift of God: And we are his
Workmanship created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 8, 10.

3. It was called their own Righteousness, because it was a way of seeking to
be justified of their own devising, and not of God's appointing. And on the
contrary the Gospel-Method of Justification is called the Righteousness of God
through Faith, because it is of God's Institution and appointment: It is the
substance of God's new Law or Covenant.

The result of all then is, That they were the Works of the Law, as exclusive
of Faith in Christ and his death; which the Apostle denied any Man to be
justified by; and not those works of the Law which are the immediate effects of
Faith in Christ, in his Death, and in his Doctrine.

CHAP. VI.
How St. Paul's Doctrine of Justification by Faith, and not by Works, was then
mistaken by some.
I Come in the next place to show how that St. Paul's reasonings about Faith
and Works, in reference to Justification, were probably mistaken by such
Solifidians as St. James reasoned against. For he having taught that God did
justify the ungodly Gentiles upon their believing, and without the deeds of
the Law, but denying Justification to as many of the Jews as did not believe,
though they were Observers of the Law; there were some who thereupon through
mistake, laid the whole stress of Salvation upon believing, to the neglect of a
holy and virtuous life. And St. Paul being sensible how apt some were to make a
bad use of his good Doctrine, and to draw bad Conclusions out of good Premises,
he frequently mentions such Inferences, on purpose to caution Men against them.
As for Instance: He having said in Romans 5. 20. That where sin abounded, grace
did abound much more: In Chap. 6. 1. he says, What shall we say then? shall we
continue in sin, that grace may abound? as some it seems were ready to infer;
God forbid, says he; how shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein? You may consult to like purpose in general, Romans 3. 5, 6, 7, 31. and
6. 15. Gal. 2. 17. and find that St. Paul and others were slanderously reported
to have said, let us do evil that good may come.

That there were such as did misrepresent St. Paul's Doctrince touching God's
grace and long-suffering, and wrest several passages in his Epistles, and other
Scriptures, to their own destruction, we are told by St. Peter also, 2 Pet. 3.
15. 16. And account that the long-suffering of the Lord is Salvation; even as
our beloved brother Paul also, according to the Wisdom given him, has written
unto you; as also in all his Epistles, speaking in them of these things: In
which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and
unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures to their own destruction.

And after St. Paul in his 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, verses, had by many black
Characters, described a sort of Christians that had a form of godliness, but
denied the power thereof: In ver. 8. he further describes them by that which
was the cause of the forementioned unsavory fruits of the flesh, to wit, that
they were men of corrupt minds or understandings, and reprobate concerning the
Faith, or void of Judgment concerning the Faith, as the Margin has it. They
were Men of corrupt Principles, and injudicious concerning the Doctrine of
faith: They did not discern faith to be necessary in the operative and
practical nature of it: But as they did satisfy themselves with a form of
godliness without the power; so they did likewise with a formal inefficacious
and liveless Faith, which made them so unsavory in their lives.

And St. John, after he had in his first Epistle antidoted the Christians
against the pretentions of the Gnostics, who held a bad life consistent with
Communion with God through illumination of mind, and the Christian Faith,
deceiving themselves, and laboring to deceive others, in thinking they might
be righteous without doing Righteousness, 1 Ioh. 3. 7. He, toward the
conclusion of that Epistle, sums up his general scope in it in these words:
These things have I written unto you that believe in the Name of the Son of
God; that ye may know that ye have Eternal Life, and that ye may believe on the
Name of the Son of God, Chap. 5. 13. His meaning is, as I conceive, that he
wrote this Epistle, first, to the end they might be the better assured of
salvation by Christ upon their rightly believing on him. And secondly, To the
end they might not be drawn into mistakes in the point of believing, as if any
Faith less than such as is accompanied with a constant adherence to Christ's
Doctrine and example touching a holy life, would give them that assurance. He
wrote to them that did believe, that they might believe; that is, that they
might believe yet more understandingly, more groundedly, and so perseveringly
against all temptations to Apostasy from the Profession of the Faith, or to
looseness in the Profession of it.

St. Jude also, ver. 3, 4. stirred up the Christians to contend earnestly for
the Faith, the Doctrine of saving Sinners in the way of Believing; because, as
he told them, there were certain Men professing Faith, but of ungodly lives,
that were amongst them, that turned the grace of God into lasciviousness; so
understanding the Law of Grace, the Gospel, as if it had been a Proclamation
from Heaven of a general pardon for Christ's sake, and through Faith in him, of
as many sins as Men had a mind to commit. The which Error led them into those
Monstrous Impieties charged upon them in that Epistle: By reason of which, the
way of Truth, the right Faith they pretended to, was evil-spoken of in the
World (as St. Peter notes) they being indeed Spots and Blemishes to the
Christians and Christian-Profession, so long as they were admitted to their
Feasts of Charity, as owned by them to be of their number. This was indeed an
ungodly Faith: But the Faith which he exhorted them to contend for, and to
build up themselves upon, as on a sure Foundation, he calls their most holy
Faith, verse. 20. such a Faith as is an Operative Principle of a holy life.

And they were such Christians as St. James in his Epistle did expostulate
with, that did lean so much upon a mere believing, upon a mere assent of the
mind unto the truth of certain Propositions, as that they were careless in the
subduing of their Passions, and bridling their Tongues, and regulating their
Actions; as if these had not been necessary to Salvation: But thought
themselves safe upon account of their barren Faith, though they were proud and
conceited of their knowledge and Atainments, censorious and contentious,
unmerciful and uncharitable. In a word, they were such as were injudicious
concerning the Faith that will save, and under mistakes of the Apostles
Doctrine about it. All this will easily appear to any that shall but with a
competent measure of understanding, view and consider the Scope and Contents of
that Epistle.

And thus you see how plainly it appears by the Epistles of the Apostles, that
the Doctrine of Justification by Faith without Works, in the sense in which the
Apostles asserted it, was misunderstood by many Gnostics, carnal Gospellers,
or Solifidians. The sense in which the Apostles did assert it, was, that Faith
justifies without Works Antecedent to believing, and without Works as the Works
of a literal observation of Moses Law, which was opposed by the Jews to Faith,
as having Christ crucified for its Object, and Repentance, Regeneration, and
sincere Obedience in a holy Life, for its inseparable Effects. But these
deceived Souls that deceived their own Hearts, seem to have understood the
Apostles, as if they had taught Justification by Faith, considered only as
having the Death of Christ, and the Atonement made thereby, for its Object,
without respect to Regeneration and new Obedience, as any part of the Condition.

And it had been much better for the Christian World, if those corrupt Notions
about the Doctrine of Faith as justifying, had dyed with those Men, which in
the first Ages of the Christian-Church were infected with them. But alas, it is
too apparent, that the same, or much of the same dangerous and destructive
mistakes, have been transmitted to, or revived in these latter Ages of the
Church. For we find by experience in this present Age, that very many of those
who are called Christians, presume themselves to be Christians indeed, and such
as shall be saved by Christ, though their lives declare them to be far from
being new Creatures, from ^eing renewed in the Spirit of their Minds, Wills,
Affections, and Conversations, as those are that have been taught as the Truth
is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 21, -- 24. For they are confident they believe all the
Articles of their Creed, and in doing so, they are confident they shall be
saved; and so they would, if that belief of theirs were but so effectual and
operative as to produce such a change in Heart and Life, as would denominate
them new Creatures. But the mischief is, they deceive themselves in the nature
of their Faith; it being but an Opinionative inoperative and dead assent to the
truth of the Gospel, such as is only an act of the mind or understanding, and
does not powerfully influence the Will, and so it is not a believing with all
the Heart, but is the act only of one faculty of the Soul. A Belief its
probable may be found in the Devil himself: And such a Belief was found in some
who were so convinced by the power of Christ's Miracles in concurrence with his
Doctrine and Life, that they could not choose but believe him to be an
extraordinary Person sent from God; though their carnal interest prevailed so
much in them, as that it would not suffer them to confess him openly, because
they loved the praise of Men, more than the praise of God, Joh. 12. 42, 43. And
besides, these Men deceive themselves about their Faith in this also; that they
do not heartily believe the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, but are partial in
their Faith. They in a sort believe Christ to be the Son of God, and that he
came into the World to save sinners, and that he dyed for our sins, and the
like. But then they do not heartily believe his Doctrine touching the necessity
of Repentance, of being born again; of denying all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and of living righteously, godly, and soberly in this present world. Or
else they frame such Notions of these things unto themselves, of Repentance and
Regeneration, as that they think they believe Christ's Doctrine touching them,
when they believe only the lying imagination of their own brains.

And there is too much ground to fear, that many Men's ill managing the Doctrine
of Justification by Faith, has not a little strengthened Men in this vain
confidence. For while Evangelical Obedience it self, under the Notion of those
Works to which Faith is opposed, has been decryed as Popish when interessed in
Justification, and Justification asserted to be by Faith alone in opposition to
all works whatsoever, inward and outward, as well Evangelical as Legal, as well
those after Conversion as those before, yea, and the disposition thereunto; the
Flesh and the Devil to help it, has got great advantage thereby to persuade
men against the necessity of a holy Life, in such a sense of a holy Life, as
the Scripture makes absolutely necessary to Salvation. For though its true that
good Works have been acknowledged and pressed too as necessary to Salvation;
yet when withal, they have been denied to be necessary to Justification, and
Men have been taught that when once they are Justified, they can never fall
away from a state of Justification, they have easily been drawn to believe that
good Works are not absolutely necessary to Salvation no more than to
Justification, but Faith only. And upon supposition that the other 2 Points of
Doctrine are true, it would be but rational for them so to believe. For if good
Works be not necessary to Justification at all: And if it is impossible but
that those who are once justified should be saved; how should Men choose but
infer from hence, that good Works are not absolutely necessary to Salvation?
unless it shall be said that Men are not put into an immediate capacity of
Salvation by being justified: Which to affirm would be to say Men are not freed
from Condemnation, by being freed from Condemnation, which would be a
contradiction in terms: For to be justified, is to be freed from condemnation,
Romans 8. 33, 34. and 5. 16, 18. and therefore Justification must needs put Men
into an immediate capacity of being saved.

And as there is great reason to think that the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith alone in opposition to the works of Evangelical Obedience, has been a
stumbling-stone unto many, and a back-friend to the power of godliness; so
there is another which has been wont to be joined with it, that has rendered
it the more dangerous, and it self no good friend to holy living; and that is
the Doctrine of the imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto Justification, in
that way in which it has been managed by very many: for otherwise there is a
sense (as I have showed) in which it is a great and a comfortable truth. For
when Men have been taught to esteem their own Righteousness but as filthy rags
(not only because of its utter insufficiency to justify in stead of Christ, or
as he justifies, in which respect indeed it is no better; but also as any part
of a Condition of Justification or of our acceptance with God:) And when they
have been taught also, that upon their believing only, Christ's Righteousness
in fulfilling the Law for them, becomes imputed to them in it self, and not
only as the procuring cause of their Justification upon the terms of the
Gospel, so that they are looked upon as having themselves perfectly kept the
Law in him, it has doubtless infeebled their endeavors after an inherent
Righteousness, and proved a temptation to them, to think that so long as they
have such another inherent Righteousness essentially in it self imputed to
them as Christ's is, they have no great need to find it in themselves;
considering also that if they had it, they must rather loath themselves for it,
than take any comfort in it: But let no man deceive you (says St. John) he
that does righteousness, is righteous, as he is righteous, 1 John 3. 7.

I do acknowledge, that many of them have been worthy men, who yet have
propagated these Opinions: But that makes the Opinions never the better, but
have done more hurt in gaining thereby the more credit. It is true also that
those worthy Men have zealously pressed the necessity of Repentance,
Regeneration, and a holy Life: which proved indeed an Antidote against the
Poison of the other Opinions, so that they did not become mortal to many as
otherwise they would have done. And indeed they would have made mad work, if
they had not been yoked with wholesomer Doctrine, as we see they did among
Antinomians, Ranters, and other carnal Chistians that have followed the Docture
of those Opinions, but have been shy of letting the Doctrines of Mortification
and strict living, to have any power over them. But then if the preaching of
those sounder Doctrines of Repentance, Regeneration, and a holy Life, have done
much good, notwithstanding they have been clogged with Opinions of another
tendency; it is easy to imagine that they would have done much more good, if
they had not been checked by those unsound Principles.

But I shall say no more of this (though more might be said) because I hope I
may say, that most of those who have formerly imbibed these Opinions, are now
come to deliver themselves with more caution than heretofore. And so I shall
proc^^d to the last thing I propounded to touch upon, and that is, to show,

CHAP. VII.
That the Doctrine of St. Paul, and of St. James about Faith and Works in
reference to Justification, do not differ, but are wholly one.
IT is true indeed, though the Doctrine of St. PAVL, and St. JAMES, was in
nothing opposite the one to the other, yet the nature of the subject matter of
their Epistles, did differ, just as the Errors they engaged against, did
differ. The Errors of the unbelieving Jews consisting much in denying
Justification to be by Christ and Faith in him, and in placing it in their own
works of Circumcising, Sacrificing, and other Mosaical Observations. And St.
Paul, designing in some of his Epistles, to antidote the Christians against the
infection of them, and to establish them in the saving Doctrine of the Gospel,
was led of course to bend his discourse in great part against Justification by
Works of the Law; and on the contrary to assert it to be by Faith in Christ, in
his Death, and in his Doctrine, without those works. Whereas St. James having
to do in his Epistle, with such as professed the Christian Faith, and
Justification by it, but erring dangerously about the nature of Faith as
justifying, thinking that opinionative Faith would save them, though destitute
of a real change in the moral frame and constitution of their Souls, and of a
holy Life: Hereupon it became in a manner as necessary for him to plead the
Renovation of Man's Nature, and Evangelical Obedience to be some way necessary
unto Justification, as it was for St. Paul to contend for Justification by
Faith without the deeds of the Law. And therefore though their Doctrines in
this respect did in great part differ, yet they did not differ as Truth differs
from Error, nor as opposites, but only as one Truth differs from another. For
otherwise when St. Paul had to do with the like Erroneous and Scandalous
Christians, as those were which St. James expostulated the matter with: When he
had to do with such as had a form of godliness, but denied the power thereof,
he could, and did decry a reprobate faith, and plead the necessity of a Faith
that is unfeighned, and of a holy Life, as well as St. James; as appears in
part by what was said in the former Chapter, and will, I doubt not, be made
sufficiently evident in this. In order whereto I shall recommend to
consideration these ten things.

1. That Works of Evangelical Obedience, are never in Scripture opposed to
God's Grace.

2. That St. Paul in speaking against Justification by Works, gives sufficient
Caution not to be understood thereby to speak any thing against Evangelical
Obedience in reference thereto.

3. That Regeneration, or the new Creature as including Evangelical Obedience,
is oposed to Works in the business of Man's Justification, as well as Faith is,
and as well as the grace of God it self is.

4. That Evangelical Obedience as well as Faith, and together with Faith, is
opposed to the Works of the Law, in reference to Justification.

5. That Evangelical Obedience alone, is opposed to the Works of the Law.

6. Faith it self is an act of Evangelical Obedience.

7. By Evangelical Obedience, Christians come to have a right to Salvation.

8. The Promise of benefit by the Blood of Christ, is made to Evangelical
Obedience.

9. Repentance. And 10. Forgiving Injuries are both acts of Evangelical
Obedience, without which a Man cannot be justified. And if these things be made
out, they will I think amount to such a Demonstration, as that we cannot well
desire a clearer or fuller proof, that St. Paul, together with other the
Apostles, taught Justification by Evangelical Obedience as the effect of Faith,
as well as St. James.

1. The works of Evangelical Obedience, as the effects of Faith, and
Regeneration by Faith, are never in St. Paul's Epistles, or any other the holy
Scriptures, opposed to God's Grace in referenee to Justification and Salvation.
Works and Grace indeed are opposed to each other: But then by Works we are to
understand either Works antecedent to Conversion, or as they are denied to
merit at the hands of God: or the Works of the Law of Moses as Erroneously
contended for by the Jews: Or the Works of the Law as Typical, and as opposed
to things Typified: Or the Works of the Law, as the Law is in its rigor
opposed to the milder Economy of the Gospel: But the Works of Evangelical
Obedience are never opposed to Grace, no more than Faith it self is. And there
is no reason why they should, because Evangelical Obedience is the effect of
Divine Grace as well as Faith it self is, and tends to the praise of it, and is
accepted, and will be rewarded through Grace.

Contrary hereunto, those words in Titus 3. 5. Not by works of Righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, are wont to be
alleged to prove that Works after conversion, as well as those before, are
opposed to the Mercy of God in the saving of Men. But whether this be duly
collected from these words, will best appear by opening the Scope and meaning
of the words with the Context. The words in the 3, 4, and 5, verses, are these;
For we our selves also were sometimes foolish, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. But
after that the kindness and love of God our Savior toward Man appeared: Not by
Works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved
us by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. By their
being saved here, is meant their being rescued and delivered from their sinful
state, mentioned verse. 3. In that this is said to be done, not by Works of
Righteousness which they had done, but according to God's Mercy: The plain
meaning (I doubt not) is, that this change of their condition, and deliverance
from their sinful state, was not effected, or so much as begun among them by
any Reformation of their own, till the Gospel came to work it, (which is meant
by the appearing of the kindness and love of God, verse. 4. and is of like
import with that Chap. 2. 11, 12.) which God of his mercy, and not of their
desert, sent among them to that end. And if this be the meaning of the words,
the Apostle was far from intending by Works of Righteousness in this place,
Works after Conversion. I might rather well argue on the contrary from this
place; That Baptism which is an Act of Evangelical Obedience in the person
Baptized, and Regeneration which is Evangelical Obedience in the root and
principle, are together with the mercy of God, and, as subordinate to it,
opposed to the Works of Righteousness here mentioned, in the Work of Salvation.
For it is probable that by the washing of Regeneration here, is meant Baptism
as the Figure of Regeneration, and by the renewing of the Holy Ghost,
Regeneration it self. By both which, as subordinate to God's mercy therein,
they were said to be saved, and not by the Works of Righteousness which they
had done before these. There is another place in 2 Timothy 2. 9. which is wont to
be urged with this to Titus, to the same purpose: But it being of the same
nature with this, the same answer may serve both with a little variation.

2. St. Paul in speaking against Justification by Works, gives sufficient
caution not to be understood thereby to speak against Evangelical Obedience in
the Case. When he had asserted Justification to be by Faith without the deeds
of the Law, and that the Gentiles might be justified by believing, without ever
observing Moses Law, Romans 3. 28. lest he should be understood thereby to favor
Gentilism, or loose living in men, provided they would but turn Christians; he
frames and answers an Objection thus, verse. 31. Do we make void the Law through
Faith? God forbid: Yea we establish the Law. And how did they so? certainly
they did not thereby establish the Ceremonial Law in the Letter of it, but in
the Spirit of it they did, in as much as in Preaching Justification in the
Gospel-way, they preached in plain Precepts the necessity of that Spiritual
purity unto salvation, which was but darkly, and in a Figure taught by the
Ceremonial Law: And this they did, in Preaching the necessity of Mortifiation,
instead of Circumcision. And by the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, they
established the Moral Law, both in the Letter and Spirit of it, in teaching the
necessity of Evangelical Obedience to it, after a more Spiritual and forcible
manner than had been taught before. So again when he had charged* the
unbelieving Jews with a great Error, in going about to establish a
Righteousness of their own, in opposition to God's, in adhering to their Law
against the Gospel, Romans 10. 3. to the end it might not be thought that he
would take them off their Law, that they might be lawless, or less Religious,
he adds, verse. 4. that Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every
one that believes. For so he is in his Doctrine, having therein taught that
Righteousness of living which the Law it self taught, but in a far more
Excellent, Spiritual, and effectual manner, than was taught by the Law. So that
all that he designed in taking them off from their Law, was but to put them
under a better conduct: To make them dead to the Law, that they might be
married to another, viz. to Christ by his Gospel, that they might bring forth
fruit unto God, as it is, Romans 7. 4. And likewise in ver. 6. he says, We are
delivered from the Law, but not to be lawless, but that we might serve in
newness of Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter; that is, according to
the Spirit, Scope, and Design of the Law, now expressed in plain Precepts, and
not in the oldness of the Letter and Ceremony. And so he says of himself, Gal.
2. 19. I through the Law am dead to the Law, i. e. he through a better
understanding of God's Design in the Law, became dead as to all his former
expectations of Justification by it. But then, if he were dead to the Law, it
was, as he says, that he might live unto God, live a life in the flesh through
the Faith in his Son, through believing his Gospel in its Precepts and
Promises; the one directing, and the other quickening unto a most excellent
life, ver. 20.

And if St. Paul were thus careful in denying Justification by Works, to assert
the necessity of Evangelical Obedience, we may well conclude, that he never
intended under the notion of Works of the Law, to exclude Evangelical Obedience
from having any hand sooner or later in Justification.

3. Regeneration, or the new Creature, as including Evangelical Obedience, is
opposed to Works of the Law, in the business of Man's Justification, as well as
Faith is, and as well as the Grace of God it self is. Gal. 6. 15. For in Christ
Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
Creature. Circumcision is here as elsewhere by a Synecdoche, put for the Works
of the Law in general. For there were none that were for circumcising, but who
were also for keeping the Law of Moses: Only Circumcision is mentioned
frequently instead of all the rest, because they held it to be not only a part
of the Law, but more; and because they laid the greatest stress upon it, as I
showed before, Chap. 5. Now in that which the Apostle deni^s Circumcision and
the Works of the Law to avail a Man, in that he affirms the becoming a new
Creature will avail him, and that was in the business of Justification and
Salvation: For in that sense the unbelieving Jews and Iudaizers held
Circumcision and other Works of the Law available. And this new Creature thus
opposed to works, and thus available to Justification, consists in a new
frame of Spirit, and the vital operations thereof, and which we can have no
right notion of, without Evangelical Obedience in will and resolution at least
(which are really inward acts of that obedience, and are a conformity of the
renewed will to the Divine Law).

4. Evangelical Obedience as well as Faith, and together with Faith, is opposed
to the Works of the Law in reference to Justification and Salvation. Gal. 5. 6.
For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by love. Here again Circumcision by the
same Figure, and for the same reason as before, is put for the Works of Moses
Law. And as these are denied to avail any Man to Justification and Salvation,
so on the other hand it is affirmed that that Faith which works by love does
avail to these great ends. For to say that Faith which works by love does so,
is the same in sense, as to say, that Faith which works by fulfilling the
Law, and by keeping the Commandments, does so avail: For so love is said to be,
Romans 13. 10. 1 Ioh. 5. 3. The Assemblies Annotations upon the place give
notice, that the word here translated [ worketh] (Faith which works by love)
being in the mean, or middle voice, may be taken either Actively or Passively.
And several other Learned men (among whom Dr. Hammond is one) do render and
understand it passively; as if the Apostle should have said, Faith which is
wrought, or perfected, or consummate by love, and so make it directly parallel
with that in St. James, Chap. 2. 22. by Works was Faith made perfect. So far is
the Scripture we see from opposing acts of Evangelical Obedience to Faith in
the Work of Justification, as that it conjoyns them with Faith in the title to
it, and in opposition to false pretentions to it.

5. Evangelical Obedience alone is opposed to the Works of the Law in reference
to Justification; so far is it from being true, that where the Works of the Law
are excluded, there Evangelical Obedience is excluded from having any share in
the Work of Justification. 1 Cor. 7. 19. Circumcision is nothing, and
uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God.
Circumcision is here again, as before, put for the whole Law: And indeed he
that was circumcised, was bound to keep the whole Law, as this Apostle notes
in Gal. 5. 3. And when he says Circumcision is nothing, he means here
doubtless, as in those other places already opened, that it avails nothing to
any Man's acceptance with God, or to his Justification and Salvation, as the
Iudaizers of those times thought it did. But then the keeping of the
Commandments of God will avail to these ends: For that I conceive was intended,
and ought to be understood by the opposition that is made between Circumcision
and keeping the Commandments.

6. Faith it self is an act of Evangelical Obedience; this as well as love is an
act of Conformity to our Lord's Commands; and therefore a Man cannot be
justified by Faith, but in being so, he must be justified by Evangelical
Obedience. 1 John 3. 23. This is his Commandment, that we should believe in the
name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us Commandment.
This by our Savior is called a work, Joh. 6. 29. This is the work of God, that
ye believe on him whom he has sent. And there is so much of the Nature of
Evangelical Obedience in Faith it self, as that to believe and to obey are
promiscuously put one for another; and so is unbelief and disobedience.
Accordingly you have in many places the one reading in the Text, and the other
in the Margin, as Acts 5. 36. Romans 11. 30, 31. Ephesians. 5. 6. Heb. 4. 11. and 11.
31. And belief and disobedience are in Scripture opposed to each other as
direct contraries, Romans 10. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 7. 2 These. 2. 12.

So that since Faith is an act of Evangelical Obedience, it follows, that to
say the Works of Evangelical Obedience do justify, does no more derogate from
the Grace of God, or the freeness of his Grace in justifying, than to say Faith
justifies. First, Because other acts of Evangelical Obedience are the effects
of God's Grace, and produced by it, as well as Faith. It is God that works in
you both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. And secondly,
Because it is merely of the Law of Grace, that Faith and other Acts of
Evangelical Obedience, are made the Condition of the Promise of Salvation,
Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace are ye Saved, through Faith in Christ Jesus; and that not
of your selves, it is the gift of God. As Men do not believe or obey of
themselves without supernatural assistance, so neither is it of themselves that
they are justified or saved upon their believing, but both the one and the
other, is the gift of God. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy. It is by virtue of God's new Covenant,
that a Promise of pardon is made to Repentance, or to Faith; for the primary
Law, the Law of Nature, promised no such thing upon Repentance. And it is by
virtue of the same Law of Grace, that a Promise of Justification and reward, is
made to sincere Obedience in other Acts of Obedience, as well as those of Faith
and Repentance.

That which has made many afraid of interessing Evangelical Obedience with
Faith, in justifying men, has been an Opinion, that so to do would derogate
from God's Grace, and attribute too much to Man: But you see there is no ground
for such an Opinion. It Is true indeed, the proper merit of Works, and God's
Grace are inconsistent: And therefore are opposed to each other in Scripture.
But Evangelical Obedience and Grace, are no more opposite or inconsistent, than
Cause and Effect, or than Causes principal and subordinat^. And as it does not
follow, that because we are justified freely by God's Grace, that therefore we
are not justified by Faith: So neither does it follow, that because we are
justified by Faith, that therefore we are not justified by sincere obedience.
For these and the Blood of Christ, do all concur in producing many of the same
effects, though not in the same respect.

7. By Evangelical Obedience, Christians come to have a right to Salvation.
Revel. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have a
right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the gates into the City.
This is left on Record as a special Memorandum for Christians in closing up the
Canon of the New Testament; and therefore is to be taken special notice of.
This right to the Tree of Life, and of entering into this blessed City upon
keeping the Commandments, is from a new Covenant, or Law, Act, or Grant from
God: For otherwise Man that had transgressed the first Law he was put under,
would have been far from having any right to such happiness upon the terms here
mentioned, viz. of sincere, though imperfect Obedience. But seeing that a Right
to Salvation does accrue to Men upon a sincere keeping of God's Commandments,
notwithstanding their forfeiture of their first Right by Man's first fall, it
evidently follows, that Evangelical or Sincere Obedience, is part of the
Condition of the Promise of blessedness in the new Law or Covenant, and is here
put for the whole of it, as at other times Faith is put for the whole of the
Condition. And that Moses, David, Solomon, Nehemiah, and Daniel received it in
this sense, and understood all along that sincere Obedience flowing from Love,
was the Condition of God's Covenant of mercy when they styled him a God keeping
Covenant and mercy with those that love him, and keep his Commandments, Deuteronomy.
7. 9. 1 King. 8. 23. Neh. 1. 5. Dan. 9. 4. I have before showed.

If it shall be here said, that sincere obedience is indeed a Condition of
Salvation, but not of Justification, and that it is so made here in this 22d of
the Revelation. I have I think sufficiently answered this Objection in the
former Chapter, but shall here add; That such as thus say, are morecurious and
nice in distinguishing between Justification and Salvation, than St. Paul was.
For he calls Justification, the Justification of Life, Romans 5. 18. Whom he
justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8. 30. and proves that men shall be
justified by Faith, because it is written that the Just shall live by Faith,
Gal. 3. 11. Thus with him to be justified, and to be blessed are all one, Gal.
3. 8, 9. To. 4. 7, 8, 9. And to confirm this, Righteousness or Justification
and Life, are used by him as Synonimous terms, Gal. 3. 21. For if there had
been a Law given which could have given life, verily Righteousness should have
been by the Law. And Justification and Condemnation are put in direct
opposition to each other, Romans 5. 18. and 8. 33, 34. And to be from
Condemnation (which is Justification) and to be saved, are as much one, as not
to dye, is to live. In short, Salvation as well as Justification, is promised
to believing, Ioh. 3. 16. Act. 3. 31. Heb. 10. 39. And therefore Salvation as
well as Justification, must needs be the immediate effect of Faith; if we take
Salvation as begun here in this Life (as the Scripture represents it to be,
Ioh. 5. 24. 1 Ioh. 3. 14. and 5. 12.) From all which me may conclude, that what
is absolutely necessary to Salvation, must needs also be necessary to
Justification.

Add we hereto, that to be justified, and to be saved, is the same thing with
St. James, as well as it is with St. Paul, according to the tenor of his
reasoning, Chap. 2. from ver. 14. to the end. What does it profit my brethren
(says he) though a man say he has Faith, and have not Works? can Faith save
him? verse. 14. This Interrogation implies an Emphatical Negation, and the
meaning is, that such a Faith can by no means save a man; and he gives the
reason of it twice over in verse. 17, 20. because Faith without Works is dead.
And then afterward argues the necessity of Works together with Faith, unto
Justification, or unto Salvation (which was the thing he began with) by God's
justifying Abraham by Works, together with his Faith, who was the great Pattern
or Example of God's justifying all others. If then to be ju^tified, and to be
saved amounts to the same in St. James's Discourse here, then by the way, they
do not rightly understand St. James, who think he does not speak of a
Justification before God in this his Discourse about Justification by Works,
together with Faith, but of a Justification before Men, and to their own
Conscience only. Which supposition of theirs does directly thwart the very
Scope and Design of his whole Discourse, which is to set forth what will, and
what will not avail a Christian-Professor in the sight of God, to the saving of
his Soul, as abundantly appears. So that the Scripture which says Abraham
believed God, and it was accounted to him for Righteousness; and which St.
James says was fulfilled in Abraham's being justified by Works as well as by
Faith, was not fulfilled in Abraham's being justified to others, and to his own
Conscience, but in his being justified before God, and so St. Paul understood
it, Romans 4. 3. Gal. 3. 6. But this was touched before in Chap. 1.

The result then of what has been argued in Answer to the Objection, is this,
viz. That all that are justified, are thereby put regularly into an immediate
capacity of Salvation; so that if they should dye the very next moment after
they are once justified, they would undoubtedly be saved. And therefore
Evangelical Obedience can be no more necessary to Salvation, than it is to
Justification, and it is as necessary to the one as to the other. And if to say
Evangelical Obedience is necessary to Justification, be injurious to Christ and
to the Grace of God, as some would pretend* how comes it to pass then, that to
say Evangelical Obedience is necessary to Salvation, is not so too? For our
final Salvation is as much the effect of God's Grace, and of Christ's
undertaking for us, as our Justification it self is, and of as much value. And
therefore if the one be not injurious in this kind, neither is the other.

8. As the Promise of forgiveness of sins by the Blood of Christ, or the
Promise of an interest in his Blood to the pardon of Sin, is sometimes made
unto believing, so sometimes again it is made unto Evangelical Obedience, or a
holy Life, as in 1 Ioh. 1. 7. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light,
(that is, endeavoring to be holy, as God is holy) then have we fellowship one
with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all Sin;
but otherwise it does not. And so the Christians to whom St. Peter wrote, were
said to be elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 2. But they were not elect to the benefit of being
sprinkled with the blood of Christ without obedience. And therefore by this we
see also that Evangelical Obedience, is part of the Condition of the Promise of
Justification by the Blood of Christ.

9. To forgive Injuries is an act of Evangelical Obedience to that Precept of
our Lord, Mar. 11. 25. And yet without this act of Obedience, Men that have
been injurious, cannot be justified, because they cannot be pardoned, according
to the Word of our Lord, Mark 11. 26. Mat. 6. 15. and 18. 35. Therefore
Evangelical Obedience must needs be part of the Condition of Justification.

10. Repentance is an eminent Act of Evangelical Obedience, Acts 17. 30. and
yet pardon of sin which is essential to Justification, is not to be obtained
without it, Luke 13. 3, 5. Therefore again it follows, that Evangelical
Obedience is necessary to Justification, and part of the Condition of it.

And now by this time I suppose it fully appears to any unprejudiced Reader,
that the Doctrine of St. Paul, yea, and of St. Peter, and John too, do fully
accord with the Doctrine of St. James, touching the necessity of Evangelical
Obedience unto Justification. The opposition then which some have made between
Faith and all Internal and External Works in reference to Justification, as
well Evangelical as Mosaical, has not been only without Scripture-ground, but
against Scripture-evidence; and looks more like that which was made by the
Gnostics, or other Solifidians, opposed by St. James, (if it be not the very
same) than any the Scripture any where makes. And how much injury the
Christian Religon and the Souls of Men may have suffered thereby, is a thing to
be thought on, and sadly laid to heart.

It is a pleasant Doctrine, and the worst of Men called Christians, are glad to
hear that they may be justified by Christ, only upon their believing in him
without any Works of Righteousness or self-denial of their own. And upon that
account (presuming verily that they do believe) they are confident that they
are justified, though they are unsanctified. But those especially are in great
danger of deceiving their own Souls, by building their confidence upon this
Doctrine, who together with this belief, have more of the form of godliness
than the other have, and are found much more in the use and exercise of the
external devotional part of Religion, and are zealous for this or that Opinion,
Party, or Way which they think most Orthodox; though they be greatly destitute
of love to the Nature of God, and of Humility, Charity, strict Justice,
Fidelity, Peaceableness, Sobriety, Temperance, Modesty and Meekness, and of
that renewed frame of Soul which would make them like Christ Jesus, wherein the
power of Christiany does consist: The External duties of Hearing, Reading,
Praying, and the rest, being in great part but means referring to the other as
the end: So that no Man is to account himself truly Religious, further than he
attains to these truly Christian Qualifications, by the use of the External
Means, and Internal Aids. Yea, the fleshly part, even in Men good in the main,
is very apt to make an advantage of such a Doctrine as aforesaid, to the
lessening of their Care, Diligence, and Zeal, in working out their Salvation,
in striving to enter in at the straight gate, in governing their own Spirits
and Appetites, in cleansing themselves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit,
and in perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

And therefore there is great need for those that are Spiritual Guides to the
people, to insist much upon the necessity of Repentance, Regeneration, and a
holy Life as well as Faith, in order to their being justified and saved by
Christ Jesus. For the people, yea, the better sort of them, stand most in need,
as of being well-grounded touching the truth of the Christian Religion, so
especially of having the Doctrines of Morality inculcated upon them, the
Precepts of the Gospel being almost all of that Nature, (though some speak
diminutively of Moral Preaching) and tend to the perfecting of the Nature of
Man in regulating the Internal operations of the Soul, and the External actions
of life, in reference both to God and Man, our selves and others: The
recovering of Men to which, is God's great design by the Gospel, in order to
their being made perfectly happy at last, as I have showed in Chap. 1.

There is indeed an absolute necessity of believing the Gospel in order to
Christian Practice: And therefore our blessed Savior did not only Preach the
necessity of Faith in him and his Doctrine, but also wrought abundance of
Miracles to beget this Faith in Men. And yet he knowing the great danger of
Men's miscarrying in point of Morality in the disposition of Soul, and actions
of Life, insisted chiefly in his Preaching, upon Doctrines of that nature; as
you may see in his Sermon on the Mount, and elsewhere. He taught the necessity
of being born again: Of making the Tree good, that the fruit might be good. And
to enforce this Doctrine of his, he was not wont to tell his Auditors that
every Man shall be rewarded according to his belief, but that when the Son of
Man shall come, every Man shall be rewarded according to his Works: That those
that have done good, shall come forth to the resurrection of life, and those
that have done evil, to the resurrection of damnation: That by their words they
shall be justified (which are no more Faith than Works are) And by their words
they shall be condemned: That in the great day of the trial of all Nations;
every Man shall be acquitted or condemned, according to the good they have
done, or neglected to do, Mat. 25. And that then not every Man that had Faith
enough to cry Lord, Lord, or to Prophecy, cast out Devils, or do wonders in
his Name, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but such and such only as
have done the will of his Father.

Great need there is therefore of peoples examining themselves impartially, and
of being often admonished to take heed, left they mistake and deceive
themselves in the nature of Religion, and in what is absolutely necessary to be
done on their part; because men are very apt to flatter and deceive themselves
in that, and to think that when their Faith is right in the Object of it [as
when they believe in the true God, and in his Son Jesus Christ, and expect
Salvation by him alone] that then they are true believers, and such as shall be
saved; especially if therewith they join the frequenting of God's Ordinances,
and the paring off of some of the grosser enormities of their lives, though in
the mean while they make no Conscience of cleansing their hearts, and governing
their Spirits, of subduing their Passions and inordinate affections, and of
bridling the Tongue. For this cause it is that Christians are so often in
Scripture cautioned to take heed lest they should be deceived. Be not deceived,
God is not mocked: for whatsoever a Man sows, that also shall he reap, Gal. 6.
7, 8. Little Children, let no man deceive you: He that does righteousness, is
Righteous, even as he is righteous, 1 John 3. 7. 1 Cor. 6. 9. Ephesians. 5. 6.

An APPENDIX touching the nature and Difference of that Faith which is
justifying, and of that which is not; and the reason of that difference.
MEn's Eternal Estate of Weal or Woe in another World, and their Peace and
Comfort in this, being very much concerned in their right understanding, or
mistaking the nature and difference of that Faith which is saving, and of that
which is not; I shall here add to what is said before, something to state the
nature and difference of those two kinds of Faith, with what brevity and
perspicuity I can. I cannot (I co^fess) think that the nature of Faith, which
is of absolute necessity to the Salvation of the meanest Christian, is in it
self hard to be understood, were it not that the many Controversies about it,
about its Object, and the Acts of the Soul necessary to it, had puzzled men's
minds, and distracted their apprehensions concerning it.

Things absolutely necessary to Salvation, as they are not many, so there are
hardly any Doctrines delivered with more plainness than they, that the weak who
are as much concerned in them as the strong, might competently understand them
as well as they.

Men may multiply Notions about Faith, as the Scripture uses various
expressions about it: But I doubt not but that the general sense of the
Scripture hereabout may be summarily ^xpressed in this plain Proposition: That
saving Faith is such a belief of Christ to be the Son of God, and of the truth
of his Doctrine, especially touching the virtue of his Death and Resurrection,
and the necessity of amendment of life, for the obtaining remission of Sin, and
Eternal Life, as causes a man to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
to live a godly, righteous, and a sober life.

This is so plain in Scripture, as that there is no Christian so weak, but may
easily come to understand it, and so evident, that none who acknowledge the
Truth of the Gospel, can deny it. That I may state the difference then between
Effectual and Ineffectual Faith, and matters relating to them, with all the
plainness I can, I shall very briefly endeavor these five things.

1. To open the comprehensive nature of Faith.

2. Show wherein the defect lies of that Faith which is not saving.

3. Show whence that defect proceeds.

4. How, and after what manner, Faith in the Understanding, works savingly upon
the Will.

5. Answer some few Objections.

1. The comprehensive nature of ^aving Faith opened.
That I may open the comprehensive nature of Faith the better, I shall first
observe how variously the Condition upon which saving benefits are promised, is
expressed in Scripture, and then what actings of the Soul are thereby signified.

It is thus variously expressed in Scripture: Sometimes its called a believing
God, Romans 4. 3. Gal. 3. 6. a believing in God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. a believing on
God, Romans 4. 24. a believing the Record which God has given of his Son, 1 Ioh.
5. 10. Sometimes its called a believing on Christ, Ioh. 3. 16, 36. Act. 16. 31.
a believing him to be the Christ the Son of God, Ioh. 20. 31. 1 Ioh. 5. 5. It Is
called Faith in his Blood, Romans 3. 25. a believing that God raised him from the
dead, Romans 10. 9. Sometimes its called a believing of the Gospel, Mar. 16. 15,
16. a believing of the Truth, 2 Th^s. 2. 15. a believing the testimony of the
Apostles, 2 These. 1. 10. Sometimes it is expressed under the Notion of
Repentance, Acts 2. 38. and 3. 19. and 11. 18. 2 Cor. 7. 10. and sometimes of
obedience, 1 John 1. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Heb. 5. 9.

The Condion of the Promise of saving benefits, being thus variously expressed,
can signify no less than a threefold Act of the Soul: The first, being the
Act of the Understanding: The second, of the Will: The third, of the
Understanding and Will conjunct.

I. Such expressions of the Condition of the Promise as is the believing God,
the believing in God, the believing his Record, the believing the Gospel, the
believing Christ to be the Son of God, do most properly signify the act of the
mind or understanding in assenting to the truth of what God testifies, or
promises. Which assent is grounded upon a knowledge, or belief of God's
Veracity, his Truth, and Faithfulness, armed with All Sufficiency of Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness, to make good his Word to a tittle. And although such
expressions as aforesaid, do most properly signify the act of the
Understanding, yet, when ever saving Benefits are promised, and the Condition
expressed in such a form of words as does most properly and primarily signify
the assent of the mind, even then the act of the Will in consenting to the
Condition, is employed, and ought to be understood; as I shall fully prove in
the next Particular.

And the reason why the whole of the Condition of the Promise relating to the
consent of the Will, as well as the assent of the Understanding, is frequently
expressed in such a form of words, as primarily and strictly signify the
assent of the mind, is, I conceive, because such assent of the mind, is the
Principle from which all concurrent acts of the Will necessary to Justification
and Salvation do proceed.

And it is of frequent use in Scripture, to denominate the whole of Religion,
by some one Principal part which is a fruitful Principle of all the rest.

Thus the knowledge of the true God, and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent, is
said to be Eternal Life, Ioh. 17. 3. And thus sometimes the fear of God, and
sometimes the love of God, is put for the whole of Men's saving Religiousness,
and the same Promise of blessedness made to one of these singly expressed, is to
be extended to the whole.

In like manner, the whole of Christianity, is frequently denominated by Faith,
and the Christians styled Believers, and the household of Faith, and the like;
and all because that Christian life of theirs, by which they differ from other
Men, flows from their Faith, which is the first active Principle of it.

2. Another act of the Soul essentially necessary to that Faith which is the
Condition of the Promise, is the consent of the Will to repent, to receive
Christ as Lord and King, to be govered by his Laws, as well as to own him for a
Priest once of^ering himself, and ever making interecession for us.

For the Condition of the Promise of Pardon and Salvation, is expressed under
the notion of Repentance, and sometimes of Obedience, as I showed before: And
Repentance and Odience are acts of the Will as renewed.

And that there is no Promise of saving benefits upon mere believing, without
observing that part of the Condition which consists in Repentance,
Regeneration, and Obedience, is most evident: Because they are expressly
excluded in Scripture from having any share in the saving benefits of the
Covenant, Justification, or Salvation, who do not Repent, Luke 13. 3. who are
not regenerate, Ioh. 3. 5. who love not the Lord Jesus Christ, and that above
any worldly enjoyment, 1 Cor. 16. 22. Matthew. 10. 37. and who do not obey him,
Acts 3. 22, 23. Luke 19. 27. 2 These. 1. 7. By all which we may certainly know
that when ever there is Promise of Justification and Salvation, made to
believing, it is to be understood of such a believing as does at that instant
in which a man believes savingly, produce a sincere consent of the Will to
repent, to love Christ, and to obey him: For otherwise those Scriptures and
these would be in^onsistent.

For if men cannot be pardoned, nor delivered from the curse, nor be safe from
destruction until they have repented, are regenerate, do love Christ, and obey
the Gospel, as the forecited Scriptures do assure us they cannot; then no Faith
whatsoever is justifying, or can entitle them to Pardon and Salvation acording
to the Tenor of God's Promise, until it has produced that Repentance,
Regeneration, Love, and Obedience: Which is a full and an undeniable proof of
the necessity of such a consent of the Will as aforesaid, to render Faith
justifying and saving.

Now this consent and resolutionof the Will to repent and obey Christ, and to
forsake all for him, is the Moral change of the Soul, and the new life in its
first beginning. And so a man's first effectual Belief, is his whole Christian
life in its beginning. And a man's first Faith is perfected afterward by Works,
( Iam. 2. 22.) as a Child is perfected in his manly state, as he grows up to
manly actions; or as the Seed is perfected when it grows to a full Ear.

By this first consent of the Will, we restipulate and strike Covenant with
God; and not only so, but we thereby begin also to keep and perform Covenant
with him on our part. When this consent is first wrought in the Will, then the
Laws of the new Covenant are first put into the mind and written in the heart:
And by this we first begin to become savingly a people unto God, to believe in
him, to love and serve him, as he by Covenant and Promise becomes a God unto
us, to make us happy. Heb. 8. 10. This is the Convenant that I will make, I
will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts; and I will be
to them a God, and they shall be to me a people.

3. The other act of the Soul, which I call the act of the Understanding and of
the Will conjunct, is an affiance in God through Christ* a trusting in him, or
a relying on him for the fulfilling of his Promise of saving Benefits, while we
continue sincerely to consent, resolve, and endeavor to perform the Condition
on our part.

This is that, or part of that, which is called a believing on God, a believing
on Christ, and a trusting in him: Noting the Souls dependence upon Christ ^or
the saving benefits which accrue to Men by his Mediation, Office, and
Undertaking, and on the Truth and Faithfulness, Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of
God, to perform all that he has promised them through his Son, and upon the
terms he has promised, and not otherwise.

For the Promise of saving Benefits being made but upon the Condition before
mentioned a true Believer, or he that is rational and wise, considers as well
upon what terms the benefits are promised, as who has promised them, and what
they are; and expects the one, no otherwise than as he sincerely resolves and
endeavors to perform the other.

And therefore if any shall rely on God, and Christ for those benefits, in whom
yet the qualifying condition of the Promise of them is not found; Such a
relyance is but a groundless presumption, and not Faith or Affiance duly so
called. For such do not only rely on Christ for that for which they have no
Promise, but for that which God has expressly declared they shall have no share
in whilst they remain destitute of that qualification, which is the Condition
upon which, and not without it, the promise of those benefits is made.

These three acts of the Soul exercised on their Objects, do make up that Faith
which is justifying and saving. And when justifying Faith in the complete
nature of it is spoken of in Scripture; all these three acts of the Soul are to
be understood, and especially the two first; though perhaps they are many times
mentioned severally and apart; Faith being described sometimes by one of them,
and sometimes by another: As God himself is represented to us, sometimes by one
Attribute, sometimes by another.

II. Wherein the Defect lies of that Faith which is not saving.
By what has been discoursed touching the nature of that Faith which is
saving, it is easy to dis^ern wherein the defect lies of that Faith which is
not so.

And the defect lies chiefly in the Will, in its not consenting to perform the
condition of the Promise in repenting, and in receiving Christ as Lord to be
governed by his Laws.

I will not deny but the defect in part may be in the Understanding, when its
assent unto the Truth of Divine Revelation is so weak, as that it can make but
a too weak and ^aint impression upon the Will, to procure its consent unto the
Condition of the Promise.

But then that defect in the assent of the Understanding, does usually, at
least in great part, proceed from the Will; as I shall show afterward. Now
that the defect lies mainly in the Will's not consenting to the Condition of
the Promise, appears by this; because unregenerate men may assent unto the
truth of God's Testimony, and may trust that they shall be saved by Christ
(which contain the other two acts of the Soul) but no man truly consents, to
perform the Condition of the Promise, but in doing so, he is regenerate in the
first Act, and justified.

1. Unregenerate men may have the same Faith of assent in the Understanding to
a degree, as the regenerate may: They may believe God to be the Father
Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and Jesus Christ to be his only Son, and
the rest of the Articles of the Creed* and they may believe in great part that
to be their duty both toward God and Man which is so indeed, and yet hold that
truth in unrighteousness, which they do believe. Romans 1. 18. Many of the chief
Rulers believed on Christ, who yet loved the praise of Men more than the praise
of God, and durst not confess him, Joh. 12. 42, 43. As also did many others
when they saw his Miracles, who yet were such as Christ had no mind to commit
himself to, Ioh. 2. 23, 24. And Simon Magu^ believed, wondering, and being
astonished at the signs which were done by Philip, who yet remained in the
bond of iniquity, Acts 8. Such as are resembled by the stony ground, believed,
who yet loved their ease and worldly interest more than Christ; And those that
St. James expostulates with, Chap. 2. were thus far believers also.

2. Excepting the consent of the Will to the Condition of the Promise;
unregenerate Men may hope to be saved by Christ, and rely on him for Salvation
as well as the Regenerate: Only for want of their performing the Condition of
the Promise, their hopes and confidence are groundless, and will deceive them.
But otherwise men, that are but carnal, and live in some known sin, may and
oftimes do persuade themselves that they shall be saved by Christ Jesus,
because they believe that he dyed for sinners, and because they ask God
forgiveness, and perform some acts of Religion.

Our Savior says, Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, open unto
us: Have we not prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name have cast out Devils,
and done many wonderful works. We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and
thou have taught in our streets. To whom he will say for all that, Depart from
me, ye workers of iniquity, Matthew. 7. 22, 23. Luke 13. 25, 26. These had some
kind of Faith in Christ, by which they prophe^ied in his Name, and cast out
Devils, and did many wonderful works. They were such as were hearers of his
Word, and Preachers of it too, and had eaten and drunken in his presence. And
because of this Faith, and these Works, they had a Hope and Confidence that
Christ would open unto them, and receive them into his Kingdom, and would not
be easily beaten off from this confidence.

But the true reason why their Faith will stand them in no stead, nor their
Religious performances neither, is, because for all that they were workers of
iniquity, they never heartily consented to the terms of the Promise of
Salvation by Christ in repenting: They did not first heartily resolve, and
after sincerely endeavor to turn from every known sin, unto every known duty.
And in this very thing does the defect of that Faith lie which is short of
saving.

Which will yet further appear, in that St. James when he would state the
difference between that Faith which is saving, and that which is not, fixes it
here.

The dead Faith is denominated such by him, from its being alone without Works,
Iam. 2. 17. Even so Faith if it has not Works, is dead, being alone, or by it
self. And again, verse. 20. But will thou know, O vain Man, that Faith without
Works is dead. And again, ver. 26. For as the body without the Spirit is dead,
so Faith without Works is dead also. Meaning by its being dead, that it avails
a Man no more to his Justification and Salvation, than a dead Corpse avails to
the produceing the useful and serviceable effects of a living Man; or than a
Tree that is dead, avails to the bringing forth fruit; or than a few good
words, Depart in peace, be ye filled and warmed, will avail poor people, when
nothing is given which is needful to the body, ver. 15, 16, 17.

In all this I do not deny, but that there may be in such as do not savingly
believe, some consent of the Will to do something toward performing the
Condition of the Promise, in repenting and obeying. Such Men may consent and
resolve to forsake some sins, and to do some, yea many duties, who yet never
savingly consent, because they do not heartily consent and resolve to forsake
[all] known sin, and to do [all] known duties; in which the sincerity of
Repentance and Obedience does consist, to which the Promise is made. Such men
may not be far from the Kingdom of God, but yet must go farther, if ever they
would have any good ground of hope to enter into it: But of this more
afterward.

III. Whence this defect does proceed.
I have showed before, that there is the Faith of assent in the Understanding
unto the truth of God's Testimony, in some unregenerate men, as well as in the
regenerate. And in whomsoever the Faith of Consent in the Will to perform the
Condition of the Promise is found, it always proceeds from the Faith of Assent
in the Understanding. A Man always (in order of nature at least) believes that
the promised benefits shall be made good to him, in case he perform the
Condition, before he consents to perform it; and does consent to perform the
Condition in hope and confidence of obtaining the promised benefits.

Now then the Question is, whence is it' and what is the reason that the Faith
of assent in the Understanding, does not always produce the same consent in the
Will in one, as well as in another* and as it always does, when it becomes
effectual to Justification and Salvation? Why does this Faith remain alone in
some, when as it is accompanied with Works in others?

I shall offer what I conceive to be the reason of this, First, in general, and
then more particularly.

The difference sometimes may proc^ed from the different measures and degrees
of the evidence upon which the same Truth is believed. One man may have a
clearer discerning of the evidence than another, which causes a stronger
assent in the discerning faculty, and that stronger assent in the
Understanding, may well cause a stronger consent in the Will, and a firm and
lasting resolution. As on the contrary, a weak and partial consent and
resolution in the Will to the Condition, sometimes proceds from a weak assent
in the Mind, to the Truth of God's Testimony, or Promise, and that from the
weakness of the faculty in the discerning the evidence of that Truth which is
the Object of Faith.

But the reason most commonly why the assent in the Understanding unto the
Truth of God's Testimony does not work a consent in the Will to the Condition
of the Promise, is to be taken, I conceive from the opposition which the lower
faculties of the Soul, the Will, and Affections, assisted and influenced by the
sensual Appetites, make against the superior Faculty the Mind, or
Understanding, so that they do not hearken to its Notices, nor obey its
Dictates. The Will which is the Spring of Action, is a middle Faculty between
the Understanding and the sensitive Affections or Appetites, and is solicited
by both.

As the Understanding calls upon it to obey its rational Dictates in choosing
the means which tend to the best end, both which the Understanding represents
to it from the Word of God; so on the other hand, the sensitive Affections
solicit it to be on their side, and to be active in making provision for the
flesh, in choosing such things as tend to satisfy its cravings and lusts. And
because the Will has usually been pre-ingaged to the flesh, and had a share in
its gratifications, it is not without much difficulty prevailed with to be
co^senting to, and active in the crucifixion of those affections and lusts.
Which until the Will do, and herein obey the enlightened Understanding, the
Faith of assent in the Understanding abides alone. The Will's obstinate
adherence then to Men's fleshly lusts, and carnal interests, in opposition to
that belief in the Understanding which puts it upon destroying them, as
absolutely necessary to the Man's Salvation, as believing God touching the
necessity of this as a means, as well as it does believe him touching the
blessedness of the end; this obstinate opposition in the Will, I say, is the
true reason why the Faith which is in some men, is but a dead Faith. How can ye
believe (says our Savior) which seek honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes from God only? Joh. 5. 44. Yes, some of them could, and did
believe so far as to assent in their minds, that Christ was no Impostor, but
one that came from God; and that therefore his Doctrine must needs be true; but
they did not believe so as to be converted in their Wills, to consent to part
with their carnal interest of honor and reputation, with their party the
Pharisees, which they must have done as the case then stood, if they would have
confessed him openly; which to do, was necessary to make them capable of the
Promise of Salvation by him. Ioh. 12. 42, 43. Among the chief Rulers, many
believed on him, but because of the Pharisees, they did not confess him, lest
they should be put out of the Synagogue, for they loved the praise of Men, more
than the praise of God. These had more understanding than the common people,
who, as they said, knew not the Law, ( Ioh. 7.) and yet not so many of them as
of the people believed on Christ, so as to confess and follow him, because
their wordly interest being greater, it held them faster and had the greater
power over their Wills. The unbelief then of Men where the Gospel comes, is
generally to be resolved into the obstinacy of their Wills, in opposition to
the convictions of their Understanding, John 5. 40. Ye will not come to me that
ye might have life. How often would I have gathered you, and ye would not, Mat.
23. 37. O that my people had hearkened to my counsel! but Israel would none of
me. Psalm. 81. 11. They did not choose the fear of the Lord, Prove. 1. 29. They
chose their own ways, their Souls delighted in their abominations, Isa. 6. 3.
Thus much in general. But I would show yet more particularly how the Will does
obstruct the perfecting the work of Faith after it is begun in the
Understanding. And it does it as I conceive.

I. By calling off the Understanding from a frequent consideration of that
evidence by which it was first convinced of the Truth of Gods Testimony
touching the Promised Benefits, and the Condition and Means of obtaining them,
and from a frequent application of it to the Will: and this the Will can do.

For as the Understanding has a power over the Will, so far a to represent
it is apprehensions to the Will in order to its acting thereupon according to a
Man's own concerns therein; so also the Will has ak^nd of power over the
Understanding, both to put it upon frequent consideration, to strengthen it
self in the belief of that which the Will would have to prove true and to be
believed; and also to call it off from so doing, when there is a great
reluctance in the Will against having that prove true which the Understanding
represents as true. And if the Understanding be taken off, so that it has not
frequent recourse to that evidence which first procured its assent unto the
Truth of God's Testimony in the Gospel, that it might be thereby nourished,
strengthened, and maintained; that Faith in the Understanding will languish and
grow weak, and so have no powerful operation upon the Will to change and renew
it, and to procure its effectual consent to perform the Condition of the
Promise, when the Will stands disinclined of it self, to the Verdict of the
Understanding. Besides, if the Understanding does not ply the Will, and
frequently inculcate upon it, its own apprehensions concerning God's Testimony,
and the consequence and concernment of it to a Man's own self, thereby to make
the Word believed to be an ingrafted Word, it will not not work any Cure upon
it, or any through change in it.

The unwillingness in Men to have their Minds engage in the consideration of
God's ways and their own, is the reason of their turning back from him, Io^ 34.
27. They turned back from him, and would not consider any of his ways. As on
the contrary the Scripture represents the conversion of a sinner as proceeding
from the consideration of the bad tendency of his evil ways, Ezekiel. 18. 28.
Because he considers and turns away from all his transgressions which he
has committed, he shall surely live, he shall not dye. And our Savior seems
to cast men's profiting, or not profiting, their belief, or not belief by
hearing Gods Testimony in the Gospel, upon their considering, or not
considering of it. Mark 4. 24. And he said unto them, consider what you hear
(so Dr. Hammond reads it) for with what measure ye mete (viz. in considering,
or not considering) it shall be measured to you again, in profiting, or not
profiting; which is to be understood according to God's ordinary proceeding
with men.

The reason why the Faith of those resembled by the stony ground, does not
abide, or come to perfection, is, because they have no Root in themselves, and
that comes to pass for want of much consideration, and a frequent working the
first conviction of the mind from the evidence of Truth, into the Will and
Affections, by a constant Consideration, and close Application of it. Acts 17.
11. They searched the Scriptures [daily] whether th^se things were so; and
therefore they believed.

2. When men hold fast their lusts out of their great love to them,
notwithstanding their conviction in their Understandings, and are ^ot willing
to part with them upon any terms; the Fumes of those lusts continually
ascending, will cloud and darken the Understanding as a thick Fogg does the
Sun, and by degrees make it less capable of discerning its Object, viz. saving
Truth, in its clear evidence, and proportionably hinder in its that opperation
upon the Will. The cares of this World, and the deceitfulness of Riches, and
the lusts of other things, choked the Word, and it becomes unfruitful, Mar.
4. 19. He that hates his Brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and
knows not whether he goes, because darkness has blinded his eyes, 1 John 2.
11.

3. Sinful Men's understandings are ^ot so incorrupt, but that they are apt to
be bribed by their Wills, to cast about and devise how to evade the force and
edge of their own notices and Dictates, and to attempt and baffle their former
apprehensions and convictions, to the end they may still retain their lusts
without any great disturbance from their Understandings. This when it is
yielded to, and put in practice, is that which in Scripture is called Men's
closing their eyes, le^t at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear
with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and should be converted and
healed, Mat. 13. 15. And when this takes place in Professors of Christianity,
that do believe that Faith, Repentance, and Obedience are necessary to
Salvation, as the Condition on which it is promised, the way by which they
u^ually deceive their own hearts, is, by persuading themselves, that they do
perform the Condition of the Promise in these, when indeed they do not; but
frame to themselves Notions of saving Faith, Repentance and Obedience,
different from the Scripture Notions of them, as I shall show in ^ach of them.

1. Many delude themselves by taking up a wrong Notion of saving Faith, and so
think they have it, when they have it not. They believe indeed Christ to be the
Son of God, and Savior of the World, and that those shall be saved that
believe in him, and those damned that do not, because the Scripture, which they
believe to be the Word of God, says so: And thus far they believe rightly
objectively. But then they deceive their own Souls by persuading themselves
that a mere assent of their mind to the Truth of these and other Evangelical
Verities, is the Faith to which the Promise of Justification and Salvation is
made, though it has no such powerful operation upon their Wills, as to make
them new Creatures, to make any through change in the temper of their hearts and
tenor of their lives. And many doubtless have been greatly strengthened in this
delusive confidence, by having been taught that Faith justifies without any
Works at all. And these again persuade themselves, that they believe in Christ
to the saving of their Souls, because they rely on him alone for Salvation, and
upon what he has done, and suffered for them, though they love their sins, and
live in them still. Just like some Jews of old, who though they were very bad
in their lives, yet leaned upon the Lord, and said, is not the Lord among us?
none evil can come upon us? Mich. 3. 11. Isa. 48. 1, 2. They leaned upon God's
Promise of being their God, as those do upon Christ's undertaking to be a
Savior, although they overlooked the Condition to be performed by them in
being a people unto him, in loving and serving him, as those Christians I speak
of, also do. Though Christ alone is to be relied on for Salvation, as touching
all that is proper to the Mediatory Office and Work, yet no man is to rely on
him, so as to think he should excuse him, if he do not repent, or be not
regenerate, or as if he did repent, or were regenerate for him. If they do;
they promise themselves from him, that which he never promised, or undertook,
but has told them plainly, that except they themselves repent, they shall
perish, and that except they themselves be born again, they cannot see the
Kingdom of God.

2. They deceive their own hearts also in the nature of Repentance, their
Notion of it being one thing, and the Scripture-Notion of it quite another: So
that they persuade themselves they have repented, when indeed they have not.
They know and believe perhaps, repentance to be necessary to Salvation, because
Christ has said, that except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. But then
they mistake in persuading themselves that they do repent, because they are
frequently sorry for what they have done, though they cease not to do the same
again. Indeed when the pleasure of Sin is over, and rebukes of Conscience come
in the room of them; these trouble their minds for what they have done, which
was the Repentance of Judas; and there is no peace to the wicked, who are like
the troubled Sea. Now this they count repentance, though it work no effectual
and through change in Heart and Life; but when that sad fit is over, they appear
to be the same Men they were before, by returning to the same sins.

And herein the Romish Church has most unhappily laid a Snare, which as is to
be feared catches multitudes of Souls to their destruction, in asserting
Contrition, yea, Attrition with confession, to be repentance sufficient to
Salvation. Whereas sorrow alone, though it be godly sorrow, is not Repentance,
but as St. Paul says, Godly sorrow works repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 10. But
Repentance itself, which is saving, consists chiefly in a real change in Men's
apprehensions of, and affections to both sin and duty; and in ceasing to do
evil, and learning to do well.

Others again deceive themselves in taking a partial Reformation for true
Repentance: Because they have left some sins which they could best spare, as
blemishing their Reputation, or impairing their Estates, or their Health: And
because they have done many things (which yet Herod also did, Mar. 6.) they
think they have repented, and are converted, though they retain others which
are more gainful, or yield them more pleasure. Whereas the sincerity of
Repentance can be proved by nothing less then a hatred of, and turning from sin
as sin, and so from all sin, by diligent and careful endeavors.

3. They deceive themselves by a false Notion of that Obedience which is
necessary to Salvation. They believe in the gross indeed, that Obedience to the
Commands of God, to the Rules and Precepts of the Gospel, is necessary to
Salvation, because the Scripture so plainly declares it to be so: But then
they deceive their own hearts, in thinking and persuading themselves that they
have performed this part of the Condition of the Promise, when as they have not
performed one half of it. They have, been it may be, somewhat careful to be
found in acts of External Worship and and Devotion, both public and private;
and to keep themselves from Idolatry, Swearing, Cursing, Sabbath-breaking,
Murder, Adultery, Stealing, False-witness-bearing, and the like, in the outward
and gross acts of them. But all the while have made no conscience of governing
their Thoughts, Affections, and Passions, nor their Tongues neither as to many
things. And in all this, wherein do they exceed the Pbarisees, whom if we
exceed not in Righteousness, Christ has told us (who best knows) that we shall
never ^nter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5. 20. They were strict and
zealous in the observation of the Laws for Circumcision, Sacrifice, Sabbaths,
Tithes, and other positive Precepts, and that to a tittle; and fasted often,
and made long Prayers, and gave Alms; and made Ostentation also that they were
not as others were; Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, nor as the Publicans. And
why would not all this bring them to Heaven? Because all this notwithstanding
(as they had not Faith in Christ, so) they were Covetous, Proud, and Ambitious,
seeking Honor one of another, contemning, and despising others, they were
envious, and malicious, cruel, and ill-natured, unmerciful, and persecuting
such as faithfully reproved them. They made clean the outside of the Cup and
Platter; and so far as they did so, they did well: But that for which Christ
denounced woe to them, was that their inward part was full of ravening and
wickedness, and for want of love to God, and of Judgment, Mercy, and Fidelity.

God is a Spirit, and the Service that is acceptable to him, as being most
agreeable to his Nature, is that which is done in Spirit and Truth. And
therefore his Preceps are given to govern the inward Man as well as the outward.

He that said thou shall not kill, has said also, Thou shall not hate thy
Brother in thy heart, nor be angry with him without a cause, or bear a grudge
against him. He that said, Thou shall not commit adultery, has said also, Thou
shall not lust after a Woman in thy heart. And he that said, Thou shall not
steal, has said also, Thou shall not covet, and the like. And therefore they
that think themselves to be obedient Children to God, upon account of their
abstaining from outward gross sin, and of being outwardly righteous, and do not
truly endeavor, and make a business of it to mortify and subdue their Pride,
Covetousness, love of the World, Envy, Hatred, Malice, thoughts of Revenge, the
unruliness of Passions, and all immoderate Affections; but indulge themselves
in these, or any of these, or the like, they deceive themselves, whatever their
External Conformity to Divine Precepts otherwise may be. They are the pure in
heart that shall see God. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts.

God observes more what Men are inwardly, than what they are outwardly, and
judges of them accordingly. He is not a Jew, nor he a Christian, who is one
outwardly, in the flesh, but he who is so inwardly in heart, whose praise is
not of Men, but of God, Romans 2. 28, 29. And therefore St. James counted them
but Earthly, Sensual, and Devilish, in their profession of Christianity, how
high soever they professed, and such as did lie against the Truth, that
indulged bitter envying and strife, though it were but in their hearts, Jam. 3.
14, 15. And if (...) and passions within, shall break out in an unbridled
Tongue in slandering, reviling, backbiting, evil-speaking, rash, and
uncharitable censuring, or the like; how Religious soever such a man may
otherwise seem to himself, or others, yet St. James has plainly determined his
case; such an one has deceived his own heart, and his Religion is vain, Jam.
1. 26. Mat. 5. 22.

Men may go a great way in Religion, yea so far as until they are not far from
the Kingdom of God. Yea, many shall seek to enter in by doing many things in
order thereto, and yet shall not be able for want of striving to do all that is
necessary thereto. And for that very reason, and because of the great danger of
Christians falling short, though they have gone far, and done much, are they so
earnestly exhorted to work out, or to work through their own Salvation with
fear and trembling; with a fear of falling short, Phil. 2. 12. And not only so,
but to fear even a seeming to come short of the promised rest, Heb. 4. 1. Let
us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any
of you should seem to come short of it. The matter is of that huge consequence,
that every wise Man that does not despise his own Soul, should be afraid to do,
or omit to do, any thing that has but the least ^eeming show or appearance of
putting his Salvation into any hazard. And therefore [all] diligence is not too
much for the wisest Man living to use, to make his calling and election sure, 2
Pet. 1. 10.

Thus when Men's Understandings are bribed by their corrupt Wills, they then
take up with a partial Faith, a partial Repentance, and a partial Obedience,
instead of that which is Evangelically complete, and hope it is a fulfilling of
the Condition of the Promise.

And when Men shut their own Eyes, and stop their own Ears against the evidence
of the word of Salvation, that they may the more quietly enjoy the pleasures of
any sin, God many times in his righteous Judgment, after much striving, and
long-suffering, withdraws the assistances of his Grace and Spirit, and leaves
them to themselves, and their own delusions, and to be practiced upon by the
Devil for their farther hardening; according to that dreadful Prophecy, in
Isa. 6. 9, 10. mentioned no less than five or six times in the New Testament;
Mat. 13. 14. Mar. 4. 12. Luke 8. 10. Ioh. 12. 40. Acts 28. 26. Romans 11. 8. Go
tell this people, hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye indeed, but
perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their Ears heavy, and
shut their Eyes, etc. When Men will not receive the love of the Truth that they
might be saved, but have pleasure in unrighteousness, God sometimes sends them
strong delusions to believe a lie, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. Whereas on the
contrary, the good ground-hearers are described by the honesty of the heart
into which they receive the Word: They study no tricks or shifts, nor use any
shuffling upon the account of any dishonest interest, to evade the plain Truth,
but are content that should take place, and all other things give place to it:
They suffer that Word which was received and assented to in the Judgment
before, in order of Nature, to sink down into their hearts, by which the Will
and Affections become changed.

IV. How, and afer what manner Faith in the Understanding, works savingly upon
the Will.
The Faith of Assent in the Understanding, works a Consent in the Will unto
the Condition of the Promise, by its operative and affecting influence upon the
passions of Hope, Fear, and Love, the powerful Principles of Action in Man. For
though Faith in the Understanding, is the first Principle of Action as
Christian, yet not that, but the Will, as it is affected with Hope, Fear, or
Love, is the next and immediate Principle of Action. The Understanding when it
rightly performs its Office, does not only assent unto the Truth of Divine
Revelation, upon competent evidence that it is from God; but also considers and
weighs, as in a balance, the import of it, and how a man is concerned in it;
as whether it betoken good or evil to him, and how much, and upon what terms,
whether absolutely, or conditionally, and what the Condition is: All which when
brought down to the subordinate Faculties of the Soul, the Will, and
Affections, is apt to affect them, and work upon them more or less, accoring as
the things believed are expressed more or less to concern a Man.

And the things believed, Eternal Life, and Eternal Death in another World,
being invisible and absent things, it is a man's Faith, touching the reality of
them, that supplies the room or absence of sense. For Faith is the substance of
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. We neither
see nor feel the glorious things promised, nor the dreadful things threatened in
another World, otherwise than by Faith, which gives the Believer a prospect of
them. But a man by his Faith in that Gospel by which they are revealed, has a
foresight of them (as Abraham had of Christ's day) and that fills the Soul with
hope, and fear, and a sense of God's love in giving such an hope. And this
hope, fear, and love, puts Men upon, more or less, care, diligence and industry
in doing what is necessary for the obtaining of the one, and efcaping the
other, as they are more or less influenced by a Faith that is weaker or
stronger, or more or less active and exercised about these things. And hence
comes that change which is made in the Hearts and Lives of true Believers, who
walk by Faith, and not by Sight, that is, they govern their Lives by the belief
of invisible, and not sensible things, 2 Cor. 5. 7. This in general. But more
particularly, the Faith of Ass^nt in the Understanding, works the Faith of
Consent in the Will, by its operation upon those three Passions, or Affections
of the Will, Hope, Fear, and Love.

1. As a firm asse^ting to the Truth of God's Promise through Christ, of pardon
of Sin, and Eternal Life upon Condition of Repentance and new Obedience,
together with his Faith, gives a man hope and confidence of obtaining these
great benefits upon the terms on which they were promised.

The hope of this happiness causes a Man to be willing to comply with the
Condition upon which it is promised, in order to the obtaining the happiness it
self.

There is a Principle of self love planted by God in the nature of every Man,
by which he does naturally desire and aspire after the happiness of his own
being. And that will put a man upon the use of such means, and the performance
of such a Condition, without which he believes, and is verily persuaded he
cannot be happy. Now every Man in whom there is the Faith of assent unto the
Truth of God's Testimony in the Gospel firmly fixed, being verily persuaded
that everlasting happiness is not attainable without Repentance, Regeneration,
and sincere Obedience, because God has declared this as plainly as he has
done any thing: (And it is the nature of Faith to acquiesce in his Testimony.)
The love of the end, which is Man's own happiness, makes him in love with the
means, such as is Repenting, Mortifying, and Obeying work, without which he
cannot attain his end in being happy. This Principle of Self-love under the
conduct of a Man's Understanding and Reason enlightened, and regulated by a
Declaration of the Divine Will, and influenced by a firm belief of it, will
work in a Man new apprehensions of, and new Affections to both Sin and Duty;
and will cause him to abandon the little pleasures of sin which are but for a
season, that he may come to the fruition of that fullness of joy, and those
Rivers of pleasure, which are in the presence of God, and at his right hand for
evermore; when once he knows, and firmly believes that they cannot otherwise be
obtained.

Thus by Faith is the victory over the world obtained, in all its temptations
from Honors, Profits, and Pleasures, 1 Ioh. 5. 4. For by such a Faith a Man
well perceives that the World offers him to his unspeakable loss, though it
should offer him all of these that it is able to confer upon him, if it be upon
condition of doing, or omitting to do that by which he shall certainly deprive
himself of that Glory, Honor, and Immortality, which he is well assured of
through Faith in God's Promise, if he overcome.

We see Men are so commonly governed by a Principle of Self-love, in parting
with a lesser good or convenience for a greater, even in the things of this
life, that they are worthi^y an ^ deservedly counted fools that do the
contrary: And therefore those are guilty of so much the greater folly and
madness, who deprive themselves of the happiness of Heaven, by a sinful seeking
or possessing of the Honors, Profits, or Pleasures of this life: as the
happiness of Heaven exceeds the enjoyments of this World, in kind and height of
satisfaction, and in continuance and duration, so rational a thing it is to
live and walk by Faith of unseen things, and unreasonable and unmanly to be
governed by the sense of present things in opposition thereunto, 2 Th^ss. 3. 2.

2. The Faith of Assent in the Understanding, works a Consent in the Will to
the Condition of the Promise, as the passion of fear is awakened by believing
God's threatenings against such as do not observe and fulfill that Condition.
There is a Principle of self-preservation planted by God in every Man's nature,
by which he fears and abhors that which he knows, and verily believes tends to
the infelicity and misery of his being, and which puts him upon the avoiding of
that which he believes has such a tendency, in order to the declyning the
misery, or destruction it self.

When a Man receives such sayings into his Understanding, as threaten, that if
ye live after the flesh ye shall dye; that except ye repent, ye shall all
perish: That without holiness, no Man shall see the Lord, and the like; and
does assent unto them as the true sayings of God, which assent is his Faith;
the fear of the misery threatened, and the Principle of self-preservation, work
in him a desire and endeavor to have his sinful inclinations and appetites
mortified, and a care to avoid the outward acts of sin, as really and truly as
he desires to escape Eternal Destruction it self; as believing and knowing they
tend thereto, and that he cannot escape the one, without a sincere desire and
endeavor to destroy and avoid the other.

And in this way Faith is a Believers Victory, by which he also overcomes the
World, when it tempts him to sin by threatening him with disgrace, loss of
Estate or Liberty, or with enduring of corporal punishment, or death it self.
For he believes the punishments in the other world to be of such a nature and
duration, as that the worst things which Man can inflict, are altogether
inconsiderable in comparison of them. By which belief he is so far guided, that
he chooses to suffer the less, when his faithfulness to God, and his own best
interest does expose him to it, rather than to expose himself by unfaithfulnes
to infinitely the greater, to avoid the less. And thus Faith purifies the heart
of all inordinate affection to Riches, Honor, Ease, and Pleasures, Acts 15. 9.

3. The Faith of Assent or Credence in the Understanding touching the exceeding
greatness of God's love to mankind in the gift of Christ for their Redemption,
and in his great and precious Promises made in him upon a very gracious
Condition, works in the Will a love to God, and so a love to please him, in
doing those things which he has made the Condition of his Promise. When once
the Understanding represents it to the Will, as a certain Truth upon clear
evidence, that notwithstanding Men's Apostasy from God, and Rebellion against
him, and the Condemnation they are under thereby; yet God is reconcilable to
them, yea, willing, and so desirous to reconcile them to himself; that as an
evidence and proof of it, he has given his own Son Christ Jesus to become a
Rans^me for them; and that he has made a new Covenant, declaring that upon
account of his Son's undertaking for them, he is not only abundantly willing to
pardon all such as shall unfeig^^dly repent of their disloyalty, and sincerely
return to their duty; but that he will also bountifully reward their future
sincere Obedience with perfect and perpetual happiness: I say, when all this is
represented to the Will, as unquestionably true, it will work in it a love to
that God and Savior, that has been so loving, if it be but kept close to it.
A minifestation of such love and goodness to Man, and that while yet in enmity
against God, so ill deserving, and so obnoxious to the power of his wrath; when
he has no need of him, nor can be profited by him, will create good thoughts
of God, and reconcile Man's mind to him, and work melting affections in him to
God, when heartily believed.

What Rebel is there, or Nature so bad, that would not be won to leave off
rebelling against his Priuce, and to love and please him, upon undoubted
assurance, that by so doing he should not only be pardoned, and restored to
favor, but also preferred to the greatest honor and happiness he is capable
of receiving from any mortal? And yet how weak a motive is this in comparison
of what comes from God, to reduce men to their love and loyalty to him? God's
love to Man when perceived, and heartily believed, is the great motive, and
attractive of Man's love to God. We love him, because he first loved us, 1 John
4. 19. Love is an active and commanding Principle in Man, and procures
Thoughts, Cares, and Endeavors of pleasing God. If any Man love me, he will
keep my words, says our blessed Savior, Job. ^4. 23. And after this manner,
Faith works by Love, Gal. 5. 6.

Thus I have represented to you, how, and after what manner Faith in the
Understanding works a saving Consent in the Will unto the Condition of God's
Covenant of Salvation.

V. Some few Objections answered.
1. Some have thought Men may be justified only by their believing, even while
they are ungodly in their lives; and have thought that Scripture, Romans 4. 5.
will bear them out in such a conceit, which says, He that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness. But they grossly mistake the Scripture, and deceive themselves.
For that Text speaks of God's justifying the Gentiles upon their sincere
conversion to the Christian Faith and Life, though they had lived in Gentilism,
in all ungodliness before, and until then, and though they should not work at
all, as the Judaizers would have had them, in turning Proselytes to the Jewish
way. But otherwise it is flatly against the express Doctrine of the Gospel, and
current of the Scriptures, for Men to hope to be pardoned by any believing
whatsoever, while they remain impenitent; as every Man does while he remains
ungodly. To justify the wicked is an abomination to the Lord. It Is said that
Christ made the blind to see, the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, as well
as it is said God justifies the ungodly. But is any man so senseless as to
think that Christ made them to see, to hear, and to speak, while they remained
blind, deaf, and dumb? And if not, but that they know the meaning is, that
Christ made those to see, to hear, to speak, which had been blind, deaf, and
dumb, before those Cur^s were wrought upon them; they might as well know also
that the meaning is, that God justifies those upon their believing, which had
been ungodly until then, and not that he justifies them while they remain
ungodly.

2. Some allege that although the Faith which is alone, and with the
concomitant effects of it, Repentance, Regeneration, etc. does not justify;
yet that Faith alone which does produce such effects, does justify without the
concurrence of these in the justifying act. Which they illustrate by this
Similitude. A Man sees with his Eye alone, though he does not see with his Eye
that is alone, or separated from his body. In return to all which, let these
things be considered.

1. They that go thus far, do grant that which will secure the Notion of the
necessity of Repentance, Regeneration, and new Obedience unto Justification.
They grant we see such a necessity of these, as without which no man can be
justified, no not by Faith. In granting which, though we suppose them to err in
their foresaid Notion, yet this makes their Error the less dangerous; because
the presence of Repentance, Regeneration, and Obedience are no less necessary
to Justification according to this account, than they esteem them to be, who
say they concur with Faith in the very act of Justification.

2. When they say Faith, alone is all that is necessary to the justifying act,
without the concurrence of any thing else done by us: By justifying Act, they
mean either God's Act, or Man's Act. If Man's Act, that is nothing but Man's
performing* the Condition upon which God has Promised to justify Men. If they
mean God's Act, it is his imputing Men's performing the Condition of the Promise
unto them for Righteousness. The only thing then in question will be, what it
is which is a fulfilling of the Condition of the Promise of Justification,
which God imputes for righteousness? If they say it is only the Assent of the
Understanding unto the Truth of Gods Testimony in the Gospel; or this Assent,
together with a relyance on Christ for Salvation: I have showed before, that
both these may be found in Men unregenerate, and unjustified: And that these
two of themselves without Repentance and hearty Obedience to the Laws of
Christ, are not a fulfilling of the Condition of the Promise, and that
consequently Men without these cannot be justified by any Faith whatsoever, and
so not by Faith alone; unless they will call Repentance and Heart-Obedience in
conjunction with the foresaid Assent of the mind and relyance of the Soul, by
the name of Faith: Which if they will, we are agreed as to the thing at least,
if not to the name, that we are justified by such a Faith alone. And yet I
doubt not that when ever Justification is promised to believing singly and
alone expressed, but that there the foresaid effects are comprehended under that
name also, for the Reasons formerly given.

3. They which say, we are justified by Faith alone, but not by that Faith
which is alone, do distinguish where the Scripture does not distinguish: The
Scripture no where says we are justified by Faith alone, as
contradistinguished from Repentance, Evangelical Obedience, etc. The third
Chaper of Romans 28. and Tit. 3. 5. are sometimes made use of to countenance
their Notion, but to how little purpose, has been showed already in the
Treatise, which needs not be here repeated.

4. The Scripture is not only silent in the case, not any where affirming we
are justified by Faith alone; but it expressly affirms the quite contrary. Iam.
2. 24. Ye see then how that by Works a Man is justified, and not by Faith only.
That this is affirmed in reference to our Justification before God, has been
showed before.

5. Faith and Repentance are a joint Condition upon which Justification is
suspended, and are both constituted so by the same means, and that is by
promise of pardon to such as do believe, to such as do repent, and by
threatening the contrary to those that do not both. And if they are a joint
Condition of the Promise of Justification, then Justification proceeds not upon
either of them alone, but upon both together.

6. Whereas it is said in the Similitude, that a man sees with his Eye alone,
though not with his Eye which is alone, or when it is alone. I doubt this is no
more true than that which is intended to be illustrated by it. For Naturalists
will tell them the contrary, that it is not the Eye alone by which a Man sees,
but that it is the Soul that sees by the Eye as its Organ. The Eye sees not
when the Soul is departed, though it be not then alone. I confess I cannot
possibly conceive either how the Soul should not concur with the Eye in the act
of seeing, when the Eye cannot see without it, nor yet that Repentance should
not concur with Faith in the act of Justification, so long as men cannot be
justified by Faith it self without it, or in the absence of it, as they
themselves grant.

3. This lies in the way of some; they cannot conceive how Justification by
Evangelical Obedience as well as Faith, should consist with the possibility of
somes being justified by believing, who yet may not live so long after, as to
have an oppertunity of doing good Works.

How rare Instances of this kind are, I shall not dispute: But doubtless, when
ever men so believe Gods Promise of pardon through Christ upon their
Repentance, and the necessity of their own Repentance for the obtaining of it,
as that they in Will, and a fixed and lasting Resolution become new men, then
they first believe unto Justification. And it is not impossible but that some
may so believe, that may never after they do so, have opportunity to be much
active in External Acts of Obedience. But though this should so fall out, yet
such are not justified without Evangelical Obedience as well as Faith. For,

1. These Motions and Acts of the Will, are themselves Acts of present
Evangelical Obedience.

2. They are in the Root and Cause, Evangelical Obedience future, and to come.

I. They are in themselves Acts of present Evangelical Obedience. For by these
Motions and Acts of the Will, Men do when ever they take place, turn from sin
to God and their Duty, out of hatred to that they turn from, and out of love to
that they turn to. And these Acts of the Will which consist in affection and
resolution, are proper effects and fruits of Faith in the Understanding, and
Acts of Heart-Obedience in the sight of God, and a conformity of Soul to his
declared Will and Commandment. And they may as well, and as truly be called
Works, as evil Acts of the Will may, such as are a love to evil, and desires
and resolutions of perpetrating it: Which evil Acts of the Will, are yet in
Scripture called Works, and a working of wickedness, Psalm. 58. 2. Ye work
wickedness in your hearts, Micah 2. 1. He that looks upon a Woman to lust
after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart, Matthew. 5. 28.
And envy, wrath, and hatred, which are Internal Acts of the Soul, are called
Works of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. And if such inward fixed resolutions in
Men, of obeying God in External Acts, if ever they have opportunity and a Call
to it, did not pass in God's account for Obedience, and were not accepted in
stead of the Deed, when opportunity for the Deed is wanting, the best Man in
the World could be no Disciple of Christ, who does not actually forsake all
that he has, and lay down his life for him. Whosoever of you forsakes not all
that he has, cannot be my Disciple, says he Luke 14. 26, 33. Whereas Christ
pronounces the poor in spirit blessed, many of whom never became actually poor
for his sake, as not being called to it. But if they are poor in Spirit, if
they firmly resolve to become poor in forsaking all for Christ's sake, when
called to it, these are capable of blessedness in Christ's account, as well as
those that suffer the loss of all for Righteousness sake, Matthew. 5. 3.

II. Those Acts of the Will, are in the Root and Cause, Evangelical Obedience
future, and to come: Because those resolutions against evil for good, when they
are of a fixed and lasting nature (as they always are, when together with
Faith, they make men capable of Justification) will certainly produce External
Acts of sincere Obedience, as opportunity does occur.

When the Tree is made good, it will bring forth good Fruit in the season of
Fruit, if it be not cut down before: When the heart is renewed in affection and
resolution, the course of a Man's Life will certainly be answerable to it, if
ever he have opportunity of showing it. A good man out of the good treasure of
his heart, brings forth good things, Mat. 12. 35. And God who knows the
heart, does judge of, and estimate men according to what they are in the inward
frame of their heart, and prevalent bent of their Wills. If there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to
that he has not, 2 Cor. 8. 12. We judge of the Cause by the Effects; of the
goodness of men's hearts by the goodness of their lives; to us the Tree is known
by its Fruit: But God who is greater than our hearts, and knows them better
than we do, judges of the effect by the Cause, and knows what a Man's Life will
be by what his heart is upon its first conversion to him; and so confers on him
the benefit of Justification, when the Foundation of a good Life is laid in the
conversion and renewing of the heart.

The Understanding of this Part of Discourse, will serve not only to satisfy
the foresaid doubt, but also to inform us what Evangelical Obedience is
necessary to Justification in its beginning. Not but that actual Obedience in
Life is necessary to the continuance of Justification where Life is continued.
And therefore we find that Abraham was justified by his after-believing, and
after-obedience, as well as by his first; and so was Noah before him. Noah was
a righteous Man, and justified, before he became heir of the Righteousness
which is by Faith, by his believing and obeying God in preparing the Ark, Genesis
6. 9. Heb. 11. 7. It was by Faith in God's Promise that Abraham left his
Country to obey God at the first, and by that he was first justified, Heb. 11.
8. And yet his believing God's Promise, so shall thy Seed be, which was not
made till some years after, was imputed to him also for righteousness, Genesis 15.
6. It was many years after that again, that by Faith he offered his son Isaac
upon the Altar, and yet by that he was justified as well as by his first Faith
and obedience, Iam. 2. 21. pardon of sin, is our Justification from sin, Act.
13. 39. And this we are directed by the Lords Prayer, to pray for daily all our
days. And the continuance of Justification is promised upon Condition of
continuance of Faith and Obedience to the Gospel, Col. 1. 21, 22, 23. and a
discontinuance of it threatened in case of disobedience, according to the Tenor
of the Parable, Mat. 18. from ver. 23. to ver. 35. By all which we may see what
need there is for all Christians to work out, to work through their own
Salvation with fear and trembling, to which they are earnestly exhorted, Phil.
2. 12. and to run so that they may obtain, 1 Cor 9. 24.

4. Some to evil affect their own and others minds; with prejudice against
Discourses of this nature do suggest, That the laying so great a stress upon
Duty, as to esteem any thing of it necessary to Justification, save believing
only, does derogate from the Glory of Christ's great Undertaking in the
business of Man's Salvation; and that it is a trusting in our own Righteousness.
But it will appear far otherwise, if they will but impartially consider in what
sense, and upon what account such stress is laid upon Duty; which I shall open
in two particulars.

1. They that rightly understand themselves in this matter, do not look that
any of their Duties of what nature soever, should of themselves as such, be
available to their Justification or Salvation; but that it is for the sake of
Christ, and upon account of his undertaking for us, that God accepts, and
imputes for Righteousness to us, such Duty as Faith, Repentance, and Obedience
is, and that he does make promise of Justification upon Condition of these.

Since the fall we say, all our Duties that are acceptable to God, or available
to us, become so through Christ, and for his sake. And therefore so long as we
Attribute and Ascribe the benefit we expect upon our Repentance, and sincere
Obedience or Belief, unto Christ, and to his great and worthy undertaking for
us; we are far from derogating from the Glory of it, and from trusting in our
own Righteousness in that Notion in which men's trusting in their own
Righteousness, is condemned in Scripture, or any otherwise than as our Duty is
made a Condition, without which we shall have no part in Christ, nor be
qualified for glory.

2. When we lay such stress upon Repentance, Obedience, etc. as a condition, or
part of a Condition of the Promise of Justification and Salvation, as without
which we say, we cannot be justified or saved by Christ's undertaking for us,
yet then this stress is laid, and depends upon the Will and appointment of God,
by which these Duties are thus made the Condition, and not on the intrinsic
worth or value of the Duties themselves simply considered without reference to
God's Ordination, appointing them to that use. For if God had not made a new
Covenant, promising pardon for Christ's sake to such as do repent, and
acceptance and reward to such as sincerely obey him, they would have had no
sufficient ground to have been confident of Pardon, Acceptance, or Reward,
though they should have repented, and so obeyed. And the reason is, because Men
are not justified in the Eye of the Natural or Moral Law, upon any such account
as that is. So that all the stress which is laid on Duty by them that rightly
understand their Duty in this matter, does terminate partly in Christ's
undertaking for them, and partly in God's Institution and Appointment, who has
made his Promise of justifying us for Christ's sake so, as that he has made
our Duty of Repentance, and sincere Obedience a necessary Condition of it. And
he that trusts to be pardoned, accepted, and rewarded for Christ's sake upon
his repentance, and sincere Obedience, because God has promised that he shall;
trusts in God, and in the fidelity of his Word and Promise. And in doing so,
what more stress does he lay upon Duty in this kind, than they that trust to be
justified and saved upon their believing? For their believing is matter of
Duty, as well as their Repenting and Obeying: And their believing would no more
have entitled them to the benefit without the Promise which gives them that
title, than other Acts of Duty would do. And other Acts of Duty do entitle to
the same benefits as fully as Faith it self does, where there is promise of the
same benefits annexed to them, as Faith has: And that they have, I have showed
before. So long then as the stress which is laid on Duty, terminates in Christ,
and in God's Will and Appointment in the new Covenant, and is regulated by his
Word and Promise, there is no danger of overcharging Duty.

It Is true indeed, if we should expect that Duty should do that for us, which
is proper only to Christ, as to expiate our sin, or the like; we should
sinfully overcharge it, as the Pharisaical Jews did their Sacrifices, and other
Legal Observances, in expecting remission of Sin by them without Christ's
Atonement: Which Righteousness of theirs is for that cause called their own
Righteousness which was by the Law, as being no method of Justification of
God's appointment, but of their own devising, which in that respect was indeed
but as filthy Rags, and loathsome to God. But this is not the case with
Protestant Christians, who lay no such stress upon Duty, no not upon Faith it
^elf; but do acknowledge that all the power and virtue it has to justify,
depends wholly upon, and is derived from the Will and Ordin^tion of God in
Christ, Ioh. 6. 40. and 1. 12. Ephesians. 2. 8. And we say the same of Repentance,
and sincere Obedience also. And a confidence of being saved in a way of Duty
upon such terms, is represented in Scipture, as trusting in the Righteousness
of God through Faith, in opposition to ones trus^ing, in his own Right^ousn^ss,
Phil. 3. 9. ^o (...) is it (...) trusting* in our own Righteo^sness ^r from
(...) from Christ in the Glory (...) Natural or Moral Law, upon any such
account as that is. So that all the stress which is laid on Duty by them that
rightly understand their Duty in this matter, does terminate partly in Christ's
undertaking for them, and partly in God's Insitution and Appointment, who has
made his Promise of justifying us for Christ's sake so, as that he has made
our Duty of Repentance, and sincere Obedience a necessary Condition of it. And
he that trusts to be pardoned, accepted, and rewarded for Christ's sake upon
his repentance, and sincere Obedience, because God has promised that he shall;
trusts in God, and in the fidelity of his Word and Promise. And in doing so,
what more stress does he lay upon Duty in this kind, than they that trust to be
justified and saved upon their believing? minds, thirst more after Discourses
Consolatory upon account of believing only. Which may serve instead of an
Apology for writing this and the forgoing Discourse.

Saint Paul charged Titus to affirm this [ constantly] that they which have
believed, be careful to maintain good Works, Tit. 3. 8.

(...) pointment in the new Covenant, and is regulated by his Word and Promise,
there is no danger of overcharging Duty.

It Is true indeed, if we should expect that Duty should do that for us, which
is proper only to Christ, as to expiate our sin, or the like; we should
sinfully overcharge it, as the Pharisaical Jews did their Sacrifices, and other
Legal Observances, in expecting remission of Sin by them without Christ's
Atonement: Which Righteousness of theirs is for that cause called their own
Righteousness which was by the Law, as being no method of Justification of
God's appointment, but of their own devising, which in that respect was indeed
but as filthy Rags, and loathsome to God. But this is not the case with
Protestant Christians, who lay no such stress upon Duty, no not upon Faith it
self; but do acknowledge that all the power and virtue it has to justify,
depends wholly upon, and is derived from the Will and Ordination of God in
Christ, Ioh. 6. 40. and 1. 12. Ephesians. 2. 8. And we say the same of Repentance,
and sincere Obedience also. And a confidence of being saved in a way of Duty
upon such terms, is represented in Scripture, as trusting in the Righteousness
of God through Faith, in opposition to ones trusting in his own Righteousness,
Phil. 3. 9. so far is it from trusting in our own Righteousness, or from
derogating from Christ in the Glory of his undertaking for us.

And now for a Conclusion: It would be considered whether such as are educated
in Christianity, are not hardlier brought to live as becomes the Gospel in
point of practice, than to believe that Christ Jesus came into the World to
save Sinners; and that he dyed for them, and rose again: And whether there is
not cause to fear that very many more such do eternally miscarry through
neglect of the former, than for want of the latter: And if there be, as
doubtless there is; Then practical discourses among such must needs be highly
necessary, however some of weak minds, thirst more after Discourses Consolatory
upon account of believing only. Which May serve instead of an Apology for
writing this and the forgoing Discourse.

Saint Paul charged Titus to affirm this [ constantly] that they which have
believed, be careful to maintain good Works, Tit. 3. 8.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2^. Line* 35, read 25. P. 40, l. 6. for of, r. and. P 42. l. 29. f.
should promise, r. should have promised. P. 43. l. 28. f. were, r. are. P. 45.
l. 32. dele of. P. 49. l. 10. dele a. p. 56. l. 24. f. and, r. but. P. 59. l.
2. f. these, r. those. P. 60. l. 24. f. Law, r. Land. P. 61. l. 6. f. these, r.
those -- ^. 28. f. these, r. those. P. 62. l. 5 and 6. dele from that. P. 65.
l. 17. dele from that. P. 67. l. 14. f. wherefore, r. therefore. P. 83. l 30.
f. would, r. will. l. ibid. f. should, r. shall. P. 84. l. 11. f. seem, r.
seems. P. 87. l. 25. r. the. P. 89. l. 27. f. of, r. from. P. 91. l. 9. f.
sactifieth, r. sanctifies P. 93. l. 14. f. until, r. unless. P. 95. l. 8. dele
as. P 97. l. 19. r. to be. P. 99. l. 8. r. as he did. P. 120. l. 30. r. is P.
133. l. 18. r. such. P. 154. l. 8. r. freed. -- l. 18. f. me, r. we. P. 157. l.
16. f. injurious, r. injured. P. 180. l. 27. f. a, r. as. P. 183. l. 10. dele
in that -- l. 14. f. choked, r. choke. -- l. 24. f; and, r. to. P. 189. l 30.
f. immoderate, r. inordinate. P. 193. l. 27. f. expressed, r. appr^hended. P.
202. l. 11. r. without P. 208. l. 2. r. and.


