The Danger of ENTHUSIASM Discovered, IN AN EPISTLE TO THE QUAKERS: IN WHICH
It Is Endeavored, to convince them of being guilty of Changing God's Method of
bringing men to Salvation.

By one who is no more an Enemy to their Opinions, than their Opinions are
Enemies to them themselves.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil,
1674.

AN EPISTLE TO THE ENTHUSIASTS, Or the People called QUAKERS.
Sirs,
I Have cause to think that your unmeasurable Confidence of the Truth and
Goodness of your own Way, in opposition to the best men that differ from you,
and the scornful entertainment the best Endeavors of men have met with, to
convince you of Error, and Mistake; have discouraged many of those from
attempting it, who are best able herein to serve you. But my Love to your
Souls, and Desires of recovering you to a sound mind, being stronger than my
hopes of effecting it, by any Endeavors of mine, have prevailed with me to
offer a few things to you however, whether you will hear, or whether you will
forbear; not being without all hope, but that it may have such effect upon some
among you, or inclining to you, as may be worth my Labor.

. 1. You know, it was said by our Blessed Savior, That straight is the Gate,
and narrow is the way that leads unto Life, and few there be that find it.
And I little doubt, but that an Appearance at the first of a greater Strictness
and Narrowness in your way, than in theirs that differ from you, was a
Temptation to some injudicious persons I have known; and probably to many other
such, to strike into it, as supposing it must be the best and safest, because
the narrowest and fewest of it.

Which Snare, I presume, they would easily have escaped, had they been but wise
enough to have considered these two things.

First, That that Narrowness and Strictness consisting in outward Austerities
and Incivilities, wherein you differed from other Sober Christians, was no
Narrowness or strictness of God's appointing, but a piece of Superstition of
your own devising, when you placed Religion in it. And you are not the first
that have been deceived with such Appearances; several Orders among the Papists
have been built upon the same Bottom, long before your way was heard of in the
world. And we read of others long before them also, who subjected themselves to
like Ordinances of men; such as touch not, taste not, handle not: Such things
having a show of wisdom in Willworship, and Humility, and neglecting of the
Body, not in any honor, to the satisfying of the Flesh; as the Apostle speaks,
Col. 2. 20, 23. In respect of which, and other like little things that had no
real worth or goodness in them; the false Apostles pretended to more strictness
than was in the Apostles of Christ themselves; whom they represented but as men
walking according to the Flesh, in comparison of themselves, 2 Cor. 10. 2. And
the Pharisees before them, by reason of some Austerities they used about
Fastings, external Purifications, and shunning the company of Publicans,
pretended to greater strictness in Religion, than was in Christ's Disciples;
yea, than in Christ himself; whom they accounted to be but a Gluttonous person,
and a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners, in compare with
themselves. By such appearance of extraordinary Zeal and Strictness, though
alas, it be but in things that do not tend at all to the bettering or
perfecting men in their Nature. Deceivers are wont to procure to themselves a
Reputation among people of weak minds; by advantage whereof, as of a Bait that
covers the Hook, they obtain a ready reception for their more dangerous
Doctrines.

Again, They would not so easily have been overcome with the aforesaid
Appearances of Narrowness and Strictness; if they had but well considered, that
in reference to those things wherein the Narrowness and Strictness of Christ's
way to Life does most consist; and wherein he has tied up his followers to
strictness indeed; ye have taken liberty to walk loosly, and to cast off his
Yoke; and that is, in not governing your Spirits, Passions, and Tongues,
according to the Laws of his Kingdom and Government. He has strictly enjoined
his Followers to be humble and lowly in heart, to esteem others better than
themselves, to speak evil of no man, but to show all meekness to all men; yea,
and in meekness to instruct even those that oppose themselves; to bless those
that curse them, to overcome others evil with their good; not to judge, and the
like. But quite contrary hereunto, your very Leaders, and such as have been
esteemed most eminent among you, have by their examples taught you to rail on,
and revile, if not bitterly to curse such as wished you no harm, but sought
your good; and proudly to exalt and justify your selves, and to despise and
set at naught, yea, to judge, condemn, and sentence to eternal destruction,
such whom ye ought to have honored, as probably much better than your selves.
What less signifies such Language as this? Thou accursed, thou Beast, to whom
the Plagues of God are due, a Reprobate, a Child of Darkness thou art; thou
disobedient one, upon whom God will render vengeance in flaming fire; thou
dark, blind Hypocrite; thee man that is Cain; with the Light of Christ thou art
seen, and with the Life judged and condemned; thou Sorcerer, thou dead Beast,
and so art not justified before God, nor never shall be; -- But such polluted
filthy Beasts as thou: Thou polluted Beast -- who art a Reprobate; and thou
shall find him to be thine eternal Condemnation; thou dark Beast and Conjurer;
thou dark, sottish Beast. Works of Edw. Buroughs, p. 29, 32, 33, 34. With
abundance more in other of your Writings. This truly is Language more like to
proceed (one would think) from such presumptuous, daring, arrogant men, whose
mouth speaks great swelling words; as Peter and Jude describe; than from men
inspired with any of that Spirit of Meekness and Gentleness which was in Jesus
Christ. If Humility, Charity, and Modesty, were the prevailing Constitution of
these men's Spirits, as it is of those who have been taught of Christ, as the
Truth is in Jesus, and are made one Spirit with him; I should think they would
by no means speak at this rate.

And yet this, and such like, is not the Language only of some bold, rash,
heady women, or of men less considerable among you, transported with furious
Zeal; but even of Ed. Borough himself, one of the Chieftains among you in- his
time: And that, not upon any sudden surprise of Passion, but upon so much
deliberation as men use in writing of Books; and upon no other provocation,
than a bare propounding certain Queries touching some points of Doctrine, about
which you and others differ. And truly in vain do you boast of the Light within
you, if you have not so much left as to discern this behavior altogether
unbecoming, not only a man of Note among Christians, nor only of any worthy the
Name of a Christian, how weak soever; but even of any that is worthy but of the
Name of a man, and not a --. And yet how are those Works in which these things
are found, applauded as the Works of a Prophet of the Lord, by several men of
great Note among you; such as George Fox, George Whitehead, Francis Howgil, and
Josiah Co^le, who adjoin their several Testimonials to them. And wherefore do I
lay these things before you, but to give you occasion to reflect upon your
selves and your way with a jealous eye; and to convince you that ye know not of
what Spirit ye are of; but that while ye have thought ye have been walking in
the Light, ye have been walking in Darkness; and that whilst ye have fancied
your selves the most spiritual among Christians, ye have discovered your selves
to be but carnal. If any man among you seems to be Religious; and bridleth
not his Tongue, but deceives his own heart, that man's Religion is vain, Jam.
1. 26. If there be bitter Zeal, glory not, and lie not against the Truth; for
that wisdom is not from above as you are apt to boast it to be, but from
beneath; and is Earthly, Sensual and Devilish, Jam. 3. 15.

But it is not strange if men be left first or last to fall into unchristian
practices, who out of affectation of Novelty, and Singularity in Doctrine, and
a desire to appear more sublime in their Notions, than all that went before
them, have left the old beaten path of Christian Doctrine, in which the several
Generations of holy men have lived and walked, from the Apostles time
downwards. For when men wax spiritually proud and wanton, in rejecting the
plain way and method, which God has chosen to bring men to saving Faith,
Repentance, and a holy Life, and to continue them in it; and invent and choose
another in its stead, and call it by the name of his, and preach to, and press
it upon the people in his Name; he takes no pleasure in their so doing, nor
does he delight to vouchsafe his concurrent Grace and blessing therewith, which
he does with his own way and method, by which it becomes effectual to make men
good, and to keep them so. And therefore, as I said, it is no marvel if men by
degrees lose in the goodness of their Frame and Temper, which sometimes they
had attained, while they kept close to God's way and method, in which he
bestows it; and degenerate into men of quite another Spirit and Temper, when
they forsake that, and run into another of their own invention and choice. The
disobedient Jews, who had declined from the better way of their Ancestors, and
grew into a worse spirit and temper; they had a zeal of God still, but not
according to knowledge. They did will and run for Justification and Life; they
followed after Righteousness, and yet attained not to the Law of Righteousness;
and wherefore? but because they sought it not by Faith; which was the method of
God's choosing; but as it were by the works of the Law, which was a method of
their own choosing, in opposition to God's, Romans 9. 31, 32.

. 2. And whether you are not guilty of rejecting God's way and method of
converting men to, and keeping them in the way of saving Faith, Repentance and
Evangelical Obedience; and of inventing and choosing one of your own, different
from that, comes now to to be considered. I shall state your way in this, by
what you have published to the world in your own Books; and for Brevity sake,
shall instance but in two Authors, Ed. Borough formerly, and Mr. Pen of late,
who speak for you, that which is otherwise well enough known to be your common
Opinion.

In the Works of Ed. Borough (whom you are pleased to style that true Prophet,
in the Title Page) which are published by you, there are these Sayings: In Page
252, thus. His pure Spirit is put into the inward parts, to be the Rule and
Guide of Life in all things. And again, [Only] by the teaching of the Eternal
Spirit, is the Living God known in the Creature. Again, p. 408, It is promised
(says he) that the Spirit shall lead into all Truth; and such do own the
Scriptures, but not as their Teacher; for the Anointing dwells in them, and
they need no man to teach them, but as that Anointing teaches all things; and
they have no need of the Scripture to teach them; for all the Children of God
are taught of God, and need not any other Teacher; nor need not to say one to
another, Know the Lord. And yet all such do own the Scriptures to be the
Testimony of that which they believe and have received. And again, in p. 834,
The only perfect Rule of Conscience in the exercise to God, is the Spirit of
Christ, and not any other thing. And because something besides the Spirit of
God exercises the Conscience, therefore it is that here are so many Ways and
Sects of Religion, and kinds of Worship in Christendom, and among Christians,
while the Spirit of Christ [only] is not the Rule of Judgment, and exercise of
Conscience to God and man. Again, page 861. The judgment in that matter
(Heresy) must be just, equal, Holy, and [only] by the Spirit of Christ, which
is infallible, and gives infallibility of judgment and discerning into all
Cases and Things.

Mr. Pen spends the Fourth Chapter of his late Book, Entitled, Reason against
Railing; to prove that the Light within, and not the Scriptures, is the Rule of
Faith and Practice. In p. 47. he says, We dare boldly affirm in the Name of
the Lord, that the great reason of our Belief concerning them (the Scriptures)
is [not any outward thing] but that inward Testimony, Record, and heavenly
Amen, that we have frequently received from the Holy Light within us, to the
Truth and Faithfulness of those Sayings. Again, p. 48. Wherefore the Scriptures
are so far from being the great Rule of Faith and Practice, that the Light of
Christ within us, is both our Warrant and Rule for Faith in, and Obedience to
them. Again, p. 114. Let it be remembered (says he) that Christ promised to
send the Spirit of Truth to lead into all Truth; as much as to say, none are
led into the Truth, nor in the Truth, but by the Holy Spirit of Truth; or that
their practice is a Lie, or they are led into a Lie, who are not led by the
Spirit of Truth; [that alone] leads into all the ways of Truth. Where, by Truth
is not meant the mere Letter of the Scripture; which notwithstanding is true,
but the living, powerful Truth, Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life; of
which the Scripture is but a Record, or Declaration. And, p. 115. Many may run
into the practice of several outward things mentioned in the Scriptures to have
been the practice of Saints in former Ages, and yet not be led into the Truth;
for [all that] is but Will Worship, Imitation, and Unwarrantable.

Your Notion concerning your Way, then, thus represented, is this, or to this
effect.

That God, Christ, the holy Spirit, do by immediate Illumination of your minds,
and without external teaching by the Scriptures, or by men, show you, or reveal
to you what you ought to believe and do; and by their immediate motion or
operation, draw or persuade you to believe and practice accordingly. Which
Illumination or Operation, you call The Light within, or the Holy Anointing,
which teaches all things. This I take to be your sense, when you say, you own
Scripture, but not as your Teacher; and that such have no need of the Scripture
to teach them, and that all the Children of God are taught of God, and need not
any other Teacher. And again, that God's pure Spirit is put into the inward
parts to be the Rule and Guide of Life in all things; and that the only perfect
Rule of Conscience in the exercise to God, is the Spirit of Christ, and not any
other thing. That the Scriptures are so far from being the Rule of Faith and
Practice, as that the Light within is both your Warrant and Rule. That the
Spirit of Truth [alone] leads into all Truth. And that the infallible Spirit of
Christ gives Infallibility of judgment and discerning into all Cases and Things.

This then is your Method and Way.

Now I will show you what is God's Method and Way; which is quite different
from yours. The Gospel plainly declares, That there shall be a Resurrection of
all men after Death, and a State of everlasting weal or woe in another world;
and that as many as believe Christ to be the Son of God, and Savior of the
world, and repent them of the evil they have done, and sincerely obey his Laws,
shall, by his Death which he suffered for sin, receive Remission of sin, and
Eternal Life; but that those that do not, shall be punished with everlasting
Destruction. This Gospel, this Doctrine, being not knowable by men, by any
Natural Light in them, without Divine Revelation from God; Jesus Christ, who
came from the Bosom of the Father, he revealed it himself to his Apostles and
others, by his Doctrine, and after his Ascension into Heaven, he by sending
them the Holy Spirit, immediately inspired them with a clear knowledge and
understanding of it, and so by the gift of speaking diverse Languages,
accompanied with boldness and utterance, enabled them to reveal and publish it
to the world, and to procure Credit to it by many Signs and Wonders which were
done by them. And ever since that, God's way and method of bringing men to
Salvation, that live where the Gospel comes, has been by making known this
Gospel to them, by word or writing; and so by the mighty Motives contained in
it, such as the Manifestation of God's Love in the Gift of Christ, the Hopes of
Eternal Life, and the Fears of Eternal Death, in concurrence with the Operation
of his Grace and good Spirit, together with the rational Evidence of the Truth
of it, to persuade men to believe and embrace it, and to live according to it.

So that according to this Representation, compared with that made of your Way,
God's Way and Method, and yours greatly differ.

You^ holding that the Holy Spirit directs and persuades men what to believe,
and do, by his own immediate working, without outward teaching; whereas (as we
say) he does it by outward teaching.

It is God, Christ, the Holy Spirit, that works the saving change in men; but
he does it still by the Word of the Gospel, as communicated to men's minds by
the Scriptures, or by men's teaching the same Doctrine which is contained in the
Scriptures; and it is this Doctrine that is the Rule of Faith and Practice. And
this I doubt not to make very plain to you (in opposition to your way) if you
will not shut your eyes. And this I shall endeavor gradually, step by step, in
certain Propositions.

. 3. First, In the Apostles days, in which there was the greatest effusion of
the Holy Spirit on them and other Christians, that ever has been yet; even
then God's way of bringing men to believe the Gospel, and to live according to
it, was by publishing it to men by men, either by Word or Writing, and
evidencing it to be from God. The Apostles indeed had the Gospel from Christ
himself immediately, as he himself had it from the Father, who gave him
Commandment what he should say and what he should speak: It at the first began
to be spoken by the Lord himself, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard
him; as it is said, Heb. 2. 4. But after Christ's Ascension, others at the first
received the Knowledge and Faith of the Gospel, by the Ministry of the
Apostles, who were his Ambassadors to the world, by them he made known his
Salvation to the Ends of the Earth. When our Savior prayed for all other good
Christians that should be in the World, besides his Apostles, he describes them
thus, viz. Such as should believe through their Word, John 17. 20. Neither pray
I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their
Word. And it pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching, to save them that
believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21. And so Faith comes by Hearing, says he, Romans 10. 17.
By hearing of what, and of whom? Why, by hearing the Gospel preached by such
whom God sent to preach it; of which mention is made in the precedent Verses.
The Doctrine which the Apostles preached, which is the Gospel, is said to be
the Power of God to Salvation, Romans 1. 16. And the Reason is given in ver. 17,
18. Because thereby the Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith.
That is God's method of justifying men, upon condition of their believing, and
obeying of it; and because thereby the eternal Wrath of God from Heaven, is
revealed against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men. This Revelation
being from God, and the things, the Motives revealed being powerful Arguments
to prevail with men, to receive and obey the Gospel; upon their doing of which,
they shall be saved: thence it is that it is called The Power of God to
Salvation, not excluding the concurrent Operation of God's Spirit upon the
heart by it.

This being so, your Leaders manifest a strange degree of Vnlearnedness in the
things of the Gospel, when they deny saving Grace to be wrought by the outward
Administration of the Word, or Teaching by man (as they do when they attribute
it to God alone, as his immediate Work) and all because the Scripture
attributes it to God, to Christ, to the Holy Spirit: Whereas nothing is more
common than to attribute the same Effect sometimes to one Cause, sometimes to
another; when there is the Concurrence and Cooperation of several Causes to
the producing of the same Effect, as there usually is in God's working savingly
upon men. As men are said in Scripture to be born of God, to be born of the
Spirit; so they are said to be born of the Immortal Seed of the Word, 1 Pet. 1.
23. Because that is God's Instrument. Of his own Will begat he us by the Word
of Truth, Jam. 1. 18. And the Gospel is the Ministration of the Spirit, and the
Sword of the Spirit, as it is called; because it is the great Instrument or
Means by which the Spirit does its Work upon men.

Indeed the Work of Grace in men, is most properly attributed to God, to
Christ, though other Causes concur to the producing of that Effect; because he
is the principal Cause of it, and all other but subordinate; and yet the Effect
is sometimes attributed to subordinate and second Causes also, though less
properly. Thus Christ, the principal Cause of it, is said to be The Light of
the World, the Light of men, because he by his Gospel, as the Author of it,
discovers and reveals to them a future everlasting Happiness attainable in
another World, and the way to it; and yet the Gospel it self, yea the Apostles,
and Pastors, and Christian Professors, are also said to be the Light of the
world, as subordinate Causes, under Christ, of the Illumination of men in the
knowledge hereof, Mat. 5. 14. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Phil. 2. 15, 16. All which had you
well considered, you would never have opposed men's being enlightened and taught
by Christ, as ye do, to their being taught by the Scriptures, or by men; and
all because, forsooth, the Illumination of men is attributed to Christ. This
very thing here suggested to you, would in great part reduce you, and set you
to rights, if you could be but willing to receive and own that for truth, which
cannot without great absurdity and contradiction to the Scriptures be denied.
But for want of distinguishing between things and things, which in some
respect, seem to be the same, but in other respects greatly differ, you run
your selves into Error and great Absurdities.

I will upon this occasion, instance in another thing not much unlike to that
but now mentioned, wherein you greatly mistake, for want of distinguishing; and
that is, touching the Presence of Christ in men: For because the Scriptures
speak of Christ's being [in] men; and because Christ is God, and God every
where present, and so in all men; from these thus jumbled together, you infer,
that therefore Christ is in all men; and that being so, you farther infer that
all men are taught by him himself immediately without external Teaching. In
doing of which, you confound things together which are distinct, to the
darkning of them in your understandings, and the misguiding you in Judgment:
You do not distinguish as you ought to do between the Essential Presence of
Christ, as God, and his Virtual Presence, as Mediator, God-man. For although
Christ, as God, is present to every man, in the exercise of common Providence,
in the world; ( My Father works hitherto, and I work; says he, John 5. 17.)
yet in respect of his Virtual Presence, as Mediator, as when he rules and
operates in men's hearts by his Authority, and by the Evangelical Law, in this
sense (which yet is, doubtless, the sense in which Christ is said in Scripture
to be in men, and to dwell in them) I say, in this sense he is not in all men.
For men are said to be without Christ, until they are converted to
Christianity, Ephesians. 2. 12. And it is by Faith (which only some, and not all men
have) that Christ dwells in any man's heart, Ephesians. 3. 17. It is by that Faith
that his Authority in his Doctrine and Law is owned, and where that is sincerely
owned, there Christ is said to dwell. Not that Christ as Mediator God-man,
dwells personally in men; for in that sense and respect he dwells in Heaven,
and is at the right hand of the Majesty on high. And therefore as Teacher of
his Church, he does not teach men now immediately in person, but by his Gospel
which he sends to them, by which he enlightens them in the way of Salvation. Ye
do therefore err, not knowing or understanding the Scriptures, while you
attribute those effects to the Essential Presence, and immediate operation of
Christ in men, which are wrought by him indeed, but it is by the
Instrumentality and Agency of second Causes, the Gospel and the Ministration
thereof by men.

I wish that by these Instances, you could be made sensible of your great
weakness in despising Distinctions, as if they were but effects of Carnal
Reason and Fleshly Wisdom; for since Words that are the same in sound, are often
used to signify things of a different Nature; and words different in sound, to
signify things of the same Nature; instances of which the Scripture abounds
with, they must of necessity be perpetually liable to Error and gross Mistakes,
that throw away distinctions as useless, which is your own case in many other
things besides these now instanced in.

Since then it was God's Method in the Apostles days to bring men to
salvation, by believing and obeying the Doctrine preached by them, as I have
showed; It is mavelous that any that pretend to know any thing in
Christianity, should deny this Doctrine to be the Rule of Faith and Christian
Practice, whenas that is the very end and Reason of the promulgation of it, to
direct men what to believe and do, that they might be saved; and to excite them
to believe and do accordingly. When St. Paul says, Whereto we have attained,
let us walk by the same Rule; does he not by Rule mean the Apostles Doctrine,
whenas in the next words, he proposes himself that lived according to what he
taught, as an example for them to follow, Phil. 3. 16, 17. It was the great
commendation of the primitive Christians, that they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine, Acts 2. 42. And St John said, Whosoever transgresses, and
abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God: And to transgress, sure is
to swerve from the Rule, 2 John 9. This Doctrine of Christ is called the Gospel
of the Kingdom, Mat. 4. 23. and 9. 35. and 24. 14. For it is that Rule by which
Christ our King does rule and govern his Subjects both in Heart and Life; as
the Laws of the Land are the Rule according to which Earthly Kings do govern
theirs.

The Sum and Substance of the Doctrine which the Apostles preached, one as well
as another, and in one place as well as another, is called The Form of Sound
Words, 2 Timothy 1, 13. The Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6. And this
Form of Doctrine was delivered to the Christians, to rule and govern themselves
by, Romans 6. 17. But now have obeyed from the heart that Form of Doctrine which
was delivered to you: And it was so much a Rule to them, that they were
commanded to mark and avoid such as caused Divisions and Offenses contrary to
the Doctrine which they had learned, Romans 16. 17. And forbid to receive into
their Houses such as brought not this Doctrine, 2 John 10. And if any man teach
otherwise, says St. Paul, and consents not to wholesome words, even the words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, he
is proud, knowing nothing, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4.

These things being all so plain, as what can be plainer; it cannot but be
highly ridiculous for such as are ignorant in the very A, B, C, of Christianity
(as by your dissent in this plain Truth, you appear to be) to pretend to such
Sublimity and Spirituality, as to esteem all other Christians in the world, of
what denomination soever, that are not of your way, in comparison of your
selves, to be all in Darkness and Confusion.

4. The Second Proposition is this; Although the first Promulgators of the
Gospel were enabled by immediate Revelation from Christ to teach it unto
others; yet afterward God's ordinary way and method of transmitting the
Knowledge and Faith of the Gospel downwards to others successively, was by such
men's teaching it to others, as had themselves learned it of the Apostles, or
others that taught the same Doctrine as they did. Thus Timothy and Titus,
though Evangelists, were instructed by Paul in the Christian Faith; and how
they should behave themselves in their public capacities as Evangelists or
Bishops; and this was done, partly by Speech, and partly by his Epistles to
them, 2 Timothy 1. 13. Hold fast the Form of sound words which thou have heard of
me, 2 Timothy 3. 14, 15. Continue in the things which thou have learned, and have
been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them, and that from a Child
thou have known the Holy Scriptures. Titus learned the Christian Faith by Paul;
for which cause he styles him his Son in the Common Faith, Tit. 1. 4. And by
his Epistle instructs him in the Election of Bishops, which he was to place in
the Cities of Crete: And one of his Instructions about this Affair was, that he
should ordain such as held fast the faithful word as they had been taught, Tit.
1. 9. And the same things which Timothy had learned of Paul, he was to commit
to faithful men, and such as should be able to teach others, 2 Timothy 2. 2. The
things which thou have heard of me among many Witnesses, commit thou to
faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also.

. 5. 3. The same Doctrine, and many of the same Miracles were committed to
writing by the Apostles, which were first preached and done by Christ, and his
Apostles, and for the same end; to wit, to bring men to the Christian Belief
and Life, John 20. 31. But these are written that ye might believe that Jesus
is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing, ye might have life through
his Name, 1 John 5. 13. These things have I written unto you that believe on
the Name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have Eternal Life; and
that ye may believe on the Name of the Son of God: That is, that they might
believe more groundedly and firmly, and so constantly and perseveringly against
all opposition and temptations to the contrary, Luke 1. 3, 4. It seemed good to
me also, having had perfect understanding of things, from the very first, to
write unto thee, most excellent Theophilus, that thou might know the
Certainty of those things wherein thou have been instructed. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16.
The Scriptures given by inspiration of God, are profitable for reproof,
correction, and instruction in righteousness; and able to make men wise unto
salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. Romans 16. 26. And by the
Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the Commandment of the everlasting
God, made known to all Nations for the obedience of Faith. God of old commanded
the Law written, to be read to all the Congregation of Israel, that they might
learn to fear him, Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12.

6. 4. The Apostle required the same regard to be given to what he taught by
his Epistles, as to what he taught by speech, face to face, 2 These. 2. 15.
Therefore stand fast, and hold the Traditions which ye have been taught,
whether by word or our Epistle, 1 Cor. 14. 37. If any man think himself to be a
Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things which I write unto
you, are the Commandments of the Lord. And the Epistles written to particular
Churches, were intended for the benefit of all, in those things which in their
nature were of common concern unto all, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Unto the Church of God at
Corinth -- With all that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our
Lord both theirs and ours. The two Epistles of St. Peter, the first Epistle of
John, the Epistle of Jude, and that of James, are all General Epistles, not
directed to any particular Churches, as such; but to the Christians scattered
abroad in the world. And the Colossians were to read the Epistle sent to
Laodicea; and the Laodiceans to read that sent to the Colossians, as well as
those that were sent to both themselves respectively, Col. 4, 16. And St. John
was commanded to send all the seven Epistles to each of the seven Churches in
Asia, and not only one Epistle to one Church, and another to another. And in
Rev. Chap. 2, and 3. It is seven times said, He that has an Ear, let him hear
what the Spirit says unto the Churches; as every man in the world has, that
is not deaf. And Chap. 22. 18. I testify to every man (says Christ) that
hears the words of the Prophecy of this Book, etc. And there is great reason
why the same regard should be given to what the Apostles and Evangelists wrote,
as to what they spoke; as long as they either wrote the same Doctrine, or
History, upon the same evidence. For the Doctrine is the same after it is
written, as it was before; for its Being written, does not alter the Nature of
it. And therefore men must needs be as much concerned in their Belief or
Disbelief, Obedience or Disobedience to it, when it is communicated to them by
writing, as when it is so by Preaching; yea, I had almost said, or by immediate
Revelation: For it is not the way and manner of communicating the will of God to
us, that makes it saving; but our belief and serious consideration of it, and
yielding obedience to it, how, or by what means soever we come to know it.
Otherwise it is possible men may have Revelations from God, as Balaam had; and
as Judas and other workers of Iniquity, that prophesied and cast out Devils in
Christ's Name, had, or might have had, and yet not be profited by them. And if
there be any less degree of evidence of Divine Truth when it is communicated to
us by writing, than when it was communicated to others by the Apostles
preaching, or to the Apostles themselves by immediate Revelation; yet belief of
it, and obedience to it upon that less degree of Evidence, is not the less, but
rather much more rewardable, than is obedience to it upon greater evidence,
John 20. 29. Jesus says unto him, Thomas, because thou have seen, thou have
believed; blessed are they which have not seen, and yet have believed.

It is not to be imagined but that the Apostles and Evangelists have expressed
the Christian Doctrine, and the Reasons why it should be believed, in as plain
terms when they wrote it, as when they preached it.

They could hardly speak those great Doctrines touching the Essentials of
Christianity, plainer than they are communicated to us by their Writings, yet
how plain soever they spoke them, the very same things (prejudice, worldly
interest, and the love of T^ust) which now detain men from obeying their
Doctrine, as communicated and transmitted down to us by their Writings, did in
like manner keep back Multitudes from yielding Obedience to their Doctrine,
then when they themselves preached it to them, and wrought many Miracles to
convince them that it was from God. And as men then that had no mind to obey
the Doctrine which Christ and the Apostles preached, raised Cavils and picked
Quarrels against it: Why do you not understand my speech? even because ye
cannot hear my Word; said our Savior to such, John 8. 43.) Even so at this
day; those Atheistical and loose men, that have no mind to conform their Hearts
and Lives to the holy Doctrine of Christ in the Scriptures, raise Cavils, and
pick Quarrels against the Scriptures, which are a standing Reproof to their bad
Tempers, and evil Lives; which because they are so, they seek by all means to
invalidate them, that they might the more securely, and without disturbance
from them, hold on their ungodly course, secretly, or openly.

How far any that have led you the way, may be concerned in such a thing as
this, I shall not say; but sure I am, it concerns both you and them to think
on it: and so much the rather, because it is seldom, if ever seen among other
men, but that those that are cold in their affection to the Scriptures, are as
cold to the power of Godliness, or rather zealously hot against it.

And indeed I must needs say, you bewray your cold affection to, and your
little and slight esteem of the holy Scriptures, while you think you have
ground pleasedly to call them the Dead Letter, from that Saying of the Apostle,
in 2 Cor. 3. 6. Who has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of
the Letter, but of the Spirit: And to call those that preach from the
Scriptures, Ministers of the Letter. Whereas that Expression is so far from
serving your purpose herein, as that if you understood it (which alas, you do
not) you would find it to cast a Glory and Honor upon the Scriptures of the
New Testament, and no disparagement at all upon those of the old, upon any
account of the matters therein contained, as being written. For the Doctrine of
the Old Testament it self is not called the Letter because it is in Writing;
nor that of the New, the Spirit, because not in Writing; but because the
Subject Matter of which the Mosaical Covenant did much consist, and many of the
things therein contained, were but figurative, and outward Representations of
those excellent Spiritual things, which in the Gospel, are plainly and nakedly
expressed, without any such Vail or Cover: For so the Apostle, in the process
of this his Discourse, does more plainly express it, ver. 12, 13, 14. We use
great plainness of Speech, and not as Moses, which put a Vail over his Face, so
that the Children of Israel could not look or see to the end of that which is
abolished -- Which Vail is done away in Christ; that is, in the Doctrine of
Christ, in the New Testament; in which Doctrine, Divine and Spiritual Truth is
stripped out of its Clothing and Covering, and represented as it is in its own
nature, and not in dark figures. And that this, and not the Writing, or not
Writing, is meant by Letter and Spirit, will farther appear by comparing other
Texts of Scripture with this. Romans 2. 29. Circumcision is that of the heart, in
the Spirit, and not in the Letter. By Letter here is plainly meant Circumcision
in the Flesh; and by Spirit, that which was couched under it, or signified by
it; and that is the Circumcision of the Heart; which in the New Testament is
called Mortification, or Purifying of the Heart, or crucifying Affections and
Lusts.

So again, Romans 7. 6. But now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead,
wherein we were held, that we should serve in Newness of Spirit, and not in the
Oldness of the Letter: That is, according to those plain Precepts of the Gospel
which answer the Spirit and Scope of the Law; and not in the outward Ceremony,
which were but figurative of them; as in offering our Bodies a living
Sacrifice, instead of slain Beasts; in cleansing our selves from the filthiness
of the flesh, instead of Legal Purifications by washing the Body, in putting
off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, and all evil Concupiscence, and not in
cutting off the Foreskin of the Flesh. And those Ministers that preach this,
and other like Spiritual Doctriue, out of, or according to the Scriptures of
the New Testament, and not the Ceremonies of Moses, they are Ministers of the
New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit. Which had you understood,
you would never have poured your spiteful contempt on them as you have, by
calling them Letter-Preachers.

I shall conclude what I have said in this Proposition, to show that the same
regard is due to the Doctrine of the Apostles when written, as now it is, as
when it was preached by them; by remembering you of this one great Truth, That
every man shall be tried and judged at the last day, by that Law he has been
under. The Gentiles that are, or have been without a written Law, shall be
judged without any such Law: and the Jews which were under a written Law, they
shall be judged by it, Romans 2. 12. Even so, those that are under the Gospel
written, will be judged by that; as those that were under the immediate
preaching of it by Christ and his Apostles before it was written, will be
judged by that. He that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that
judges him; the Word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last
day, says our Savior, John 12. 48. And if that be the Rule by which those
shall be judged that have his Word made known to them, be it by one means or by
another, then it greatly concerns all such to make that Word of his the Rule of
their Life and Practice, as ever they hope to come off well upon their Trial at
last, whatever you talk of its not being a Rule as it is a written Word. And
therefore beware lest then that come upon you, and be said of you, which is
written in one of the Prophets; I have written to them the great things of my
Law, and they have counted them as a strange thing, Hos. 8. 12.

. 7. 5. The next Proposition is this; That the Holy Scriptures extant in the
Apostles days, in conjunction with the Doctrine of the Christian Faith, however
made known, by Writing, or otherwise; were then, through that Grace of God,
which usually attends a due use of them, able to make men wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. And that from a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which
are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through Faith which is in Christ
Jesus.

If by Scriptures here, you will understand the Scriptures of the Old Testament
only, yet you may easily collect that if those Scriptures were in great part
able to make men wise unto Salvation, then when the Gospel was on foot, then
the Scriptures of the New Testament, as containing the Christian Doctrine, are
able to do it much more; and both in conjunction to be effectual to that end.

The Apostle acquainted the Christians then that the Mystery of the Gospel by
the Scriptures of the Prophets, is, and that according to the Commandment of
the everlasting God, made known to all Nations for the obedience of Faith, Romans
16. 25, 26.

8. 6. The Holy Scriptures, as the means which God works by, are able, not only
to make men in a private capacity wise unto salvation; but also to furnish men
for the discharging of the public Office of Teaching and Governing in the
Church of God. The Holy. Scriptures given by inspiration of God, are profitable
for Doctrine, Reproof, Correction, and Instruction in Righteousness, so as to
make the man of God, to wit, a public Preacher, perfect, thoroughly furnished
to all good works; even to enable him to discharge his whole Duty toward the
Souls of others, 2 Timothy 3. 16. And St. Paul by his Writings, instructed even
Timothy himself, how to behave himself in his Office and public Capacity, 1 Timothy 3. 14. These things write I unto thee, that thou may know how to behave
thy self in the House of God, which is the Church of the Living God. And for
the better discharge of his Ministerial Office, directs and enjoins him to give
attendance to Reading, and to Meditation, or Study, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 15. Which
sure would have been needless, if he had been sufficiently able to have done
all by the immediate Illumination and operation of God's Spirit; as you fancy
your Teachers are able to do.

9. 7. The same promise is made to the reading of the Word written, and to the
keeping of it, as is to the hearing and keeping of it, Rev. 1. 3. Blessed is he
that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those
things which are written therein.

10. 8. The Scripture is said to say this or that, which yet God said himself,
or by his Servants, Romans 9. 17. The Scripture says unto Pharaoh, even for this
same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, Romans
10. 11. The Scripture says, Whosoever believes on him, shall not be ashamed.
Gal. 3. 22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin. What says the
Scripture? Cast out the Bondwoman and her Son, Gal. 4. 30. Which yet was the
Saying of God himself. Genesis 16. Another Scripture says, They shall look on him
whom they have pierced, John 19. 17. No Prophecy of the Scriptures is of
private Interpretation, 2 Pet. 1. 20. So that according to this, look what God
says in and by the Scriptures, touching such things as concern us, is in
effect the same, as if he had spoken them to us himself immediately, If any man
think himself to be a Prophet, or Spiritual, let him acknowledge that the
things I write unto you, are the Commandments of the Lord, said St Paul, 1 Cor.
14. 37.

You are wont to insinuate indeed, as if the Scriptures were not of that use to
us now, as they were to them, to whom they were first written. But however they
might more concern them than us in some particular cases proper to them, yet in
things of common concern, they are as much for our use as they were for theirs.
For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our Learning,
Romans 15. 4. What God said to Joshua, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee;
the Apostle would have all faithful Christians rely on; as if it had been
spoken to themselves, Heb. 13. 5. That which was first spoken to the Jews, Lev.
26. The Apostle applies to the Believing Gentiles, as much as if it had been
spoken to them only, 2 Cor. 6. 16. For ye are the Temple of the Living God; as
God has said; I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God,
and they shall be my people.

11. 9. We that have the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles brought down to us
in the Scriptures, may, according to Scripture-Dialect, be said to have Christ
and his Apostles, as truly as it was said of the Jews in our Savior's days on
Earth, that they had Moses and the Prophets; for it was by having in the
Scriptures, what they said and did; that were said to have them. And by hearing
and believing the Scriptures of the New Testament, we may as well be said to
hear and believe Christ and his Apostles, as they to hear and believe Moses and
the Prophets; which yet they were said to do, when they did believe their
Writings, Luke 16. 29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.
Ver. 31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead. John 5. 46, 47. Had ye believed Moses,
ye would have believed me; for he wrote of me: But if ye believe not his
Writings, how should ye believe my Words? Christ promised his Apostles, upon
his giving them Commission to teach all Nations, that he would be with them to
the end of the world; and he is so in one sense, when he accompanies their
Ministration by their Doctrine and Writings, with the presence of his Grace and
power in their continuation to the end of the world. And as it is said of
Moses, Acts 15. 21. That he had those in every City that preached him, being
read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day; inasmuch as his Books of the Law were
read; so for the same, or like reason, it may be as truly said, that Christ
has those that preach him now, when the Books of the New Testament written by
inspiration of his Spirit, are read among us and opened unto us every Lord's
Day. You may then safely conclude, that those that have the Doctrine of Christ
in his Gospel among them, have Christ among them; and all that receive and hold
fast that, do receive and hold fast him: So says St. John in his second Epist.
v. 9. He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and
the Son. And again, 1 John 2. 24. If that which ye have heard from the
beginning, shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son and in the
Father.

12. 10. That in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision; but a new Creature; is a most important Doctrine, declared in
writing by St. Paul, Gal. 6. 15.

And when he says in the next Verse, As many as walk according to this [Rule]
peace be on them; it is most evident he was not of your mind and way, who hold
that the Holy Scriptures, or Doctrine contained in them, which is the same, are
not a Rule of Christian Faith and Practice.

This written Doctrine of the Gospel, we see, is a Rule for Christians to walk
by; as the written Law and Testimony was to the Jews; and as it was said of
those that walked not according to that Word or Rule, that it was because there
was no Light in them, Isa. 8. 20. Even so, and for the same reason, it may now
be said of you, that if you walk not according to this Rule, it is because in
truth there is no Light in you, how much soever you vainly boast of it, and
censure others for want of it; that yet make it their daily care and endeavor
to walk according to the Light and Guidance of that Rule, that has its seat in
their Conscience.

And now, Sirs, by this time, methinks you should not but perceive, that I have
given you proof in good measure heaped up, shaken together, pressed down; and
running over; That Gods way and method of directing men, what to believe and do
as necessary to their Salvation, and of persuading them to believe and do
accordingly, is, and has been by that teaching which comes from God into the
Soul by outward means, such as is his Word written, or by men's teaching the
same Doctrine which is contained in the Scriptures; and if so, then not by his
immediate teaching and operation, without such outward teaching, which yet is
that which you hold and teach, in opposition to God's Method. The Proof of this
is so evident and convincing, that if you will but give your minds and
Consciences Liberty seriously to consider it; I cannot imagine how you should
possibly persist in your way, without offering some violence to the reason of
your Minds.

. 13. But since you have strengthened your selves in this your persuasion, out
of an Opinion you have that some Scriptures are on your side in it, I shall yet
add something farther to convince you of Error and Mistake therein.

You seem to ground your selves much upon John 1. 9. Where it is said of
Christ, This is the true Light which lightneth every man that comes into the
world.

That Christ does one way or other lighten every man that comes into the world,
is a great truth here declared: But that which you are wont to allege it for,
and which you are to prove hence, if you would have it do your business, is,
That Christ lighteneth every man that comes into the world, with the knowledge
of what he ought to believe and do in order to his salvation, without learning
it from or by any Outward Means.

That no such thing, as that Christ so lightens all men without Outward
Teaching* can be proved; either from this or any other Scripture, I shall
easily show you.

Christ does enlighten all whom he does enlighten in one or more of these three
ways; either, 1. By Natural Light. Or, 2. By Supernatural Revelation. Or, 3. By
outward Teaching by Speech, or Writing, or Example, in conjunction with the
inward assistance of his Spirit.

1. Christ indeed, as God Creator (as he is described in the beginning of that
Chapter) does enlighten every man that comes into the world, with the faculty
of Reason and Understanding, by which he may know that there is a God, and that
he is to be worshipped, and that he is placable; and the difference between
moral good and evil in many things. But however this may possibly be a Light
sufficient to direct the Heathen to as much as God expects from them (if they
live up to it) to whom he affords no other Light; yet this Natural Light is not
sufficient to direct those that live under the Gospel, to believe and do what
they are bound to believe and do, upon pain of Damnation. They that live under
the Gospel, are bound to believe Jesus to be Christ, the Son of God, and
Savior of the world, and that upon pain of damnation. If ye believe not that I
am he, ye shall die in your sins; said our Savior to them to whom the Gospel
came, Jo. 8. 24. Every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh, is not of God, but is the Spirit of Antichrist, 1 John 4. 3. He that
believes not the Son of God, shall not see Life; but the wrath of God abides
on him, Joh. 3. 36.

Now that no man can know Christ, know him to be the Son of God, and Savior of
the world, by his Natural Light, without Supernatural Revelation from God, or
Instruction from without, derived from them that had such Revelation, is most
evident. When Peter said to Christ, Thou art Christ the Son of the Living God;
our Savior told him, Flesh and Blood had not revealed that unto him, but his
Father, Mat. 16. 16, 17. And the Natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned; that is, they are knowable only by means that are purely spiritual
and supernatural; as the revelation of the Gospel at first was. And it may well
be, that in this respect it is said, that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord,
but by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3. For no man could know that he was so, but
by that Revelation and discovery which the Holy Ghost several ways at the first
made concerning him. He shall glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and
shall show it unto you, said Christ to his Apostles, concerning the Holy
Spirit, John 16. 14. And Christ is said to be justified in or by the Spirit, to
be what he himself said he was, and his Apostles witnessed him to be, 1 Timothy 3.
16.

All this shows that though Christ do enlighten all men with Natural Light, yet
this is not sufficient without somewhat else, to enlighten all men;
particularly those that are under the Gospel, with the knowledge of what is
necessary for all such to know and believe in order to their Salvation: For to
whom much is given, of him much shall be required, Luke 12. 48.

Then secondly, Another way by which Christ enlightens men with the knowledge
of himself, and of what is necessary for men's Salvation, is by immediate and
supernatural Revelation; and thus he enlightened the Apostles, that they might
be able infallibly to teach the way of Salvation by Christ, through Faith in
him, and Obedience to him; For God, says one of them, who commanded the Light
to shine out of Darkness, has shined into our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ: to give, that is,
to give it forth to others, 2 Cor. 4. 6. And again, in 1 Cor. 2. 12, 13. Now we
have received, not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God;
that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God: Which things
also we speak, not with the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the
Holy Ghost teaches. And besides this of internal and immediate Revelation,
there is no way imaginable for men to come to the knowledge of Christ as
Mediator, but by external and mediate Revelation.

So that by the process of this Discourse, you are brought to this; either to
say that all men to whom the Gospel comes, are enlightened by Christ with the
knowledge of his being the Son of God, the Christ of God, and Savior of the
world, by immediate and supernatural Revelation, as the Apostles were; or else
to grant that some men in the world are not enlightened by Christ without being
^aught by outward means, to know what they are bound to believe, upon pain of
Damnation. For I have showed before, that all men and women to whom the Gospel
is preached, are bound to believe Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of God, upon
pain of Damnation; and that there is but these two ways imaginable, by which
they can come to know it, that they might believe it, immediate and mediate
Revelation or Instruction.

If being reduced to this straight, you shall be so absurd as to choose to say
that all those under the sound and outward teaching of the Gospel, that shall
be damned for not believing on Christ as the Son of God, and for not obeying
him, had that knowledge of him by immediate and supernatural Revelation, as the
Apostles had; for the sinning against which, they shall be damned, as knowing
their Masters Will, and not doing it; yet the Scriptures, as well as all
Experience, will detect your Folly in so saying: For I have proved in my
Propositiions, to which I refer you; that God's way and method of proceeding
with men, in justifying or condemning them, will be according to their
Obedience to, or Disobedience against that Doctrine of the Gospel which they
had heard preached by men to them. Go, preach the Gospel to every Creature
(said our Savior) He that believes not, shall be damned; that believes not
that Gospel so preached and made known to them by preaching, Mat. 16. 16. And
the Apostle supposes it impossible for the generality of men to believe, that
have not heard of Christ in the way of preaching the Gospel to them, and
concludes that those that do believe, are brought to it by hearing it preached;
and that is not by way of immediate inward teaching of God's Spirit without the
teaching by man, Romans 10. 14, 15, 16, 17. How shall they believe in him of whom
they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? says St.
Paul; Yes, might it have been said, by immediate Revelation and inward teaching
of God's Spirit, or the Light within, if that had been the common way of
bringing men to believe the Gospel. But you see Paul knew of no such way to
propagate the Faith, after it was once set on foot in an extraordinary way: If
he had, he would not have put such Questions, nor have made such a Conclusion
as he does in v. 17. So then Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word
of God. And do you know more and better than he did?

And for your selves, it is not to be imagined that ever you could have known
that ever there was such a one as Christ in the World, any more than the poor
Indians or Pagans that never heard of him, had you not been beholding to the
Scriptures, or Oral Tradition for it, as God's means, for all your great talk
of your Light within you.

If Christ Jesus then does not savingly enlighten all those who yet are
savingly illuminated, neither by Natural Light, nor by Supernatural Revelation
in an immediate way; then it follows, that such are enlightened by Supernatural
Revelation mediately or instrumentally by the Scriptures, and Ministration of
men, unless there can be another way of saving Illumination assigned, different
from the three before mentioned, which none pretend to do, so far as I have
heard.

These things are so plain and full of Evidence, and so easy to be understood,
and in their Nature so apt to prevail with all such as do not deny but that the
Scriptures are true, that after you have considered them, I cannot but think
you will be convinced by them, if there be that love to Truth in you, which you
pretend to, that you have unawares all this while abused that first Chapter of
John, v. 9. and abused your selves and the world, by a misrepresentation of it;
whereas Christ is the Light of the world diverse ways, and in several respects;
as, by his Spirit, by his Word, and by his Works, both Miraculous, and
Exemplary; it cannot but be very great weakness or waywardness in you, to limit
his being so to one of these only.

14. Another Scripture which you allege as favoring your foresaid Opinion, is
that Prophecy of Joel 2. 28, 29. Cited by St. Peter, in Acts 2. 17. Behold the
days come, says the Lord, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, and
your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, and your young men shall see
Visions, and your old men shall dream Dreams; and on my Servants, and on my
Handmaids I will pour out of my Spirit in those days, and they shall prophecy.

But that this Scripture also is impertinently alleged, to prove that in the
days of the Gospel every one is immediately directed and moved by the Spirit of
God without outward teaching, in what they are to believe and do, will appear
by two things. The one from the Nature of the thing here predicted: The other
by the Application of this Prediction to the event.

1. From the Nature of the Subject Matter of this Prophecy. It is not that the
Spirit should be poured out upon all flesh, so as to direct every one what to
believe and do without outward teaching; but to qualify persons
extraordinarily for outward teaching: it is to enable them to prophecy; for
that is twice mentioned in the Prophecy forecited, as the end for which the
Spirit should be poured out upon all flesh. And prophesying is for the
instruction of others; it is a means of conveying knowledge of the Divine Will
from one man to another: He that prophesies edifieth the Church, says St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 4. This of Prophets, was a Second Order in the Evangelical
Ministry: God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, 1 Cor. 12. And although seeing Visions, and dreaming Dreams be also
mentioned as the effect of the pouring out of the Spirit; yet that refers but
to the same thing, the qualifying of persons to prophecy: For the Prophets of
old did usually receive the matter of Prophecy by Dreams or Visions, Numb. 12.
6. If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him
in a Vision, and will speak unto him in a Dream, Hos. 12. 10. And it was not
unusual for Prophets then to foretell Evangelical Events in an Old Testament
Dialect. And when it is said the Spirit should be poured out upon all flesh, it
is not meant of all persons in the world without exception; for it was never
given unto all persons to prophecy, taking all in so large a sense, but to
persons of all sorts both for Sex and Age, Sons and Daughters, old men and
young, yea Servants and Handmaids also, as they are particularly expressed in the
Text: and these not of the Jews only, but on the Gentiles also, as the Event
shows; which was new to the world.

2. The Application of this Prophecy to the Event, plainly shows that the End
for which a Promise of this pouring out of the Spirit was made, was to enable
some to teach others. For the event of this Prophecy, in which it received its
completion, was the pouring out of the Spirit in extraordinary and miraculous
gifts upon the Apostles and Disciples on the day of Pentecost, and for some
time after. This appears by St. Peter's application of that Prophecy to this
very Event, Act. 2. 16. This is that, says he, which was spoken by the Prophet
Joel, etc. And that those miraculous Gifts were poured out on some to enable
them to teach others, will appear in these two things, not to instance in more.
First, the Gift of speaking diverse Tongues, which was one of them, was to
enable them to declare the things of the Gospel to people of all Nations,
Tongues and Languages, in their own Mother Tongue wherein they were born. Upon
the use of this gift those of every Nation under heaven then resident at
Jerusalem, said, We do hear them speak in our Tongues the wonderful works of
God, Acts 2. 11. By this Gift the Apostles were prepared to preach the Gospel
to all Nations, to every Creature, as Christ afterward commissioned them to do.

Secondly, As by this Gift of Tongues they could and did propagate the
Knowledge of the Gospel to them that never heard of it before; so by this, as
by other miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, was Belief of the Gospel procured from
them to whom it was made known. For hereby they knew, or had reason to believe,
that persons thus qualified were sent of God, and the Doctrine they brought was
from God, John 3. 2. We know that thou art a Teacher come from God; for no man
can do these Miracles that thou do, except God be with him. In which respect,
this and other miraculous Gifts were called signs, and signs of what? but that
the persons so qualified, and their Doctrine were of God. Tongues, says St.
Paul, are for a sign to those that believe not, 1 Cor. 14. 22. They were
teaching Signs, they taught those to believe the Gospel, who did not believe
before. Signs and Wonders done by the Apostles and others, were those things by
which God gave testimony to the Word of his Grace, as it is Acts 14. 3. These
signs, said our Savior, shall follow those that believe in my name; in my name
they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with new Tongues, etc. Mark 16.
17. And in v, 20. They, the Apostles, went forth, and preached every where; the
Lord working with them, and confirming the Word with Signs following. And Heb.
2. 4. God also bearing them witness with Signs and Wonders, and diverse Miracles
and Gifts of the Holy Ghost according to his own will. Truly, says St. Paul,
the Signs of an Apostle were wrought among you, in Signs and Wonders, and
mighty Deeds, 2 Cor. 12. 12. These were teaching Signs by which the Apostles
were known to be Apostles, Messengers sent by God, and their Word and Doctrine
to be the Message which God sent by them. These miraculous powers of the Spirit
of God visible in the Apostles, and those that received their Doctrine, were
that which procured such wonderful success to the preaching of the Gospel,
notwithstanding the fiercest opposition of Adversaries. The very first day in
which the Gospel set out armed, and attended with these powers, it brought in
of Converts no less than 3000 Souls: and so went forth conquering and to
conquer from Jerusalem and throughout all Judea and Samaria, and to the
uttermost parts of the Earth. I will not dare, says St. Paul, to speak of any
of those things which Christ has not wrought by me to make the Gentiles
obedient, by word and deed (by the word preached, and the mighty deeds that did
accompany it) through mighty Signs and Wonders by the power of the Spirit of
God; so that from Jerusalem, and round about to Illyricum, I have fully
preached the Gospel of Christ, Romans 15. 18, 19.

That which made the Gospel the more credible, as coming from God; and the more
successful in bringing in multitudes of new Converts, and in confirming and
establishing those who were already converted, was in that the holy Spirit was
shed abroad in those Miraculous Gifts, not only upon the Apostles that preached
that Doctrine; but also upon those that received it, and believed it
afterward, as well as on the day of Pentecost. And that the more credit might
be thereby procured to the Apostles in their Message from God to men, the holy
Ghost in extraordinary gifts was given to the Disciples after they believed, by
the laying on of the Apostles hands. Thus at Samaria, the Believers converted
by Philip, received the holy Ghost, not by the laying on of his hands, but of
the hands of Peter and John, Acts 8. 17. And that they received the holy Ghost
in some visible effects, appears, in that it is said that when Simon saw that
through the laying on of the Apostles hands, the Holy Ghost was given, he
offered them Money for the like power. What, to confer inward spiritual Grace?
No; that was not the thing which he saw or could see the Apostles do; nor is it
probable that he desired it. Likewise those Believers at Ephesus, when Paul had
laid his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with
tongues, and prophesied, Acts 19. 6. Thus it is said of them, that after they
believed, they were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, as the earnest of
the future Inheritance, and purchased possession, they continuing in the belief
and practice of that Gospel that came thus confirmed to them, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
At the very first indeed it should seem the Holy Ghost fell on the Believers
thus without laying on of the Apostles hands; as in Acts 2. and 10. 44. But
afterward we have seen how it was. The Spirit in some extraordinary gifts was
poured on some of the Prophets of old; but we never read that it was in such
sort poured out on them that believed their Prophecy likewise, as now it was
upon those that received the Apostles Doctrine. And therefore such a thing as
this was foretold by the Prophets, as peculiar to the coming of the Messiah,
and as that by which he might be known to be come when the event of such
Predictions took place, even as it came to pass here. The Prediction, Joel 2.
28. was, that in the last days the Spirit should be poured out upon all flesh;
in the last days, that is, in the last days of the Jewish State or Commonwealth
(as may be evinced by the Context) i^ which Christ came, as was foretold by his
Prophets; in which time also the Spirit was poured out in miraculous gifts and
operations, as a testimony that the Messiah was come. The Holy Spirit in the
effects of it in these extraordinary gifts and operations, is called the
testifying of Christ, or the witness which he bore touching his being the true
Messiah and Savior of the world, John 15. 26, 27. But when he, the Comforter,
is come (...) even the Spirit of Truth -- he shall testify of me, and ye also
(Apostles) shall bear witness, because ye ye have been with me from the
beginning. And again, 1 John 5. 6. This is he that came by water and blood --
and it is the Spirit that bears witness, because the Spirit is truth. John
16. 8. And when he (the Comforter) is come, he will convince the world of sin,
because they believe not on me, says Christ; of Righteousness, because I go to
my Father, (was taken up into heaven) and of Judgment, because the Prince of
this world is judged: the Devil dethroned and cast down, as he was when the
Mouths of his Oracles were stopped, and the Idol-Temples shut up, and his
Kingdom and Rule demolished by the preaching of the Gospel among the Heathen,
accompanied with these Miraculous Effects of the Spirit, which bore down all
before it, as it were; and therefore this is called the Demonstration of the
Spirit and Power; as opposed to Humane Oratory among Heathen Philosophers, and
the way of Humane Demonstration, 1 Cor. 2. 4. This wonderful effusion of the
Spirit in miraculous Gifts, was that Baptism of the Spirit we read of, which
you with some others, have in these days, vainly pretended to under another
Notion, of being baptized with the Spirit. But if you will but compare Mat. 3.
11. and Acts 1. 5. with Act. 2. 3, 4. and 11. 15, 16. you may easily discern
your Error in applying it to any thing but to that extraordinary and miraculous
effusion of the Spirit.

By all this you may see how one Scripture falls in with, and explains another,
if you will but take hold of a right Notion of the end for which the plentiful
effusion of the Spirit was foretold and promised. Which was not to guide all
Christians by its inward motions without outward teaching, but to enable some
to teach the right Faith and Life to others, even to those of other Tongues, in
their own Language; and to confirm their Doctrine thereby, and by other
operations of the Spirit to be from God.

And these extraordidary effects of the Spirit were greatly necessary to
accompany the first promulgation and planting of the Gospel in the world, to
procure credit to it, belief of it from the Jews, who otherwise would not have
been taken off from their old way of Levitical and Ceremonial worship, which
they had received from God: and from the Gentile-Nations, who otherwise would
not have been taken off from their Idolatrous and Superstitious way of Worship
in which they had been deeply rooted by long and ancient Tradition, received
from their Forefathers. And therefore St. Paul says, as was observed before,
that Tongues, that is, the gift of speaking diverse Tongues on a sudden, are a
sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not; 1 Cor. 14. 22. As
the giving of the Law by Moses, was accompanied with Signs and Wonders which
were wrought by Moses, both before and after the first promulgation of it, to
procure belief from the Jews, that he was sent of God, and that the Law given
by him, was from God: So it was as necessary that the first promulgation of the
Gospel by the Son of God himself, and by those that were immediately sent by
him, should be, for the same reason, accompanied with more and greater Miracles
and Wonders, than those wrought by Moses were; as Christ himself was greater
than Moses; and as the abrogation of the Old, and the giving of the New Law,
was more than the giving of the Law only, when there was no promulgate Law
before in being. And therefore our Savior said of the Jews that would not
receive his Doctrine, but still stuck to the Letter of the Law of Moses; If I
had not done among them the works which none other man has done, they had not
had sin, John 15. 24. And as it was not necessary to continue those or the like
Miracles and Wonders in the Jewish Church, after the Law had been well
established by them; but that the Law being once committed to writing, might
be, as it was, their standing Rule of Worship and Conversation: Even so after
the Gospel had received a sufficient attestation to be from God, by the
continuance of those miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost in the Church for some
time, till the Doctrine and History of the Gospel were committed to writing,
and those Writings owned as Authentic Records every where by the Church, in
all known parts of the world; it was then no more necessary, as the event
shows, to perpetuate Miracles in the Christian Church, for the confirmation of
the Gospel, than it was to perpetuate them in the Jewish, for the ratification
of the Law; but that the Doctrine and History of the Gospel in Books of the New
Testament, should be of like use to Christians, as the Law and Prophets in
Books was to the Jews of old.

The Prophets of old, who though they were extraordinarily inspired, did all
along, in their time, call the Jews to obedience to the written Law of Moses,
and to Repentance for transgressing that. And when prophesying in this sense,
was to cease from among them, for several Ages, God by Malachy, the last of
those Prophets, gave it in charge to that People, to remember the written Law
of Moses, as that by which they were to govern themselves. Remember, says he,
the Law of Moses my Servant, which I commanded him in Horeb for all Israel,
with the Statutes and Judgments, Mal. 4. 4.

And it was foretold by Moses, concerning Christ, that a Prophet should be
raised up by God, like unto him, Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 18. And although Christ that
Prophet was unlike unto Moses in many other things wherein our Lord excelled
him, yet he was truly like unto him in this, viz. in that he as Mediator, gave
forth the Evangelical Law at his Appearance in the world, as that which was to
be the standing Rule unto Christians throughout the whole duration of the
Kingdom of the Messiah; as Moses, who also was a Mediator in that respect, had
delivered a standing Law to the Jews, by which they were to govern themselves
throughout their Generations, and the Administration of the Mosaical Covenant.

By what has been said touching the plentiful effusion of the Spirit upon the
first setting out of the Gospel into the world, you may see (if Prejudice do
not blindfold you) that what was done in that kind, is so far from giving any
countenance to your Opinion of the Spirit's being given to teach men
immediately by internal Illmination and Operation, without outward Ministry and
Teaching, that it is an evident proof of the quite contrary. For the Spirit was
thus given to the Apostles and others, that they might propagate the Christian
Faith in the world, being enabled thereby to make it known to them of other
Languages, in their own Tongues, and to embolden them to run all hazards in so
doing (for they being filled with the Holy Ghost, spoke the Word of God with
all boldness, Acts 4. 31.) And likewise to convince the World that Christ and
his Apostles, and their Doctrine, were all from God. All which was done by
Vocal Teaching, and Visible Signs, not excluding the Inward Assistance of
divine Grace: All which would have been needless, if God had chosen to teach
men by the Light of Christ within only, as you speak. So that either your
Enthusiastical Notion overthrows God's Method of proceeding to teach men the
Christian Religion, or else his Method overthrows your Notion; for doubtless
they are contrary one to another; and whether it be better to follow God or
man, judge you!

15. Another place misunderstood and misapplied by you, is, John 16. 13. When
the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth. Which is not a
Promise of sending the Spirit to guide all Christians by its immediate motions;
but a Promise to his Apostles; for they only were then present with Christ at
the Passover, just before his Apprehension and Suffering.

And this, and other like Promises of sending the Spirit, were made to them, to
encourage them the better to bear his departure from them; giving them to know
thereby, how they should be enabled when he should be taken from them, to carry
on the great work of Apostleship, to which he had chosen them. And this he did,
first by giving them to understand that this Spirit should bring all things to
their remembrance which he had spoken unto them while he was yet with them. 2.
That this Spirit of his should teach them all things in which Christ himself
had not instructed them while he was with them, inasmuch as they were not then
able to bear them. 3. That this Spirit (to wit, in his miraculous Gifts) should
concur with them in testifying of Christ, John 14. 26. But the Comforter, which
is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall bring all
things to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you. John 16. 12, 13. I
have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now: Howbeit,
when he, the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth, and he
will show you things to come. Chap. 14. 26. He shall teach you all things.
Chap. 15. 26, 27. But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you
from the Father, he shall testify of me; and ye also shall bear witness,
because ye have been with me from the beginning. This agrees exactly with what
he said again to them after he was risen, Acts 1. 8. Ye shall receive power
after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be Witnesses unto me,
etc.

And that these Predictions and Promises of sending the Holy Ghost upon the
Apostles, the better to qualify them for their great Work, and Office, began
to be made good to them in those extraordinary Gifts which were poured out on
them on the day of Pentecost, and that Christ's Prediction of the coming of the
Holy Ghost did refer to that, appears by what Sr. Peter said in his Sermon upon
that occasion, Acts 2. 33, Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted,
and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed
forth this which ye now see and hear, the Spirit in its sensible effects.
Compare herewith Acts 1. 4, 5. Wait for the Promise of the Father, which, says
he, (Jesus) which ye have [heard of me] -- ye shall he baptized with the Holy
Ghost not many days hence. The giving of the Spirit thus, was purposely
reserved for the honor and evidence of Christ's Exaltation in Glory; but the
Spirit to sanctify, was given before: The Holy Ghost was not yet given,
because Jesus was not yet glorified, John 7. 39.

But the sending of the Holy Ghost to these ends, is greatly remote from the
end you assign thereof, as has also been shown before; and which you may
easily see by what has been here represented to you, if the Light which was
once in you, be not become Darkness. Your applying Promises, as if made to all
Christians as Christians, and to common and ordinary cases, which were made to
the Apostles only, or to them and some others in extraordinary cases, peculiar
to persons extraordinarily qualified, and extraordinarily sent, has led you
and some others into very dangerous errors, that have made very bad work in the
Church of God.

16. Another Scripture which you are wont frequently to produce in defense of
this Opinion of yours, touching the Spirits inward Teaching without outward
Teaching by man, is, 1 John 2. 20. But ye have an Unction from the Holy One,
and ye know all things. And again, ver. 27. But the Anointing which ye have
received of him, abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you; but as
the same Anointing teaches you of all things, and is Truth, and is no Lie; and
even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him.

Whatever the right sense of this Scripture is, it is certain your Notion of the
Holy Spirit's teaching men (that live under the Gospel, as those did to whom
these words were written) whatever they ought to believe and do without any
outward Teaching by Speech or Writing, cannot be the sense of it; because such
a sense of the place is inconsistent with what is manifestly proved in my
Propositions before laid down; and because it would render the design of St.
John in this Epistle and other Writings of his, needless, in which he labors
to settle and firmly establish the Christians in the Belief and Practice of
what they had heard, and by hearing had been taught from the beginning, against
all Temptations to Apostasy from, or Looseness in the Profession of
Christianity. But if we consider upon what occasion these words are here
brought in, and compare them also with what we find in some other Scriptures,
it will be no hard matter to understand the Apostles scope in them.

He had observed to them in the 18. v. that even then there were many
Antichrists. And in ver. 19. that they, those many Antichrists, went out from
them: And his scope in the rest of the Chap. is to fortify and antidote them
against the poisonous pretensions of those Antichrists, who as he describes
them in ver. 22, did deny that Jesus was the Christ. That this was here his
scope and design, appears by ver. 26. where he says, these things have I
written unto you concerning those that seduce you.

Now the means he makes use of to preserve them under this danger; and to
establish them, is by putting them in remembrance by what means they at the
first came to be persuaded of the truth of that Doctrine, by which they were
taught that Jesus is the Christ, and that was by pouring out the Holy Ghost in
visible effects upon the Apostles that taught it, and upon those that believed
it, and consequently upon themselves, by which the truth of it was abundantly
confirmed to them as coming from God.

For that doubtless is meant by the anointing here spoken of. Jesus Christ
himself in respect of the Spirit of glory that appeared in him by his Doctrine
and Miracles, was said to be anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power, Act,
10. 38. As it was foretold by Isaiah the Prophet, saying, the Spirit of the
Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the Poor,
Isa. 61. 1. Luke 4. 18. and so in like manner the pouring out of the Holy Ghost
in miraculous gifts, both upon the Apostles and believers for the confirmation
of the Doctrine the one preached, and the other believed, is elsewhere called,
their being anointed by God, as here also it is called the Unction of the holy
one, which is the same thing 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22. Now he that establishes us with
you into Christ, and has anointed us, is God; who has also sealed us, and
given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. By this it appears that both
Apostles and other believers were established into Christ by the anointing of
God upon them, which anointing was his pouring out of the holy Spirit. Ye have
an unction from the Holy one, and ye know all things. Not that by this Unction
the common Christians were immediately inspired with the knowledge of all
truths, but that by it they were assured of the truth of all things which the
Apostles had taught them; and consequently must needs know thereby that Jesus
was the Christ, because that was one of the principal Doctrines which they
taught, and taught all they did teach in the name of him as such. As they were
induced at the first to believe the Doctrine to be from God, because they
perceived the anointing of God to be upon them that preached it; so they were
afterward confirmed in the truth of it, because upon their receiving of it,
they themselves also received of the same anointing. It is not said that this
anointing did teach them all things, but that it did teach them [of] all
things, that is, of, or concerning the truth of all things to which it was a
witness or evidence as I have showed it was to the Apostles Doctrine from Heb.
2. 4. 5. Mar. 16. 20. and other places.

When then this Apostle says ye have an Unction from the holy one, and ye know
all things; he did not intend thereby to tell them that all things they were to
believe and do, were revealed to them by it, but that the Doctrine by which
they were taught all things necessary to their salvation, was thereby attested
to be from God, appears evidently by that which he persuades them to by it in
v. 24. and that was that the Doctrine which they had heard from the beginning,
might therefore be retained and held fast by them that had been so ratified and
confirmed to them by the Unction they had from the Holy one. Let that therefore
abide in you which you have heard from the beginning: if that which ye have
heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son
and in the Father. Agreeable to what he says also in his second Epistle verse
9. He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the
Son. And therefore when he says again, ye need not that any man teach you, but
as the same anointing teaches you of all things and is truth, and is no lie,
he does not thereby mean that they needed no farther teaching by man for their
establishment and building up in the Faith: for if he had, he had contradicted
himself in what he was now doing in this Chap. and all along in this Epistle.
And therefore his meaning must be, that they needed not from him or any other
man, any teaching that could, or could reasonably pretend to give them greater
assurance of any thing, than that anointing gave them of Jesus his being the
Christ, and of the truth of that Doctrine which they had heard from the
beginning: for that anointing says he, is truth and is no lie, but such as
could not deceive them, it being God's witness from Heaven. And from thence
concludes, saying, that as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him. As if he
should have said: as this anointing did at the first prevail with you to
receive Jesus as the true Messiah; so for the same cause I am confiyou will (as
you have the greatest reason) still abide in him, notwithstanding all pretenses
of Seducers to take you off.

This then being the scope and drift of the Apostle in this place, to which the
several expressions here used are accommodated, and by which they are to be
interpreted and understood, how I pray you will you find your opinion here, of
the Spirits inward teaching of all things without any outward teaching? You are
wont to say that the Scriptures are not to be understood but by the same Spirit
that gave them forth. And the Spirit doubtless is not wanting to assist the
sincere endeavors of men in searching after the sense of the Scriptures in
order to practice. But truly if we should judge of men's having the Spirit by
their understanding the Scriptures, I think there would be as little reason to
think you have the Spirit, as any sort of men that have read the Scriptures,
for doubtless there are scarce any sort of men if any at all, that do more
grossly misunderstand and misapply, and so abuse the Scriptures, than you do,
and that under the greatest confidence too of being guided in your sense and
notions of them by the Spirit of God. You take the sound of words in Scripture,
which, as you fancy, comport with your notions and opinions:, and then apply
them to your purpose, and then are confident the Holy Spirit has guided you
therein. When As alas you do not understand the intent or design of the Writer
in the places where such expressions are, no nor, as is to be feared, do you
make it your business to understand it, but think your business is rather to
sit still and to expect the immediate teachings of the Spirit, and then
conclude your conceptions which first offer themselves to you, to be his
teachings. And on the other hand conclude all rational opposition that is made
against you by such as have taken pains to consider the scope and coherence of
Scripture, to be the issues of fleshly wisdom and carnal reason. So that I know
not which is more to be pitied, your ignorance or your confidence: but certain
it is that you are to be pitied for both.

It is observable that when Solomon (a man wiser in his generation than any of
you are in yours) had a promise from God of being made wise above all that were
before him, did not therefore think himself unconcerned in labor and diligent
search to attain it, but said, I gave my heart to seek and search out by
wisdom concerning all things that are done under heaven: this sore travel,
says he, has God given to the Sons of men to be exercised therewith, Eccles.
1. 13. And as he says the blessing of the Lord makes rich, in one place; so
he says the diligent hand makes rich, in another, from which may fairly be
collected, that the blessing of God in the diligent use of due means, is the
way to prosper in the world. And it is as true in the course of attaining to
spiritual riches in understanding and grace, as it is in temporals. And
therefore he says again in reference to that: if thou cryest after knowledge
and liftest up thy voice for understanding: if thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for hid Treasures: then shall thou understand the fear of
the Lord and find the knowledge of God, for the Lord gives wisdom: out of his
mouth proceeds knowledge and understanding: that is he gives such wisdom
unto men usually upon those terms forementioned, Prove. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

But your rare notions, like Jacobs Venison, are usually too soon and too
easily come by to be right.

. 17. But because I would not be too tedious, I shall, I think in reference to
the business in hand, consider but one or two places of Scripture more, at
which you stumble, unless others fall in upon occasion of discussing those. And
one of them is, Romans 8. 14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are
the Sons of God. And you suppose this comports with your wild notion of men's
being guided by the internal teachings of the Spirit, without outward teaching.
But why I pray you without outward teaching? Do you not know that the whole
Gospel preached by Christ and his Apostles, and afterward written, is the
Issue or product of the Spirit? Is not all the Holy Scripture given by
inspiration of God? Did not the holy men of old (the Prophets) speak and write
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost? and do not you your selves say that the
Scriptures cannot be understood but by the same Spirit that gave them forth? by
which you suppose and grant that they were given forth by the Spirit. And for
what end did the Holy Spirit inspire the Apostles first to preach, and after
that to write the Holy Doctrine of the Gospel, but to teach men thereby what to
believe and how to live that they might be saved? And if so, are not all those
who are led and guided by this Gospel which is the Doctrine of the Holy Spirit,
led by the Spirit of God?

There Is no doubt but that the Spirit by its inward operations upon the minds
of men does concur with that teaching of his which is from without by the
Scriptures, and by men from the Scriptures. But methinks it is wonderful! I mean
wonderfully absurd that you should divide the Spirits teaching and leading, and
oppose his inward to his outward teaching. Whereas the Lord has declared
expressly that his word outwardly, and Spirit shall be so conjoined in carrying
on his design of grace toward the world under the Gospel, as that they shall
never be separated, Isa, 59. 21. As for me this is my Covenant with them says
the Lord; my Spirit that is upon thee and my words which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor
out of the of mouth thy Seeds Seed, says the Lord, from hence forth and for
ever, ( Prove. 123.) By which and by other Scriptures, I know assuredly that
whatever inward teaching by the Spirit you pretend to, yet the Holy Spirit
never taught you to believe or to say that the Spirits inward teaching only,
without any outward teaching by the Scriptures or by men, is the rule of Faith
and Practice, whatever other Spirit it is that taught it you, the which it
concerns you more than me to examine. For the Spirit having said thus much by
this holy man of God in this Place (for he as all other Prophets spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost) I am sure he has said nothing to the contrary in
any other; for the word that proceeds from the Spirit of truth, is not yea and
nay.

When St. Paul said, Gal. 5. 18. if ye are led by the Spirit ye are not under
the Law; he did not mean, if they were led by the inward guidance of the Spirit
without the outward conduct of the Gospel, but under the word Spirit here, he
opposes the Gospel to the Law. And his meaning was, that if they gave up
themselves to the conduct of the Spirit by the Gospel, they should not need to
make conscience still of the Ceremonies of Moses's Law, as Circumcision or the
like, as some among them did, from which he had been dehorting them in the
beginning of this Chapter.

This Gospel is called the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, which
frees those that walk after it, and not after the Flesh, from the Law of Sin
and Death, Romans 8. 1, 2. And where this Gospel is received into the heart so as
that it is predominant there, there Christ dwells and the Spirit dwells by that
word of the Gospel. And thus Christ is in men the hope of Glory: and thus
Christ dwells in the heart by Faith, by Faith in his word: and those live and
walk in the Light, that live and walk according to this word: and thus they
abide in Christ, that have his word abiding in them: and those that abide in
the Doctrine of Christ, have both the Father and the Son: and they are
spiritually minded, whose minds are powerfully influenced by the Gospel: and
they resist the Holy Ghost, who resist that word which has been declared by
motion and inspiration from him: So inseparable are the Word and Spirit in the
conduct of Christians to happiness.

St. Paul exhorted the Ephesians to be filled with the Spirit. in order to
their speaking to themselves in Psalms, and Hymns and Spiritual Songs, Ephesians. 5.
18, 19. and the Colossians that they would let the word of Christ dwell in them
richly, in order to the same end, Col. 3. 16. From both which passages compared
it appears, that the Word of Christ which is the Gospel, and the Spirit, do
concur and cooperate in producing the same Spiritual effects in men: Yea, it
seems they are so unanimous in their operation in reference hereto, that when
but one is named, the other is to be understood; or else that the variation of
expression, is but another word for the same thing.

These things being so plain throughout the current of the Scriptures; your
bold and confident assertion to the contrary, discovers your very great
unskilfulness in the nature of the Evangelical Dispensation, and your utter
insufficiency and unfitness to take upon you to teach others, and that you need
rather your selves to be taught the first principles of the Doctrine of Christ.

. 18. Heb. 8. 10, 11. is another place which you would constrain to serve your
turn, and to make it evident that under the New Covenant, God himself does so
inwardly teach men and write his Laws in their hearts, that they need no
outward teaching what to believe or do, by any other means: because it is there
said, I will put or give my Laws into their minds and write them in their
hearts: and they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his
Brother; saying, know the Lord; for all shall know me from the least to the
greatest. But when you can but obtain of your selves seriously and impartially
to consider for what end God has set in his Church first Apostles, and then
Pastors and Teachers, if not to teach men what to know, believe and do that
they may be saved; I doubt not but you will then find it necessary to
understand this place of Scripture so as that it may not run counter to, and
contradict the whole current of Scripture, elsewhere; as it will if your sense
of it take place, as I have already showed at large. And therefore seeing your
sense of it cannot stand unless the general testimony of the Scriptures fall;
another sense of it must of necessity be accepted of.

These words then as noting the difference of the second Covenant from the
first, are a form of speech to set forth after a rhetorical way, how plainly
and easily to be understood, the mind of God touching the Salvation of men,
shall be revealed and made known under the Gospel, in comparison of what it was
before. Before and under the old Covenant it was but obscurely made known by
dark Prophesies, (which are therefore said to be a light shining in a dark
place, 2. Pet. 1. 19.) and under types and figures and literal representations,
so that the Children of Israel could not see to the end of those things which
are now abolished: they could rarely and not without much difficulty and
uncertainty, if at all, understand the end or design of them, or what was
signified by them, till the Gospel came and revealed them. And therefore St.
Paul says, before Faith came, we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the
Faith, which should afterward be revealed, Gal. 3. 23. So that by all the
teaching they had though there were Precept upon Precept, Precept upon Precept,
Line upon Line, Line upon Line, here a little and there a little, as the
Prophet speaks, yet they had and could have but a dim and very imperfect sight
and knowledge of what is now revealed in the Gospel. And therefore its said of
the Prophets themselves, who having their predictions by immediate revelation
from God, were like to know more in this kind than any other in those times,
yet its said of them that when they Prophesied of the Grace that should come to
them that are under the Gospel, though they enquired diligently what as well as
what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when
it testified before hand the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should
follow, yet I say it is said of them, that not unto themselves but unto us they
did Minister the things which are reported by them that have preached the
Gospel, with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, 1. Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. In
this respect it was said, though none of the Prophets were greater than John
the Baptist, yet the least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he. This was
their Case then.

But now by the Gospel the way of Salvation by Christ, and the terms and
conditions upon which it is promised, are so nakedly, plainly and clearly
revealed, and fitted to men's understandings and capacities, that so much as is
necessary to Salvation, may very easily be understood by persons of very
ordinary and common capacities, and without much teaching; as appears by those
that were converted and baptized (as the Jailer and his Household, and the three
thousand in Acts 2.) with little teaching. Upon account of which clear
revelation, its said, we all with open face behold as in a Glass the Glory of
the Lord: the Glory of his Wisdom, Goodness, Grace and Mercy, in the way of
Salvation now exhibited in the Gospel, 2. Cor. 3. 18. Upon account of this
difference it is I conceive that St. John says, the darkness is past, and the
true Light now shines, 1 John 2. 8.

Besides, the Laws and terms of the New Covenant, are not only fitted to the
understandings and capacities of all sorts of persons by the plainness of the
Revelation of them; but are such also in the very nature of them as that they
commend themselves to every man's acceptance and choice, and are every whit as
worthy to be embraced by their wills, as they are easy to be understood by the
reason of their minds.

A great part of the Laws of the Old Covenant which were but figurative of the
terms of the New, had little or nothing in them to commend themselves to men's
acceptance and choice, so long as their Symbolical nature was not understood,
save what the authority of God in commanding them gave them. Circumcision,
Sacrificing, legal washings, and Purifications and the like, were in St. Paul's
account but beggarly Elements when the command of God for the observation of
them, was taken off: And not only so, but they were a Yoke, which as St. Peter
said, neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear; a Yoke of Bondage as St.
Paul calls them. Whereas most of the Precepts of the Gospel, the things
commanded there, are desirable in themselves, if they had not been commanded by
a promulgate Law: To love and worship God; to repent of that which has been
ill done, to be sober, chaste, and temperate: to do to others as we would be
done to our selves in point of equity, fidelity and charity: to be humble and
meek, patient and contented, and the like, are things that tend to the peace
and satisfaction of the mind, to the health of the body and long life, to a
man's Credit, Reputation, and thriving in the World, and to the good of humane
Society; Besides their certain relation to a future happy State. And there is
no man that acts according to the best reason of his mind, but would choose
these things though you should suppose him under no express command to do it,
and though there were no Heaven promised or Hell threatened. But when you
consider the great reward in another World that is promised to a faithful
observance of the Laws of Christ and to a belief in him; and the dreadful
threatenings against such as despise and neglect them, it makes them yet far
more desirable and eligible; because as it is natural for every man to desire
the happiness and perfection of his own being, so it is agreeable to the
highest reason in man to choose the means that tend thereto, and such is our
obedience to the Gospel. And these rewards which are such mighty motives to
obedience, are far more clearly revealed and brought into open Light by the
Gospel, than they were before; which makes the Gospel far more effectual to
persuade to Holy Living, than the Law could be. The Law made nothing perfect,
but the bringing in of a better hope did, by which we draw nigh unto God, Heb.
7. 19.

These two things forementioned then, the easiness of understanding God's way
and method of Salvation from the plainness and fullness of the revelation of it
under the New Covenant, by which it is fitted to every capacity, and the ^nnate
goodness of the Laws thereof, in conjunction with the promise of eternal Life
made to the observance of them, by which they are also completely fitted to
attract and draw men's wills to accept, embrace and choose them; these I say are
the things I conceive foretold in that Prophecy, Jer. 31. here cited in Heb.
8. under those expressions of God's putting, giving or conveying his Laws into
the mind and writing them in the heart, so that they shall not teach every man
his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, etc. And when it is so said, it is
not then said that they shall not be taught neither by Apostles, Evangelists,
Pastors, or Teachers; but they shall not teach every man his Neighbor and
every man his Brother. And though the Phrase here used seem absolute in sound,
yet it may well be understood in a Comparative sense, as other expessions in
Scripture of like nature sometimes must be. As when its said labor not for the
meat that perishes, but for that meat which endures to everlasting Life, Joh.
6. 26. The meaning here of labor not, is labor not so much. And so again; I
desired Mercy and not. Sacrifice, Hos. 6. 6. the meaning is, I desired Mercy
more than Sacrifice, or Sacrifice not so much as Mercy. So again Ephesians. 6. 12. we
wrestle not with flesh and blood, that is, not only or not so much, but against
Principalities, etc. And so here, when it is said they shall not ^^each every
man his Neighbor, etc. The meaning may be that they shall not so much need to
do it under the second Covenant as under the first. But indeed the words and
phrase here used, seem to be a strain of elegance often used in Scriptures, when
to set forth the greatness or great abundance and plenty of things, expressions
are used improperly and hyperbolically in reference thereto, and so are not to
be understood properly, but figuratively. As when it is said in reference to
the same thing under the Gospel with that I have been now speaking of, That the
Earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the
Sea, Isa. 11. 9. I suppose you will not understand this in such a strict sense
as if it foretold in Gospel Times, that there should be no more knowledge of
God wanting on the Earth, than there is bare ground in the Sea: or that David
would have the World believe that he did weep a River, yea Rivers full of
Tears, when he said, mine eyes run down with Rivers of Tears, because men keep
not thy Laws, Psalm 119. or that St. John did think in a strict sense that the
world could not contain the books, if all the signs which Jesus did, should be
written, Joh. 20. And if not, why should you so much as once imagine that these
words of the Prophet should foretell, that under the New Covenant there should
be no need of teaching by man's Ministry, when the whole current of the
Scriptures of the New Testament both in precept and example, show the contrary?
The words of the Prophet here, are only a prediction of the rich and plentiful
means of Knowledge and Grace that was to be vouchsafed under the New Covenant
more than under the Old.

. 19. One would think you have an aching Tooth against outward teaching, when
you build such Castles in the Air as ye do rather than none, to batter it down.
But how comes it to pass that you use it so much your selves, if there be no
more need of it than you pretend? I know that which you allege to excuse your
selves in this seeming contradiction, is this, or to this effect. You say
though men need not be taught by men what it is which they ought to know,
believe and do, the light within teaching them this, and being a Rule to them
in these things: yet in as much as men may and do rebel against this light, its
necessary to call upon and persuade them to obey it.

But in this Plea you suppose for truth that which is a manifest, gross, and
most dangerous and pernicious error, which is this: That it is not as well
necessary to teach men by the Scriptures and by the Ministry of men, to know
and believe what is necessary to their salvation, as it is to persuade them to
do what is necessary thereto. For contrary hereunto I have already proved, that
for men that live under the Gospel, its necessary to their Salvation that they
know and believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and Savior of the
World, and that remission of sin is promised in his name to such as repent* I
have proved likewise that these things cannot be known, but either by immediate
revelation from God, or by instruction from them that have had such Revelation,
or by them whose knowledge thereof has been derived down successively by
outward teaching from the first preachers of such Doctrine. To which I will now
add as follows.

In the Apostles days the Converts that were then made such, were brought to
the knowledge and belief of those great Articles of the Christian Faith,
fundamentally necessary to Salvation, by hearing the Word taught and the
Scriptures opened. This appears all along the Acts of the Apostles: In Chap. 2.
when Peter had said ver. 36. Let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that
God has made that same Jesus whom ye crucified, both Lord and Christ: and had
further said unto them ver. 38. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the
Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins: then its said ver. 41. then
they that gladly received his Word were baptized. And Chap. 8. 12. But when
they believed Philip, Preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God and
the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized. And Chap. 11, 13, 14. Send men to
Joppa, and call for Simon whose surname is Peter; who shall tell thee words,
whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved. Again Chap. 16. 31, 3^, 34. They
said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved and thy house:
And they spoke unto him the Word of the Lord, and to all that were in his
house: and he rejoiced believing in God with all his House. And Chap. 17. 2, 3,
4. And Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, and three Sabbath days
reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, opening and alleging that Christ
must needs have suffered and risen from the dead: and that this Jesus whom I
preach unto you is Christ. And some of them believed, ver. 11, 12. They
received the Word with all readiness of mind and searched the Scriptures daily
whether those things were so, therefore many believed. Again Chap. 18. 8. And
many of the Corinthians, hearing, believed and were baptized, ver. 28. and he
mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the Scriptures that
Jesus was Christ. And Chap. 26. 17, 18. To whom now I send thee to open their
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light. Also Chap. 28. 23, 24. To whom
he expounded and testified the Kingdom of God, persuading them concerning
Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses and out of the Prophets, from morning till
evening: and some believed the things which were spoken. By all these instances
you see or may see in what way and by what means God brought men to know
Christ, and to believe in him in the Apostles days under the highest
Dispensation of Gospel Light as ever shined upon the World. The Apostles
Commission was to go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever he had commanded them, Mat. 28. They in pursuance of this,
first taught the People to know and believe that Jesus was the Christ, and that
remission of sins was granted in his Name to such as believed, repented, and
were baptized: and then they afterward instructed them in the particular
duties of Holy living.

Nothing can be plainer than that this was the way and method which God pitched
upon, and used in the Apostles days, to bring men to the knowledge and belief
of what was necessary to their Salvation. And how you will satisfy the World
or your selves either, that God a few years ago not heard of till then, has
altered his method, and that now he reveals these things to men without any
such teaching by the Scriptures and Ministry of men, as in those times he
constantly used to do, I know not, nor as I believe you neither.

But I pray you give an honest account to such as are unsatisfied, for what
reason it is that you are so zealous against teaching by men, when you have but
such thin pretenses to support your selves in so doing. Suppose your error were
the truth, and that God did by a light created in every man, sufficiently teach
them what they ought to believe and do: pray you what hurt would accrue to men
by having the same things imparted to them by men from without, which they know
and believe already by a light within. When St. Peter had occasion to write to
those that were already enlightened within (though not in your pretended way)
he said unto them, I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of
these things, though ye know them and be established in the present truth, 2
Pet. 1, 12. And St. John in his 1. Epist. 2. 21. I have not written unto you,
because ye know not the truth, but because you know it, and that no lie is of
the truth. And do not you your selves grant that the Light within you
witnesses to that which is in the Scriptures, and that the Scriptures are as a
Coppie of it? Why then are you so angry with them that teach the people from
the Scriptures, those truths which you say the light within you witnesses to?

I would ye did not give too much occasion hereby to suspect your integrity,
when you make such sad outcries against the public Ministry, one as well as
another without distinction, as you are wont to do; when as you cannot but
know, if you know at all what they preach, that they teach the same Doctrine in
the main to the people, which the Apostles taught, and which is declared in the
Scriptures, and so the same which you say the Light within you witnesses to:
And also that they teach the Peopel, that it is not the hearing of this
Doctrine preached to them, no nor yet the knowledge of it neither, will avail
them to their Salvation, without receiving it into their hearts, or without
such a belief of it as issues it self in a frame of Spirit and tenor of Life
and conversation, as is suitable to it. And if you know not this, and yet speak
evil of them for their preaching, as surmising worse; you then make your selves
of the number of those ill men which Peter and Jude describe, who spoke evil of
the things they know not, 2. Pet. 2. 12. Jude 10.

Besides you apparently discover a very ill mind while you seek to make them
odious to the people by that which does not at all make them so, save only in
the opinion of those whose minds are corrupted with prejudice against all
teachers of Holy things as such, or with Covetousness, or Interest of a party;
and that is their taking money of the people wherewith to support themselves and
Families in serving them in the dear concernments of their souls: And therefore
you style them hirelings, such as preach for hire, and make a trade of it, and
so make merchandise of men's souls. Not considering that in doing thus you
reproach the wisdom of our Lord who has ordained that those that preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. 14. and has said in reference
hereto, that the Labourer is worthy of his hire, Luke 10. 7. and that such as
labor in the Word and Doctrine are worthy of double honor, 1. Tim. 5. 17.
that those that are taught in the Word, should communicate to him that teaches
in all good things, Gal. 6. 6. And St. Paul said of himself that he robbed
other Churches taking wages, that he might serve the Church of Corinth without
charge; which he did only to take occasion from the false Apostles, who songht
occasion to blast the reputation of his Ministry upon occasion of his taking
money; just as you do now by the Ministers of the Gospel, 2. Cor. 11. 8, 12, 13.
And if you do as they did, you will too much deserve the same name they had.

You think, it seems, you may compare them (as frequently you do) with the
false Prophets and bad Priests of old; of whom it is said that the Priests did
teach for hire, and the Prophets divine for money. But are you indeed so far
forsaken of understanding as to think it was a crime in the Priests under the
Law to take money, or moneys-worth, whereby to live to discharge their Office?
You cannot but know what ample provision God made for them, and accounted
himself robbed when their Tithes were detained and kept back from them; and
therefore that could not be their crime: But when the people were wicked and
did not make conscience of observing God's Laws, but broke them in keeping back
the Tithes as well as in other things, the crime of the Priests complained of
then, doubtless was that they taught the people corrupt Doctrine, such as would
please them, that they might thereby incline them to pay them their Tithes. God
in Malachi's Prophecy complains of the people that they had robbed him in
Tithes and Offerings, even the whole Nation. And then he complains of the
Priests also, saying, but ye are departed out of the way, ye have caused many
to stumble at the Law, ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, says the Lord
of Hosts. Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the
people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been Partial in the
Law. Mal. 2. 8. 9. And so the false Prophets that saw vanity and divined lies,
saying thus says the Lord God, when the Lord had not spoken. And why did they
so, but to get the peoples money by pleasing them in Prophesying peace to them,
when the true Prophets prophesied of judgment, and were prasecuted for it?
Ezekiel. 22. 25, 28.

And are you sure that all those Ministers that receive money of the people as a
reward of their Labors, whom you brand with preaching for hire and divining
for money, are such and do as those Priests and Prophets did, for which they are
so stigmatized? And if you are not sure of it, as I am sure you are not nor can
be: Then I pray you consider how or which way you will quit your selves from
being of the number of those false accusers of whom St. Paul Prophesied, as
persons that should have a form of Godliness, and yet deny the power of it, by
whom the times should be mad perilous, 2 Timothy 3. 3.

It Is possible and too probable that there may be some who for worldly and
fleshly respects, may greatly fall short of a faithful discharge of their duty
toward the souls under their charge: and if there be any that by dawbing with
untempered Mortar, do betray them, I am no advocate for such; they shall bear
their burden whosoever they be. But if there be some such, how unreasonable and
unchristian is it, to condemn the Righteous with the Wicked, and to censure all
for somes sake! It looks as if the work and office it self, were the eyesore
to you, as much, if not more, than their miscarriage in it. And that which adds
ground of suspicion herein, is that your great outcry against them is for
taking money for preaching, which is none of their crime they doing their duty.
But those which I fear stand behind you and insensibly influence you herein,
know well enough, that if the people could be but prevailed with to withold
maintenance from the Ministry, the Ministerial work would cease, and a Door
would be opened for somewhat else. And therefore those Romish Factors that can
turn themselves into any shape, have cunningly made use of all sorts of Sects
among us, however otherwise differing among themselves, yet in this to agree,
to cry down the public Ministry.

There were in the Apostles time such pretenders to Christianity, and Teachers
too, as sought their own things and not the things of Jesus Christ, that served
their own bellies instead of serving Jesus Christ: that through covetousness
with feigned words made merchandise of the people; in order to all which they
did corrupt the Word; by reason of whose pernicious ways, the way of truth was
evil spoken of: But by whom? doubtless by none but by malignant adversaries to
the truth it self. But we have not the least whisper of any good Christians
speaking evil of the faithful Ministry because of some miscarriages of the
Scandalous and unfaithful. And yet I believe you would take it ill, if upon
account of your doing now not as the good, but as ill men then did, you should
be ranked and numbered not with the good but with the bad; which if you be not,
it is because some have more charity for you, than you have for others that
better deserve it.

What I was beginning to answer to your Plea for the incongruity of your
opinion and practice, has led me to somewhat a long discourse; and yet I have
something more directly to say to it. Your opinion is that men being taught of
God himself by his Light and Spirit within now under the New Covenant, need not
to be taught by men, nor to have the Scripture for their Teacher. And yet for
all that you take upon you to teach the Peopel your selves, whilst you decry
it in others; and say in your defense, that in as much as men may disobey the
Light in them, therefore your teaching is necessary to persuade them to obey
it. But I pray you, is God's showing men their duty all the inward teaching you
pretend to? Do you not pretend to be led and moved by the Spirit to do as well
as to know your duty? Do you not say expressly that the Spirit of God moves and
leads into all the works of righteousness, and that the Spirit of Christ only
exercises the Conscience to God and Man, and leads into the practice of all
Truth? Nay do you not make the acceptance of what is acceptably done to depend
upon the motion and work of the Spirit in the doing of it, and do you not count
all that is not so done, to be done in man's own will? And therefore why do you
thus dissemble the matter, and heap one contradiction upon another? But suppose
that which you pretend were the only reason of your teaching: is there not then
the same reason that others should Preach as well as you? Or are none in danger
of rebelling against the Light but only such as hear you? But the plain Truth
is for all your talk, that you do undertake to teach men what their Duty is, as
well as persuade them to do it; as appears abundantly in your Books,
particularly in those of Edward Buroughs. So that by this tergiversation and
shuffling, it plainly appears to intelligent men, that the business at the
bottom is not that you are against the needfulness of man's teaching,
notwithstanding all the teaching by the Light within; but only against all
other men's teaching but your own. So that if you knew your own hearts in this
business, you would find that the meaning of your crying down all other
Teachers, is that yours alone might be exalted. But if your Teachers or any
among you do see and know the inconsistency of these your Pretenses and
Practices, and yet use the Pretenses for a blind, to hide the design from the
people, it is then a perfect piece of --

There is another thing like unto this: you say those that are taught of God,
need not that the Scripture should teach them, and that all men are taught of
God by his Light within them; and yet it seems you think that men have need to
be taught by your Books, though they have no need to be taught by the
Scriptures; else why is the World troubled with so many of them? The Pharisees
made void the Commandments of God that they might establish their own
Traditions: and it looks but untowardly, that while you represent the Holy
Scripture as such a needless thing, that you at the same time have sent out
such a crowd of your own Books as you have done. And if you would have the
people believe that they proceed from the same teaching of the Spirit as the
Books of the Holy Scriptures do, what shall the people then do when they find
them to contradict one another, as they may easily do, if they will but do as
the noble Bereans did, who searched the Scriptures daily whether those things
were so which were preached to them in the Name of the Lord. As in the present
case before us: the Scripture plainly teaches one method of bringing men to
Salvation, and your books another. Ed. Borough in his book teaches that that
is not the body of Christ which was not with the Father before the World began
p. 465. But the Scripture teaches that in the fullness of time God sent forth
hi Son, made of a Woman, Gal. 4. 4. Which of these two now must the people
believe, or which of these must be the rule to try the other by? your Books or
the Holy Scriptures? I pray you speak out, and tell the people plainly; For if
the Scriptures be true, as you dare not deny but they are, than your Books in
such things as contradict them, must be false; and consequently not the Issue
of the infallible Spirit, as you would have the world believe they are. But
though we, or an Angel from Heaven, Preach any other Gospel unto you, than that
which we have Preached unto you, let him be accursed, said St. Paul, Gal. 1. 8.

I have been the longer upon the Point of your Enthusiasm, by which you have
set up a new method of your own in opposition to God's method of bringing men
to the Christian belief and Life, because I deem it a Mother and a Master-Error
to many others which you hold. And therefore have good hopes that if you could
but be cured of this, you would be in a hopeful way of being cured of the rest,
which depend on it, with less difficulty. Having therefore been so long upon
this beyond what I first intended, I shall draw toward a conclusion of this
address to you, not engageing in particular with the rest of your mistakes. But
before I make an end, I would caution you touching two or three things which
among others may probably have had a large share in introducing you into this
strange mistake.

. 20. The one is an opinion or conceit that the Gospel is a more mysterious
thing than indeed it is. It is true, there are things in the Gospel called a
Mystery, the Mystery of God's will, the Mystery of Christ, the Mystery of
Faith, the Mystery of Godliness: and to you, says Christ to the Disciples,
it is given to know the Myeries of the Kingdom of God, and the like. Upon
occasion of all which, and the like expressions in Scripture; Some people have
fancied that there is something else necessary to make a man a true Christian
indeed, than what is obvious to vulgar apprehensions, and easy to be
understood as other matters are. And therefore they have been wont to esteem a
plain and familiar way of teaching the Doctrine of repentance, and the
necessity of obedience to the Law of God, together with a belief that Christ
dyed for our sins and rose again according to the Scriptures, to be but a dry
and legal way of Preaching. And those that have vented high Speculations and
almost or altogether unintelligible notions and new coined Phrases and
expressions, concerning the work of God in the Soul, and of Union with Christ,
and Communion with God, of living by faith, and walking in the Spirit* these
they have accounted Evangelical Preachers, and such preaching and discourses in
conference, to be truly Spiritual, and those to be Spiritual Christians that
are of this make. And because this way obtained a great reputation among a
great many of Christian Professors, many persons have been tempted hereby to
proceed so far from one thing to another in this way, both allegorizing
Scriptures of plain import, and turning plain points of Doctrine and of great
concern into Mystical speculations, until they have made another thing of the
plain Doctrine of the Gospel than Christ made it. And this seems to be directly
your Case, who in this way are come at last to turn the plain and intelligible
method of God's proceeding with men to bring them to the Christian belief and
Life, and so to salvation, into Enthusiastical Fancies, Airy Notions and
speculations. Such is your conceited Mystery of of the inward Flesh of Christ
in contradistinction to the Flesh of the Veil, as you phrase it: as if Christ
had two kinds of Flesh, one hid under another; by which you trouble yea,
utterly confound the true Notion of Christ's humane Nature: and the great
effects which the Scripture attributes to the Flesh or humane Nature of Christ,
those you attribute to a mere fiction which you call the inward Flesh; a thing
altogether foreign to the Scripture; an error doubtless of a very high nature.
Such also is your spiritualizing Baptism and the Lords Supper, to the exclusion
of their literal use, and to the disparagement of his wisdom and goodness that
ordained them, as well as to the contempt of his Authority which has enjoined
the use of them for the ends for which they were first instituted. Such
likewise is your invented Mystery of the Redemption of the Seed in men: for the
Scripture speaks of no* such thing, but of the Redemption of men themselves.

This mistake about the Mysteriousness of the Christian Religion, has I fear
had a bad influence upon, and produced ill effects in some others as well as
your selves, who perhaps have not been yet carried so far out of the way by it,
as you have been.

Whereas those things that are absolutely necessary for men of all capacities
to know, believe and do, in order to their Salvation, are delivered in the
Gospel with great plainness and easiness to be understood, even of those, of
meanest capacities that have but a mind to understand them, and will attend to
them and consider them. Who is so weak as not to understand it when it is
declared to him, that there was such a one as Jesus Christ, and that he was
declared to be one come from God, and his Doctrine touching his being the Son
of God, and concerning all other things to be true, by the wonderfulness of his
Birth of a Virgin, and the many and mighty miracles which he wrought, and which
were wrought by others in his Name, and by his Resurrection from the dead? Who
is so weak as not to understand when it is declared to him upon good grounds,
that this Jesus was put to death not for his own, but for our Sins; and that he
rose again from the dead the third day? Who is so weak as not to understand
when he hears it declared in the Gospel, that forgiveness of Sins, a glorious
Resurrection, and eternal Happiness in another World, are promised to those
that believe in him as such, and that believe his Doctrine and sincerely obey
it, touching the necessity of Repentance consisting in amendment of Life,
proceeding from sorrow for Sin, and in a sincere observing all his Precepts.
These are things that may be understood by every body that hears and considers
them: And yet these are the things revealed by the Gospel as necessary to be
believed and done in order to salvation. The reason why so many of those that
hear the Gospel, do not believe, and obey it to the saving of their Souls, is
not because they cannot understand it, but because they are not willing to obey
it, and so not willing to believe it, or to consider it, that they might
believe it, but choose rather to please themselves in their evil ways for the
present, and so run the hazard for the future, of the Gospels being true or not
true; or else flatter themselves with hopes that they do repent and obey the
Gospel, under vain and delusive notions of the nature of saving Repentance and
Obedience.

And it is not congruous to the goodness of God's nature, to think that when he
has been pleased out of his great compassion to lost men, to make a New
Covenant of Salvation upon terms suitable to that love and goodness of his, to
think I say, that he should lay the stress of their Salvation upon terms not
easy to be understood by all, one as well as another that are concerned
therein.

And therefore the greatest reason I conceive why some things in the Gospel are
styled a Mystery, is because they were so till they were plainly revealed by
Christ; a great part of the things therein contained, being such as no man by
the highest improvement of, reason, could discover or apprehend, till God in a
supernatural way was pleased to reveal them. Such was God's sending his Son to
assume our Nature, and to die for our Sins, and the granting Remission of Sins,
and eternal Life for his sake, to those that believe and obey the Gospel. But
when they are once revealed, and by revelation made plain and easy to be
understood by men of all capacities, they are sure then no longer Mysteries to
them, unless they remain so through their own wilful neglect to understand
them. Agreeable to this is that of St. Paul, Col. 1. 26. Speaking of the
Gospel, even, says he, the Mystery which has been hid from Ages, and from
Generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints. Ephesians. 1. 9. Having made
known to us the Mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he
has purposed in himself. So the calling of the Gentiles is called a Mystery,
not because it was hard to be understood when the thing was revealed by
Christ's Commission to preach the Gospel to them, and by preaching the Gospel
had given them the Holy Spirit as he had to the believing Jews at the first,
but because this calling of them was little known or understood in the World
till then.

God says St. Paul by revelation made known to me the Mystery, which in other
ages was not made known unto the Sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his
Holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit; that the Gentiles should be
fellow-Heirs, and of the same Body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by
the Gospel, Ephesians. 3. 2, 6. And so again Ver. 9. and to make all men see, what is
the fellowship of the Mystery, which from the beginning of the World has been
hid in God. So that as the Gospel is called a Mystery as containing things in
it which had been altogether a Mystery till they were revealed, so it is called
a Revelation of the Mystery, by reason of its discovering that which was a
Secret before. Romans 16. 25, 26. -- The preaching of Jesus Christ according to
the Revelation of the Mystery, which was kept secret since the world began, but
now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets according to the
commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all Nations for the obedience
of Faith.

In all this I do not deny but that there are in the Gospel things very
Mysterious and hard to be conceived, as touching the manner of their existence,
as the Union of Christ's two Natures, and the Doctrine of the Trinity of Persons
and Unity of Essence, and some other things: But it is not hard to understand
that those things really are, when God has revealed and declared that they
are, though it is very hard, or rather beyond our apprehension to know how and
after what manner they are: and to know and believe more than he has plainly
revealed, is not doubtless necessary to men's Salvation: and therefore men
should be cautious of laying too great a stress upon their different
apprehensions about them.

If you shall say, if Evangelical Truths be made so perceptible by the
plainness and fullness of the Revelation of them; how comes it to pass then that
there is such difference in men's opinions, and so many controversies about them
as there is? I answer, if the differences and controversies be about those
things that are necessary to Salvation, I have told you the reason already: it
is because men will not be satisfied nor acquiesce in that plainness in which
such things are delivered in the Scriptures, but still fancy there is some
farther Mystery in them than indeed there is. And when men take that liberty,
and think they do excellent well in it, then one fancies he sees this hidden
Mystery couched under truths plainly expressed, and another that; when both are
wide of the mark. And then men weary themselves in defending their notions on
both sides, and can never be reconciled until both lay down their bye-opinions,
and submit their judgments to the plainness and simplicity of the truth,
laboring to improve it to practice, which is the true and proper use of it,
which will bring more solid satisfaction to the mind, than all men's Airy
notions, how taking soever they may be with some.

But though the things necessary to salvation, are in the Revelation of them,
accommodated to the capacities of the weak and simple, whose Salvation is
designed by them as well and as much as theirs of stronger and quicker
apprehensions, yet there are things under the New Testament that are hard to be
uttered (as the phrase is Heb. 5. 11.) and therefore hard to be understood, as
the phrase is again 2. Pet. 3. 16. As there is milk for Babes who are unskilful
in the Word of righteousness, so there is meat for strong Men who by reason of
use have their Senses exercised to discern both good and evil, as it is said
Heb. 5. 13, 14. And men's differences about these points proceed at the best
from their different measures of Light and understanding, and sometimes are
persisted in from that which is worse. So it was in the Apostles time between
the believing Jews and the blieving Gentiles, Romans 14. Which by the way, would
not have been, if all good Christians then had been guided by an infallible
Light within, as you suppose they are now. If they had, they would not have
needed to have been taught and re-taught which are the first principles of the
Oracles of God, as some of them were, Heb. 5.

But when men which are but poor in knowledge and yet rich in confidence,
undertake to manage and master these more difficult points and passages of
Scripture, they too often wrest them to their own destruction, as St. Peter
speaks, 2. Ep. 3. 16. And this they either do or are in great danger of doing,
when they fasten upon some wrong sense and notion of hard and difficult places
of Scripture, and then pervert plain and easy places by interpreting them to
their wrong sense of those that are more obscure and difficult; especially when
their interpretations are not mere speculations, but such as influence men in
their practice, as becoming a rule to them therein. Whereas the more wise and
judicious, never interpret hard places in opposition to the common sense of
those that are plain and easy, but explain those that are hard and difficult,
by those that are plain.

The use I would advise you to make of all this, is to review the grounds you
have gone on, and to cease from your new notions and speculations of your being
taught only by the Light within; which you have taken up from some expressions
in Scripture misunderstood by you, and wholly disagreeing to the Scope of the
places where they are found, and contrary to the general current of the
Scriptures in their plain and obvious sense. Seek not a Knot in a bulrush; seek
not for Mysteries there where the Lord has declared his mind plainly and in no
parable. But form your notions of God's method of proceeding with men to bring
them to Salvation, according to the plain and express Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles in the Scriptures, and receive from and regulate by that Doctrine,
all your apprehensions, persuasions, affections and operations of your Souls,
together with all your words and actions; So did the good Christians of Old:
they obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine which was delivered to them,
Romans 6. 17. They purifyed their souls in obeying that Truth through the Spirit,
1. Pet. 1. 22. Yea, the Apostles themselves were first taught by Christ's
preaching unto them, what to think and believe concerning Christ, John 17. 8. I
have given unto them the words which thou gave me; and they have received
them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed
that thou did send me. And just as the Apostles preached, so the Christians
believed: they made their Doctrine the Adequate Rule of their notions of
things; the Rule of their Faith, the Rule of their Life: So we Preach, and so
ye believed, says St. Paul, 1. Cor. 15. 11.

And those great, plain, known and commonly received Truths, necessary to
Salvation, called the common Faith, Tit. 1. 4. the Faith once delivered to the
Saints, Jude 3. these I say were the Rule and Standard by which they were to
try the Doctrine of such as only pretended to Inspirations from the Spirit.
Beloloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of
God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the World, 1. Joh. 4. 1. And
then St. John. in ver. 2, 3. commends to them one known fundamental Doctrine
pertinent to his Case then in hand, by which they might know the Teachers he
cautioned them against, were not inspired by God nor authorized by him. Hereby
know ye the Spirit of God: every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is
come in the Flesh, is of God. And every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus
Christ is come in the Flesh, is not of God. And again verse 6. We are of God:
he that knows God, hears us (adhered to and governed themselves by the
Apostles Doctrine) he that is not of God hears not us: hereby know we the
Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Error.

And truly if you will not make the plain and express Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles in the Scriptures touching Faith and a good Life, your Rule by
which to try and to judge of the Truth and erroneousness of your conceptions,
persuasions, motions and inclinations, under the notion of the Light within,
and of all your words and actions consequent thereupon, you are and will be in
great danger to be like the wandering Stars and the clouds carried with a
Tempest, of which St Peter and Jude speak; unfixed and unstable in your
judgment, Faith and Ways. For it is certain and evident, whatever you pretend
to the contrary, that the Light within you, is not in your own account always a
certain, constant and infallible Rule to you; for if it were, you would not act
so contrary to your selves as you have done under pretense of being taught of
God, and guided by the Light within: One while crying up your former practice
of shaking as the effect of God's work in and upon you, and another while
confessing it to be a delusion, as Samuel Fisher one of note with you, did to
me, saying, it was so judged. One while crying down all Ecclesistical forms of
Government as tyrannical, another while erecting one among your selves,
pretending to as much Infallibility in your Body representative in managing it,
as the Papists do in reference to the Pope, One while owning the witnessing of
a person to be from God, and another while condemning the same for an error or
delusion. How often have those of your number thought they have been sent by
God on messages, who after have found themselves deluded?

By these and other like instances you may be convinced, that if you do not
make the Doctrine of Christ in the Scriptures the Adequate Rule of the motions
and inclinations of your minds and the actions of your lives, whereby to know
when they are of God and when not, you have then no certain Rule to go by but
are continually liable to most horrible mistakes, and to think that to be a
teaching or command from God, which is indeed a delusion from the Devil. Nor
without this Rule in Scripture which lies open to all, have you any way to
satisfy others, that what you say or do is from God. You have no miracles
amongst you, by which God was wont to bear witness to his servants, when he
sent them on messages new to the World. And have you indeed such an opinion of
your selves as to think men ought to believe only because you say it? Our
Savior said, if I bear witness of my self my witness is not true, John 5. 31.
and is your credit better than his? And I pray you what have you to bear
witness for you in what you say, if the Scriptures cannot; To the Law then and
to the Testimony of Christ in the Doctrine of the Scriptures, if you speak not
according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in you.

. 21. There is one thing more which I would admonish you to beware of, and that
is a high opinion of your selves, and a low and despicable opinion of all
others that differ from you: a thing which I fear has betrayed you into that
desperate error which I have been detecting, together with many others.

For when men by reason of their New Mystical notions of plain Scriptures and
familiar points of Doctrine, and of their new-minted phrases answerable
thereto, do fancy themselves to be spiritual, and all the rest that still stick
to the plainness and simplicity of the Gospel, to be but carnal and formal
professors (though in their tempers and lives better than themselves) they then
begin to think, that they are nearer and dearer to God than they, and
consequently that God will reveal himself after a more intimate way and manner
to themselves than he does to such. And when they are intoxicated and grown
giddy with such conceits, then they are drawn by degrees to imagine themselves
to be brought into some kind of equality with the Apostles themselves, and that
now they do not need to be taught by such whom they esteem so much below
themselves, but that they shall be now taught of God immediately. And when they
are thus transported and exaltted with these dreams, fancies, and high
conceits, then they conclude that all those Scriptures which speak of men's
being taught of God, led by the Spirit, and anointed with the Unction of the
Holy One that teaches all things, and the like, do speak directly to their
case, and represent the happy state and condition into which they are now
brought. And now they look down upon all others with a kind of compassionating
contempt, as men in the dark, sticking in the form and imitation, and the
Letter; and guided by carnal reason and fleshly Wisdom, to whom the things of
the Kingdom of God are altogether a Mystery. And by this time they fancy
themselves to be in the Resurrection, and to have attained to the perfect
state, and are came so for as to be in the judgment, and to sit in judgment
upon the World. And thus through the abundance of revelations, not which they
have had, but which they fancy to have had, they are exalted above measure. And
does not your Conscience witness that this comes home to you, and represents
your Case or the Case of many of you?

I confess Pride, especially Pride of this kind, is not so easily discerned by
them that are infected with it, as it is by bystanders; as a Fever when come
to its height, sometimes is not by them that are in it. And no doubt but you
rather fancy your selves to be the humblest and most self-denying people, of
all others; nay to be the only humble people; for you have thrown off and cried
down the bravery and Pride of the World which others retain. But do you not
know that a voluntary humility and a being vainly puffed up with a fleshly mind,
do often keep company? If you do not, then read Col. 2. 18. And do you not
remember that false Prophets are wont to come in sheeps clothing, and to wear a
rough Garment to deceive, who yet inwardly are ravening Wolves, not sparing the
Flock, but preying upon them. Zach. 13. 4.

Be persuaded them to enter into a serious and impartial examination of your
selves, and of your own hearts, and feel the Pulse of your Spirits, and try
whether things have not been so, and so with you, as I have said. And remember
what our Savior said to those Disciples, who were ambitious of being greatest
in the Kingdom of Heaven, and of sitting the one at his right hand and the
other at his left: except ye be converted (said he to them) and become as
little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18.
Remember who has said, if any man think that he knows any thing, he knows
nothing yet as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. Remember again, that if he which
is but a Novice come to be lifted up with Pride, its many to one that he falls
into the condemnation of the Devil, 1. Tim. 3. 6. for God resists the proud,
and knows them afar off: He is far enough from being familiar with them or
communicating his mind and Counsels to them in any extraordinary way; it is the
humble he will teach, and the meek he will guide in judgment, Psalm 25.
Therefore take the Apostles Counsel who said, see that no man among you think
of himself more highly than he ought to think but to think soberly, according
as God has dealt to every man the measure of Faith, Romans 12. 3. Learn rather
to esteem others better than your selves, as knowing your own weakness better
than you do theirs, and not to lift up your selves in your own conceits above
all others that are not of your way, how worthy soever they are, as your manner
has been: remembering who has said, he that exalts himself shall be brought
low. Do not flatter your selves with an opinion that you are nearer and dearer
to God, than all others, or that he has anointed you with the oil of gladness
above your fellows; or that he will teach you more immediately himself, than he
has taught others before you.

Think it not below you to be taught by the Scripture or by the ministry of
man, no though you were indeed so highly in God's favor as you suppose your
selves to be. The Churches of Smirna and Philadelphia were much favored and
highly commended and applauded by Christ, when the rest of the Churches in Asia
were rebuked: and yet wh^^ he would make his mind known to them and the rest of
the seven Churches, he does not do it immediately by himself, but first
acquaints an Angel with it, and by that Angel makes it known to John, and by
John to the Churches, and yet not by him in person neither, but by his
writings, Rev. 1. Christ could have taught Paul himself when he appeared to
him, as well as to have sent him to Ananias to be told what he should do: He
could have told Cornelius by himself or by the Angel that he sent to him those
words by which he and his house should be saved, as well as to direct him to
Peter to learn them of him. God could have revealed the same things to the
World by immediate inspiration of his Spirit, which he made known to it by
Prophets, by Christ himself; by Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers;
but he chose rather at sundry times and in diverse manners to speak unto the
Fathers by the Prophets, and at last by his own Son which he sent into the
World in our nature to teach the way of Salvation. And when he left the World
again and ascended up on high, he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets; and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the
Saints for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ.

These things are so plain, that it is a matter of great astonishment that ever
Christians that have read these things, and that have not a design to undermine
the Gospel and to Paganize the World again (as I hope you have not) should be
ever tempted to think, much more that ever you should be brought to believe it
your selves and teach it others, That the Light within, without being taught by
man or by the Scripture, is the Rule of Faith and Practice. But doubtless the
inward Pride, the over-valuing of your selves, which I have been admonishing
you of, has had a great hand in bringing you to it. And if ever you be
recovered from this snare of the Devil, it must be by being brought to a sight
and sense of your own injudiciousness and ignorance, and altogether groundless
confidence. And if you were but well awakened out of that Spirit of Slumber,
into which your intoxication has cast you, and out of that pleasant Dream in
it, which has so tickled your fancy, you would be ashamed and confounded
before God and Men, that ever you should be so strangely deluded, and prevailed
upon as you have been, to trouble the World with your whimsies and fancies, and
thereby to bring a scandal upon the Christian Religion, and make sport for them
that have no mind seriously to consider the things of the Gospel, and to
encourage Romish Agents in their design against the Reformation.

Be persuaded then by the Reason of the matter it self, to become modest and
humble and sober-minded: and be not only content to receive your teaching from
God by the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, as all good Christians do, and ever
since the Primitive times have done, but count it also as a high favor from
him that he has given us the Scriptures and sent the Gospel among us, when so
great a part of the World are at this day without it. Remember, how the
Psalmist, when he was therein assisted by the Spirit of God, was affected with
a less favor than that which you make little of, when he said; he shows his
Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel: he has not dealt
so with any Nation: and as for his judgments, they have not known them. Praise
ye the Lord, Psalm 147. 19, 20. And if it be so great a favor to us that have
the Scriptures above what is vouchsafed to the Infidel and Pagan World which
have them not; then you cannot but be guilty of high ingratitude to God,
whilst you give the Precedence to that Light within, which you say every man
coming into the World has, and so the Pagans themselves; and speak of the
Scriptures as if they were but a Declaration of that which was in you and which
you knew without them, and which you might have known if you had never heard of
them. By all which you teach them that have so little Wit* or Grace as to
believe you, to have a low esteem of the Scriptures, and to think that men may
as well be saved without them as with them. And how then can you possibly free
your selves from that horrid guilt which God charged upon the Jews of old,
saying, I have written to him ( Ephraim) the great things of my Law, and they
were esteemed as a strange thing; Hos. 8. 12.

You have no doubt, thought your selves more sublime and spiritual than others,
upon account of your new Notions and new affected Modes and Phrases: And not
only so, but there is great reason to think that an affectation of being
esteemed so, did insensibly lead you, or at least the Leaders among you, from
one novel conceit to another; until you have exceeded all bounds of Sobriety of
mind, and become perfectly Drunk, though not with Wine as the Prophet speaks.
Whereas alas? the Spirituality of Christians, does not lie in highflown Notions
and Speculations, nor in uncouth Phrases and expressions different from what
are common among Men, but in the inward frame and temper of their Spirits and
conversations, when these are conformable to the Doctrine of the Gospel which
is of and from the Holy Spirit, and thereby become partakers of the spiritual
and Divine nature or likeness to Christ Jesus, in purity, in lowliness
huroility, and meekness, and in love to God and Charity to Men, in patience and
gentleness, in contempt of the World, in contentation, and self-resignation to
God, in Zeal to honor God and to do all the good we can in the World. Upon
account of which Spiritual qualifications, Christians are said to be one Spirit
with Christ, and by this Spirit and temper when given us, we know that we dwell
in him and he in us: and if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, in some
measure, he is none of his. Such as in whom are found the fruits of the Spirit,
they are the spiritual Christians, such as is, Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, as they are
enumerated by St. Paul in Gal. 5. 22, 23. And as these do more or less abound
in Christians in the degree and measure of them, so they are more or less
Spiritual. And who-ever they be that do estimate themselves to be Spiritual
Christians upon account of any sublime Notions, or Speculations, or affected
Phrases, or by their being for or against any form, way, or party, or (which is
more) by their being in the constant use and exercise of God's own Ordinances,
farther than they are bettered in the frame and temper of their Spirits thereby
and made more like Christ Jesus; they take wrong measures of their Spirituality.

And if there were nothing else to make us suspect your new-taken-up way to be
not Spiritual, but carnal, this would do it, in that it has according to
common observation, made you since you came into it or were looking toward it,
moreself-conceited, proud, and disdainful, slighting and setting at naught all
others that differ from you, and more desperately censorious, and more bold and
confident in reviling than you were before; which are no signs of Spirituality
I am sure. But if there were more of that Spiritual qualification in you,
forementioned, by which Christians are denominated Spiritual indeed, it would
take down your high conceits of your high seize, and rather make you say
inwardly to your selves, and to your own Souls, I am less than the least of all
Saints, and make you afraid to think or speak ill of others, lest in doing so,
you should judge your selves, being perhaps not comparable to them in true
worth.

But if you would become spiritual Christians indeed, and not in fancy and
conceit only: Then let it be your care to observe and do these things. First
converse constantly and intimately in your thoughts with the Laws of Christ in
their Spirituality, as reaching to the Government of the thoughts and motions
of the mind and affections of the Soul, in reference to their various objects,
as God his Word, Worship and Works: Man as diversely related to us; the things
of this World and pertaining to this present life; and the things of the World
which is to come. And in doing this compare the bent disposition and operation
of your Souls in reference to these Objects, with those Laws of Christ, thereby
to discover not so much how far you have attained, as to know and discern what
is wanting, and how far you fall short of coming up close to your Rule, Christ's
precepts and imitable example. And if this were well done, it would make you
little in your own eyes, and to say with Paul, not as though I had attained or
were already perfect.

Then next in the sense of your defects, be diligent and constant in the use of
God's appointed means for Spiritual growth, such as is the hearing and reading
of Christ's Holy Doctrine in the Scriptures touching the great motives as well
as directions to obedience, accompanied with frequent meditation and serious
consideration of it and of your own concern therein. And then still have in
your eye, the end for which these and other means are or ought to be used by
you, and that is for the bettering the frame and temper of your Spirits, the
moral habit and constitution of your Souls; and never divide the means from the
end in your intention, nor satisfy your selves in the use of the means, but in
reference to the end: and in all the means be still sincerely endeavoring to
mend that which is amiss, and to fill up and supply what is lacking in the
degrees of Grace, and all divine Virtue.

And then in and together with all this, do you in a due sense of your own
weakness and insufficiency, and of the great need you have of the constant
assistance of God's Holy Spirit in all, make instant and importunate
supplication to God for it. And then without all doubt you shall be assisted
and enabled by that Spirit of his in the use of the foresaid means, by degrees
to become Spiritual Christians indeed. For our faithful Lord Jesus has assured
us, that our Heavenly Father will give the Holy Spirit to those that out of a
sense of its value and worth and of their own want of it, do importunately ask
it of him, Luke 11. 13.

. 22. I might yet farther show you that in all probability, your great
uncharitableness toward other good men against whom you had taken up undue
prejudices, had also a great hand in bringing you into this Wilderness of odd
conceits wherein you have so wonderfully lost your selves. For prejudice
against, and uncharitableness toward men, is a great temptation upon them in
whom it is, to differ and depart from them in opinion as well as in affection,
and to study opposition against things they hold in an uncharitable opposition
to those that hold them. And so truth no doubt has many times suffered for the
sake of those that have held it.

After you had entertained undue prejudices against the Ministers of the Gospel
upon one account or other, whom in derision and contempt you are wont to call
the Priests; you were then soon induced to think it meet to differ from them in
your Notions about Religion, lest otherwise you should not seem more Spiritual
than those whom you thus despised. And by this doubtless among other things,
were you led into your gross errors, under the Notion of higher seize and
more Spirituality in the Christian profession. For such and so great was your
prejudice against the Ministers and those that adhered to them, that you
disliked almost every thing they did, and the Notions they had of Evangelical
Truths and points of Doctrine. And therefore lest you should be thought too
like them, you fell to differencing your selves from them in Habit, in modes of
Speech, and in your Notions of the parts of revealed and instituted Religion.
And thereupon applied your selves to spiritualizing your Notions of
Gospel Truths in your way of Spiritualizing, till you had made them or many of
them, quite other things than in Truth and reality they are or were ever made
by the Author of them. And if ever you recover your selves, it must be by
coming to have better thoughts of others, and meaner of your selves; a thing
greatly necessary to men's keeping in the way of Truth. For he that loves his
Brother, abides in the Light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him:
But he that does not, is in darkness and walks in darkness, and knows not
whither he goes, because darkness has blinded his eyes, 1 John 2. 10, 11.

Besides uncharitableness being a sin so contrary to God's dealing with us in
the New Covenant, and so contrary to the great and affecting example of
Christ's Love to us, and so contrary to the scope and design of the Gospel (for
the end of the Commandment is Charity) that it is a great and sore provocation
to God to give up uncharitable men to an injudious mind and ridiculous
conceits, and such as shall render them ridiculous among all sober and wise
men. Which is matter of good caution to men to take heed how they take up
uncharitable prejudices against good men, upon account of their holding or
doing such things which they dislike, but not understanding, or not fairly
weighing the grounds on which they hold and do them. But I have already so far
exceeded the intended bounds of an Epistle, that I shall not farther enlarge
upon this, but shall draw toward a conclusion, with a word of advice to such
as have already seen their error, and are come off from you, and to others that
shall follow them therein.

. 23. I know it is a very hard thing for such to get quite rid of all their
confused, and Enthusiastical Thoughts, Notions and Phrases, but that some
relics of their old Disease will still hang on them and cleave to them, and
so encumber them, that they can very hardly come quickly to any clear and
distinct apprehensions of Evangelical Verities. To such I would give this short
advice, that laying aside all thoughts and conceits of high seize in the
things of God, they would repent and do their first works, and begin as it were
again at the first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and so lay their
Foundation a new in the beginning work of Christians. Also that they would
frame their Notions and apprehensions of things absolutely necessary to
Salvation, according to that plainness in which they are expressed in
Scripture, not affecting, nor entertaining Mystical Notions of them.

More particularly, that they would furnish their minds with right
apprehensions of the person of Christ, as Son of God and Son of the Virgin
Mary: and of the Nature of his Mediatory Office.

That as Priest he offered himself in Sacrifice to expiate Sin by his Death,
and in virtue thereof makes continual Intercession for us. That as Prophet, he
revealed and declared the New Covenant of Salvation.

That as King he has given Laws to the World, and that he does Rule and Govern
his Church through his Spirit by those Laws; and that at last he will try and
judge all men by them that have lived under them, and that he will reward all
with eternal happiness or endless torments, according as they have been
obedient or disobedient to them.

That they be careful also that their Notions of the New Covenant be according
to the plain Doctrine of the Gospel in the Scriptures.

Particularly;

That it consists of two parts; of Promises and of conditions of those
Promises. Also that the Promises of it are made upon account and for the sake
of Christ his undertaking, as Mediator.

That the great and special Promises of it, are pardon of sin or justification:
the assistance of God's Spirit in our endeavoring to perform the condition;
and eternal Life.

That the condition on which these Promises are made, are Faith in Christ,
Repentance; sincere Obedience, and the craving of the assistance of God's
Spirit in the use of appointed means, and our endeavors to perform the
condition.

That they be careful also to form right Notions of the nature of the condition
on our part on which the Promises of the New Covenant are made. As that no
Faith short of such a belief in Christ and of his Doctrine, as works
unfeigned Repentance and sincere Obedience is justifying and saving.

That no Repentance short of a desire, resolution and endeavor to forsake all
known sin, is saving Repentance.

That no Obedience short of a desire, resolution, and a continued endeavor to
observe all the Laws of Christ, without baulking any one of them when known to
be such, is sincere.

That no Faith, no Repentance, no Obedience short of these as thus described,
is a fulfilling of the condition of the Promises of Salvation in the Covenant
of Grace.

As these great things of the Gospel are in Scripture expressed in great
plainness, so great care must be had to keep close to, and to hold fast the
form of sound words according to which they are so declared not affecting any
Notion, Phrase or Expression, which makes them more hard to be understood by
common capacities, than they are by the very Letter of the Scriptures; but when
other expressions are used than what are in the Letter of the Text as its
necessary there should sometimes, especially in explaining metaphors, and
Idioms of Speech proper to the times and places in which the Scriptures were
written, they should be such and so used, as may give a clearer insight into
the Nature of the things themselves, than without them can well be had;
carefully avoiding to take words properly, which are spoken metaphorically, or
to be led by the mere sound of words, but to take the measure of the sense of
them, by the scope and design of the Author, since words of the same sound, are
not always of the same signification.

. 24. And now after I have laid things before you which are very apt in their
own Nature to rectify you in one of your grand and fundamental mistakes
especially, if invincible prejudice hinder not; I should be very sorry to think
or suspect that what is done herein, should turn to no better account than to
be a witness against you in that great day in which every man's work will be
tried of what sort it is. And therefore to prevent that, I cannot for your
sakes, and for the longing I have after your salvation, but earnestly persuade
you to give things purposely prepared to serve you, a due consideration in your
minds, and not to pass over such things slightly, as wherein your eternal
Estate is much concerned.

Remember that Heresy is one of those works of the Flesh, which shut Men out
of the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 20, 21. And considering the Nature and bad
influence of several of your opinions, and with what pertinaciousness you
persist in them, its greatly feared, not to say confidently believed by such as
are jealous over you with a Godly jealousy, that many of you at least, lie
under no less guilt than that of grand Heresy. And do you not then owe all
seriousness of consideration to what is offered to rescue you from so great a
danger? Doubtless you do. Let not then the height of your confidence to the
contrary deceive you: For it is not the greatness of your confidence, that will
in the least alter the nature of things, or make them bend to your humor. You
are not the first that have been as confident as confidence it self could make
them, that they had fast hold of Truth, when all the while it has been but a
lie they have had in their right hand. But the more confident you are in your
way, you are like to be so much the more surprised with amazement; when in
another World you shall find yourselves to have been mistaken in that of which
you are now so strongly confident in this, if you should be so unhappy as to
carry such mistaken confidence with you thither without a pardon. Which that
you may not, is I assure you all the hurt that is designed you in this Address.

And therefore let me tell you again, that it will be your wisdom much rather
to bestow your thoughts and pains in laboring to find out whether you be not
indeed under a delusion; than in darkning of words without knowledge, in
laboring to obscure to your selves and others, the evidence of Truth offered,
which clearly tends to your conviction.

FAREWELL.
THE END.
POSTSCRIPT.
THere being some vacant Leaves: and because I have not so plainly represented
the nature of Faith, which is the condition of the New Covenant, as I have the
other parts of it, in my advice touching a right Notion of the Nature of the
Mediatory Office and of the Covenant of Grace, I shall for these and other
Reasons add a short hint of the help which the Scripture does offer us herein.

When St. John says, Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of
God, 1 John 5. 1. and again, Who is he that overcomes the World, but he that
believes that Jesus is the Son of God, v. 5. We must needs take this for a
description of saving Faith; because those that are born of God and overcome
the World, are the Children and so the Heirs of God. To the same purpose are
those words, John 2. 31. These are written that ye might believe that Jesus is
the Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his
Name.

And to this description of Faith, agrees the several confessions of Faith we
read of. Thus Peter's confession runs: Thou art the Christ the Son of the Living
God, Mat. 16. 16. And again, John 6. 69. We believe and are sure that thou art
that Christ the Son of the Living God. Thus runs Martha's, John 11. 27. I
believe that thou art Christ the Son of God, which should come into the World.
And thus runs the Ennuchs also, Act. 8. 37. I believe that Christ is the Son of
God.

But in as much as we are assured by the same authority of Scripture, that
those that repent not shall perish, Luke 13. 3. and that those that obey not
the Gospel shall be punished with everlasting destruction, 2 These. 1. 7, 8. and
that except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3.
nor without holiness see God, Heb. 12. 14. it follows of necessity that the
Faith before described, is such a belief that Jesus is the Christ the Son of
God, as does effectually draw Men to believe his Doctrine and to obey his Laws;
in doing of which they become New Creatures, and overcome the World.

For he that believes Christ to be the Son of God, and considers what he
believes, must needs believe all his sayings, and the whole of his Doctrine to
be true, for it is impossible for God to lie: And he that believes his Doctrine
to be true, and considers what he believes; must needs be under the influence
of the most powerful Motives imaginable to repent of a bad, and to lead a good
Life; because Christ has expressly declared from God, that the one shall be
punished with everlasting Destruction, and the other rewarded with Life Eternal.

So that Faith works that change in Men by which they become New Creatures, are
born of God, and sanctified, by way of Motive, as it does evidence to the Soul,
and bind upon the Mind, the things not seen, as those wherein a Man is
infinitely more concerned than in any, than in all the things which are seen;
and therefore must needs be governed in the course of his Life by them, and not
by the other, but in subordination unto them.

For Faith, as it is a powerful Motive, is an Operative Principle of a good and
Holy Life; And upon this accoont all the brave and Heroic Acts of those
Worthies mentioned in Heb. 11. are said to be done by their Faith, as that was
to them the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen,
and as such an active Principle of those effects. And thus the Life which St.
Paul lived in the Flesh, he lived through the Faith of the Son of God, as every
good Christian does, as being thereby persuaded thereto, Gal. 2. 20. And
because Faith is thus Motive-wise such an Operative Principle of a good and
Holy Life, therefore it is that Men of such a Life, are usually described by it
in the New Testament, and are styled Believers. And when good Men are otherwise
described by their fear of God, and Love to him, as many times they are,
especially in the Old Testament, it is because Fear and Love are also powerful
Principles of Action, that Govern Men in their way.

A true Believer then, according to the New Testament Dialect, is neither more
nor less than a Disciple of Christ, or a faithful follower of him; one that
frames his Belief and Life according to his Doctrine and Example. And the Faith
of every such one is such in its Operation and Effects, as does constitute and
denominate him a good Man.

By all this it may easily be dis^rned that when Men are said to be justified
or to be saved by Faith, it is not to be understood of the mere Act of
believing abstracted from its effects and alone, but as it is an Active and
Operative Principle, changing the Heart and reforming the Life. And accordingly
Justification, and Salvation, are in Scripture attributed to the Effects of
Faith, as well as to the Act of believing, Jam. 2. And when ever they are
attributed to believing indifinitely, it is not without reference to the
effects proper to it when it is of the right kind.

Now as Faith is described in the Scriptures forecited, by its Object, and by
its acting upon its Object by assent; so it is in other Scriptures described by
its effects, which are produced by its actings upon its Object: And so a
Believer is described by his coming to Christ, John 6. 35. He that comes to me
shall never hunger, and he that Believet on me shall never Thirst, says
Christ. For men's coming to Christ to learn of him what he has done and will do
for their Souls, and what they themselves are to do that they may be saved, is
the effect of their believing him to be the Son of God, and sent of God to
bring Salvation unto Men, and to declare how and upon what Terms it is to be
had.

And so when Believers are described by their receiving of Christ, as John 1.
12. As many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God,
even to them that believe on his Name, they are then described by the effect of
their Faith also. For when they receive him for what indeed he is, Priest,
Prophet and King, it is because they believe that evidence by which he appears
to be so.

Furthermore, when Believers are described by their Trusting in Christ, or
Relying on him, as in Ephesians. 1. 12 -- Who first trusted in Christ. Their Faith
is described by its effect. For men will not venture their Souls in trusting in
Christ and relying on him for the expiation of their Sins by his Blood, for
direction what to do that they may be saved, and for Pardon and eternal Life
upon the condition upon which those Benefits are promised, until they first
believe him to be the Messiah, the Son of God and Savior of the World, upon
some evidence they have that he is so.

But although the Holy Penmen of the Scriptures did not in every description of
saving Faith, attend unto the Rules of Art, by taking in all the essential
parts, but described it sometimes by its assenting Act and Object, and
sometimes by its Fruits and Effects, as occasions did occur: Yet we for our
parts shall be best able to make a right Judgment of the true Nature of Saving
Faith, by that which results out of the several descriptions of it in Scripture
when compared together. And by comparing those several descriptions together,
we may also perceive that when Faith as saving is described by its Effects, yet
then the assenting Act of Faith upon its Object is still employed, supposed, and
ought to be understood, though it be not there expressed: and so are the effects
too, when but only the Act and Object are mentioned.

By all which we may learn, that those are none of the best definitions of
saving Faith which Men make, when they define it by the Act and Object alone,
or by any of the Effects alone.

THE END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately published a Book called A Persuasive to Peace and Unity among
Christians, notwithstanding their different apprehensions in lesser things.

To be sold by B. Aylmer, at the three Pigeons in Cornhil.


