THE OPERATOR For The TEETH: SHOWING How to Preserve the Teeth and Gums from
all the Accidents they are subject to: With particular Directions for Childrens
Teeth. As also the Description and Use of the POLICAN, Never Published before.
By CHARLES ALLEN; Professor of the same.

To which is Annexed A Physical Discourse, wherein the reasons of the Beating
of the Pulse, or Pulsation of the Arteries, together with those of the
circulation of the Blood, are mechanically Explained; which was never done
before. By an Unknown Hand.

DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook and Samuel Helsham for the Author, and are to
be Sold by Robert Thornton Bookseller, at the Leather-Bottel in Skinner-Row,
and by the Author at his own Lodging at Mr. Banister's at the Smiths-Arms in
Essex-street.

IMPRIMATUR, (...) Christo P. D. Franc. (...) Dom.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE AND TRULY LEARNED The Physicians, Chirurgions and
Apothecaries Of the City of DUBLIN.
GENTLEMEN,
When I see your INDEFATIGABLE Care in procuring men (that without which all
the World is nothing) HEALTH, the PRIMARY cause, sole Foundation and Prop of
Humane FELICITY; and how the experience of so many years manifests to all men,
by the happy success of your Undertakings, and your great Charity to the Poor,
that your private intentions do correspond admirably well with your external
actions; and that all your endeavors are real and unfeigned: I am persuaded,
that whatever can in any wise contribute to the promoting of your most Noble
and Generous Design, cannot but be acceptable to you. Wherefore having with the
same passion, for the public Advantage, composed the following small Treatise,
I take the liberty most humbly to present it You; that (as You are the best
JUDGES of the thing) so You may by Your Judicious and Impartial Censure of it,
inform the World of its worth; that no person may be deceived in it. For my
intentions in publishing it, being to advance the common Good; if I thought it
did contain any thing contrary to that DESIGN, I should be the first that would
endeavor its suppression.

But, GENTLEMEN, besides the foregoing reasons, which I had of offering You
this first Essay of mine, I did it also to acquit my self in some measure of my
Duty toward You; and to assure You further, that I am in all respects,

GENTLEMEN, Your Most Humble, Most Obedient, And Most Obliged Servant CHARLES
ALLEN.

THE OPERATOR FOR THE TEETH.
The PROEM.
KNowing that it is the duty of every man, and especially of su h as live under
a Civil Government, (where the general Interest always includes the particular)
to contribute as much as he can (in his own station) to the public Good* and
also of what Importance it is to all men to be informed of those Benefits which
by my Art they may enjoy; I am resolved to set down here what I think most
convenient for every one to understand concerning the preservation, and
melioration of his own Teeth; A thing indeed of little esteem among most
people, but in truth, of inestimable value for its many and important
consequences. However, in so doing, I shall acquit my self of my duty toward
God and Man: And provided my Endeavors prove but beneficial to others, (as
certainly they will, if put in practice) it is all I desire, caring very little
what opinion the Critics of Words and artificial Logic may have of me.

Of what Vtility this Undertaking of mine may be to every body, will appear by
the sequel of this Discourse; whereof the scope is to prevent the loss of
Teeth; the use of which is so necessary in the preparing of food, that the want
of such a help (if not supplied by strong dissolvents) hinders a true
concoction of the Aliments in the Stomach; whence do proceed Indigestions, and
abundance of Crudities very noxious to the body of man; as being the seed of
most of those innumerable Diseases and Infirmities, whereby life is not only
made troublesome to us, but also considerably shorter than it would otherwise
be, which is so consonant to truth, that vulgar observation it self has turned
it into a common Proverb: For they use to say of one whose Teeth are naturally
thin, that he is short-lv'd, whereof the reason is, that such persons do not
chew their meat well. Moreover, the loss of Teeth renders the pronounciation
both troublesome to ones self, and unintelligible to others. In a word, the
corruption, and want of them, is as great a deformity, and of as much prejudice
to one, as any thing whatsoever can be.

SECTION I. Of the Nature of the TEETH.
WHat men are wont to call Science, or the Cognition of any being, is by them
commonly divided into two several parts: one whereof is termed Theoretical, and
the other Practical. The first includes the reasons and causes of things, with
the order and manner of their progress in coming to be what they are. The
second regards only their Properties and Effects, and what they are actually in
themselves, without inquiring how they come to be so made, or thus qualified.
As for example of those two branches of Humane Learning, (in respect to
Physical matters) when Philosophers go about to inspect the nature of the
Loadstone, they search into its Origin, tracing out the several causes of its
Formation, even to their source or springhead; from whence they draw arguments
for the solution of all the Phenomena thereof; whereas Mariners consider it
only as a certain Stone that draws Iron to it self, having the power of
communicating its properties to the said Iron; and which, if not hindered (by
its own gravity, or any other impediment) will always turn one of its sides
toward the North, and another diametrically opposite to the first toward the
South; which suffices them for the use they make on it, in directing their
courses through the Sea, without caring what may be the cause of so admirable
virtues in the Magnet. Either of which constituent parts of Knowledge being
separated from the other, cannot afford a full and satisfactory account of a
thing: And therefore being about to treat of my Art, I should by consequence
begin with its Theory, and discourse of the Elements, Principles, and first
Rudiments of the Teeth; which make the Subject thereof, unfolding the reasons
of their constitution and frame, and how they come to have several Roots, and
to grow above the Gums; with what ever else may be the cause of their
specifical being; and thence pass to the Practice. But some Considerations
obliging me to defer treating of the former Part, or Theorick, till a better
opportunity, I design only to lay down in this Paper some of the most principal
Points relating to the other; namely, the Practical part of my Profession. In
doing which, although it would be enough for us to speak of things, as in the
state wherein we find them: yet for the satisfaction of the Reader, and out of
a real desire to serve him; we shall not destitute our Discourse of such
Reasons as are necessary for the well understanding of what we shall say. So
that although this Tractate will be imperfect, as wanting many things, yet what
it shall contain, will be as useful and advantageous as if it were accompanied
with all the rest. However, according to the method we have prescribed our
selves here, we are to proceed next to the consideration of the Structure, and
constitution or nature of the Tooth.

In Analyzing the Tooth, its substance is not found to be uniform every where,
but manifestly distinguishable into two different sorts of make: one of them
being harder, whiter, and of a finer texture; and the other softer, more
obscure, and of a courser composition. The first makes up the head of the
Tooth, or that part of it that stands out naked above the Gums* and the other
its stump, or that part on it which is hidden within the said Gums. The exposed
part of the Tooth consists also of two different Parts: To wit, its stony Cover
or Case, and its inward substance* the first is as it were an hard Periosteum,
that invests the head of the Tooth on all sides, lying on it much after the
same manner that Enamel does upon Gold, or any other thing. This natural Enamel
which I call the gloss of the Tooth, is of a far harder, whiter, more dense and
lucid nature than the inward substance lying under it: which for its several
uses may properly be compared to the Cuticula, or Scarf-skin, for like unto
this it is bloodless, and altogether destitute of sense, serving to cover and
defend the extremities of the Vessels, contained within the inward substance,
from external injuries, and to render the Tooth more beautiful and strong. It
has pores for the perspiration of the excrements of the Tooth, which pores are
not always of the same figure, nor magnitude, but vary almost in every body.
The said gloss or stony substance is likewise very various in point of
thickness: from which differences, do arise the diversity of its color in
several men.

The inward part of the head of the Tooth, though inferior to its cover or
gloss in brightness and solidity, yet its substance is nevertheless much more
compact, and clearer than that of the stump: and contains two several sorts of
pores, or small channels, both of a conical figure, having their Bases in the
concave superficies of the Tooth, and their Apexes in the unequal superficies of
the inward substance, immediately under its glassy integument. Through some of
which channels the blood is carried by many and very small Arterial Sprigs,
from the middle of the Tooth to its extremity: and through the others the same
blood is sent back again from the said extremity toward its middle, by some
capillary veins, as shall be said hereafter.

As to the root or stump of the Tooth, it is the darkest, most soft, and porous
portion of its whole substance; and yet is closer and harder than any other
bone of the body, having also two sorts of channels, but of different situation
from one another: for some of them have their Bases (like those above
described) toward the cavity of the Tooth, and contain the branches of the
Artery, that carry the blood quite through the substance of the Tooth, to the
Gums, as shall be explained in its place; but the others contrary to any of
those already mentioned, have their Bases toward the external superficies of
the Tooth; the use of which last conduits, is to transmit to the Gums the blood
that is returned to the heart from the membrane that invests the cavity of the
Tooth. This rooty part of the Tooth consists in the small Teeth of a single
body, and in the big ones is divided into two, three, or four branches, called
roots or fangs: along the middle of each of these fangs, there is a little
channel that goes up to the head of the Tooth, where they are united together,
and make but a single cavity, whereinto are carried the vessels of the Tooth,
passing first through the hollowness of the stumps. Every Tooth has its
particular cell or socket within the Mandible, distinct from all the rest (by a
thin production of the jaw bone passing between the Teeth, from one side of the
said bone to the other) wherein most of its stump is comprehended, the rest
being encompassed about with the Gums.

SECT. II. Of the Alteration of the Teeth, with their Remedies.
FRom the consideration of the nature of the Teeth, let us now pass to that of
the first step of their degenerating, or mutation. For the better understanding
of which, we shall take notice, that as our body is so made by nature, that it
wastes continually by the dissipation of some Particles, separating themselves
from its Mass, without intermission; (transpiring for the most part through the
pores of the skin) and that if these particles (which being divided from the
whole, become Excrementitious) are kept too long within the body, (by reason of
the Opilation of the said pores) it causes Fevors, and great disorders in our
blood, and vital as well as animal Functions: So likewise from the substance of
the Teeth are emitted certain Effluviums through their pores, the transpiration
of which being hindered, (by the obstruction of those invisible passages) the
Teeth become liable to all those infirmities hereafter to be mentioned.

The substance of the Tooth being rigid and inflexible, it cannot be Opilated
by contraction, or astriction: as the skin usually is but only by the intrusion
of some extraneous matter into its pores, or the incrustation of some slimy
stuff upon its superficies; which is done when we eat any thing of a glutinous
nature, for then some of its most viscous parts do stick, and cleave about the
Teeth; and by the mixture of some tartarious particles coming from the Lungs,
the heat of the mouth, and a certain petrifick juice distilling into the mouth,
out of the Salival Ducts, is turned into a stone-like substance, commonly
called the scales or scurf of the Teeth: these scales grow thicker and thicker
continually, and if let alone, will cover the Teeth all over, except just at
the top were they grind one against another.

Having thus taken notice of the production of those scales, let us now
consider of what ill consequences they may be to the Teeth. The first whereof
is the Opilation of their pores, from whence proceed all the rest: for by that
the exit of those Excrementitious particles before mentitioned being hindered,
it causes them to stagnate within the body of the Tooth, and there corrupting,
do corrode it by degrees; beginning first by the alteration of its color from
white to yellow, and from yellow to black; and then follows the real decay of
its substance, etc.

The said humor is not only destructive to the Teeth, but extends also its
malignity to the Gums; some of its particles being subtle enough (after a due
fermentation) to pass through the scales, and thence sliding between the Gums
and the Teeth, they eat clear away the ligaments that tie them together,
dividing them one from another to the very jaw bone: which is sufficiently
proved by the excoriation and rawness of the Gums, and their being so tender
and loose from the Teeth where ever such scales are found; and especially if
they be grown to a considerable thickness.

It happens sometimes that the usual passages of this corrupted humor being
stopped by the scales, (when they are hard, and close enough) is thereby
repercussed, and made to take its course toward the middle of the Tooth,
discharging it self therein between the Concave supersicies of the Tooth, and
the Tunicle investing the same; where it occasions very great pains, and at
last by its fretting, and corrosive quality, gnaws and consumes quite away the
said membrane, as also the vessels of the Tooth; and then passing out of the
said Tooth, it diffuses it self through the Alveolus or socket, where exerting
its dangerous faculty, it destroys utterly whatever causes any connection
between the Teeth, the jaw bone and the Gums, as the Periosteum, etc. After
which the Teeth do consequently fall out for the most part sound, and
unaltered, except only in their color, (which becomes yellowish) by reason
that the aforesaid Excrementitious Humor being at first diverted another way,
did not stay long enough under the scales to occasion in them a greater
detriment: All which incommodities to obviate, keep only your Teeth clean from
scurf, or any foulness; and if they be already clean, you need but to preserve
them as they are; but if not, get them to be made so by some Artist in that
Function; for otherwise if you employ any body that is unskilful in it, you may
chance to find the Remedy worse than the Disease; by reason that not knowing
the dangers attending such an Operation, he may commit a great many and
pernicious Errors, as the breaking of the Film that unites the Gums to the
Teeth, the taking away of the gloss of the Teeth, etc. Soon after which, the
Tooth will lose its natural luster, and become yellowish, subject to ache, and
at last wholly perish away, the Gums being loose and broken, will likewise
decay, and fall away from the Teeth, etc.

Your Teeth being once clean, you may preserve them with this composition; Take
Magistery of Pearls, Powder of Coral, and Dragons-Blood, of each equal
quantity, and as much Red-Rose-water as will incorporate them together; and
make the Compound of a mean consistence, between hard and soft. I have to that
effect a very excellent Dentifrice, which being used only once a week will keep
the Teeth clean and white; and by the constant using of it, fetch up their
color, if lost; (tho in a considerable measure) this is the same that in my
Bills (to keep my Masters term, tho improper, as he well knows himself,) I call
an Opiat*

SECT. III. Of the Corruption of the Teeth, with their Remedies* Whereto is
Annexed the Description and Use of the Polican.
HAving in the former Section considered the Teeth, as at the beginning of
their decay, in such a condition as tho they suffer some light change in their
accidents, yet their substance, form and proportion remaining still the same,
is only called alteration; that is, in a state wherein indeed they are
environed, and assaulted by their greatest enemies, but yet in a capacity of
being rescued and preserved from their harms. But now we shall consider them as
overcome by all those threatening evils, and really corrupted; in which case,
all that can be done, is to prevent their total ruin.

And as there are some not so far gone, but that they may still do good
service, if timely helped, we are to use our utmost endeavors to do it; which
to effect, we shall in the first place clear their outside from all foulness,
and then with a proper Instrument scrape off whatever is rotten within, washing
them very well afterward with some convenient liquid, to scour and smooth away
what the Instrument may leave behind: and then if the Tooth be so hollow that
it may be stopped, it must be filled up with such ingredients as are neither
corrosive, nor ill tasted, and of a consistence firm enough to be used in the
same manner as the Teeth are, and to keep from wasting for a considerable time;
but if the Tooth rots every way equally, so that there is no cavity left,
wherein any thing can keep fast, it must only be kept clean, taking care after
every meal to pick out any meat that may get into it, and then wash it very
well with fair water; for if you neglect so to do, the corruption of the rotten
Tooth will fall upon the others, and so infect all the rest.

With these precautions, I would advise every one to keep his Teeth as long as
he can, although they were rotten to the very Gums, provided only they do not
ache, by reason that their stumps filling up their sockets, serve (like so many
wedges) to keep the others straight and firm in their places; but if they are
very bad, and withal subject to ache, it is better to have them out, lest they
should occasion an ill habit in the Gums, that might be hurtful to the sound
ones.

The Drawing out of Teeth is practiced by a great many, but perhaps understood
but of very few; and I am sure that there is a great deal more danger in the
Drawing of a Tooth, (especially out of the lower Jaw, than most people are
commonly aware of. It is an Operation that requires to be performed with great
care and circumspection, and not so rashly as it is commonly done.

But as the greatest difficulty of this Business lies in understanding the
make, and application of the Instruments that are employed about the Drawing of
Teeth; I shall (for the benefit of Practitioners, as well as of those that will
be their Patients) subjoyn here, the description and use of the Polican; which
is one of the best of them.

The Description and Use of the Polican.
THe Construction, and usual shape of the Polican, is a thing so well known by
every body, that it would be needless to insist at all upon it. And therefore,
without losing time in such superfluous Discourses, we shall here take notice
of some other things appertaining to the said Instrument, more material and
useful: as the due proportion that its parts ought to have, considered in
themselves, and in respect of each other.

In the first place then, (supposing that you know the stuff wherewithal it
must be made, which ought to be a tough steel, or steel and iron together) let
the tree of the Polican be about four inches long, and so perforated, that the
distance betwixt the center of the hole (wherein goes the pin* upon which are
fastened the two branches) and one of the extremities, be a line greater than
the other. Let one of the two branches be two lines longer than the other; let
also each claw be three lines long. And finally, let the distance between the
bolster, or semicircle of the longest side of the tree, be two lines. And you
will have four distances between the claws and the bolsters, which is
sufficient to draw all sorts of Teeth. For with the first, which is of two
lines, you may draw the Incisores* With the second, of three lines, you may
draw the Ganini. With the third, of four lines, the Double and Treble Teeth.
And with the fourth, of five lines, the Quadruple ones.

Your Polican being thus made, if you have a mind to use it, you must so apply
the Claw to the inside of the Tooth you intend to pull out, that its branch may
stand exactly upon the middle of the said Tooth, gently leaning your Bolster
upon the next to it, the better to take your measures; and then draw the Tooth
out. But take heed you do not draw obliquely, but in a direct line from the
Tooth outwardly; for in drawing laterally, you might chance so to force the
Tooth to be drawn, upon the next to it, that you would draw them both together,
or at least loosen very much the sound one, and put a far greater force upon
the other in drawing it, than is necessary. Which would occasion an infinitely
greater pain to the Patient, than if you had done it rightly.

Thus much have I thought fit to tell you concerning the nature and use of the
Polican; which if you observe punctually, you need never fear the Drawing well
of any Tooth. As for the rest of the Instruments now in use, with several
others of my own Invention, I shall give you the particular Description, and
use of every one of them in the next Impression of this Discourse; if you think
this worthy of your acceptance*

SECT. IV. Of the Restoration of the Teeth.
WHen our decayed Teeth are so far gone before we think of any Remedy for their
preservation, that whatever we can do, proves but fruitless* And that
notwithstanding all our best endeavors, they perish, and rot quite away; or
that some intolerable pain has made us to draw them; we are not yet to despair,
and esteem our selves toothless for all the rest of our life: the loss indeed
is great, but not irreparable; there is still some help for it, the natural
want may be supplied artificially, and herein Art imitates Nature so naifly,
that when the succedaneous Teeth (if I may so speak) are well set in, they
cannot be distinguished from the natural ones, (neither in color, firmness,
nor proportion) but by them that know of it. Being thus exactly fitted to their
place, they will keep the next to them, and by consequence all the rest of that
Jaw abundantly firmer and stronger than they would otherwise be.

The Advantages that may be attributed to the artificial Teeth, are many; as
that they keep the others fast, as we said just now, that they are of a great
ornament, and help pronounciation extremely, etc. But all that is with a
Proviso, that they be well made, and according to the best Art; for otherwise
they might prove quite contrary.

Besides this Artificial way of repairing the loss of Teeth, there is another
that may be called Natural; which is done by taking out the rotten Teeth or
stumps, and putting in their places some sound ones, drawn immediately after
out of some poor body's head: which thing (tho difficult) I know to be feasible
enough, not only by my own reason that tells me so, but by experience it self,
as (to say no more at present) may be instanced in the case of a certain Lady,
who thinking to have two Teeth growing one on the top of another, came one day
to my Master to have one of them Drawn: my Master told her that they were not
two distinct Teeth, but only a double one; but the Lady being not satisfied
with this, desired him to take out the Tooth she had told him of, let it be
what it would. The Tooth being drawn out, and proving as my Master had said, it
was quickly set again into the Jaw; and with the use of some convenient and
proper Remedies, became in few weeks to be as firm again* as any of the rest.

And yet although the event of this particular had not proved so prosperous as
it did; its ill success would not destroy in me the possibility of such a
transplanting, or Inoculation of Teeth: (if I may be permitted to use such
terms) that was not the only motive I had to believe it; and I have not
inserted the Story of it here as an Argument to prove invincibly what I say,
but only as a proper Example to render probable to others what I know to be
true. However, I do not like that method of drawing Teeth out of some folks
heads, to put them into others, both for its being too inhumane, and attended
with too many difficulties; and then neither could this be called the
restoration of Teeth, since the reparation of one, is the ruin of another; it
is only robbing of Peter to pay Paul. But if instead of humane Teeth, there is
use made of those of some Brutes, as Dogs, Sheep, etc. In such case I do not
only approve of it as lawful and facile, but do also esteem it as very
profitable and advantageous; only care is to be had, that the thing be
undertaken, and carried on by one that at least knows something of Anatomy, and
has a right sense of the thing to be done, being furnished with whatever is
necessary in an Operation of that nature.

And that (if my Opinion may be any wise serviceable in such an Attempt) I may
contribute something toward the improvement of so useful an Invention; I think
one is, to proceed in it somewhat after this manner. First, I would choose an
Animal whose Teeth should come nearest to those of the Patient; as a Dog, a
Sheep, a Goat, or a Baboon, etc. and having tied his legs together, I would
fasten his head in some convenient place, so that he might not stir in the
least, and by some proper means keep his mouth open as long as I should have
occasion: that done, I would open the Gums round about the Tooth to be taken
out of his head, not only to the very Jaw Bone, but as far between the said
Bone and the Tooth, as the finest Instrument could go, leaving a very little
portion of the Gums about it; and then having used the same circumspection, in
dividing the Patients Tooth from the Gums, and the Jaw Bone, I would draw it
forth, and put immediately in its place that of of the Brute; fastening it very
well and straight between the other Teeth: and then with the use of suitable
Remedies, I do not question in the least but that it would unite to the Gums
and Jaw Bone, and in a little time become as fast as any of the others: which
performance might properly be termed the natural Restoration, or Renovation of
Humane Teeth.

SECT. V. Of the Tooth-ake, Looseness of the Teeth, and decay of the Gums; with
their Remedies.
THe Tooth-Ake is occasioned many and very different ways, but that I may
render what I have to say upon it, as perspicuous and intelligible as I can; I
think it very convenient we should take a special notice of the vessels that
come into the Tooth, and of their respective Functions. The first and chiefest
whereof is an Artery, whose Office is to bring directly from the heart that hot
and spirituous blood, out of which (although it is not the general Opinion) the
Tooth is at first made, (as well as the rest of the whole body) and ever after
preserved and repaired by the supply of nourishment, and vital principles it
affords continually: To this effect the whole Artery divides it self into an
infinity of small branches, which being disseminated throughout the whole
substance of the Tooth, distribute to each part as much of their blood as is
necessary to make up the incessant loss they are subject to; and the rest is
returned through innumerable hair-like veins into the great ones, and thence to
the heart again, but in two different manners: for the superfluous part of that
portion of the blood, that is carried by the Capillary Arteries to that part of
the Tooth standing above the Gums, is sent back again through some Capillary
veins toward the middle of the Tooth; where uniting together, they make but a
single channel; and this is it we commonly call the vein of the Tooth, which we
shall here take for its second vessel. But the remainder of the blood, that
goes to the relief of that part of the Tooth that is within the Gums, passing
quite through the substance of the Tooth, is carried by the Capillary veins to
the veins of the Gums, Checks, and Lips; and hence it is that whatever pain is
at any time occasioned in any of those parts, (either by bruise, excessive
heat, or cold, etc.) comes to be soon after communicated to the Teeth.

The Third and Last Vessel of the Teeth is a Nerve, one of the extremities
whereof is expanded through the Membrane that invests the cavity of the Tooth,
and that, that contains its Vessels; and the other is rooted in the Brain, from
whence it takes its Origin, and where the Animal Spirits being elaborated, are
thence sent by the Nerves to all the parts of the body, to administer sense,
and the cause of motion to them, etc. although in some, (as the Teeth) the
faculty of motion is not exercised.

From this consideration of the Vessels of the Tooth, we may gather the
following reasons of its Dolor; As first, that if either through the too great
quantity, or ebulition of the blood, the Artery is so dilated and swollen, that
it fills up the hole at the end of the stumps where it enters the Tooth, and
consequently so compresses the vein going out the same way, that the
circulation of the Blood is thereby hindered; the continual flowing in of the
blood will extremely puff up, and distend the membrane that contains the
vessels, and consequently cause a great pain in the Tooth, which will last till
either the preternatural state of the Blood be changed, or that the Arteriols
which we have said to pass quite through the rooty part of the Tooth be so
stretched and widened, that by them the Blood may be discharged into the Gums,
Cheeks and Lips; where it will then cause a swelling, greater or lesser,
according to the quantity of the superfluous Blood.

And if at the beginning of this disorder, when the Vein is first impeded in
its Function, the motion of the Blood is so rapid, and its influx into the
Tooth so impetuous, that before it can make its way through the small Arterial
Twigs into the Gums, it does extremely extend the coats of the Artery, the
Interstices between their Fibers will thereby become wide enough to give
passage to some of the thinnest parts of the Blood; which gathering at the end
of the root, between the outside of the Artery, and the common Coat investing
all the Vessels, will there putrify, and cause a great and very lasting pain
in the Tooth; during which, if the Tooth be drawn, the said gathering will
appear at the end of its stump like a little Bladder.

You shall know this sort of Tooth-Ake by the high beating of your Pulse, the
fullness of the Veins, and an often beating in the affected Tooth; with a
continual, tho not very extreme pain. And then for the Cure of it, you must
first bleed the Gums, and sometimes open a Vein in the Arm also, and wash your
mouth with Rose Water and Vinegar, of each equal quantities mixed together;
putting a little Cotton dipped in Oil of Box into the Tooth, if it be hollow.

Furthermore, if that portion of the Blood, which is diffused through the
substance of the Brain for the production of the Animal Spirits, is so
depraved, that all the sifting it receives, through the hidden meanders, and
recesses of the Brain cannot clear it from its impurities; and that
notwithstanding all the contrivances of Nature it is deposited into the
ventricles of the Brain, (tho under another form yet) still impregnated with
its ill qualities: such sort of Animal Spirits being compounded of
Heterogeneous parts, if not timely discharged of their malignant and offensive
Corpuscles, (through the usual Emunctories) will either by their fermentation
in the Ventricles of the Brain, cause an Head-ake; or by the oppilation of its
pores, cause a giddiness; or else passing out of the Brain into the Nerves,
will by their irregular motion, and preternatural extention of the coats of the
Nerves, and other Tunicles, breed a disturbance in all the parts they go to;
but more particularly in the Teeth, in which they always excite very great
pains. For discharging the peccant humor, between the membrane that invests
the inside of the Tooth, and that that incloses its vessels, it occasions a
perpetual torment in them, till it be expelled from thence by transpiration.

This second kind of Tooth-ake will be known by a disturbance in the head,
which precedes it most commonly; a soreness in the joints, and a certain
drousiness, and lingering pain all over the body, as if one were inclined to an
Ague, with a sharp and very excessive pain in the distempered Tooth, which
comes by fits, soon ceasing, and often beginning anew. As for its Cure, it may
be effected by Sternutation, the friction of the nape of the Neck with warm
clothes, and the application of aperitive Remedies, to open the pores of the
Tooth: and if it be hollow, you shall put in it a drop of Oil of Camphire,
whereinto has been infused some Henbane-root. These are the two general causes
of the Tooth-ake; all the rest proceeding from them, some few excepted.

There is what I had a mind to say at this present concerning the Tooth-ake.
But you must note further, that as it is not enough for one that intends to
travel a Country over, to understand the Map of that Country; but he must
also inquire often of the people he meets with as he goes on his journey, for
the way to such and such a place: so although I have given you a true account
of the Tooth-ake, and have delivered here the right method for the curing of
it, yet that Disease is for the most part accompanied with several
circumstances, that cannot be learnt but from experience it self. Thus sometimes
the Gums will be livid, sometimes pale, and sometimes red, and inflamed.
Sometimes the Tooth is loose, and risen above the others. And sometimes its
root is discovered, and bare of flesh. Sometimes its rotten, and otherwhile
sound, as to its substance. In fine, sometimes the pain is accompanied with a
great fluxion of Rhume, and sometimes with a dryness of the mouth, etc. Each of
which concomitants requires a particular consideration, and peculiar Remedies:
considering always these things, with reference to the age, constitution and
habit of the Patient.

Again, it is but rarely, that a Tooth-ake is found simple, or uncompound: (as
we have supposed to be, those of which we have treated above) that is,
occasioned by one cause only: but it proceeds most commonly from several; and
especially if the pain be inveterate, or of a long standing. And then, the
symptoms of this complicated Disease, are mixed in the same proportion as their
causes; which renders the Cure much more difficult, and subject to more
observations. And therefore, if any one has a mind to render himself perfect in
these things, he must not only follow our method, that directs him to the true
knowledge of them, but the dictates of his own senses also; by which he will
avoid all the obstacles he may meet with by the way. Notwithstanding all which,
people being commonly unwilling to undergo all the trouble attending a
methodical Cure, and withal apt to think, that one does them no good at all,
unless he gives them ease presently; I have been forced to abandon the Art in
my practice, and to invent certain general Remedies; which nevertheless
applying with circumspection, and as I think occasion requires, hardly ever
fail of producing the intended effect: sometimes in an instant, but most
commonly within less than half an hour. True it is, that were it not for my
former practice, and long habit in those things, I neither could have, nor
expect so good a success.

And yet I will not deny, but that the said remedies happen sometimes to
operate a great deal slower than ordinary. But that comes to pass by reason of
some unexpected, or unobserved accidents: and I think it ought to suffice, that
the Cure be at last performed. Yet this does not satisfy every body. If the
Remedy does not immediately Cure such as are Impatient or incapable of
reasoning, they strait condemn it as a thing ineffectual, and altogether void
of any Virtue. Upon which, believing the Stories of some impertinent (tho
perhaps well affectioned) friend, they make use of such things, as commonly
hinder the effect of the Remedy. And if it happens sometimes that
notwithstanding those impediments, our remedy produces its effect; they never
fail of attributing the Cure to their own endeavors.

However, I must ingenuously confess, that my Remedies do not take effect
always. And that there are some sorts of Tooth-ake almost incurable, unless it
be pulliatively; and that it self, not without a great deal of trouble, and a
tedious while. The reasons of which, I shall take occasion to explain some
other time.

The looseness of the Teeth, comes most commonly from the decay of the Gums,
which are subject to many infi^mities, proceeding for the most part from those
things that occasion the Tooth-ake, and putrefaction of the Teeth; for
sometimes there will be such an affluence of blood from the Teeth into the
Gums, that their veins being not able to contain it, are thereupon broken;
shedding the blood between the Gums and the Teeth: where gathering together, it
corrupts, rotting away all the flesh from about the Teeth: otherwhiles the
excrementitious humor, that exsudates out of the Teeth, falling upon the Gums,
eats them away by degrees, etc. But above all other things, the scales, and
foulness of the Teeth are very prejudicial to them. All which infirmities to
avoid, you need but to keep your Teeth and Gums neat and clean from any
foulness whatsoever; as has been already said in the foregoing Sections:
preventing any preternatural collection of Blood, or any other humors within
the Gums. But if the mischief is already done, that is, if your Teeth be really
loose, and your Gums wasted, you must have recourse for their recovery to one
well versed in those things. For to prescribe you here any form of Remedies,
would be to no purpose, since the same thing cannot be equally good in all
cases, and that without the perfect knowledge of the cause of the Disease, and
a right method in applying suitable Medicaments, (which commonly is understood
only by Practitioners in those concerns) it is impossible ever to perform the
Cure of any Distemper.

Yet, that you may not think me remiss in any thing belonging to my Profession,
that may concern your welfare; and by reason that you may chance to find your
selves in a place where there will be no Artist to help you; I will here
communicate to you a general Remedy against the decay of the Gums, and
looseness of the Teeth; which I am sure, if you use carefully, will often
answer your expectations: At least it will be such, that it shall always do you
some good, and never any harm. But I must tell you beforehand, that if your
body be Scorbutic, and full of ill humors, you must first be Blooded, and
Purged, according to the directions of a good Physician: and then you may use
the said Remedy as follows.

Take of Mastick, Myrrh, Pineapple, Dragons-blood, in drops, all reduced into
Powder, of each equal quantity, red Coral prepared, flowers of Pomgranats, of
each double the quantity of the other Ingredients; and steep them all in a
proportionable quantity of Spring Water upon warm Embers, for the space of a
natural day; and then filtrate the Infusion through a woollen-cloth, and keep
it close in some convenient vessel. And when you have a mind to use it, you
shall take two or three spoonfuls on it a day, keeping it in your mouth a
quarter of an hour every time: which you must continue to do while necessity
shall require it.

I might have told you at the beginning of this Section, where I spoke of the
vessels of the Teeth, that their Artery comes from the Carotids; the vein (...)
the Jugular, and the sinew from the fifth pair of Nerves: but if you are
skilled in Anatomy, you know it better than I, and if not, my telling of it to
you would signify nothing at all, unless I should in the same time, give you an
accurate description of all those vessels; tracing them from their Origin,
even to the very last of their Divisions, and furthest extremities; which would
be improper in this place.

SECT. VI. Of Childrens Teeth.
HAving hitherto spoken of the Teeth in reference to adult persons, and such as
are past childhood: we shall explain in this Section, as succinctly, and withal
as clearly as we can, what is necessary to be known touching their growth, and
change in children; a thing of no small consequence, since the life of Infants
is therein so often concerned.

The Child being born, remains Toothless, till he is about five or six Months
old: at which time his two foremost Teeth in each Jaw begin to appear, without
keeping any constant order of Precedence: sometimes those above coming out
first, and sometimes those below. After them follow all the rest successively
in both Mandibles: so next to these come the four other Incisores, the four
Canin or Dog-Teeth, and the first eight Molares, (which are properly the double
Teeth) and then come the four biggest Teeth of all, which may be called
Quadruple Teeth, as being about three times bigger than the small ones: and
after that the eight last Teeth do follow; which in respect to the Incisores
may be termed treble Teeth. But these treble ones usually vary very much in
time of growth, for it is but rarely that they all come forth in the same year,
the four last of them seldom coming out before the one or two and twentieth
year of our age; for which reason such Teeth are called by some, Teeth of
Wisdom; because that by that time, we should have a full use of our rational
Faculty, though God knows how often it proves to be true.

The eight Incisores, and the four Dog-Teeth come the first year; the eight
double Teeth the second* year; and the four Quadruples, with the four first
Treble ones, the third. During the time of their eruption, and especially when
the four Quadruple ones break forth out of their Sockets, children are subject
to Fevers, and great alterations, which weakens them extremely, and often puts
an end to their days; which comes to pass most commonly, for want of help to
facilitate their issue out of the Gums.

And as I look upon the knowledge of Childrens Teeth, as a subject properly
belonging to my Profession; so I think my self obliged to amend, amplify, and
render it as conducive to the preservation of the life, and health of Children,
and to the preventing of all those Infirmities wherewith they are afflicted,
(upon the account of the first coming, and shedding of their Teeth) as my weak
endeavors can make it. And therefore I will to that end deliver here in few
words, what reason and experience have taught me concerning the same;
Proceeding thus,

In the first place, I would advise such as may be concerned in this Affair, to
take a special care in observing when the Child's Teeth begin to trouble him:
which (besides his frowardness, and excessive crying) may be known by his
salivation or drivelling (as Nurses are wont to style it,) and the inflammation
and swelling of his Gums; and as soon as you perceive it to be so, you are to
wash his mouth now and then with the following mixture: Take seven or eight as
new Figs as you can get, and boil them in a pint or more of Whey, till they
grow very soft, and then squeeze the Whey, and as much of the substance of the
Figs as you can through a cloth; of which liquor take half a pint; of Honey of
Roses, and Syrup of Violets, of each half an ounce; and three or four spoonfuls
of Plantain-water: mix all together, and keep it close in a Bottel. The best
way to use it, is with a stick of Liquorish beaten at one end into small
threads like a Comb-brush, or little Broom, with which, being dipped in some of
the said Liquor, you shall wash and rub the Child's Gums, (especially where they
are tumified) at least five or six times a day, continuing so to do, till you
perceive the Gums to grow white above the Tooth: (which is a sign of great pain
in that part, and that the young Tooth will in a little time break through the
Gums) and then take a Lancet, or a very sharp Penknife, and divide the white
place, cutting it down to the head of the subjacent Tooth, with two Incisions
crossing one another at the center of the white spot, continuing to use the
mixture as is aforesaid, till the Tooth appears above the Gums; observing to
use the same method at the coming out of every Tooth, which you may know by the
foregoing tokens.

Now the Teeth being all come out (except only such as remain latent within the
Jaw, till about the two and twentieth year of ones age) they keep firm and
strong till the child is a matter of six or seven years old, and then most of
them grow loose, and a while after are cast clear out. The treble Teeth never
change, the Quadruples very rarely, but the Incisores, the Dog-Teeth, and the
double ones always do; sometimes whole, (and then the second Teeth, or those
that are to succeed them, are a long time before they grow up again;) but most
commonly their head only comes off, the other part remaining still for the
making up of the next Tooth; like unto the first production of a Vegetable
Seed, or tender Sprig of a young Plant; for as the upper part of this being
withered in the Winter following, by the rigorous cold of that Season, drops
off in the next Spring: (by reason that its texture being yet loose, and less
firm, the pores or sap carrying vessels, are over much dilated by the great
affluence of the nutritive juice, and so give admittance to some indigested and
grosser particles than is convenient for the nourishment of the Vegetable:
which particles being irregular, and unactive, their motion is soon stopped;
when as a great cold intervening, compresses a little the young Plant round
about, so that they are congealed, and become fixed in their Ducts, or leading
pipes, whereby that part being deprived of its due nourishment, fades away, and
dries up,) and is succeeded by a new Sprout shooting out of the stump, or
remaining part. So likewise the young Teeth coming into the cold air, when they
are yet tender, and less solid: those of them that are more susceptible of
alteration, and more exposed to the inclemency of the weather; (as must be
those before, which by reason of their smalness and situation, cannot but be
more subject to adventitious accidents,) are thereby chilled and repressed, and
their parts thrust near one another, and driven back toward their center, from
whence the substance of the Tooth becoming closer, and the intervals between
its parts narrower, and interrupted in several places, by the irregular motion
of some of the minutest of those parts, (which by reason of their unstableness,
and fluxibility, being disposed to advance and obey the action of external
Agents more than the others, do move disorderly, and spoil the structure of the
rest:) the small Veins and Arteries therein dispersed, will become so extremely
compressed, that the blood they contain (which in Children is most commonly
gross and impure, as is apparent by their stupidity, and filthy scabs; as well
as by that Feverish disposition they are always inclined to; which argues a
great disparity between the parts of their blood,) is thereby stopped in its
course, and detained in them; where the grossness of its parts, and their
incumbring figures will soon dispose them to rest, and remain entangled and
coagulated together.

If you chance to reflect upon what I say, when I ascribe the great agitation
of Childrens Blood, and its being quiet and fixed in their Teeth, to the same
cause, viz. its foulness, and the incongruity of its parts; you will perhaps be
as angry with me, as the Satyr was against the Traveller of the Fables, for his
blowing hot and cold with the same breath. But if you consider it a little more
attentively, you shall find that this, as well as the said Apologue, may easily
be reconciled with Reason.

Furthermore, the Blood coming from the live part of the Tooth, to enter the
other; and being hindered thereof by the narrowness of the passages, and the
resistance of the condensed blood, is upon that necessarily determined to
employ the force of its motion round about, against the parts lying immediately
between the dead portion of the Tooth, and that which is alive; the which it
consequently loosens by degrees, and at last breaks them all asunder;
separating thus the live body of the Tooth quite from its dead head; and the
space left between them permitting the trunk to grow, it shoots a new head;
which rising above the Gums, thrusts out the old one, becoming a perfect Tooth
in its room.

But if in the mean while, through the too great adherence of the dead part to
the Gums, the other is depressed, or retarded from growing, and by consequence
is detained under the former too long; some of the broken particles remaining
between them* will corrode, and eat holes in the new head of the Tooth, and so
it comes out already perished: which to prevent, the first Teeth must be drawn
out as soon as they appear any thing loose.

Moreover, it happens sometimes, that the new head of the Tooth is nourished,
and increases so fast, that being obstructed by the too great connection of the
old one, to the adjacent parts, from advancing in its right course; it turns
aside, and makes its way through either the inside, or outside of the Gums; and
so it grows biassing, and out of rank. This defect is remedied by drawing out
the superfluous Tooth, and the use of some convenient means to bring the new
Tooth into its place; which is very easy to do, if undertaken at first, but
otherwise a great deal more difficult; and especially if the two next Teeth are
approached so near one another, that it cannot be contained between them,
without being lessened, or the others put further off from each other.

Note, That in drawing out the old, or sucking Tooth, a great care is to be
taken not to hurt the new one, lying under it.

SECT. VII. Of the Acceleration of the Teeth.
THe five first of the foregoing Sections have been employed about men's Teeth,
and the sixth about those of Children: but this seventh and last Section of our
Discourse shall respect both men and children; for it will not only teach how
to hasten the growth of Childrens second Teeth, when it happens to be delayed,
or retarded too long; but also how to Accelerate the coming out of those in
Men, that are called Teeth of Wisdom. Which last, without the help of Art,
hardly ever appear before almost half of our life is already past away; And
when the time of our growth is over: during which, we have the greatest
occasion for them. But because the bare saying or asserting of any thing
without proofs, or some reasons to render it probable, has no force to persuade
any man of its truth, nor to make him sensible of what utility it is of; We
will elucidate the matter in hand, by an example drown from the motion of Seeds
sown in the Earth. Now the quick or slow germinating of Seeds after they have
been sown, depends upon their being buried shallow, or deep in the ground; the
lightsomness or heaviness of the Earth, and its good or ill manuring, and the
proportion of humidity that dilutes it, as well as the heat or coldness of the
season: the several proportions of either of which accidents, alter and vary
the progress of the Seed, according to their prevalency in respect of each
other.

For in a well prepared Soil, being cherished by the warmth of the Sun, and
duly diluted with water, the Seed will budd a great deal sooner; the lightsome
Earth easily yielding to the expansion of the Semen, when it imbibes that
Succus Nutritious, which Transcolating through the coats of the Seed, and
impregnating its Parenchyma, causes by its fermentation therein, a gentle
shake, and a vital motion in the Radicle, and Plume; (as the Learned Doctor
Grer^ calls the Seminal Root, and Trunck of a Plant in Embryo) whereby they are
empowered to Extricate themselves out of their Integuments, and Parenchyma; and
begin to vegetate, and grow like a Plant.

But the Seed being buried deep in a cold, cloggy earth; will, by the stubborn
Cohesion, and lumpishness of the said earth, be kept from dilating it self, and
consequently from receiving those particles that are altogether necessary for
its vivifying, and augmentation. From whence it follows, that its growth (if
not helped by Art) will be checked, and obstructed till the heat of the Sun has
opened the ground, and set its particles in such motion as they ought to be, to
enter the Seed, and protrude the earth upwards.

So likewise Childrens Gums, being yet tender, shallow, and loose, and withal
prepared, as we have taught heretofore in its place, their first Teeth come
out, and grow very easily; as also do their second, if in shedding of the
first, their heads only come off; for the others do grow up so soon, that the
Gums have hardly any time to close up again. But if the sucking-Teeth do shed
root and all, the matter out of which the next (which I call Novel-Teeth) are
to be made, will not only be a considerable time in disposing it self into the
requisite form, but when the first lineaments are drawn, and Nature has
accomplished her first work, the Gums will be reunited together, and grown so
hard by that time, that their resistance will oppose it self to the growth of
these Teeth, till a stronger nourishment produces more and hotter Blood, and a
greater quantity of Animal Spirits; by which the Gums being made hotter, and
more spungy, and the nutritive juice increased, the issue of the said Teeth
will then be facilitated, and their growth perfected.

To the consideration of these Novel-Teeth, may partly be referred that of the
last treble ones, or dentes sapientiae. It Is true, these are stayed a great
deal longer under the Gums than the others; but also they have more causes that
impede their growth. For, besides that, the Gums are more sinewy, and
membranous about them than any where else, and therefore much more difficult to
penetrate: That part of the Jaw Bone that contains them, is likewise much
thicker, and stronger than any other; and consequently, harder to be divided by
the included Teeth; which being incapable of making their way through it, are
forced to stay therein till such time that Nature having perfected our growth,
the blood becomes hotter, stronger, and its energy more powerful by the
firmness of the Heart, (which is the Sun of our Microcosm, or littleworld) and
other principal parts, and increase of those particles that were wont to be
employed in making up, and augmenting the body; most of which remain then in
the mass of the Blood: whereby the said blood, being able to surmount the
resistance of the Jaw and Gums, forces the said Teeth to come out of their
cells, and grow up.

To the efficacy of this new strength of the Blood upon the arrival of Nature
to its highest Period, may be attributed the causes of those alterations that
usually happen in men's bodies about that time: many looking pale, and being
troubled with diverse infirmities till then, of which they are afterward
delivered. But leaving off Digressions, let us return to our Subject.

We have already observed, that the Novel-Teeth in Children, and Dentes
Supientiae in Men, could not arrive to their perfection, nor therefore become
serviceable to us without a long time, and a great Effort of Nature. It remains
now, that (pursuant to our design, as we have declared it at the beginning of
this Section) we endeavor to find out some means, whereby we may remedy those
defects; in facilitating Nature's work, and rendering those tardy Teeth
abovementioned, serviceable to us as soon as we can. And as I find none more
proper and expeditious, than the Rarifaction, and Dilatation of the Gums, so
that they may lose their greatest stubbornness, and become more yielding to the
Teeth: I conclude that all the difficulty lies in knowing how such an effect
can be produced: which (after a due consideration) I think may be performed
after this manner.

In the first place, there is need of an Instrument made of Gold, or Silver,
about a foot long, as big as a Tobacco-pipe, and like a Syringe; being so
bored, that a perfectly Cilindrical embolus, or sucker, may fill exactly nine
inches of its Cavity; the rest being made a good deal smaller, and bowed like
the Blowing-pipe of Watch-makers; which ought to end into an head resembling
the cup of an Acorn; and so contrived, that it may embrace the Gums exactly.
Your Instrument being ready, if you have a mind to perform the Operation, you
must in the next place (concerning the Dentes Sapientiae) tie all the Teeth
together, (which may be done without any trouble) so that the two foremost of
them may draw the last of all toward the forepart of the mouth. By this the
included Teeth will be freed from being compressed between the others, and the
extremity of the Jaw Bone. And then the Gums being prepared by Emollients, and
relaxing things, apply the end of your Syringe close upon the Gums, under which
the imperfect Tooth lies; and then draw the Embolus, and the top of the Gums
will follow, and rise within the little Acorn-cup-like end of the Pipe, as the
flesh usually does under Cupping-Glasses. Keep it a while so, and then take
away the Syringe, and scarifie that part of the Gums that was drawn within the
Pipe, in several places; reiterating the same Operation twice a day, for about
a fortnight, omitting only the Scarification, which is to be used the first
time only. By this means it appears probable to me, that the Gums yielding, the
force of the Blood will compel the fibers or minute parts of the imperfect
Tooth, to advance according to their natural order, and situation; and so cause
the said Tooth to grow.

As to the Novel-Teeth, you shall follow the same method, and use the same
means in facilitating their coming out, that you have done to the others;
omitting only the tying of the Teeth, which would be superfluous here.

Note, that every thing is not capable of the same perfection, and that as
there is no rule without some exception; so when I have asserted such and such
things to be improvable to such a degree, it is to be understood for the most
part, and in general; not denying but that it may happen otherwise in some
particular cases: but I shall always deal heartily with every body, never
undertaking any thing but what I shall be able to do according to agreement.
And if any one will be pleased to come to my Chamber, he may have my Advice
(concerning any thing that belongs to my Profession) gratis at any time.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READERS.
GENTLEMEN,
ALthough I have offered nothing in this Paper, but what is according to my own
Experience, and the best of my knowledge; yet I will not say but that I have
been deficient in many things, and have committed a great many Errors in the
management of my Subject; but if you consider that I am the first (as far as I
know) that ever wrote any thing of this nature; and withal, what is to be
expected from one in my Circumstances, I hope you will be the more ready to
excuse my faults. However, if what I have done be acceptable to you, I intend
in a second Impression of this small Treatise, to Correct, Illustrate, and
augment it, to its full proportion. In the mean while I would advise you, to
make use of what is here presented you, by

Your very Humble Servant, CHARLES ALLEN.

Printed in the Year 1686.
A Physical Discourse WHEREIN The Reasons of the Beating of the PULSE, or
Pulsation of the Arteries; Together with those of the Circulation of the Blood,
are Mechanically Explained: Which was never done before.
THe Beating of the Pulse being one of those Phenomena, that deserve man's
consideration the best, it has excited the most Learned in all Ages to search
out what might be the cause of it.

The best Physicians and greatest Philosophers of former times, being ignorant
of the Circulation of the Blood, did ascribe it to their occult qualities, and
unknown powers.

Galen, an Eminent Physician, searching the natural cause of the Beating of the
Pulse, thought upon the making of that famous Experiment of his; by which,
having put a Quill into an Artery, and tied the Artery upon it, he found that
the said Artery ceased from beating betwixt the ligature and the extremity, tho
it continued still beating betwixt the same ligature and the heart: And then
seeing also, that the Artery being untied from about the Quill, the Pulse would
immediately pass beyond the place where the ligature had been made, and beat
all along the Artery; although the capacity of the Quill remained still the same,
he concluded, that the Pulse was caused by a Pulsisick faculty residing in the
coats of the Artery.

Gassendus, a Modern and most Learned Philosopher, attributed the said effect,
to the Pulsifick Faculty of the heart; which, in his opinion, communicates it
self to the Arteries. Both which opinions (although proposed by extraordinary men,
yet) are so inconsiderable, that they need no refutation.

The most Learned and most Profound Cartesius was of opinion, that the Beating
of the Pulse proceeded from the motion of the Blood, which coming out of the
lest Ventricle of the Heart into the Aorta, in a tumultuous manner, extends it
self forcibly, and thereby drives all the mass of the Blood, from the heart to
the heart again, according to the Circulation of the Blood. After which this
great Man (who would always give natural and intelligible reasons for every
thing, as he has done for most;) coming (at the instigation of a Physician of
Louvaine) to examine Galen's Experiment, he attributed the cessation of the
Pulse, that happens below the ligature, to the narrowness of the passage of the
Blood through the Quill; which Blood, according to the principles of the
Philotopher, coming out of the said Quill into a wider space, cannot
communicate its action to the sides of the Artery, but is disposed to employ
the force of its motion forwards, according to the length of the Artery.

But the said Physician alleging against this, that if one takes an Artery
without Quill, or any Incision, and ties its sides so close together, that
there be left a far smaller passage for the Blood in that place, than in the
Quill; the Artery will nevertheless continue still to Beat on both sides of the
ligature, as it did before: (the contrary of which would necessarily follow* if
it were so, that the straitness of the passage of the Blood did occasion the
loss of the Pulse) Cartesius was here forced to recede somewhat from his former
Sentiment, and to confess, that the motion of the Arteries depends partly upon
the free continuation of their coats; which totally overthrows his opinion.
For, let the power of the said continuation be what it will; supposing, as the
Philosopher did, that its action may be stopped by the compression of the sides
of the Artery: It is certain, that although the Quill in the Artery were of equal,
or, if you will, greater capacity than the Artery; yet if the said Artery were
tied upon it, the Pulse would, notwithstanding all that, cease below the
ligature. But Cartesius said, that such a Quill as that we were speaking of
just now, being in an Artery either tied, or untied; would never hinder any
part of the Artery from Beating: And therefore, etc.

Doctor Lower says, after many Disquisitions on this Subject, that the
knowledge of those things was left to God alone.

Doctor Willis ascribes the Beating of the Pulse to the contraction of the
circular Fibers of the muscular coat of the Artery: But it is absurd to think
so; for its impossible to imagine that those Fibers could contract themselves
of their own accord; neither does the Doctor give any reason for what he says.
Besides, he is inconsistent with himself, when he ascribes the same motions to
the circular Fibers of the muscular coat of the veins; which are
notwithstanding wholly destitute of any Pulsation, etc.

All which considering, and how these and other great men had (through the
difficulty of the thing, and not out of any insufficiency in them) fallen into
so gross and so erroneous opinions concerning the Point in Question; I
concluded, that it was as good as impossible ever to solve the difficulty. Yet,
recollecting my self, and seeing that the said Effect must have a cause,
whatever it be, which probably cannot reside any where else, but either in the
Heart, Blood, or coats of the Artery; or finally, in them all together; I made
a resolution to examine carefully each one of these things separately, as
possibly containing alone the cause sought after; and then all together, as
being possibly Coadjutors in the production of the known Effect. And after as
exact an Inquiry into the matter as I am capable of, my Reasons (which would be
too tedious to tell you now) persuade me, that all the Mystery consists in the
three following things.

The First is, the Structure of the Artery; which is made up of four Coats. (We
shall examine in another place how they are generated at first) The first of
them, which contains the Blood immediately, seems to be nervous, and made of
strait Fibers; which take their Origin from the heart; or rather are a
continuation of those that immediately invest the cavity of the heart. As soon
as they are arrived at the orifice of the heart, they rank themselves by one
another; forming a certain Cartilagineous Ring; from the circumference of
which, they run almost parallel along the Artery; but yet with such an
inclination toward one another, that going from the heart to the extreme
parts, they form a kind of Cone; (for that we may render our Discourse more
intelligible; we shall consider here one of the trunks of the great Artery,
(suppose the ascending one,) as a continued right Conical Pipe, abstracting
from all its divisions and branches; to every one of which may easily be
applied, what we are going to say of one of them,) a little below the Apex of
which, those Fibers unite themselves together; and do compose a little
tendinous ring, called Anastomosis: to which is affixed the extremity of the
vena cava: which vein we shall suppose here to be a single conical channel, or
pipe, disposed, as we have taken the Artery to be. Within this Anastomosis
there is a little Valve so disposed, that it permits the blood to pass from the
Artery into the vein, but hinders it from returning back again from the vein
into the Artery. Between every one of those nervous Fibers, there is a thin
membrane that joins them together; (as the skin in a Goose'sfoot ties its toes
to one another,) which permits the said Fibers to open, and go further from one
another, when the Artery is dilated: And which do continually increase in
breath, as they go from the Anastomosis to the basis of the Artery: so that
they become so conspicuous near the heart, that Doctor Willis took them for
some large fleshy Fibers; to which he assigned the faculty of shortning the
Artery, in order to promote the circulation of the Blood. The second coat is
the Muscular, and the third the Glandulous: but the consideration of these
middle coats, being not necessary to our present purpose, we shall speak of
them another time. As to the fourth, or outmost Coat, it is that which we have
most need to take notice of here; as being the principal Instrument of the
Systole and Diastole of the Artery. This Coat is made up of two orders, or
ranks of spiral Fibers; which proceed from the oblique Fibers of the heart;
from whence they go twisting and winding themselves about the body of the
Artery, as Ivy does about Trees; some running upon it from the left to the
right, and the others from the right to the left; intersecting thus one another
obliquely, as they go from the heart to the anastomosis; whereby they form a
sort of Net, or Sieve-like-woof upon the outside of the Artery. At their coming
out of the heart, they are knitted together by a cartilagineous substance, that
incompasses the root of the Artery round about, as an iron-ring does the end of
a handle: from the circumference of which cartilagineous Ring, they run
Helix-wise upon the superficies of the artery: at the extremity of which, being
arrived, they insert themselves into the tendinous small ring, or anastomosis.
These spiral Fibers are tied so loosely on the body of the artery, and so
slightly between themselves, at the places where they intersect one another,
that they may run very easily to and fro upon the artery.

The second thing conducive to the production of those stated turns of
Systole's and Diastole's of the artery, is, that the blood contains a certain
subtle matter, or vital spirit, which can move it self, and pass between its
parts very easily. And in fine, that the blood coming out of the heart (where
it acquires an extreme agitation) into the arteria magna, expands it self with
great violence, and strongly dilates that part of the said artery that lies
contiguous to the heart, (forcing in the same time the blood to advance from
the heart toward the extremity,) whereby the spiral Fibers being necessarily
drawn toward the dilating place, do compress the artery round about all along,
and so squeeze the subtle matter, from between the parts of the compressed
blood, into that which is not; forcing it thus to pass from the extremity
toward the heart, which makes the ebbing or systole of the artery. And then
the spiral Fibers having been extended violently, and on a sudden, upon the
dilatation of the artery, do (by the Elastick faculty of some of their parts)
come back again, and restitute themselves into their former situation, and
state; forcing thereby the subtle matter to fly through the blood, from the
dilated place of the great Artery, toward the extremity of the capillary ones,
etc. which makes the flowing or Diastole of the Artery.

THE EXPLICATION.
WE have already supposed the Artery to be of a right Conical figure; let us
further, for greater evidence, imagine it to be mentally divided into four
parts of equal capacity: so that as much as the first shall exceed the second
in breadth, the second will exceed the first in length, etc. Let besides, the
places of the supposed divisions be marked with several letters, as A, B, C,
and let A, denote the first division; (proceeding from the heart to the
extremity;) B, the second; and C, the third: let us also mark the Basis of the
Cylindrical artery, which is inserted into the basis of the heart, by X; and
its capillary end inserted into the circumference of the annular anastomosis,
by Y.

And now, suppose that a certain portion of blood, as a dram for example,
passes out of the heart into the aorta, where it swells, and dilates it self
very considerably, (by reason of a very intense degree of heat, it acquires in
the ventricles of the heart; and of its being mixed therein with a certain
leaven, or fermentative juice, (it being the residue of that portion of blood,
that had past immediately before through the heart,) which necessarily causes a
great commotion and strife amongst its parts;) it must follow according to true
Philosophy, that the said portion of blood coming out of the heart, does in the
same time thrust the blood already in the artery, forwards, and dilates that
part of the artery that lies contiguous to the heart. It thrusts the blood, I
say, toward the extremity; because that it must occupy a space in the artery
equal to its natural bulk, neither greater nor smaller; by reason that a like
quantity of the blood to that, that comes out of the heart into the artery, is
poured out of the vein into the heart; so that there is only room left in the
vein to admit just as much blood, as comes out of the heart at each Diastole.
And if we suppose the space X A, to contain a dram of blood, (whether more, or
less, makes no matter here) as we have also supposed, that the same quantity
comes out of the heart at every Diastole, (or Systole, as some would have it)
it is an invincible truth, that this blood coming out of the heart, must
exactly occupy the space X A; and that therefore, it thrusts in the same time,
the blood that occupied it before, into the space A B; that in A B, into the
space B C; that in the space B C, into the space C Y; and that in C Y, into the
capillary end of the vein, etc. And although (according to our Hypothesis) the
passage from the artery into the vein be much smaller, than that of the heart
into the artery; yet if the motion of the blood through the anastomosis, is to
the motion of the blood at the orifice of the heart, as the orifice of the
heart is to the anastomosis; that is, as X is to Y, (as it may easily be so,
although it is naturally otherwise: the rest of the anastomoses, from which we
have abstracted here, being together at least as capacious, as the orifice of
the heart,) it is plain, that a dram of blood will as soon pass from the artery
into the vein, as another shall from the heart into the artery.

And as the blood coming out of the heart into the great artery, cannot
possibly occupy a greater space, than such as is adequate to its volume in a
condensed state; and that nevertheless it dilates it self, it must necessarily
extend and dilate X A, the part of the artery that contains it, as much beyond
its natural tone, or reach, as the rarefaction of the blood increases its
volume; which cannot come to pass, but these two things must necessarily
follow. First, that when the blood dilates it self, it leaves some intervals
between its parts; which intervals (because there is no vacuum in nature) must
in the same time be filled up with some other fluid matter: (which ought to be
thinner than the blood; for otherwise it could not pass between its parts.) And
as this subtle matter cannot come from the heart, because that then it is empty;
and that besides its orifice is shut close by its three valves; it can neither
come through the coats of the artery, by reason of their thickness, and close
texture; neither is there any such matter about them. It remains then only,
that it must come from the blood contained in the artery.

Secondly, that the spiral Fibers must be drawn toward the dilated place, and
the rest of the artery made as much narrower than ordinary, as X A, becomes
wider than it uses to be. Whereby the artery being compressed round about, the
vital spirit is squeezed from between the compressed parts of the blood, and
forced to advance toward the dilated place; in such manner, that as much of
the spirit, as is necessary to fill up the spaces left between the parts of the
dilated blood, is sent thither from between the parts of that, which is
compressed; the remnant of the spirit being equally distributed through the
rest of the artery; so that if every one of the four parts, or divisions of the
artery, contains a certain quantity of vital spirit, distinguished into three
parts, and that three of those parts, do pass from A B, into X A, two of them
will in the same instant pass from B C, into A B; and one from C Y, into B C;
in which action consists the ebbing, or systole of the artery. And as a rope,
(or more sensibly, a gut-string) which is fixed to any place, being pulled with
a jerk, will draw back again him that drew it at first; so likewise the spiral
Fibers being extended violently, and on a sudden, upon the dilatation of the
artery, do come back again instantaneously, (by reason that some of the parts
of each Fiber, being strongly thrusted toward its middle, and somewhat bent
from its circumference toward its center, do presently spring back again,
extending themselves according to the breadth of the Fiber; whereby the said
Fiber is necessarily as much shortened, as it had been stretched before) and
restitute themselves into their former situation and tone; (which they are
facilitated to do by the extenuation of that extraordinary agitation of the
blood; which it communicates in an instant to the yielding sides of the artery)
forcing thereby three parts of the vital spirit, or subtle matter, to repass
from X A, to A B; and the two parts, that were already in A B, to pass into B
C; from whence another will pass into C Y, etc. which makes the flowing, or
Diastole of the artery.

I foresee an Objection, that some may make against what we have said, that
that portion of the blood, that comes out of the heart in its Diastole, is
dilated, and yet occupies no more of the artery, than if it were condensed;
only that part of the artery which contains it, is a little more extended than
the rest: for, they will say, this supposes, that both the artery and the vein
are always full of blood; being certain, that if the blood, in coming out of
the heart into the great artery, did find there any empty space, where it might
expand it self freely, it would start forwards into it, and then it would not
dilate the artery, nor by consequence draw the spiral Fibers; and therefore
there would neither be Systole nor Diastole in the artery: But it is most
certain, they will continue, that men have sometimes more, and sometimes less
blood in their bodies: and that if a man has, for example, fifteen ounces of
blood drawn, it will follow; that there being a vacuity in the Sanguiducts,
till the same quantity of blood be regenerated anew, the Beating of the Pulse
must also cease till then; which being contradicted by daily experience, they
will conclude, that the motion of the spiral Fibers, with whatever else we have
taught concerning the Beating of the Pulse, is altogether chimerical. To which
I answer in few words, that for the Beating of the Pulse, and Circulation of
the Blood, it matters not at all, whether or no, the artery and vein be quite
full of blood; since that as the blood decreases in them, the muscles of the
limbs, and other adjacent parts, do proportionably compress them round about;
so that their internal superficies touches the blood continually every way;
which has the same effect, as if the artery and vein were exactly full of
blood: for the blood coming out of the heart, and finding as much difficulty in
lifting up the adjacent parts, as to drive on the blood of the artery and vein,
when they are full on it; it is forced to keep the same order and method in that
case, as it does in this, concerning its dilatation and place in the artery.

Now, these being the true and genuine reasons of the Diastole, and Systole of
the arteries, it is very easy thereby to explain all the Phenomena relating to
Galen's experiment. For the Quill being put into the artery, and left there
without being tied, the artery will nevertheless beat still above and below the
Quill, as it did before; because that the spiral Fibers can still play to and
fro from one end of the artery to the other, without impediment. But if you
bind the sides of the artery upon the Quill, the motion of the same spiral
Fibers will be intercopted by the ligature; so that it must necessarily follow,
(by the foregoing reasons,) that the artery being not alternatively compressed,
and dilated betwixt the said ligature and the extremity, the Pulse must also
cease in that part of the said artery, etc.

Many things may easily be explained by this Doctrine, tho impossible to be
interpreted any otherwise; which therefore become as many proofs of its verity:
as namely, the difference which is between the arterial and venal blood. For
(having demonstrated above, that when the blood advances in the great artery
from the heart toward the anastomosis, and from thence into the vein, the
vital spirit goes in the very same time from the anastomosis toward the heart;
whereby the said spirit is necessarily kept within the artery;) it is certain,
that this disparity proceeds from the want of spirit in the venal to keep its
parts in agitation; which abounding in the arterial, keeps it in a continual
effervency, etc. I could add many other things to authorize what we have said
concerning the Beating of the Pulse, and Circulation of the Blood: but I hope
this will suffice to rational men, and such as are of a Mechanical Genius. As
for those that attribute all things to final causes, and have recourse upon
every occasion, to the designs and intentions of Nature; (as when they say,
that the Eyebrows are made to hinder the Sweat from falling into the eyes,
etc.) if, notwithstanding all that we can do, they remain still insensible to
our reasons, it matters not much; and, in my opinion, such persons had a great
deal better study Astrology; or, if they are big with devotion, go and comment
upon Job, or Paraphrase some Psalms, than meddle with Physical matters.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
Section I. Of the Nature of the Teeth Page 7 Sect. II. Of the Alteration of
the Teeth p. 11 Sect. III. Of the Corruption of the Teeth, with their Remedies
p. 15 The Description and Use of the Polican p. 17 Sect. IV. Of the
Restoration of the Teeth p. 19 Sect. V. Of the Tooth-ake, Looseness of the
Teeth, and decay of the Gums, with their Remedies p. 22 Sect. VI. Of Childrens
Teeth p. 31 Sect. VII. Of the Acceleration of the Teeth p. 37 Advertisement to
the Readers p. 44 A Physical Dicourse concerning the Beating of the Pulse, and
Circulation of the Blood p. 45 The Explication p. 52

