THE WAY OF THE SPIRIT In bringing SOULS TO CHRIST.

Set forth in X. SERMONS, ON JOHN 16.7, 8, 9, 10. And CHAP. 7.37.

By that able and faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. Thomas Allen, late
Pastor of a Church in the City of Norwich.

London, Printed in the Year. 1676.

To the Reader
HAving a sight of these Sermons before they went to the press, I thought fit
to speak something of them, and something of the Author.

1. As to these Sermons, The design of them is excellent. First, they show that
the Holy Ghost in bringing Souls to Christ, does first convince them of sin, so
making them to feel their need of Christ, working in them to hunger and thirst
after him, prize him above all, and count all things loss and dung in
comparison of him. Secondly, In these Sermons is excellently set forth the
fullness and righteousness of the Lord Jesus, whereby he is able to save to the
uttermost all that come unto God by him. Thirdly, here is set forth how freely
Christ admits sinners to come unto him that they may have life, not standing
upon any merit or worthiness in us, but only works our hearts to a sense of our
own vileness and unworthiness, and by a secret work of his Spirit draws the
humbled and convinced sinner to take of the water of life freely.

Possibly some may meet with a few passages in some of these Sermons, that they
may not clearly understand, Let such consider that these Notes were neither
intended nor prepared by the Author for the Press, but taken in short hand from
the mouth of the Preacher, in which case there must be great allowance.
Likewise some may think the Author did inculcate things too much, and was not
so concise and sententious as were to be desired. In answer to that, I would
say, that in my poor judgment I always looked upon it as one of the many
excellent gifts of God bestowed upon him, that he had a great dexterity in
clearing and urging things with variety of expressions. As he was a heart
Christian, so he was a heart Preacher, and those things that are to be wrought
upon the hearts of the hearers are to be sufficientey cleared to their
understandings, and earnestly set home to their Souls and Consciences, though
God can set in with a short hint to convert a soul, and enlarge that with great
light and power upon the hearer, that was not sufficiently cleared and urged by
the Preacher, yet truly it is an excellence in a Preacher to set forth the
truths of God plainly and fully with power and authority in the name of Christ.

2. As to the Author of these Sermons, that burning and shining light Mr.
Thomas Allen (now with Christ) I must needs say something (having such an
opportunity) of the exceeding grace of God in him.

1. I will speak of him as a Christian. He was one that obtained mercy to fear
the Lord from his youth, and soon grew up to sueh a measure of grace as to be
one of the highest form in Christ's school, he attained to be more than one of
the children or young men in Christ, even to be one of the Fathers, one of the
most grown and most experienced Christians, full of Faith, and of the Holy
Ghost. His heart was much awed with a holy reverence of God, he was a man of a
tender conscience, fearful to offend God, Christ was exceeding precious to him,
he made him all his salvation, and all his desire, he was full of holy zeal,
valiant for the Truth, he had a heart for God, and a tongue for God upon all
occasions. In communicating to others necessities he was so free, that usually
he did beyond his estate, he was every way eminent in grace, adorning the
Gospel with a holy and fruitful conversaion.

2. As a Minister, he was very able and faithful, he was an excellent Preacher,
plain and powerful in his doctrine, and though he was a learned man, yet he
preached without all ostentation, he did not confound his hearers with obscure
terms and fantastical expressions, but endeavored to set forth the Truths of
God in the most plain and convincing way to the consciences of men. He preached
not himself, but Christ, he was not desirous of vain glory. In his preaching he
was not in jest, playing with his Text and with the souls of men (as the manner
of some is) but was in sober sadness and good earnest to bring souls to Christ,
and build them up in him. He was eminent in self-denial, he made not the
Ministry a trade to get money, his design was not to make himself rich in the
World, but to make others rich in grace. In those places in which he labored
he might say with the Apostle that he sought not theirs, but them, not their
goods, but their good. It Is no dishonor to a Minister of Christ to live of a
little, and to leave but little when he dies: Proud, lordly, self seeking, high
living Ministers no way suit the Gospel of Christ; (which was first preached by
a company of poor men, without any worldly splendour, who went through wonderful
hardships and difficulties in fulfilling the Ministry which they received of
the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 6.4, 5. 2 Cor. 11, 23, 24, etc.) but are rather like the
Merchants of Babylon, who grow rich and great with the abundance of her
delicacies, Rev. 18.3.11.12

Another thing that I would mention of this worthy man was his mavelous
condescension in private discourses to his brethren in the Ministry, who were
much inferior to him in age and gifts, not standing upon his own great worth,
never exalting himself, but preferring them above himself, hearing their
judgments in any matter with as great reverence and respect as if they had been
his Superiors. Surely his humility was extraordinary, and a notable example to
all that knew him.

As he was a Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of God in all points of the
Doctrine of Religion, so he was expert in all Questions about Church Discipline
above many; for which he had been much advantaged by living so long in
New England, and having there such intimate acquaintance with those famous men
Mr. Bulkly, Mr. Hooker, Mr. Cotton, Mr. Shephard, and others there, who lived
in his heart when they were dead, and he delighted to speak, and to relate some
remarkable passages of them.

One thing more I would take notice of in this man of God, he was full of
compassion to those that were under violent temptations, and terrors of
Conscience, and very judicious to direct them in the way to find rest unto
their souls.

Whilst I commend this Servant of Jesus Christ, let none be offended, as if I
thought or spoke of man above what is meet, I know indeed there is in these
days a kind of man-worship, a crying up this man and the other, and having
their persons and preaching in admiration without cause, when in the mean while
who almost cries up the Lord Jesus, and makes him all in all? Therefore let
me be so understood in all that I have said, that I mention these excellencies
of this Servant of God not to cry up a piece of clay, but for the glory of
Christ, who put all this treasure into an earthen vessel, and to quicken us
that are alive and remain to follow such an holy example and pattern as Christ
has shown us in his grace bestowed upon him.

To conclude, when we have considered the graces and excellencies of the
Servants of Christ, we should turn our eyes presently to Christ himself to
admire him, and praise him. He came from above, and is above all, greater than
all both men and Angels, We has a name above every name. The best Ministers
must decrease, go off the stage, and ly in the dust: but he must increase, and
be yet more glorious in the eyes of Angels and men. The best Ministers are but
under-shepherds to that good, great, chief Shepherd, and Bishop of our souls.
It is he that brings the many sons to glory, he is the one Mediator, Savior,
Redeemer, and Head of the Church. Ministers are but Stewards to this high Lord
and King, Laborers for this Lord of the harvest, Vnder-rowers to Christ the
Master Pilot of the Ship of the Church. Blessed are those Servants that are
faithful to him our high and most excellent Lord Jesus, our good Lord and
Master, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Martin Fynch.
Grimsby, August 26, 1674.
Christ does all for the Best.
SERMON I.
JOHN 16.7, 8, 9, 10. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, It is expedient for
you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you,
but if I depart, I will send him unto you.

And when he is come, he will reprove the world of Sin, and of Righteousness,
and of Judgment.

Of Sin, because they believe not on me.

Of Righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more.


OUr Lord Jesus Christ is now about to leave the World and to go from his
Disciples and Servants; he does endeavor before his Departure to strengthen
and establish their hearts both against those sufferings they were like to meet
withal, and also against that sorrow that now their hearts were filled withal
upon the hearing of his departing and going away from them.

As for their sufferings you have that spoken to in the first 4 verses, wherein
he gives them a Reason why he speaks to them concerning their Sufferings. Says
he, These things have I spoken unto you, that you might not be offended. I tell
you before hand of your Sufferings, that you may not be offended. What Is that?
Namely, that you may not be so stumbled when you meet with Sufferings more than
you did expect, and so be ready to turn your backs upon the Gospel, upon your
Profession. These things have I spoken unto you; He had been speaking in the
last verse of the former Chapter, of their meeting with Tribulation in the the
world; And, says Christ, These things have I spoken unto you beforehand, that
when they come you might not stumble and go back.

You see, Brethren, how tender Jesus Christ is of his Disciples and Servants,
he would not have them to be offended, and therefore he tells them beforehand
of their Sufferings, and that is the way to prevent Offenses, and Stumblings,
and fallings back from our Profession by our Persecutions and Sufferings, to
understand and know beforehand what we are like to meet withal; and
therefore, says Christ, I tell you of these things before, that when they come
to pass, you may not be offended. And then he tells them mo^^ particularly what
Sufferings they are like to m^et withal. And, says he, You are like to meet
with the highest and greatest kind of Sufferings, Sufferings of the highest
nature both from the Ecclesiastical and Civil State, the highest kind of
Sufferings they possibly can inflict upon you, for, says he, You shall be
brought into their Ecclesiastical Courts, they shall Excommunicate and cast you
out of their Synagogues, and not only so, but you shall have the Censure of
their Civil Courts, you shall have sentence of death passed upon you, they
shall put you to death, and think they do God good service in so doing. These
things, says he, you must look for.

And by the way, take notice of this, That Christ and his Servants are exposed
to the greatest wrath, malice, indignation and hatred that this world can
exercise on them. The highest kinds of evil and punishment that this world can
infl ct upon them are all little enough; and then he gives the reason of it,
why they shall thus inflict such punishments on them, and put them to such
sufferings, Verse 3. These things will they do, because they have not known the
Father nor me; It is from their ignorance of God and Christ. And truly so all
Persecutors, what they do against the Saints and People of God, it is from
their ignorance of Christ; for did they know God and Christ, they would not so
persecute the Saints and Servants of Christ; but these things will they do,
because they have not known the Father nor me.

But then the Disciples might ask Christ, Why did he not speak of these things
before, and tell them what sufferings they were like to meet with? To that
Christ answers them, Verse 4. I said not these things to you at the beginning,
because I was with you. They were not then so liabl^ to Sufferings the time
Christ was with them, all their hatred and malice was then let out against
Christ himself, as long as Christ was personally present; so the Disciples were
free, Christ preserved them: but now (says he) I go away, now you shall be
exposed to all these things, and now I tell you of them, that you may be
prepared, strengthened and fortified against them.

But as then for their sorrow about his going away, he tells them of his going
away from them, that they should be deprived of his personal presence, from
verse 5. and so on; but now I go my way to him that sent me. And now Christ
does in a very gentle manner blame his Disciples that they did not enquire into
the end and reason of his going away, I go my way to him that sent me, and none
of you ask me, Whither go thou? If they had but enquired whither Christ was
to go, and to what end he was to go away from them, their hearts would not have
been so full of sorrow, if they had understood whither he was going, namely
that he was going to the Father; he was going to Heaven to be glorified there,
and exalted there, to sit at the right hand of God there, to have all power
given into his own hand, to have power over all Creatures and things; None of
you ask me, Whither go thou? Had they enquired after that, had they
understood that, they would not have been so full of sorrow.

Objection.
But you will say, Did not some of the Disciples ask him before, whither he
went. John 13.36. Simon Peter said unto him, Lord, whither go thou? Jesus
answered, Whither I go you cannot follow me now, but you shall follow me
hereafter -- Lord, says he, why cannot I follow thee now --? Why then does
Christ say here, none of you ask me whither go thou? when Peter expressly
asked the Question before.

Answer.
To this I answer, The Question that Peter put to Christ whither he went, was
not so much to understand his Exaltation and Glory, and the End of his going
away, as out of presidence of his own strength and ability to follow Christ:
but now Christ's meaning is, when he says, None of you ask me whither go
thou? that is, you do not understand the end of my going away from you, you do
not know wherefore I go to my Father, and therefore Sorrow has filled your
hearts; and then he blames them for being so sad and sorrowful for his going
away, Verse 6. Because I said these things to you, Sorrow has filled your
hearts; if they had known that Christ was now going to the Father to be exalted
at the right hand of God, they would not have been so sorrowful: no says
Christ, John 14.28. If ye had loved me, ye would have rejoiced, because I said
I go to the Father; for my Father is greater than I. Now observe and take
notice of this, That it is displeasing unto Christ to see any of his Disciples
and Servants to be immoderately sorrowful upon any account; though it was upon
the account of his departing from them and their losing his Presence, yet
notwithstanding Christ would not have them immoderately sorrowful, he blames
them for it, and now says he, because I said these things, to you, Sorrow has
filled your hearts. And further, he comes to lay down some Comforts and
Antidotes against their Sorrow here in the Text, the 7th verse, wherein by way
of Comfort he tells them,

1. That it was expedient for them that he should go away, It is expedient for
you; not only expedient for me that I go to the Father to be exalted in Heaven,
but it is expedient for you also, says Christ, Expedient for you; That is one
Ground of Comfort to allay their Sorrow. And not only so, But

2. He does assert it and affirm it very confidently, he would have them fully
persuaded of it; Because it was hard for them to believe that Christ should
leave them and go away from them, that they should be deprived of his personal
presence; was there any thing harder for them to grapple with than that? could
there be any thing more expedient for them than that he should stay with tnem?
but says Christ, I tell you the Truth, it is expedient for you that I go away,
You may be confident and persuaded of it, nevertheless I tell you the Truth.
And.

3. He does further amplify this Comfort about his going away, by telling of
them, What Benefit they would have by his going from them, Therefore that may
sustain and support their Hearts and Spirits. Why? what shall they get by it?
says Christ, you shall have something that shall be equivalent to my bodily
presence, you shall have that that is more expedient for you; you shall have
the presence of the Comforter the Holy Ghost, and this he does express both
negatively and affirmatively, If I go not away the Comforter will not come to
you, but if I depart I will send him unto you: You shall be sure to have the
Comforter if I go away; when I come to sit at the right hand of my Father, I
will send the Comforter; and you cannot have the Comforter so fully now my
presence is with you as you shall have after I am ascended up to Heaven to be
glorified. And

4. He does more particularly set out the Benefits they shall have by the
presence of the Comforter, and amongst other things he says the Comforter
shall be with them to give them success in their Ministry, shall make their
Ministry effectual and powerful for to convince, To convince the World of Sin,
of Righteousness, and of Judgment.

Thus you see the Scope of these Words, they are spoken by Christ by way of
Comfort to his Disciples, whose hearts were filled with Sorrow at the hearing
of his going away from them. Nevertheless I tell you the Truth, it is expedient
for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come, but
if I depart I will send him unto you; and when he is come, he shall reprove the
World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment.

I have formerly (as you may remember) spoken concerning the glorious effects
of the Gospel from that Scripture Acts 26.18. Now here you have laid down the
Cause whereby the Gospel came to be so efficacious, and effectual, namely, by
the presence of the Comforter, by the assistance of the Holy Ghost with the
Ministry of it. You may observe and take notice of it, That after Christ's
Ascension into Heaven, immediately their Ministry was more powerful and more
effectual in one Sermon, than it was in all the time they were with Christ in
his bodily presence, three thousand at one Clap were brought in by one Sermon,
so powerful was the Holy Ghost with them in their Ministry. But briefly then,
before I come to speak to the eighth Verse (which principally I aimed at in
pitching upon this Scripture) I shall take up one Note or Observation, which
may be of Use and Concernment to us, from the 7th verse; and that is this,
Doct. That it is a most certain Truth that it is expedient for the Disciples
and Servants of Christ sometimes to be deprived of the nearest and dearest
Comforts that they have in this World.

Brethren, the Presence of Christ was the nearest and dearest Comfort that they
had in this World, yet says Christ, It is expedient for you that I go away
from you, and that you be deprived of my bodily Presence; and because it was a
hard thing for them to believe; what? to be deprived of his Presence that was
so dear to them: therefore he adds this, I tell you the Truth; it is true what
I say, it is no Lie. Nevertheless, I tell you the Truth, it is expedient for
you that I go away. It was expedient that Christ should go away, and lay down
his Life, that he should rise again from the dead, and ascend into Heaven, and
sit on the right hand of God, and have all Power and Glory put into his hand,
and therefore it was expedient for them, that they might enjoy all the Fruits
of his Death, and Resurrection, and Ascension, and Glorification, and
Exaltation; it was expedient for them in all these respects, but more
particularly that they might have the Holy Ghost sent down to them.

Methinks, Brethren, Jesus Christ here comes to his Disciples and speaks to
them as a tenderhearted Husband to his dear Wife, when he is about to
undertake some great Journey, or some Voyage, to go away from her, she is
mourning and weeping, he comes and speaks comfortably to her, and persuades her
to be of good cheer, as if he should say, My Dear, there is no Remedy, I must
go away, I must take this Journey, there is no help for it, it is necessary,
it is expedient, nay, and it is for thy sake, it is to fetch in Comforts for
thee, and necessaries for thee; it is expedient not only for me to finish my
Business because my occasions and business call me abroad, but it is expedient
for thee that I take this Voyage or Journey, it is for your Comfort; and be
assured of it, that I will send to you ere long, thou shall hear from me ere
long, I will send One on purpose to comfort thee and refresh thee in my
absence; and know this that I will not stay always from you, but will come in a
short time again. Thus Jesus Christ spoke to his Disciples, when he was about
to leave them, says he, My occasions call me to go away from you, and not only
so, but it is expedient for you, it is for your Benefit and Advantage, and
though I be personally absent from you, yet I will send one unto you that shall
supply my absence, even the Comforter, and after a little short time I will
come again to you, I will not stay long from you; so he says afterward, Verse
16. A little while and you shall not see me, and a little while and you shall
see me, because I go to the Father. And Verse 22. Therefore now have you
Sorrow; but I will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice: Within a
little while I will come to you, I will make all the haste I can to you. Thus
Christ speaks to his Disciples and Servants to comfort their Hearts, being
sorrowful upon his going away.

Brethren, Was there any thing, or could there be any thing that was nearer or
dearer to the hearts of the Disciples than the presence of Christ? The presence
of Jesus Christ was more to them than any Comforts of this World, more to them
than their Estates and Callings, and Gain, and Trade, for you know they left
their Ships and their Nets and Callings and all to follow Christ; nay Christ
was more near and dear to them than their nearest Relations that they had in
the World, for it is said, they left not only their Callings, their Trades and
Ships and Nets, but they left their Fathers and away they went after Christ,
yea they left all that ever they had, as Peter himself says, Matthew 19.27,
28, 29. says he, We have left all to follow thee; Not only their Callings,
their Trade and Gains, not only their Parents and Relations, But we have left
All to follow thee; Yea, Brethren, Jesus Christ was more dear and precious to
them than their very lives, for you know what Christ was speaking to them about
his going away, Mat. 26. and telling them that some of them would deny him,
says Peter, Though I die with thee, I will not deny thee; says he, I will die
first, I will lose my life first, and it is said all of them said after the like
manner; they loved Christ more than their very lives, and yet now you see what
Christ said to them, though his Presence was so near and dear unto them, yet
says Christ, I tell you the Truth it is expedient for you that I go away, it
is expedient for you that I leave you, though I be so near and dear unto you.
So that here is the Point grounded upon these Words; That it is a most certain
Truth, That it is expedient for the Disciples and Servants of Christ sometimes
to be deprived of those Comforts that seem to be nearest and dearest to them in
this World, it is expedient for them --: The Word that is here translated
expedient, it signifies most profitable, more profitable for you, or better
for you; better for you that I go away, than that I stay with you; more
Profitable for you, so the Word is sometimes translated, and so it properly
signifies, expedient, that is, profitable: so says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians
6.12. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient. The Word
is profitable, so it is in the Margin, All things are not profitable. So Chap.
10. in the last Verse, says the Apostle, Even as I please all Men in all
things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many that they may be
saved, it is the same word, only it is there translated profit, or profitable;
it is expedient or profitable for you that I go away; and sometimes it is
translated good or better, so Luke 17.2, 3. Says Christ, It were better for
him that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the Sea,
than that he should offend one of these little ones; The word is, expedient. So
again, Mat. 5.29, 30. Says Christ, It Is better for you to go into Life maimed,
with one Eye, or one Hand, than having both your Eyes and hands, to go into
Hell. It Is better, the word is, expedient. So that here is the meaning of it;
It is expedient for you that I go away, that is, it is most profitable for you,
it is better for you that I go away from you, than that you do enjoy my personal
presence.

Now for the opening and handling of this Point and Truth, I shall briefly
speak to these three things.

1. Give you the Demonstrations of it, by some particular Instances, That it is
most expedient or profitable sometimes for the Servants of Christ to be
deprived of their nearest and dearest Comforts that they do enjoy. In which I
shall give you some particulars.

2. I shall show the Ground why, or whereupon It is so expedient or profitable
for them to be deprived of their dearest and nearest Comforts they can enjoy in
this World.

3. And then show you this, That to enjoy the presence of the Comforter, the
Spirit of God, is more expedient for the Saints in this World, than to enjoy
the personal presence of Christ.

I shall not be able to go through this Point at this time; but for the

1. To give you some Demonstrations by some particular Instances, That it is
expedient for the Servants of Christ sometimes to be deprived of their nearest
and dearest Comforts that they have in this World.

I shall Instance now in some particulars. As,

1. It may be expedient for the Servants of Christ sometimes to be deprived of
their outward Estates in the World. Brethren, to have a competent measure of
Estate in the World is a comfortable thing; Those that have great Estates, do
not know and understand the temptations of a poor estate; therefore, says the
holy man Agur, Pro. 30.9. though he would not be rich, yet, Lord give me not
poverty. It is a great mercy to be comfortably provided for in the World, yet
for all that it is most expedient sometimes for the servants of Christ to be
deprived of their outward Estates in the world. You know how it was with Job,
it is said, He was the richest man in all the East; he had seven thousand
Sheep, three thousand Camels, a thousand yoke of Oxen, five hundred she-Asses,
Job 10.3. yet it was expedient for Job to be deprived of all this Estate, all
was taken from him suddenly, and it was expedient for him thus to be deprived.
If his Cattle could have spoke they would have said, as Christ to his Disciples
here; his Sheep would have said, It is expedient for you, that we go away from
you; his Oxen, his Camels and his Asses, all would have said, It is expedient
for you, for us to go away from you. We read, Heb. 10.34. That the Christians
in those days were plundered of their Estates in this World, and it was
expedient for them, because God has provided a better and more enduring
substance for them. And therefore mark the expression of the Apostle James,
1.10. Let the Brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted; but the rich
in that he is made low, because it is expedient for him. That is one thing.

2. Let us instance in Outward Accommodations. As now, to be comfortably
provided for in respect of Clothing, and in respect of an Habitation, and
Dewlling Place. Brethren, these are great Comforts, to be left naked in the
time of the Cold, to be without Clothing is a great Suffering, to be left
without a House and Habitation, to be driven by Enemies from our Houses and
Habitations, to be forced to flee up and down into the naked fields, it is a
great Affliction: but it is a great Comfort and Blessing to be well provided
for for Clothing and Habitation; I do not speak in regard of gorgeous Apparel,
but for necessary and convenient Clothing; Let thy Garments be always white,
says Solomon; hansome Clothing, cleanly Clothing, is a great mercy and
comfort. Yet now sometimes, it is expedient for the servants of Christ to be
deprived of their Clothing, to be put to their shifts to get any rags to cover
their nakedness; you shall read, Heb. 11.37. how those Worthies, of whom the
World was not worthy, they wandered up and down in Sheepskins and Goat Skins,
being destitute, afflicted and tormented; They were deprived of their Clothing
they could take up a skin that they found in the Wilderness, and were glad to
make use of it to cover their Bodies; they were covered with Sheepskins and
Goat Skins. So for a Habitation, it is a comfortable thing to have a
comfortable Habitation and Dewlling Place, to shelter them from the Weather;
and therefore it is made as a gracious promise, Hosea 11.11. That God's People
shall dwell in their own Houses. I tell you, if so be we had an enemy to come
and drive us out of our Houses and take possession of our Habitations, whilst
we escape with our Lives, it would be a great affliction; but yet for all that,
sometimes it is most expedient for the Lords Servants to be deprived of their
Habitations. Look into Heb. 11.38. You read of those, of whom the World was not
worthy, That they wandered in Deserts, and Mountains, and Dens, and Caves of the
Earth; they had no Houses at all, that if they could find out a little hole in
the Wilderness and Desert, if they could find out a Cave, they would be glad to
hide their heads there; the Lord saw it expedient for them that their Houses
and Habitations, and also their outward accommodations in regard of Clothing,
should be taken from them.

3. To instance in our Liberties. Liberty, Brethren is a great blessing, it is
a great mercy to have Liberty, that we are not in Enemies hands, that we are
not clapped up in close Prisons, that we are not in Chains; and those that have
had experience, what it is to be deprived of their Liberty, that have been
clapped up in Prison, they are better able to judge of it than we are, what a
Mercy Liberty is; those that are now in Prison for their Consciences, would
prize their Liberty if they might enjoy it. Well, but yet for all this, that
Liberty is such a great mercy and blessing, yet sometimes it is most expedient
for the servants of Christ to be deprived of their Liberty; It Is expedient for
them that their Liberty go away; you know what Christ spoke unto Peter, John
21.18. When thou was it young thou girdedst thy self, and wentest whither thou
would, thou had thy Liberty: but verily, I say unto thee, When thou shall
be old thou shall stretch forth thy hand and another shall gird thee, and carry
thee whither thou would not. It was expedient for Peter to have his Liberty
taken from him. Paul that eminent Apostle and Servant of Christ, that was so
useful in his place and generation, yet it was expedient for Paul himself to
be deprived of his Liberty; and therefore, if you observe it, the most of all
his Epistles were written by him when he was in Prison; Paul a Prisoner of
Jesus Christ; and if you look into the latter end of the Acts, he was there two
years together in Prison at Rome, though indeed he had a little more Liberty
than some others now adays may have, he had a hired house for himself, he had a
Keeper with him and a chain upon him, he could not go whither he would. And so
it has been the Lot and Portion of the precious Saints and Servants of Christ
in those Primitive times to be deprived of their Liberty, as the Apostle
speaks, Hebrews 11.26. They suffered reproaches and also imprisonment, so that
it is expedient for the Servants of Christ sometimes to be deprived of their
Liberty.

4. To instance in our Health and Strength, which is a great blessing; they
that are sick and continually exercised with weaknesses, pains, aches and
distempers; these can tell you, that health and strength is a precious mercy;
When the Lord lays his Hand upon us but a little while, Ease is a great mercy,
and Health and Strength is a great mercy, and so it is; but yet sometimes it is
expedient for the Servants of Christ to be deprived of their Health and
Strength, that their Health and Strength go from them; you find it by frequent
experience how the Saints and Servants of God have been deprived of their
Health and Strength, and commonly many that are most eminent, they are
exercised with Weaknesses and Sicknesses of Body. I remember the Apostle speaks
concerning Timothy, he was a young man, and yet for all that he had many
infirmities, therefore he advises him, 1 Timothy 5.23. To drink no longer water,
but a little wine, for his many and often infirmities. He had many and frequent
infirmities of Body upon him, that it was expedient for him that his Health and
Strength were taken away from him. I remember the Psalmist has a passage in
Psalm. 73. the beginning, says he, speaking of the wicked, Verse 4. There is no
bands in their Death, their Strength is firm, they are not in trouble as other
men; They have their Strength, and Health, and Liberty, and their Bones are
full of Marrow, and their Eyes stand out with fatness, and they have more than
heart can wish. -- But, says he, As for me, I have infirmities upon me, I am
chastised every Morning, as duly as the Sun rises, every day, and all the day
long I am afflicted. Brethren the Lord sees that it is expedient sometimes that
his Servants should be deprived of their Health and Strength.

5. To give another Instance, To instance in near Relations, as to enjoy the
comfort of Yoke-fellows, to enjoy the comforts of Children, Christian-friends
and acquaintance, these are great Comforts and great Blessings. As I remember
the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 128.3, 4. He is speaking what a mercy and blessing
it is to enjoy Children, Thy Children shall be like Olive Plants round about
thy Table; and thus shall the Man be blessed that fears the Lord. And says
Solomon, Eccles. 9.9. Live joyfully with the Wife whom thou love, all the
days of the life of thy vanity. These things are great Comforts; But yet it is
expedient sometimes for the Servants of Christ to be deprived of these
Comforts, for Children to be deprived of Parents, and for Parents to be
deprived of Children, which are accounted by Parents sometimes their dearest
Comforts in this World, yet God sees it expedient for them sometimes to be
deprived of them by Death. Son of Man, says God, to Ezech. 24.16. Behold, I
will take away the desire of thine Eyes with a stroke; that is, his Wife, and
she died in the evening. Sometimes some are taken away by some sudden
accident, as all Jobs Children were, sometimes they are deprived of them by
Persecution, they are made to forsake Father and Mother, Wife and Children, and
all for Christ's sake. We have forsaken all, says Peter to Christ, Mat. 19.
latter end. And sometimes they are deprived of the Comforts of them by having
their Affections from them, as Job complains of the Wife of his bosom, that she
was a stranger to him. And the Psalmist, Psalm. 88.8. Said, Thou have put away
my acquaintance far from me. -- Brethren, it is expedient for us sometimes to
be deprived of these Comforts and Relations, and verily, if our Relations, that
are taken away from us, if they could speak when they are dead, Children would
say to Parents, Father and Mother, It is expedient for you, that we go away.
Though it be a dear Babe, yet, It is expedient for you, that I go away. Though
it be an only Child, yet, It is expedient for you that I go away; And so for
other Relations, still remember this that it is expedient for the Servants of
Christ sometimes to be deprived of their nearest and dearest Relations. Christ
was as near and dear to the Disciples as any Relation in the World can be near
and dear to us, yet says Christ, It is expedient for you that I go away.

6. To instance in another thing, The Ordinances and Institutions of the Lord.
They are dear and precious to the hearts of the Saints and Servants of God,
they are precious things, and should be dear to every one of us. Says Job,
Chap. 12.12. I have esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary
food; He had rather lose his meat and drink than miss of the Word of God. And,
says David, Psalm. 122.1. I was glad when they said unto me, Come, let us go up
to the House of the Lord. The Ordinances of the Lord, they are and ought to be
dear unto all the Saints and Servants of God, yet for all that I may say, it is
expedient sometimes for the Servants of Christ to be deprived of the Ordinances
of Christ. David found this by experience, he was deprived of the Ordinances,
Psalm. 42.4. says he, When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me;
for I had gone with the multitude; I went with them to the House of God, with
the voice of joy and praise; but now, says he, My soul is cast down; And so,
Psalm. 63.1. says he, I dwell in a dry and thirsty Land, where no water is. He
meant where there are no Ordinances; He could not wait upon God in his
Ordinances; It was expedient for David to be deprived of the Ordinances. I
remember a passage of the Church, Cant. 3. says she, By night on my Bed, I
sought him whom my soul loves, I sought him, but I found him not. She could
not find Christ, she could not enjoy the Ordinances of Christ, nor Christ in
the Ordinances; and truly this has been, and may be the case of the dear
Servants of Christ, to be deprived of the Ordinances, that are near and dear to
them. Heb. 11.37, 38. You see there how those of whom the world was not worthy,
that they were glad to shift for their lives, to run up and down in Mountains,
and Caves, and Dens of the Earth to hide themselves, and so were deprived of
Ordinances and Communion with Saints; and it was expedient for them.

7. To instance in another thing yet higher, It Is expedient sometimes for the
Saints and Servants of Christ to be deprived of Communion with Christ in holy
Duties and Ordinances. I may say in this case (because possibly it is not easy
to be believed) as Christ said to the Disciples in the Text, Nevertheless, I
tell you the truth, it is sometimes expedient for the Saints and Servants of
Christ to be deprived of Communion with Christ in his Ordidances, though this
is most dear and precious to them. Exodus 20.24. says God, In all places where
my Name shall be recorded, thither will I come, and meet with my People, and
bless them; that is, in his Ordinances, where his Name is recorded; and I say,
sometimes it is expedient even for the very Saints and Servants of Christ to be
deprived of the presence of Christ in his Ordinances, of Communion with Christ
in his Ordinances, sometimes not to see Christ, nor to meet with Christ in holy
Duties and Ordinances. Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. By night on my Bed, says the Spouse, I
sought him whom my soul loves, I sought him, but I found him not; By night on
my Bed I sought him, I sought him in the Ordinances, that is the Bed where
Christ has Communion with his Saints and Servants, yet says the Spouse, I
sought him on my Bed, but found him not. And I remember Job has an expression,
Chap. 23.8, 9. Behold I go forward, but he is not there, and backward but I
cannot perceive him, on the left hand where he does work, but I cannot behold
him; he hides himself on the right hand that I cannot see him; Says Job I
went forward, and I went backward, I went from Ordinance to Ordinance, but I
found him not. The Lord may see this expedient for his dear Servants and
Children even to be deprived of Communion with himself, in his own
Institutions, which is hard to be believed, yet, nevertheless I tell you the
Truth it is expedient for you that the Lord do withold his Presence sometimes
from his own Ordinances to his own Servants. Yet once more.

8. Eighthly and lastly, which is still yet higher, It may be expedient
sometimes for the Saints and Servants of Christ to be deprived of seeing the
face of God, and enjoying the Sense of Gods favor, which in Truth is the most
desirable thing in the World, it is even a Heaven upon Earth, a beginning of
Heaven to see the face of God, and to enjoy the sense of the favor and
loving kindness of God. Says David, In thy favor is life; my life lay in
that, nay says he, Psalm. 63.3. Thy Loving Kindness is better than Life, and
yet I tell you, sometimes it is expedient for the Servants of God to be
deprived even of the sense of the favor and loving kindness of God, sometimes
the Lord sees it expedient for him to go away in that sense; and therefore you
find sometimes how David complains, Psalm. 13.1, 2. How long O Lord, how long
will thou hide thy face from me? for ever? And so, Isa. 14.8. For a little
moment I hid my face from thee -- It was expedient for them that God did
withold or hide his face, or the sense of his Loving Kindness from them. Nay,
Brethren, shall I say further, if it were possible for a Saint to enjoy or to
see the face of God in Heaven, as the Angels and Saints do, yet as long as they
are upon the Earth, it is expedient sometimes for them to be deprived of that
too. You know Moses was in the Mount with God, but it was expedient for Moses
to come down from the Mount again, so long as he was clothed with flesh; it was
expedient for Moses to come out from the immediate Presence of God. And you
know what Paul says; That he was wrapped up into the third Heavens, and saw
things unlawful and impossible to utter, yet it was expedient for Paul that he
should be deprived of seeing and enjoying that Vision till he came to lay down
the body.

And thus now you have seen the first thing propounded. The Demonstrations of
this Truth by some particular Instances, That it is expedient sometimes for the
Saints and Servants of Christ to be deprived of those Comforts that are nearest
and dearest to them in the World; as Christ tells his Disciples here,
Nevertheless I tell you the Truth, it is expedient for you that I go away, that
they should be deprived of his personal Presence.

I had intended to have gone on further, to have made it appear to you by the
grounds of it. There are five or six Grounds whereby it does certainly appear
that it is most expedient sometimes for the Servants of Christ to be deprived
of their nearest and dearest Comforts they have in the World, and then to come
to the third thing, but I would not willingly trespass, only remember this,
every one of you here before the Lord, We do not know how soon any of us may be
deprived of those things that are looked upon as our nearest and dearest
Comforts, when it comes to be our lot; remember what Christ says, It is
expedient for you that I go away, it is expedient for you to be deprived of
this and the other Comfort, of your Estates, of your Accomodations, Liberty,
and Ordinances; and though now you may enjoy Communion with God, yet it may be
expedient for you to be deprived of it; remember that. And if any of you be
deprived of your near Relations, as Children, -- remember what Christ has here
spoken, It is expedient for you that I go away, it is expedient for you that
the Lord has taken away such a Child, such a Son, or such a Daughter; though
it be an only Child, yet it is expedient for you that it be taken away. But I
would not proceed any further at present.

SERMON II.
John. 16.7 Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I
go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come; but if I depart, I
will send him unto you.
OUR Lord Jesus Christ, as you heard, is now comforting his Disciples against
his departure. Christ had cast out a word, that he was to go away from them,
and the word went to their very hearts, Because I have said these things unto
you, sorrow has filled your hearts. Now Christ goes about (as I said) to
comfort them against their sorrow upon his departure from them, and he gives
this as a ground of Comfort to them; namely, That it was expedient for them
that he should go away from them. Expedient! they thought it was impossible;
How could that be? What? To lose the Bodily presence of Christ, to be deprived
of that! Yes, says he, I tell you the truth, It is expedient for you that I go
away. Why? How can it be expedient? It is expedient, Because, if I go not away,
the Comforter will not come; but if I depart, I will send him unto you; I will
see that he shall come unto you: Therefore, says he, It is expedient that I go
away.

Doct. The Point or Truth propounded from hence was this,
That it is expedient sometimes for the Disciples and Servants of Jesus Christ
that their nearest and dearest Comforts that they have in this World, should go
away from them.

Jesus Christ his presence was most dear and precious to the Disciples; there
was nothing in the World more dear and precious to them, they would have laid
down their lives for him, not only Peter said so, but so said all the
Disciples; now yet Christ told them, it was expedient for them that he should
go away. I gave you the Demonstrations of this Point the last time. I instanced
in 7 or 8 things, wherein it was sometimes expedient for the Saints and
Servants of Christ to be deprived of their nearest and dearest Comforts in this
Life, which I shall not now mention, because I would finish this Point at this
time.

II
I shall now proceed to the second thing propounded, which, is to give the
Grounds and Reasons of it, Why it is expedient for the Saints and Servants of
Christ thus to be deprived sometimes of their nearest and dearest Comforts in
this World; This is a hard saying, the Disciples were hard to believe it, that
it could be expedient for them that Christ should go away from them. And so for
a Soul to be deprived of the Light of Gods Countenance, that they cannot meet
with God in holy Duties and Ordinances, these are hard things to believe, that
they can be expedient for them. Now to give you some Reasons, why it is
expedient sometimes for the Saints and Servants of Christ to be deprived of
their nearest and dearest Comforts in this World.

1. Though they cannot think so, yet notwithstanding, Because their Heavenly
Father knows it to be expedient for them. Their heavenly Father, who is
infinitely wise and infinitely loving toward them, he knows that those things
are expedient for them in this Life: you that are Parents, you know what is
more expedient for your Children than they do themselves; Alas! if Children
were left to their own judgments, they would judge those things expedient for
them that are not expedient; they would judge it were better for them, to take
their own liberty, and to do their own Wills, and that it were more expedient
for them to be playing, than to go to School; so they would judge it expedient
for them never to be put out to Apprenticeship, to be Servants, to go from
their Fathers house; they think it were better for them to be always at home,
under their Parents wing: but you that are Parents know what is more expedient
for your Children than they do themselves; and when they come to grow up then
they will be ready to say, That their Fathers did judge better for them than
they could have judged for themselves; then they will say, If I had been left
to mine own Judgment what was expedient for me then, I had not had this
bringing up and Education that I have; nay then they may think that it was
expedient for them, that they were sometimes under the Rod. Truly Brethren, the
Lord our Heavenly Father is infinitely wise, and loving to all his Children, he
knows what is expedient for them better than they do. Christ knew that his
going away from his Disciples, was more expedient for them, than they
themselves could judge of it: so our heavenly Father knows that sometimes it is
best for us to be deprived of our nearest and dearest Relations in the World;
your Heavenly Father knows that you have need of these things, and he knows
that sometimes you have need to be deprived of them. That is the first.

2. It is expedient sometimes for the Saints and Servants of Christ to be
deprived of their nearest and dearest Comforts; Because sometimes the Lord
takes away one Comfort, and gives them that in stead of it that is far better
for them. Therefore as Christ says in the Text, it is expedient for you that I
go away: why how can that be? It is more expedient for you, for you shall have
the Holy Ghost, the Holy Spirit, I will send the Comforter to you, and that is
better for you. He would give them the presence of his Spirit in stead of his
own bodily presence, and that was better for them. Sometimes the Lord takes
away one Comfort, and gives another instead of it, that is most expedient for
us; as it is said, he removed the former Covenant, and that was done away, that
so he might bring in a New Covenant in the stead of it, which was far better;
the Old was done away, to make way for the New. God took away the child from
David, that was begotten in Adultery, and gave him a Solomon; so God deals
sometimes with his Children, he takes away sometimes their outward Estates in
the World, to give them a larger, an heavenly and spiritual Estate, to give
them more of the true Riches; he takes away their outward Liberty, that they
may have more spiritual Enlargment: thus many times the Lord deals with his
Disciples and Servants, he takes away one mercy from them, which they think to
be most expedient, and gives them another, which he knows to be more expedient
for them. Therefore I remember Joseph said to his Brethren, when he sent from
Egypt to them to come from the Land of Canaan, says he, Leave your Stuff
behind you; you shall have that that is better for you than your Stuff, for all
the good of the Land of Egypt is before you. Thus the Lord makes an exchange,
if he calls us to leave one Comfort, he intends to bestow a better Comfort upon
us; thus it was with these Disciples. But,

3. Sometimes the Lord takes away our nearest and dearest Comforts we have in
the World in way of Correction and Chastisement; to correct and chastise his
people for their wantonness, for their forgetfulness of him, for their sitting
loose from him, and living even as it were without God in the World, when the
Lord sees that his Children do make a bad use of their Comforts and Mercies;
the Lord is pleased to take them away from them; just as you that are Parents
deal by your Children; if you see they go about to cut their fingers with the
knife, you take away the knife from them; if they do waste and destroy their
meat, you take away their meat from them; thus the Lord deals with his
Children; he sees his Children grow wanton, and careless, and forgetful of
God, then the Lord is pleased to take his Rod and correct them, by taking away
their Comforts that are nearest and dearest to them. As now again for Parents,
you see Parents when their Children grow forgetful of them, and do not mind
what they say to them, and do not regard their Commands, then their Parents
will be ready to take away from them that which they know to be nearest and
dearest to them, by way of Correction. Thus the Lord is pleased to deal with
his own Children, if he see they be perverse and disobedient, and careless, and
rebellious, -- It is just with the Lord then, in a way of correction and
Chastisemnet, to take those mercies from them that he sees to be most near and
dear to them: and the Lord does it out of mercy and love to his Children, in
depriving them of outward mercies, to deprive them of Health, and Strength, and
Estate, and sometimes of their near Relations, by way of Chastisement, lest
they should be condemned with the world; they would run upon their own ruin
else, if the Lord let them alone. The Apostle gives the reason, 1 Cor. 11.32.
why so many were sick, and weak, and fallen asleep, says he, When ye are
judged, ye are chastened of the Lord, that ye might not be condemned with the
World. And so the Lord is pleased to deal with his own Children and Servants,
he deprives them of their nearest and dearest Comforts in the World, by way of
Chastisement and Correction; therefore sometimes he hides his face from them,
and many times takes his Ordinances from them, and if they do enjoy Ordinances,
he withholds his gracious presence from them, that they shall not see his Face
in this and that Duty and Ordinance; and this the Lord does by way of
Chastisement.

4. The Lord does sometimes deprive his Children of their nearest and dearest
Comforts in this World, Because he will bring them thereby to be pliable to his
own Will, and train them up in a course of Obedience to his own Will. Look now,
as Parents that they may train up their Children to be obedient to them in
every thing, to be at their beck, sometimes they will take away from them that
which is nearest and dearest to them; Give me that thing, and I must have such
a thing, will a wise Father say sometimes to a Child, to train him up in a way
of Submission to his Fathers will. So the Lord deals with his own Children,
when he sees we have this or that Comfort which is near or dear to us. Now that
God may train us up to his own Will, and that we may learn subjection to his
Will, the Lord calls for this Comfort and that mercy, that is so dear to us,
that Yoke Fellow, and that Child, or whoever it be that is near and dear to us;
the Lord does sometimes call it from us, and take it away, that we may learn to
be submissive to his Will; as it is said concerning Christ, Heb. 5.8. That
Christ learned Obedience by his Sufferings, and truly so when Christ came to
drink the Cup that his Father put into his hand, says he, The Cup which my
Father has given me, shall I not drink it? He learned Obedience by his
Sufferings; and so the Lord may teach his Children Obedience by training them
up in this way, to take away their nearest and dearest Comforts from them that
they may come to be at the Lords will and word in every thing. And thus the
Lord trained up Abraham, says God to Abraham, I must have you to go out of
your own Country, to leave your Friends and Relations behind, to go into a
strange place, and Abraham did so; And then when the Lord had given him an only
and a beloved Son, says God to him, Come I must take that Son from you, go and
Sacrifice him your self to me; thus God trained up Abraham to his foot (as it
were) which is the expression of the Holy Ghost, Isa. 41.2. Abraham was brought
to the foot of God, to the beck of God. Thus God deals with his Children, he
trains them up to be submissive to his own will, to his ordering, for every
thing, therefore God will sometimes take away this Comfort and that Comfort,
though never so near and dear to us. That is the fourth Reason.

5. The Lord does sometimes deprive his Children of their nearest and dearest
Comforts, That they may learn to fear before him, that they may stand in awe of
him, as it is said Psalm. 55.19. Because they are in no change, therefore they
fear not God, they meet with no changes, they have their wills, and they enjoy
their Comforts here in the World; and because they have no changes, therefore
they fear not God. And truly the Lords own people are apt to grow secure in
time of Prosperity when they meet with few changes, they are apt to grow
secure. It was David's case, Psalm. 30.5, 6, I said in my prosperity I shall
never be moved. And so I remember Job has such an expression, Chap. 29.18. I
said I shall dye in my Nest --; His nest was feathered round about him, he was
comfortably supplied with all manner of Necessaries and comforts in this Life,
and says he, I began to grow secure, I said I should dye in my Nest; And
therefore the Lord is pleased to bring Changes upon his People, to awake them
out of their security, to cause them more to fear God, and to acknowledge their
dependence upon God, to fear that God, that is able to bring great Changes upon
them, to fear him that is able to take away their nearest and dearest Comforts.
Thus the Lord deals with his Children, to train and nurture them up in his fear.

6. And Lastly. The Lord does sometimes deal thus with his own Children, to
deprive them of their nearest and dearest Comforts that they have in this Life,
That so he may make them to look more after a Heavenly Inheritance, that shall
never be taken from them; where there shall be no Changes, where they shall be
past all fear of ever being deprived of any comfort they shall enjoy. Therefore
it is said of the Patriarchs, Heb. 11.14, 16. It Is said in the 13th Verse, They
confessed, That they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth, for they that
say such things, declare plainly That they seek a Country but now they desire a
better Country, which is, an Heavenly -- They are Strangers and Pilgrims in the
World, they meet with great Changes in the World, and therefore say they, We
are Strangers and Pilgrims; we are going to a Country where there shall be no
change. So Heb. 10.34. The Apostle speaks of those that were exercised with
changes, that they had their Estates taken away, and were plundered of all that
they had, they made nothing of that; because they had an eye to the recompense
of reward, the inheritance of Heaven, and that made them look for a heavenly
Country, because then they should be past all changes, there should be no
plundering there, no deprivation of any Comfort that they there shall enjoy,
that is an Inheritance that is incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not
away; there shall be no changes throughout all Eternity. And thus now you have
seen the Reasons and Grounds of the Point, That it is expedient sometimes for
the Saints and Disciples of Christ to be deprived of their nearest and dearest
Comforts that they do enjoy in this World.

III.
1. But to come to the Third thing propounded, and that is, to show, That the
Enjoyment of the Comforter, the presence of the Spirit is more expedient for
the Saints and Disciples of Christ, than to enjoy the bodily Presence of Christ
himself. For so Christ intimates here to his Disciples, says he, It is
expedient for you that I go away, that you be deprived of my bodily Presence,
for then you shall have the Comforter, the Spirit; if I go not away the
Comforter will not come; therefore it is more expedient for them to have the
Presence of the Spirit, than to enjoy the bodily Presence of Christ.

Truly Brethren, as long as Christ was with them in the flesh, they could not
expect to have such a communication of the Spirit, as they should have when
Christ was taken from them. When Christ was taken from them, when he ascended
up to Heaven, then the Spirit was to be given down; And that is given by the
Holy Ghost, John 7.37, 38, 39. as a Reason, why the Spirit was not yet given to
them: They had some drops of the Spirit, They had not the pouring out of the
Spirit, because, says he, Verse 39. Jesus was not yet glorified; he had said,
verse 38. That, he that believes on me, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of
living Water; but this he spoke of the Spirit, which they that believe on him
should receive, for the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was
not yet glorified. No, they could not expect the pourings out of the Spirit,
till Jesus Christ had left the World, and was gone into Heaven. For Brethren,
when Jesus Christ ascended up to Heaven, then the Father made him welcome, and
sat him down at his own right hand in glory, he gave him the highest place of
Dignity in Heaven, all power in Heaven and Earth was put into his Hands, and he
gave him the Donation or Giving out of the Spirit, the giving out of the gifts
of the Spirit; For says the Psalmist, Psalm. 68.18. When he ascended up on
high, then he received the Spirit, and the gifts of the Spirit to be given out
to his people; This is the Reward that God the Father gave to Christ, after his
great labor and suffering in the World, as soon as ever he came into Heaven:
God exalted him with this Exaltation, and then he gave him the fullness of the
Spirit, to give out when he would, therefore as soon as Christ ascended up to
Heaven, presently after there was an abundant pouring out of the Spirit, Acts
2. You know the Holy Ghost fell down upon the Disciples like fiery cloven
tongues, and then they spoke with tongues, they were able to speak in every
man's Language; and then you see the Apostle Peter made a Speech to them that
heard it, and wondered at it, Verse 33. and says he, This is the Fruit and
Effect of Christ's Ascension into Heaven. Therefore being by the right hand of
God exalted, and having received of the Father, the Promise of the Holy Ghost,
he has shed forth this, which you now see and hear. Christ leaving the World,
and being exalted in Heaven, he had this power to give out the Spirit, and
says he, this is the Fruit of it, He has shed forth this, which you now see
and hear; Therefore if Christ had not left the Discipies, then the Disciples,
and Servants, and Apostles of Jesus Christ, had been destitute of the pourings
out of the Spirit upon them. It is true indeed, it cannot be denied but the
enjoyment of Christ's bodily presence, was a most desirable thing, very
desirable to enjoy the bodily presence of Jesus Christ, to see God in our
flesh. I remember Job did rejoice in it, in the hopes of it, many hundreds and
some thousands of years beforehand, in the midst of his great Troubles and
Afflictions, Chap. 19.25, 26, 27. says he, I know that my Redeemer lives, and
with these eyes I shall see him; And this was matter of Comfort to him many
hundreds of years before hand, in the midst of those Sufferings and Troubles he
met withal, that he should see his Redeemer with his Eyes in the flesh. And
Brethren, the sight of Christ in the flesh, it is a sight that is matter of
Admiration to the very Angels in Heaven; God manifest in the flesh, seen of
Angels, it was to the Admiration of Angels, worth their looking upon, 1 Timothy
3.16. Great is the Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, justified
in the Spirit, seen of Angels; it was a great sight to the glorious Angels,
they desired to pry into that great Mystery; and it was one of holy Austines
wishes, he wished the sight of three things in this World, and this was the
chiefest of all; he did desire to see Rome in its glory; Paul in the Pulpit,
and Christ in the flesh. And Brethren, the sight and enjoyment of the Presence
of Christ in our Nature will be one of the happy sights in Heaven, it will be a
great part of the glory and happiness of the Saints in Heaven to see Jesus
Christ, therefore says Christ, Father, I will that those whom thou have given
me, may be with me, where I am, that they may behold my glory, John 17.24. So
the Apostle John, 1. Epist. 3.2. When he shall appear, we shall be like him,
for we shall see him as he is. I tell you it is a desirable thing to see Jesus
Christ in the Flesh, and yet this I may say, that it is possible for men and
women to see Christ in the flesh, and yet be never the better for it. You know
when Jesus Christ was in the World, the Jews saw him, and were near unto him,
and yet were never the better for him; We read that when Christ was sent by
Pilate to Herod, Herod rejoiced to see him, but he was never the better for
that sight; for he derided him, and mocked him, and sent him away. You know
Judas had a full Sight of Christ, he lived many years in the family with
Christ, yet Judas was never the better for seeing and beholding the bodily
presence of Christ. The Reprobates, the wicked of the World, at the last day
shall see Christ in his highest glory, but shall be never a whit the better. I
remember it is said, Mat. 14.30. That all the Tribes of the Earth shall see him,
and mourn; they shall behold him in his glory, and yet mourn. What shall we say
then? You see we may behold Jesus Christ in the Flesh, and yet be never the
better, but now to enjoy the presence of the Spirit here in this life, a Soul
cannot enjoy that, but he shall be the better for it. It is true indeed, in
Heaven, there the Saints shall enjoy the presence of Christ, and the fullness of
the Spirit too, but here in this life for the Saints to enjoy the presence of
the Spirit, it is more expedient for them, more profitable, more advantageous
for them, than to enjoy the very personal presence of Christ.

Now to give you a few Reasons for it, to show you wherein it is more
profitable, more expedient to have the presence of the Spirit, than to enjoy
the very bodily presence of Christ.

1. In regard that By enjoying the presence of the Spirit they may have more
real Comfort than they could have by the enjoyment of the personal presence of
Christ. You shall see the Disciples themselves all the time that they did enjoy
the personal presence of Christ in the World, they had not that measure of joy
and rejoicing as they had afterward, they had not that measure of Comfort and
Consolation all the time that Christ lived in the Earth, and conversed with
them, as they had after Christ was taken away from them; then they had more
real joy. Alas! before they were subject to griefs and troubles at every turn,
when they came into danger then they were affrighted and troubled, when they
were in a storm at Sea, and were ready to sink they cried out and were afraid;
but now after Christ was gone and ascended, and the Spirit fell down upon them,
you shall see then how full of joy and comfort and consolation they were, and
so Christ tells them before in this very Chapter, verse 21. A Woman when she is
in travel has sorrow, because her Hour is come, but as soon as she is delivered
she rejoices: So it shall be with you, says Christ; whilst I am with you,
you cannot have such joy, and when you hear of my departure, sorrow fills
your hearts, but when I am taken from you, and the Comforter is come, then you
shall rejoice; and therefore observe, when Christ speaks of sending the Spirit
instead of his own bodily presence, he expresses it under the Notion of the
Comforter, When the Comforter shall come: O then they shall have such comforts,
and consolation, and joy, that they never had before; and so, John 14.16. I
will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter; and so, verse
26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
Name --. So Chap. 15.26. But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto
you from the Father --. Still when Christ speaks of sending the Spirit, he
speaks of sending him under the Notion of a Comforter, which is to imply, that
they shall have more true matter of Comfort, of joy and rejoicing, than ever
they had before by his bodily presence, and therefore says the Apostle Paul,
As our Tribulations abound for Christ, so our Consolations also do
super-abound, and says the Apostle again, Romans 5.3. We glory in Tribulations,
which is an high expression. Before, upon every occasion, they were afraid when
they came into danger, but now, says the Apostle, We glory in Tribulations, we
joy and rejoice in the highest degree of rejoicing. The Apostles, whilst
Christ lived, never had that fullness of Spiritual joy and consolation as they
had after Christ was gone, and the Spirit was sent down from Heaven, and
therefore that is one Respect why it is better to enjoy the presence of the
Spirit than the personal Presence of Christ.

2. By having the Spirit, the Comforter, sent down to them, thereby they come
to have more Boldness and spiritual Courage than they had before. Alas! before
how ready were they to be affrighted and scared at every turn, whilst they had
the presence of Christ; you see how they were affrighted when Christ was
apprehended, they all forsook him and fled; and when Peter would needs peep
into the Judgment Hall, you see how he was dismayed and afraid when a Maid
spoke to him, and told him Thou art one of his Companions, and he denied it and
swore he never knew him, so timorous and fearful he was; but afterward, he
grew bold and courageous when the Spirit did descend upon him; see the Courage
of Peter and the Apostles, Acts, 4. when they came before the Judgment Seat,
Verse. 8. And when they had set them in the midst, they asked, By what power,
or by what Name have you done this? then Peter filled with the Holy Ghost, said
unto them, Verse 10. Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel,
that by the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth whom ye crucified, whom God raised
from the dead, even by him does this man stand here before you whole. This was
a Spirit of Boldness. And Verse 13. When they saw the Boldness of Peter and
John -- Now they had more Spiritual Boldness, Courage and Audacity than they
had before, now the Spirit was poured down upon them. And Verse 19. when they
commanded them to speak no more in the Name of Jesus, Then Peter and John said
unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you rather
than unto God, judge ye: for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen
and heard. Thus by the plentiful effusion of the Spirit they grew more
spiritually bold.

3. When they were deprived of Christ's personal presence, then being endued
with the Spirit, They had more Christian strength and power given to them than
they had before, to act and do for Christ; Therefore then they were said to be
endued with power from on high, Luke 24.49. When Christ was about to ascend up
to Heaven he told them they should be endued with Power from on high; Ay, the
Spirit is a Spirit of power, 2 Timothy 1.7. God has given to us not the Spirit of
Fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound mind; The Spirit of Power. When the
Spirit falls down upon a person it is a Spirit of Power, that they shall be able
to do and suffer for the Name of Christ very great things: they are now endued
with power from above. Now Christ was gone and the Spirit come, therefore you
see how they did act. They went up and down, and could preach every day from
place to place, they traveled up and down to preach the Gospel; and you shall
see what great works they did, as great works as Christ himself did do when he
was upon Earth, they raised up Tabitha from the dead, Acts 9. And it is said,
Acts 19. that the very shadow of Peter, and the Apostles passing by cured them
that were sick. We do not read of such miracles when Christ was upon Earth;
great power they had then; see what power Paul had to go through Sufferings, 2.
Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. How he suffered abundantly, and says he, I know that
tribulations and sufferings abide for me in every place, but none of these
things move me, he was endued with power from on high: now says he, I am able
to do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Philip. 4.13.

4. By having the Presence of the Spirit with them after they were deprived of
the bodily presence of Christ, Then they had a more powerful gift and Spirit of
prayer. Never such a Spirit of Prayer all the time that Christ lived with them,
then the Spirit of Prayer was poured down upon them, as it was prophesied,
Zech. 12.10. I will pour out upon the house of Judah the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication; now they were able to pray, to pour out their Souls abundantly to
God in prayer: before, all the time that Christ was amongst them, they were
poor shallow weak Creatures, not able to pray, and therefore they came to
Christ, Luke 11.2. Lord teach us to pray as John taught his Disciples, they had
not the Spirit of prayer then, in comparison with what they had afterward,
therefore Christ was fain to dictate words to them as you do to your little
Children, to say word after word after you; thus they came to Christ, Lord
teach us to pray: but afterward when Christ was ascended and left them, and the
Spirit poured out upon them, then they were able to pour out their prayers upon
every occasion; although it is true, as Paul says, Romans 8. We know not how to
pray as we ought, that is, we our selves left to our selves, but the Spirit
within us helps our infirmities with sighs and groans that cannot be uttered.
The Apostles prayed so strongly that they shook the very room where they were
praying, Acts 4, 23. And being let go they went to their own Company, and
reported all that the Chief Priests and Elders said unto them, and when they
heard that, they lift their voice to God with one accord, and mark Verse 31.
And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled
together. So Paul and Silas, Acts 16. it is said, They prayed at Midnight and
praised God, and the very foundation of the Prison was shaken by their very
Prayers; There was a mighty powerful Spirit of Prayer that fell down upon them
when Christ was gone from them: therefore in that respect also the presence of
the Spirit is more expedient for them than to enjoy the bodily presence of
Christ. And let me add one thing more.

5. It was more expedient for them to have the presence of the Spirit, than to
have the bodily presence of Christ, because by Enjoying the presence of the
Comforter, hereby they had more assistance and more powerful success in their
work and labor in their Ministry, than ever they had before all the time they
had the presence of Christ; I say, Their Ministry was more powerful and
effectual than ever it was before. It Is true, they went up and down and
preached some particular times, but we do not read of any great matter was
done, that many were converted by their Ministry all the time they lived with
Christ; but now when Christ was gone, and the Spirit fell down upon them,
Immediately you shall see, Acts 2. When Peter preached one Sermon, more were
converted at that Sermon, than there was by all the Apostles preaching, that we
read of, all the time they lived with Christ upon Earth, there were Three
thousand brought in at one Sermon. And afterward, Chap. 20.21. It Is said,
There were many thousand Believers brought in by the Ministry of the Apostles,
because the Spirit did assist them; There was a mighty effusion of the Spirit,
and a great success upon their Labors and Endeavors. And so Christ here in
the Text, to comfort his Disciples about his departure, says he, Nevertheless,
I tell you the Truth, it is expedient for you that I go away. What then? Says
he, I will send the Comforter, and you shall find mavelous success by the
presence of the Spirit in your Ministry; When he is come, He shall convince the
World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment.

By enjoying the presence of the Spirit with them, they had mighty success in
their Ministry, in their Labors and Endeavors in the Work that Christ had
called them to. Therefore, I say in these respects, it was more expedient for
them to have the presence of the Spirit, than Christ's Bodily presence amongst
them. And thus now I have finished this Point, as to the Explication, Proof and
clearing of it. Now briefly to speak something by way of Application, and so to
wind up all in three or four words.

Application 1. Then hence we are to be admonished and warned to take heed,
That our Hearts and Affections be not inordinately set upon any
Creature-Comfort, though never so near and dear unto us: Because they must be
taken away from us, or we from them. If we had the Bodily presence of Christ
amongst us, we are not to set our hearts inordinately upon him, merely for his
Bodily presence, so as to have our Hearts, as it were, rent or torn asunder for
the want of his bodily presence: So whatever Creature-Comfort we enjoy in this
World, take heed that our Hearts and Affections be not inordinately set upon
them, because there will come a time when we must part, they must go from us,
or we must go from them; as Christ told his Disciples here, it is expedient for
you that I go away: and this was that that did fill their hearts so with
Sorrow, because they were so inordinately set upon his bodily presence. There
are no Creature Comforts that we can enjoy in this World but we must be taken
from them, therefore it should be our Wisdom to have our hearts and affections
set loose from them: because the closer we are glued to any Creature-Comfort,
the greater rending and tearing there will be when we come to be deprived of
it. Truth is, our hearts and affections are apt to cleave too close to
creature comforts, as outward Relations, Husbands or Wives, Parents or
Children, our hearts are apt to be glued too close to them, to be inordinately
set upon them; and therefore hence it comes to pass that it is so grievous to
us to part with them, and that we are so inordinate in our sorrow and grief,
when the Lord says, it is expedient for you that I take this or that Comfort
from you: and therefore we should do well to follow the Apostles Counsel and
Admonition which he gives us, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. To use the World, as if we
used it not, to enjoy as if we enjoyed not, to possess as if we possessed not:
for the fashion of this World passes away. It passes away from us, and
therefore let us take heed that our hearts and affections be not inordinately
set upon any creature-comfort. Brethren, if we set our hearts upon any thing,
let us set them upon those things that shall never go away from us, and look
after these things that shall abide with us, as to look after Union with Christ
by faith, which shall never go away from us. To look after the pardon of sin,
and peace with God, reconciliation to God through the blood of Christ, which
shall never go away from us, neither shall we go from them; therefore now let
it be our care and business to choose the better part that shall never be taken
away from us, choose Mary's part, endeavor after the Communications of the
Spirit, the Comforter, the Holy Ghost which shall abide with you for ever; but
I say take heed that your hearts and affections be not inordinately set upon
any creature-comfort, for then your sorrow and grief will be the greater upon
your parting with them, and it is expedient for you to part, either you from
them or they from you, and you know not how soon. That is the first.

2. Then, Hence we may see our great folly, in mourning and grieving
immoderately for the parting from, or losing and being deprived of, any
Creature-Comfort, or Outward-Enjoyment. Here is our folly; Because, possibly we
mourn and grieve for that which is most expedient for us: And, Is not that
folly? Though we do not know so much, yet the parting with this or that
Relation, with this or that Child, or with all our Children, with this Husband,
or that Wife, it may be most expedient for us. I say therefore, Take heed of
grieving immoderately, or inordinately for it, because it may be our great
folly; it may be more expedient for us that they go away, than that they stay
with us. And truly now it may be we grieve inordinately for the loss of our
Children, or such a Child; We do not know what they might have proved if the
Lord had lengthened out their lives to us, they might have proved the greatest
vexations that ever we met with in the World, though now it may be we cannot
think so. We do not know how expedient it is; it may be more expedient for us
that they go away; Therefore mourn not inordinately, but submit to the holy
Will of God, that knows what is more expedient for us, than we do our selves.

And so for our Estates; the Lord takes away our Estates from us, our
Livelihood in the World, and brings us into a poor and low Estate and
Condition; Well, do not mourn inordinately for the loss of it; for it may be
the more expedient for you to be deprived of your Estates, than to have them
continued unto you; possibly you would have grown more carnal, more sinful,
more profane, insolent, vain, scornful, more lascivious, wanton and loose; and
so you might have run upon your own ruin and destruction if the Lord had left
you to enjoy what you would have. Says Solomon, Pro. 1.32. The prosperity of
the wicked shall destroy him. The Lord does sometimes leave some to a
prosperous estate, and it may be a means of their utter undoing. Therefore it
may be more expedient for you that they go away; therefore let us not be
inordinate in our grief and sorrow for the loss of any Creature-Comfort.

3. Then, Hereby we may see the foolishness and vanity of these apprehensions
that do sometimes come into our minds. O we are ready to think sometimes, if
we had lived when Christ was here in the flesh, when Christ's bodily presence
was in the world, or if we could now see and enjoy the bodily presence of
Christ; O, we should go to him upon all occasions; O then we could go and
worship him, and reverence him, and honor him, and adore him, and admire him.
I tell you these are vain fancies and imaginations, for the enjoyment of the
presence of the Spirit is more advantageous to us than the enjoyment of the
bodily presence of Christ could be, and if Christ were now in the world in our
days, as he was before, it may be we could not tell how we might come to speak
to him, and see him, he might be at one end of the world, and we at the other;
but now we have this advantage, we may go to Christ in any part of the World,
and enjoy Communion with Christ, and speak to Christ in Prayer in any place,
and we may worship, reverence, honor and love Jesus Christ, now he is in
Heaven and Glory. It is said of the Disciples, Luke 24.51, 52. They returned to
Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the Temple, praising and
blessing God.

I tell you we may worship, and reverence and honor Jesus Christ, now he is in
Heaven, as much as we could have done if he were bodily present with us. It is
therefore a vain imagination to think, O if Christ were now present, what
worship we would now give him, how we would adore him, and acquaint him with
our Necessities at every turn. You may have as much access to him now, as if he
were in the World, and you may have more of the Spirit given to you now than
you should have then. And let me add this by the way, not to let your minds go
too much out about the personal presence of Christ here on earth; I do not
speak to condemn that opinion That Christ shall personally reign upon Earth a
thousand years, which is the opinion of many godly and learned Men, and I would
not speak contradictorily to it, though for my own part I conceive Christ shall
have a glorious Church upon Earth, and Reign upon Earth a thousand Years too;
Yet I must needs say, I do not apprehend as to his Bodily presence. It Is true,
indeed, Jesus Christ shall come from Heaven at the day of Judgment, and appear
personally in the Clouds; and if you observe it, you shall find when the holy
Ghost, in Scripture, speaks about the appearing of Christ, you shall find he
speaks of that appearing that shall be at the Day of Judgment: As, 1 Timothy 6.14.
Says the Apostle there, I charge you that you keep this Commandment without
spot, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now what appearing is
this? or when shall Christ appear? look 2 Epistle 4.1. I charge thee therefore
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead
at his appearing, and his Kingdom. When he shall come to Judgment, then he
shall appear personally.

Objection.
But you will say, May he not appear for all that before in this World? and may
he not come in his own person and live in the World before that?

Answer.
Truly, Brethren, I have no warrant for that, but rather to the contrary; for
the Apostle says, Heb. 9.28. speaking of Christ's coming to Judgment, To them
that look for him shall he appear the second time -- So that his appearing to
judge the World shall be his second appearing, to you that look for him shall
he appear the second time. Now, when he was incarnate in the flesh, then he
appeared the first time, but he shall appear the second time, that is, when he
comes to judge the World: therefore, I say, I have no warrant for Christ's being
personally on Earth before the day of Judgment; only it is true, there shall be a
glorious appearance of the power of the Spirit, and there shall be a glorious
Church upon Earth a thousand years, that I do believe; but for the personal
appearance of Christ and his living personally in the World, I confess I have
not such grounds for that. But I would not trouble your heads about these
things, neither would I have you trouble your Fancies much about them, but look
after the enjoyment of the spiritual presence of Christ, that will be more
advantageous and expedient for you than the very personal presence of Christ.
That is the third word of Application. I have but one word more and that is
this.

4. From hence now we may have a strong Antidote and Cordial against all our
sorrows, griefs and troubles in parting with any creature-comfort, though it be
our nearest and dearest comforts in this World. Know this, for your comfort and
support under all, that it is most expedient for you; this is the very cordial
and support and antidote, that Jesus Christ himself prescribed to his own
Disciples against their immoderate sorrow; because I have said these things
(says he) sorrow has filled your hearts, in the Verse before the Text, and
now he comes to give them a cordial and andidote against it in the Text,
Nevertheless, I tell you the Truth, it is expedient for you that I go away, Not
for me only: It was expedient indeed for Christ himself to go away, that he
might be advanced at the right hand of God, that he might be endued with the
Spirit, and have all fullness of gifts to give out, it was expedient for him,
but (says he) I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you, and this he gives
them as a cordial and antidote against their sorrow, it is expedient for you
that I go away; but they could not tell how to believe it, that it should be
expedient for them that he should go away, therefore says Christ,
Nevertheless, I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I go away.
Truly, Brethren, this is the very Cordial that Christ himself gave against
immoderate sorrow and grief of mind in parting with any creature-comfort in
this World: remember, it is expedient for you, if the Lord call us to part with
any thing that is near and dear to us, near and dear Yoke-Fellows, Husband or
Wife, or an only Son, well, here is the Cordial and Antidote that Christ gave,
know, says he, That it is expedient for you that this near Comfort go away
from you, it is for your advantage, profit, and benefit.

Brethren, I pray let me ask you this Question, Do you think that any creature
comfort that you enjoy in this World can be nearer and dearer to you than the
personal presence of Christ was to the Disciples? Yet says Christ, It is
expedient for you that I go away; truly so I may say as to every Comfort that
God takes from us, It is expedient for us that this comfort be taken from us.
It may be you cannot see it now, but you may see it afterward, it is that which
your heavenly Father knows to be expedient for you, and he is wiser than we.
This may be a Cordial and Antidote both for the time past, and for the time
present and to come: the time past, when we call to remembrance, O the comfort
that sometimes we had, the comfortable enjoyment of such a Relation, such a
Husband, or such a Wife, or such a Child, our hearts are ready to bleed afresh
at the remembrance of it. Now here is a Cordial and Antidote that Christ
himself prescribes, I tell you the truth, says Christ, It is expedient for
you. O I cannot tell how to think it can be expedient for me to lose such a
Husband, such a Wife, such a Child; yea, says Christ, I tell you the truth, it
is expedient for you that such a comfort be taken away from you. So for the
time present, if God take away a near Relation, or Wife, or such a Child,
remember that Christ has said, it is expedient for you that this Child should
go, that this Comfort, that this Relation should go away from you.

And Brethren, if we do believe that it is expedient for us, why then should we
be excessive in our grief and sorrow? I pray tell me, if a Physician come unto
you, and by reason of your distemper prescribe you some bitter Pill, or bitter
Potion to take, or a strong vomit, or he prescribe a great deal of blood to be
taken from you, these things are somewhat hard, but he tells you it is
expedient for you, and you will yield to it, you will take the Vomit or Purge
though never so grievous to you, you will take the Pill though never so bitter
to you, and if he will draw so much blood from you, let him take it. So the
Lord is pleased to deal as a wise Physician, he prescribes sometimes a bitter
Pill for us to swallow down, O to lose such a Yoke Fellow, or such a Child,
this is a strong vomit, a bitter purge, this is like the drawing of a man's
blood from his heart: but our heavenly Father knows what is most expedient for
us, I tell you the Truth, says Christ, it is expedient for you that I go away;
it is expedient for you that I take so much blood from you, that I put you upon
the swallowing of this bitter pill. And remember, and lay up this Antidote
against a time of need, we know not how suddenly any of us here before the Lord
may be called to part with our nearest and dearest Comforts, we know not how
the Lord may deal with us: well, remember this Antidote, and lay it up for the
time to come, remember and say, Well, it is expedient for me, that this and
that Comfort be taken away from me; and you have heard the Reasons. O remember
these words of our Lord Jesus, which he spoke to his Disciples to comfort them
against their griefs and sorrow for being deprived of the greatest comfort they
had in this World. Nevertheless, I tell you the Truth; it is expedient for you
that I go away.

Conversion of Souls, great Joy to the Ministers of Christ.
SERMON III.
JOHN 16.8. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of Sin, and of
Righteousness, and of Judgment.


IN this Chapter (as you have heard) our Lord Jesus Christ does fore-warn and
fore-arm his Disciples against Persecution and Sufferings, which they were like
to meet withal; and this he speaks of in the first four Verses; and then he
does endeavor to comfort their hearts against that sorrow that had possessed
them for his going away from them: Says he, Now I go my way to him that sent
me: and because I have said these things unto you, sorrow has filled your
hearts. Christ endeavors to comfort their hearts against their great sorrow;
and this in the general he proposes for their Comfort; Namely, says he, It Is
expedient for you that I go away: It Is not only expedient for me, but it is
expedient for you that I go away: But they could hardly think so: And then he
gives them this Reason, says he, If I go not away, the Comforter will not
come; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. But then they might be ready
to say, Lord! Suppose the Comforter do come, will that make recompense for our
loss of thy presence? What if the Comforter do come? what if we have the
presence of thy Spirit? yet thy presence might seem to be more comfortable to
us. Now Christ lays in further for that, says he, If the Comforter come, that
will be still better for you than my bodily presence is; for if he come, he
will be with you to assist you in your Ministry: He will accompany the
Ministration of the Gospel in your mouth; he will make your Ministration to be
succesful, and effectual, for convincing and converting. Thus now Christ does
lay in against their sorrow, that they might have upon his departure from them,
that though he went from them, yet they should have that from the promise that
should countervail all that comfort and joy that they had by his bodily
presence; And this seems to be the very scope and intendment of these words.
When he is come, says he, He will so work with your Ministry, that it shall
Reprove or Convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment.

Before I come to the Point, because the words seem to have some difficulty in
them, and because there seems to be some variety in the Interpretation of them,
I shall briefly give you a hint of what I apprehend to be the most proper
meaning of these words. As now, 1. What does he mean by Reproving? He shall
reprove the World, -- 2. What does he mean by the World? And then, 3. How he
shall Reprove the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment.


I. The word here translated Reprove, has a threefold acceptance in
Scripture.

1. Sometimes it signifies to Reprove, as here it is translated: And so I
remember, Titus 1.13. This Witness is true: Wherefore rebuke them sharply, or
reprove them sharply: It Is the same Word. So here it is translated in the Text.
Though I think that is not the proper signification or intendment of it in this
place. For, observe it, It is not so proper to say, That the Spirit, when he
comes, shall Reprove the World of Righteousness, he may reprove them of Sin,
and rebuke them for Sin, but not of Righteousness, nor for Righteousness, nor
of Judgment. That is one signification of the word, to Reprove or Rebuke.

2. Sometimes the word signifies to make manifest, or to make evident, to make
apparent, so you shall find it, John 3.20, 21. Every one that does evil, hates
the Light, Neither comes to the Light, lest his deeds should be reproved (or
made manifest) and it is expounded in the next verse, made manifest; But he
that does Truth comes to the Light, that his deeds may be [made manifest] that
they are wrought in God; it is the same Word here in the Text. But this cannot
be the meaning of this Word in the Text, that he shall make manifest Sin, and
make manifest Righteousness, and make manifest Judgment: though there be a
Truth in that, yet this cannot be the full intendment of this word in this
place.

3. There is another signification of it, and that is to convince, and so it is
in the Margin, He shall convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of
Judgment; and so I remember it is, John 8.46. says Christ there, Which of you
does convince me of Sin? It is the same Word: he does not say, which of you
charges me with Sin? for they did charge him with Sin enough, and they did
reprove and rebuke him for Sin, they said, he was a Blasphemer; therefore that
cannot be the meaning of the Word to charge or reprove him of Sin; but, which
of you can convince me of Sin? to make it apparent without gainsaying, that I
am guilty of any Sin. And so I think that place, Tit. 1.9. holding fast the
faithful Word, as he has been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine,
both to exhort, and to convince the Gainsayers. And so I shall take it in this
sense all along; when the Comforter is come he shall assist you in your
Ministry, so as he shall thereby convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness,
and of Judgment.

II. What does he mean by the World? Not the whole Universe, the Fabric of
Heaven and Earth, no, that cannot be the meaning of it: but it is to be
understood of Men, the World of Men, of sinful Men, Men that are guilty of Sin;
and more particularly, by the World we may understand the unbelieving World, a
company of unbelievers: Now unbelievers they may some of them be elected and
are elected, and shall be brought to believe in Christ in time, through the
Gospel; and some of them are not elected, and shall never be brought to believe
in Christ. Now which of these does Christ here mean? when he speaks of the
World, whether he means only those Unbelievers that are elected, and shall be
brought on to believe (so some think): or whether he means the Unbelievers of
the World that were never elected, and shall never be brought to believe in
Christ (so others.) Truly I see nothing to the contrary but we may include
both, namely, Unbelievers that are not elected, the Holy Ghost shall come and
convince them of Sin, though they shall go no further, there may be convictions
where no conversion follows; and this is the work of the Spirit to convince of
Sin, and he shall also convince Unbelievers that are elected, convince them
effectually, so as they shall be brought on to conversion, and I think
especially and chiefly our Savior here means those Unbelievers in the World
that are elected, though I would not exclude the other, but those especially
that are elected, and shall be brought on through conviction and conversion to
salvation; for Christ does speak these Words by way of Comfort to the
Disciples, that the Spirit shall come and assist them in their Ministry; it is
some comfort indeed if any be convinced, but that is not so much comfort as to
be convinced and effectually wrought upon to salvation, and this comfort Christ
does hold forth as an Antidote against their sadness and sorrow, upon his going
away. And then he shall convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of
Judgment.

I shall not now come to speak particularly, to open these in particular to
you, but only thus much in short to show you how the World was convinced by the
Apostles Ministry, immediately after Christ's Ascension into Heaven, the World
was then convinced; the World of the unbelieving Jews was convinced of Sin, of
Righteousness, and of Judgment. Look but into that Sermon, Acts 2. which was
preached upon the occasion of the falling down of the Holy Ghost, the coming of
the Comforter, which Christ promises here; you shall see there how the Jews
were convinced, both of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment, by the coming
of the Holy Ghost upon them in that very Sermon, verse 23. There he convinces
them of Sin, In murdering and crucifying the Lord of Glory; they were so far
from believing on Christ as their Savior, that they did murder him; whereas,
says the Apostle in another place, If so be they had known, and so believed in
Christ, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory; but says he, Him
being delivered by the determinate Counsel of God, ye have taken and by wicked
hands have crucified and slain. He tells them plainly that they were guilty of
murdering the Son of God, and they were so convinced at this Word, that they
did not gainsay it, but were pricked in their hearts; thus they were convinced
of Sin, that they did not believe in Christ, but instead of believing they
murdered him: and then they were convinced also of Righteousness, namely, of
Christ's Righteousness, that Christ was a Righteous Person whom they crucified
and slew, verse 22. Ye Men of Israel, hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth, a
Man approved of God, by Signs and Wonders and Miracles, which God did by him in
the midst of you, as your selves know; the Apostle here holds forth that he was
a Righteous Person, and they crucified a Righteous Person, and what had they to
say against this? No, they were silent, they laid their hands upon their mouth,
and afterward their hands come upon their heart, and they were pricked at the
heart, and now they were convinced of the Righteousness of Christ; and also of
Judgment, that now God had given all power to execute Judgment, into the hand
of Christ, unto this Son of man whom they crucified, and slew. So verse 24.
Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of death, because it was not
possible that he should be holden of it; he overcame Death, and overcame the
Devil that had the power of Death; and at Verse 31. he seeing this before,
spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, that his Soul was not left in Hell, This
Jesus has God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses; Therefore being by the
right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the
Holy Ghost -- having received all Power, and Authority, and Dominion, and
Government, over all Principalities and Powers, etc. By this means he convinced
them of Judgment; for the Prince of this World is judged, Christ is exalted at
the Right hand of God, and they had nothing to say against what the Apostle
spoke, but their hearts were pricked, and now, Men and Brethren, what shall we
do to be saved?

Thus you see the intendment and scope of Christ in these Words, is to comfort
the Hearts of his Disciples against his going away, and now says Christ, I
will send the Comforter unto you: and when he is come he shall so assist you in
your Ministry, that you shall be able to Convince the World of Sin, of
Righteousness, and of Judgment; your Ministry shall be made effectual,
operative, and saving; and this he delivers as an Antidote against their
sorrow for his going away from them. And here is the Point that I shall briefly
take up to speak to at this present, if the Lord please.

Doct. That it is a matter of unspeakable Joy and Consolation unto the faithful
Servants of Christ, that their Ministry is made effectual through the power of
the Spirit of Christ for the saving of poor Souls. Christ gives them this very
thing as an Antidote, as a Comfort and Cordial against their sorrow which their
hearts are filled with for his going away from them, says he, the Comforter
shall come to you, and be with your Ministry, and make your Ministry effectual
and powerful and saving to the Souls of many persons in the World, and this he
gives as an Antidote against their sorrow. And truly I might have said it is a
matter of the greatest. Comfort that any thing in the World can afford to the
faithful Servants of Christ that their Ministry is made effectual to the
furtherance of the Salvation of Souls; he speaks of it you see, as a Comfort
suitable to their sorrow, that is able to weigh down their sorrow, that though
they were so filled with sorrow at Christ's departure from them, yet says
Christ, you shall have that, that is as comfortable to you as my bodily
presence can be, you shall have the co-working of the Spirit with you in your
Ministry to make it effectual for the furtherance of the salvation of poor
Souls.

For the opening of this Point I shall speak to these four things that are
employed and wrapped up in it.

1. That the Ministry of the Gospel is the Means of the conversion and
salvation of Souls. This is employed here, They shall go out to preach, and this
should be for their Comfort, that they should be instrumental for the
conversion and salvation of Souls.

2. That it is through the power of the Spirit, that the Ministry of the Gospel
comes to be effectual for the conversion and salvation of Souls. Therefore
says Christ, I will send the Comforter to you, the Holy Ghost, and he shall
convince the World of Sin, he shall make the Word that you preach efficacious
to further the salvation of Souls.

3. That as the Ministry of the Gospel alone of it self cannot, so neither will
the Holy Ghost work efficaciously and savingly to the conversion and salvation
of Souls without the Ministry of the Gospel. Christ does not say the Spirit
alone shall work effectually, and convertingly, and savingly, no, but with your
Ministry. It was therefore spoken for their Comfort, the Spirit shall come
along with your Ministry, and shall work effectually, and convincingly, and
savingly.

4. It is matter of exceeding great and unspeakable Consolation and Joy to the
faithful Servants of Christ, that their Ministry through the Operation of the
Spirit is made efficacious and effectual for the convincing and converting and
saving of any Soul. Briefly to run over these things.

1. That the Ministration of the Gospel is the ordinary Means of the Conversion
and Salvation of Souls. And therefore hence it is that the Gospel is called
sometimes the Word of Salvation, Acts 13.26. To you is this Word of Salvation
sent; the Word of Salvation, that is the Gospel; and sometimes it is called the
Gospel of Salvation, Ephesians. 1.13. The Gospel of your Salvation, says he; and
sometimes it is called Salvation it self, Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape if we
neglect so great Salvation? If we neglect the Gospel we cannot escape
damnation: The Gospel is called Salvation, beause it is the Instrument and the
means of conversion and salvation. And hence it is that people are said to be
begotten and born again unto God by the Gospel. Says Paul to the Corinthians,
1 Cor. 4.15. Though you have ten thousand Instructors in Christ, yet you have
not many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel; I
have begotten you, says he, to be Children of God by the Gospel. So Paul
writing to Philemon concerning Onesimus, at the 10th verse, says he, Receive
him, for I have begotten him in my bonds. Paul was then a prisoner, and
Onesimus ran away from his Master Philemon, and came to Paul, and he was an
instrument to beget him again to God by the Gospel; so says the Apostle to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2. The Gospel by which you are saved -- And so the
Apostle James calls it the Word of Truth, whereby Souls are begotten to God,
Cap. 1.8. And so Peter also, says, Ye are born again by the incorruptible
seed, the Word, namely, the Word of the Gospel. So that the Holy Ghost does
testify to us that the Gospel is the Means of the Conversion and Salvation of
Souls.

Question.
And why so I pray? Whence is the Gospel, the means of the Conversion and
Salvation of Souls?

Answer.
In a word, it is from hence, namely, Because God has so ordained it and
appointed it; It pleased God, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.21. by the
foolishness of Preaching to save those that believe. God has appointed and
ordained the Gospel, and the preaching of it, to be a means for the Conversion
and Salvation of Souls; It pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching, not
that the Apostle calls it foolishness, but he speaks after the manner of the
World, after the account and esteem that the World had of the preaching of the
Gospel: As now, Cannot we as well read a Chapter at home, and edify our selves
at home by reading of a Chapter, or reading some good Sermons, better than we
can Hear? And therefore^ is it not a simple, weak, foolish thing for us to
spend our time so? But, says the Apostle, count it foolishness if you will, It
pleased God to ordain by this way of foolishness as the World counts it; It
pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe; It Is
that that God ordains, and appoints, and institutes for that end, and that is
the reason it is a means of Conversion and Salvation, though it be a foolish
thing to carnal reason to come and hear a man speak a little time, and think
this to be a means of Conversion and Salvation; but though it be so foolish a
thing, yet this is the way and means that God has appointed whereby Souls
should be converted and saved.

Question.
But, I pray, How is the Ministry of the Gospel a Means of Conversion and
Salvation?

Answer.
Briefly; for I must not enlarge, The Gospel is a Means of Conversion and
Salvation (namely) partly by discovering or convincing People where they are
out of the way of Salvation; as in the Text, I will send the Comforter, and he
shall convince the World of Sin, of their sinful Estate, and how they are out
of the Way of Salvation, and does discover and convince them, and show them the
right way; and also the Gospel is a means to open and enlighten the
Understandings of People, to open their blind Eyes; as Christ told Paul, when
he sent him to preach the Gospel, Acts 26.18. Go, says he, I have sent thee to
open the Eyes of them that are blind, and to turn them from Darkness to Light;
that is, by the Ministry of the Gospel. The Gospel is a Means to open peoples
Eyes, to turn them from Darkness to Light, to make them see that they are in a
state of Darkness, to make them see that there is a glorious Light held forth
in the Gospel: as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 2.9. Who has called you out of
Darkness into his marvelous Light; This is that the Gospel is a Means of, and
so it brings to a state of Salvation. And again, the Gospel is a Means to
deliver people from the power of the Devil; every one naturally is in the power
of Satan, he rules and works in all the Children of Unbelief; Now the Gospel is
a means to bring Souls from under the power of Satan; and so Christ told Paul
in that 26th of Acts, I have sent thee (says he) to turn them from Darkness to
Light, and from the power of Satan to God. The Gospel is a Means of that;
therefore says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.4. The Weapons of our Warfare are not
carnal, but mighty, through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, to beat
down the Batteries, and Castles, and Fortifications that Satan builds; it is
mighty to pull down the power of Satan, and so by that means to bring a Soul
into a State of Conversion and Salvation. And also the Gospel is the Means to
work faith in the heart, to cause a Soul to believe on Christ, it is a means of
that, and so by that means the Soul comes to be justified, and freed from the
guilt of Sin. Faith, says the Apostle, comes by hearing, and hearing by the
Word of God, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing the Gospel preached; God is
pleased to make use of the preaching of the Gospel to work Faith in the Souls
of poor Sinners, and by working Faith in their Souls, drawing them unto Christ.
Now by believing in Christ they come to have remission of Sins, as Christ told
Paul in that of the Acts, To turn them from Darkness to Light, from the power
of Satan to God, that they might receive Forgiveness of Sins, and an
inheritance among them that are sanctified, and all by Faith in Christ: So that
I say, the Gospel is the means ordained and appointed of God for the Salvation
of Souls; and therefore let no body think that the Ministry of the Gospel is a
needless thing, as many are ready to think in their minds, that of all the
Callings in the World the Ministry of the Gospel may be best spared. Truly, if
so be that the Salvation of Souls be not necessary, then the Calling of
Ministers to their Office, and their preaching of the Gospel, may be spared,
but you see Christ has appointed it to be the means of Conversion and
Salvation; and therefore, whatever people may think secretly in their minds
that we may edify our selves by reading a Chapter, and meditating upon it, by
reading of good Books, and what need we to trouble o^r selves to wait upon the
Ministry of the Gospel? Truly know this, That the Foolishness of God is wiser
than the Wisdom of Man: God has pleased to ordain and appoint the Ministry of
the Gospel to be the means of Conversion and Salvation, and therefore if the
Conversion of Souls be necessary, then the preaching of the Gospel is
necessary; therefore let us take heed we do not neglect attending upon the
Gospel, and the preaching of the Gospel as we would be loath to neglect our own
Salvation. That is the first, That the Gospel is the Means of working a saving
and converting Work upon the Souls of Men.

2. The second is, That the Gospel alone of it self cannot work a saving and
converting Work upon any Soul; no, there must be the Operation of the Spirit of
Christ, that must go along with the Gsopel, or else the Gospel will never be
able to work any saving converting Work upon any Soul; it is true indeed, the
Gospel is the Word of Salvation; Ay, says the Apostle, Romans 1.16. It is the
Power of God to Salvation; Ay, where the power of God goes along with it, it
works Salvation by the power of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 13.4. The Weapons of
our Warfare are mighty through God, says the Apostle; not mighty in
themselves. The Weapons of our Warfare, what is that? The Ministry of the
Gospel, the Preaching of the Gospel is mighty, but it is mighty through God to
the pulling down of Strong Holds. Alas! of it self it cannot, the Gospel of it
self is but a weak Letter; but where the Power of the Spirit goes along with
it, it is mighty, mighty through God, mighty to convince, and mighty to
convert, and mighty to save; therefore the Gospel is compared to a Sword, and
it is called the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. Take to you the Sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God; It is a Sword that cannot do good, except it
be wielded by the hand of the Spirit of God: It is not now as a natural cause
to effect any thing; as now our Food is a natural cause, sanctified and
ordained by God as a natural cause of nourishment. Physic is ordained as a
natural Cause of health; but it is not so with the Word, the Ministry of the
Word is but as a Tool or Instrument in a Workmans hand, in a Carpenter or
Joyners hand; the Tool of it self cannot work, the Word of it self cannot work,
but as it is in the Workmans hand, so it works. Truly so, the Sword of the
Spirit, in the hand of the Spirit, that will work to the convincing and
converting, and saving of a Soul, otherwise it cannot do it; no, it is but weak
in it self; even as a Sword that cannot move or lift up it self: but now in the
hand of the Spirit the Spirit, the Gospel is mighty to open the understanding,
to open the heart. We read the heart of Lydia was opened when she heard Paul
preach, but it was not Paul's preaching, but the Spirits going along with it,
that did open her heart, and she attended to what was spoken by Paul; and so
the Spirit with the Word is mighty to draw a Soul to Christ, not the Word
alone; no, says Christ, John 5.44, 45. No man can come unto me, except the
Father draw him; that is, there must be the mighty Power of the Spirit of God
concurring, to work with the Word, to draw and persuade and convince by the
Word, and then it works. And so the Spirit with the Word will cause a Soul to
grow and increase in a Spiritual Estate. Paul may plant, and Apollos may water,
but it is the Lord must give the increase to make the growth. So it is, one may
preach, and another may preach, but still there must be the concurrance and
work of the Spirit, or else all our preaching will be but like the watering of
a dead plant; but the Spirit of the Lord must come and be present, and then our
preaching, our planting and watering may be blessed for those ends for which
God has appointed it: And the reason is this, That without the Spirit of God,
the Word, though it be ordained of God to be a Means of Conversion and
Salvation, yet the Word alone without the Spirit cannot do it, because the
Ministry of the Word is too weak to make an Impression upon our hard hearts.

Take a Seal, and set it upon a Rock or Stone, it makes no Impression, Why?
Because there is no pliableness in the Rock or Stone to receive the Impression:
Thus it is with our hearts; our hearts are naturally like so many Stones;
therefore see what the Lord promises, To take away the heart of Stone, and to
give a heart of Flesh; a soft heart, the hardness of it shall be taken away;
that when the Word comes as a Seal to make an Impression upon the heart, the
Spirit does change the heart, and makes it pliable to receive the Impression,
which othewise it could not do. You may as well make an Impression upon a Rock
or Stone, as upon any Heart, till the Spirit come and soften the heart, and
make it pliable to receive the impression of the Word; and therefore hence you
may observe, That sometimes, when diverse hear the same Word preached, there are
diversity of effects in the same hearers hearing the same Word, some are
converted, and others not; some believe, and others not. As Acts 17. When Paul
had been preaching to them, Verse 32, 34. When they heard of the Resurrection
of the dead, some mocked, and others said, We will hear thee again of this
matter: Howbeit certain clave to him, and believed. Ay, some received the
Gospel, and others not; some believed, and others not.

As I remember, it is said, Acts 28.24. Some believed the things that were
spoken, and some believed not; And, What is the Reason? The Spirit does work
effectually with the Gospel upon some hearts, but not upon others; that is the
reason that some believed, and some believed not. And hence it is again, that
sometimes some are more hardened by the very word of the Gospel: So far from
being converted and brought into a state of Salvation, that they are more
hardened and set further off, nearer to their damnation. What is the reason?
Because there wants the presence of the Spirit, and therefore you shall see
Isa. 6.9. says the Lord to the Prophet (he was an Evangelical Prophet) Go,
(says the Lord) make this peoples heart hard; go and harden their hearts, that
they may hear, and not understand, that they may not be converted and saved;
Let their hearts be more hardened, says God, by hearing the Gospel preached:
nay sometimes, what is the reason that the most eminent ablest Preacher of the
Gospel in the World; that their Ministry is sometimes less efficacious than the
Ministry of them that are far inferior to them? what is the reason? Because
the Concurrence of the Spirit goes along with the one and not with the other.
You shall see Christ himself* the most eminent Preacher that ever was under
Heaven, John 22.36, 37. He preaches there; and though he did Miracles before
them, yet they believed not on him; that the saying of Isaiah the Prophet might
be fulfilled, Lord, who has believed our Report? and to whom has the Arm of
the Lord been revealed; And therefore they could not believe, because, Isaiah
says again, He has blinded their Eyes, and hardened their hearts -- These
things, said Isaiah, when he saw his glory and spoke of him; when he saw the
glory of Christ, when he was most Evangelical in his Ministry, then he spoke
these Words, whereas Peter now, that was far inferior to Christ, having the
presence of the Spirit mightily poured down upon him, Acts 2. (where the Holy
Ghost fell down upon the Apostles like so many fiery cloven tongues.) Peter
preached to them, and he converted three thousand Souls at one Clap, because of
the powerful presence of the Spirit together with the Word. Therefore,
Brethren, still let us not satisfy our selves with hearing the Gospel preached,
though we had the most eminent preacher that ever was in the World, though we
should have heard Christ himself, but look for the Concurrence of the Spirit,
the breathings of the Spirit, wait upon God for the communicating and giving
out of his Spirit, that they may make the Gospel to be the Ministration, not of
the Letter, but of the Spirit, for it is the Spirits Work to make the Gospel
effectual and operative for the Conversion and Salvation of Souls.

3. In a Word, that, As the Preaching of the Gospel of it self cannot convert,
or save any Soul, So neither will the Holy Ghost without the Concurrence and
preaching of the Gospel. You heard before that the Preaching of the Gospel
cannot do it alone; But cannot the Spirit? will not the Spirit do it alone? It
can do it alone indeed, But mark I pray, the Spirit will not ordinarily
convince and convert effectually and savingly any Soul without the Ministration
of the Gospel: To give you but a Scripture or two for this, Acts 9. You see
there Christ himself speaks to Paul; you know how he met with him as he was
going to Damascus, to persecute the Saints, and Christ spoke immediately to
him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? well, who art thou, Lord? says he; I
am Jesus, whom thou persecutest; Well, Verse 6. You shall see, says Paul,
Lord, What would thou have me to do? Mark now, Christ does not preach the
Gospel immediately himself, but he sends him to one to preach to him; Go into
Damascus, and there it shall be told thee what thou shall do; and there Christ
sent Ananias to preach the Gospel to him; Christ himself would not preach the
Gospel from Heaven to him, nor he would not convert nor save his Soul without
the Ministration of the Gospel. And look into Acts 10. See there concerning
Cornelius, there was an Angel from Heaven sent to him, he had been fasting and
praying, and that hour there came an Angel of God to him to tell him that God
had heard his Prayers, and accepted his Alms, but why may not the Angel preach
the Gospel immediately? No, the Lord would have the Gospel dispensed in an
ordinary way of preaching, not by an Angel from Heaven, therefore Verse 5. And
now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose Surname is Peter, and he
shall tell thee words whereby thou and thy house shall be saved, he shall
preach the Gospel effectually to you; and you shall see afterward, Verse 33.
Immediately therefore I sent to thee, and thou have done well that thou art
come: now therefore are we all here present before God to hear thee; and Verse
44. Whilst Peter spoke these Words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which
heard the Word. Why did not the Angel himself preach the Gospel to Cornelius?
Why was not he an Instrument of his Conversion and Salvation? no, the Holy
Ghost will not work alone without the ordinary concurrence of the Ministration
of the Gospel, and therefore look at it as a delusion of Satan, if so be that
upon any pretense whatsoever, any shall endeavor to take you off from
attending upon the Ministry of the Gospel upon pretense of the Spirit, that the
Spirit shall anoint us and teach us all things --. Well, look upon it as a
Delusion of Satan, if it be to take you off from attending upon the Ministry
of the Gospel which is the ordinary way that God has appointed; and take this
for an universal Rule, That whatever it be that tends to take any people off
from any Ordinance of God, or any Institution of God, look at it as a delusion
of Satan, let it be under any pretense whatsoever; as now, to take one off from
Duties and Ordinances, to wait till the Spirit come immediately to inspire --
look upon it as a Delusion, because it tends to take you off from the ordinary
Institutions that God has appointed. So, you see the Gospel is the Means of
Conversion and Salvation, the Gospel without the Spirit cannot do it, and the
Spirit without the Gospel will not do it.

4. The fourth thing is this, That it is a matter of unspeakable Joy and
Consolation to the faithful Servants of Christ, that their dispensing of the
Gospel through the Concurrence of the Spirit is made effectual for the
Conversion and Salvation of any Soul. Ay, says Christ here; this shall be
instead of my bodily presence with you, and it shall be as comfortable to you.
You are now troubled and sorrowful because I am going away from you, but I will
send the Comforter to you, and the Comforter shall assist you in your Ministry,
and make it successful to convince and convert and save Souls, and Christ would
have them, to look upon it as equivalent to his own bodily presence, and would
be matter of greater Joy and Consolation to them. Look into Verse 12, 22 of
this Chapter, says Christ, You are now sad and sorrowful, but I tell you,
(says He) the time is coming that your sorrows shall be forgotten: The sorrows
that you have upon my departure shall be forgotten, they shall be swallowed up
with Joy and Consolation: Look, says he, as it is with a Woman when she
draws near the time of her Travail, when her pains begin to come upon her,
then she is sad and sorrowful, but, says he, when she is delivered, she
forgets her sorrow, for Joy that a man-child is born --: so shall it be with
you. Thus Christ comforts his Disciples against his going away, they should
have such matter of rejoicing that should swallow up all their sorrows, they
should have the presence of the Spirit, and their Ministry should be
efficacious and successful for the converting of Souls, and Christ did speak it
from his own experience, John 4. When he was speaking to the Woman of Samaria,
he sent his Disciples into the City to buy food, for he was hungry, and when he
sat down weary on the Well, he asked a little water of the woman, and so fell a
discoursing and convincing of the woman that she lived in Adultery, and
converted the woman, and when his Disciples came, Master, say they, here is
meat to eat: Meat, says he, I have that which is better than meat, I have meat
to eat which you know not of; my Meat is to do the Will of my Father; here is
my joy and rejoicing to convert Souls. Meat is matter of great joy to an hungry
man, if you give him all the World, if he have not meat it is nothing; says
Christ, I take more joy and delight in converting of Souls, than I do in eating
when I am an hungry. And you shall see how the Apostle Paul does rejoice in
this, that he was an Instrument in converting and saving of Souls, he writing
to the Thessalonians, 1 Epist. 2.19, 20. For what is our Joy, or Hope, or Crown
of rejoicing? are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming? for ye are our Glory and our Joy; ye (says he) are the Top of my Joy,
the Crown of my Joy; Paul had been an Instrument to convert them by the
preaching of the Gospel, and, says he, ye are the top of my glory and
rejoicing; So, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. We are bound to give God thanks always for
you, my Brethren, and Beloved in the Lord; because God has from the beginning
chosen you unto Salvation, through the Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief
of the Truth, whereunto he called you by my Gospel, to the obtaining the Glory
of our Lord Jesus Christ: Says he, we are always bound to give thanks to God
for you; Ay, here is matter of Joy and Rejoicing. And truly so, though Paul did
meet with Afflictions, Tribulations, and Persecutions for preaching of the
Gospel, yet notwithstanding he made nothing of all his troubles, sufferings and
sorrows, in regard he did but finish his Course with Joy. If he have but this
Joy and Consolation, I care not, says he, what troubles or afflictions do
abide me, Acts 20.24. The Holy Ghost witnesses in every City, that bonds and
afflictions abide me; but none of these things move me, neither count I my life
dear unto my self, so that I may finish my Course with Joy and the Ministry
which I have received of the Lord Jesus. If I can but preach the Gospel, says
he, and be an Instrument to convert Souls, this is the Joy of my heart, let my
life go for it. And it is a very high expression which the Apostle John has
Epist. 3. Verse 4. says he there, I have no greater joy, (mark) the Apostle
John that had such Communion with Christ; Yet says he, I have no greater joy
than to hear that my Children walk in the Truth; Those that he had been a means
and Instrument to convert by his preaching, now to see that their conversion
was true and real by their continuing in the truth: I have no greater Joy in
this world, says he; And why so, I pray? Why should this be such a matter of
Joy and rejoicing to the hearts of the faithful Servants that their Ministry is
made effectual for the Conversion of Souls?

1. Upon this Account, because, Here is a Sign and Token that God has blessed
their Ministry, that the Blessing of God from Heaven has been upon their
labors: and I pray let me appeal to your selves, is it not matter of Comfort
Joy and Rejoicing to you that you find your labors and endeavors to have any
Success, to be blessed of God? As now, take a Nurse that brings up a Child, and
she sees the child begins to thrive by her suckling of it, and it is the Joy
and Rejoicing of her heart; as on the other side, if she see the Child pine
away, and does not prosper, it is the grief of her heart, when she takes all
this pains and no good comes of it. When you plant and sow seed, if you take
any pains in your Orchard or Garden in grafting and the like, and you find that
your labor is made fruitful, is it not a Comfort to you to go into your
Garden, and see the seed that you have sown flourish and come up? It is
rejoicing to you; and much more is it to the hearts of the faithful Servants of
Christ that their labors in the Ministry are blessed and made fruitful and
successful; because now here is the more immediate presence of God upon their
labors, here is the blessing, the blessing of God does more immediately appear
in their labors. Now in sowing of Seed there is instrumental means and causes
of its growing, there is Dew, and Showers, and Rain from Heaven, there is the
influence of the Sun, the fatness of the Soil, that concur to cause it grow;
but now there is much against the Ministry of the Word to work upon the heart;
there is the corruption of the heart, and the temptations of Satan and the
World, and all to hinder the Gospel from taking effect, but now when the Lord
makes the Gospel to take effect, to become efficacious to the Conversion of
Souls, of poor Creatures, here is now the blessing of Heaven upon his labors,
and now he has cause to rejoice greatly that God is with him, and has blessed
his labors, and now God does own him as a Fellow Laborer together with
himself, We are Workers together with God, says the Apostle, We are Gods
Husband men, and we are planting for God, and God goes along with us and
cooperates with us; what a mighty cause of rejoicing is this? that we have the
presence of God with us, and the blessing of God upon us; nay, it is an
argument and token that God owns their Ministry and labor, and he seals their
Ministry and Labor, as the Apostle says, Ye are the Seal of our Ministry;
this is I say matter of great Joy and Consolation in regard it is a Sign and
Token that God has blessed the Labors of his Servants, and owned their
Ministry.

2. It Is a matter of great Joy and Consolation, because now, Here is a
Testimony that Jesus Christ in Heaven and in his Glory is mindful of his poor
Servants here below in the World, he does mind and remember such a poor Servant
of his, that labors in his Name, and does send down the Spirit to accompany
him in his Labors; as Christ said here to his Disciples, I will send the
Comforter and he shall assist you, and I will remember you, when I am in
Heaven, I will not forget you. Thus Christ now sends down the Comforter, the
Spirit from Heaven to assist such a poor Minister in his labors and
endeavors; what matter of Consolation is this to think that Christ from Heaven
sends down his Spirit to cooperate with him in his endeavors? What matter of
Joy and Consolation is this? Take but one more.

3. It must needs be matter of great Joy and Consolation to the faithful
Servants of Christ, to think that the Lord should please to make use of such as
they are to be Instruments in his hands to pull down the Kingdom of the Devil,
and to enlarge the Kingdom of Christ; That the Devils Kingdom and power should
go down, and that Souls should be drawn out of his Kingdom by the Labors of
his poor Servants, what Joy is this? When Christ sent his Disciples to preach,
Luke 10.17, 18 it is said, They returned again rejoicing, saying, The Devils
are subject to us: Ay, says Christ, I beheld Satan fall down from Heaven like
Lightning. Where the Gospel comes, there goes such a Presence of the Spirit
with the preaching thereof that Satan goes down, and poor Souls are brought
out from under his power and Dominion; as you know Christ told Paul, that he
should be instrumental to turn people from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan to God; though they be under the Kingdom and Power of the Devil,
yet by the preaching of the Gospel, when the Spirit concurs and goes along with
it, poor Souls are translated from the Kingdom of Satan into the Kingdom of his
dear Son, Col. 1.15. Now what Joy and Comfort must this needs be to the hearts
of the faithful Servants of Christ? that the Lord should please to make them
Instruments in his own hands to pull down the Kingdom of the Devil and to
enlarge his own Kingdom, that such shall be added to the Lord as shall be
saved? I say it must needs be matter of Joy and Rejoicing: But I would hasten
to an end. Briefly therefore by way of Application.

Application. And here I might in the first place take occasion to speak a Word
of Direction to the Ministers of Christ, if it were a fit place and season,
namely, to direct us how we may so preach that we may have most Joy and
Consolation. The faithful Servants of Christ have more Joy and Consolation by
being instrumental for the Conversion and Salvation of Souls, than by all that
ever the People of their Congregation can do for them; If they may be
instrumental in the Lords hand for their Conversion and Salvation, this is more
Joy and Consolation to them, than any thing in the World can be. Christ tells
his Disciples that this would be matter of Joy and Rejoicing to their Hearts
when he was gone from them, therefore we should seek to convert and save Souls,
we should do, as the Apostle says, I seek not yours, but you; we should seek
the Conversion and Salvation of Souls, and therefore we should be preaching of
Faith and of Repentance, as the Apostle Paul says of himself, Faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and Repentance toward God, whereby poor Souls may be
converted and saved: And we had need be much in pleading with God for the
Spirit, that the Spirit of the Lord may go along with our Ministry: Our Sermons
had need to be watered and soaked in earnest prayer for the Spirit.

2. Here is now a mighty Word of Encouragement unto poor Souls to be ready to
entertain and receive the Gospel, and the Ministration of it; to be ready so to
receive it into your hearts as it may be a good Word of Conversion and
Salvation to your Souls. Ay, this would be matter of Joy and Rejoicing to the
Servants of Christ more than all that ever you can do for them, if they may be
but instrumental for the Conversion and Salvation of your Souls, it will be
more Comfort and joy to them than all the World besides; Joy to them, Ay, it
will be Joy to the very Angels in Heaven, Luke 15.10, 11. There shall be Joy in
Heaven over one Ein^^^ that repents -- The Angels of Heaven observe how you
come into the Congregation, they observe your Carriage, and how you take the
Word, and what impression it makes upon your hearts to Co^v^ction and
Conversion, and Salvation, it is the Joy and Rejoicing of the Angels in Heaven
to (...) a poor Soul brought in by the Ministry of the Gospel^; and do not you
think, you your selves will have as much cause of Joy and Rejoicing? Whereas on
the other side, if so be the poor Servants of Christ do come and take pains;
they study, and labor, and hold forth the Word of the Gospel to you, and
people come and receive it into their ears, and not into their hearts; no good
done upon them, but they remain as carnal, as worldly and unbelieving as
before, and they see no fruit of their Ministry; this is the grief of their
hearts and Souls, they labor and labor and question whether the Lord does own
their Ministry or no; they have cause to complain as the Prophet Isa. 49.6. I
have labored in vain, I have spent my Strength for naught and in vain. So the
poor Servants of Christ go with a dead heart into their Studies, and come to
preach with a sad heart, when they see no good done, no saving Work wrought;
this is a very Cut to their hearts and Souls, and they would rather (if they
might have their wills) cease mentioning of the Name of Christ to people.
Therefore let it be the desire, and endeavor, and care of people so to hear
and receive the Word into their hearts that it may become effectual, and an
Instrument in the Lords hand for the Conversion and Salvation of their Souls.

Objection.
But you will say, Is it in our power (I know you think so in your hearts) to
make the Word convincing, and converting, and saving?

Answer.
I do not say it is in your power, but thus much I may say, you may oppose and
resist the saving Work of the Gospel upon your hearts; and therefore to be
found waiting upon the Lord in his way you cannot tell but the Lord may make
the Gospel effectual to you for your Conversion and Salvation. And therefore
let me commend three or four Words by way of Direction in this case, and so I
shall leave all to the blessing of God.

Do you desire to have the Word of God made effectual for the convincing and
converting and saving of your Souls? Then

1. Be much and earnest in praying for the Spirit to go along with the
Preaching of the Word into your hearts and Souls; Ay, pray much for that, O!
before you come you should be careful to wrestle with God for the presence of
the Spirit to go along.

I fear, Brethren, that people are careless in this Point, they come reeking
out of the World and from their business, and never wrestle with the Lord for
the presence of his Spirit to assist the Preaching of the Word, that it may
become effectual and profitable to your Souls, and so you go away as you come.
Therefore I say, as the Apostle, Jude v. 24. Be building up your selves in your
most holy Faith. But how shall we build up our selves in our most holy Faith?
how shall we do it? why, says he, Praying in the Holy Ghost, that is the way:
Beg earnestly for the Spirit, for the Holy Ghost to accompany the Word, and
make the Word profitable and effectual to you. That is one Direction, I do but
name it, I pray remember it.

2. As we do desire to have the Word made effectual for Conviction, Conversion,
and Salvation to our Souls, Then attend upon the Preaching of the Gospel as the
Lords Ordinance, for that very End that he has appointed it, namely, for
Conversion and Salvation. This is the very End for which God has appointed the
Preaching of the Gospel, to be a saving Word, a Word of Salvation to poor
Souls, that is the very End of the Gospel, it is appointed for that End. Ephesians.
4.11, 12. says the Apostle, Christ when he ascended up on high, he gave Gifts
to men, Ministerial Gifts, he gave Pastors, and Teachers, for the edifying of
the Body, for the bringing home of Souls to the Body, for the perfecting of the
Saints: So that those that are Saints should still attend upon the Gospel for
more edifying, for the saving work to be carried on. This is the very
Intendment of the Preaching of the Gospel, God has ordained it for this end
and purpose, therefore wait upon it for that end, attend upon it as the Word of
God which he has appointed for that end. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. We are always bound to
give thanks to God for you, beloved Brethren, because when you heard the Word,
you received it not as the Word of man, but as it is indeed the Word of God,
which works effectually in them that believe. Ay, receive it as the Word, and
the Word of God, for that End that God has appointed it, and through the
presence of the Spirit it will become effectual. Mark how it wrought in
Cornelius and his Family, Acts 10. Cornelius was directed to send for Peter to
preach to him, and Cornelius in the mean time had gathered together the
Congregation, his Friends and Relations; he had got them together that they
might hear the Gospel as well as himself, when Peter came he preached Christ to
them; Now, says Cornelius, we are all here before the Lord, to hear whatever
God has directed thee to speak to us, we are here to attend upon it as the
very Word of God; and Peter opened his mouth and preached the Gospel to them,
and it is said The Holy Ghost fell upon them all that heard it, v. 44. and then
says Peter, verse 47. Can any man forbid Water that these should not be
baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we. Attending upon the
Preaching of the Gospel as Gods Ordinance and Institution, for saving ends and
purposes, for Conversion, and Edification, and Salvation; this is the way
whereby we may have the Gospel made effectual to us, we shall be brought to
receive it, and receiving of it, we shall be brought into a state of Salvation*
and further built up in our most holy Faith: That is the second Direction.

3. Receive the Ministration of the Gospel with humility of Spirit, and
meekness, I say, receive it with all humility and meekness of Spirit, that is
the way whereby it may be made effectual to Salvation. When people come and
say, they can tell as much as the Minister can tell them, and they had as good
stay at home, and read a good Book: and not c^ming to it as Gods Ordinance,
with a teachable frame of Spirit, being willing to hear what the Lord will say,
how can the Word become effectual? but now when a Soul comes with meekness of
Spirit, to hear what the Lord will say, and then as Psalm. 25.9. The Lord will
teach the meek, and says the Apostle, James 1.21. Receive with meekness the
ingrafted Word, which is able to save your Souls; receive it with meekness,
with an humble Spirit, to receive whatsoeever the Lord shall please to direct
his Servants to speak. And let me add but one thing more, and I will have done,
and that is this.

4. Be careful to receive the Word and Truth in the Love of it, and to mix it
with Faith. Receive it in the Love of it. Truly, if so be we have no Love to
the Truth, and the Word, when we come to attend upon it, it may be just with
God to give us up to believe Lies; as that has been the very Judgment of God
upon the Antichristian World for these 1200 years together for this very Sin,
for not receiving the Truth in the love of it, 2 Thessalonians 2.11, 12, 13. Because
they received not the Truth in the Love of it, therefore God gave them up to
strong delusions to believe Lies. And Antichrist has prevailed to this Day,
upon that very account. Therefore remember, that we be ready to receive the
Truth in the Love of it, as to say, This is a Truth of God, and though I have
heard it before, yet it is a Truth, and the Lord would have this Truth spoken
to me, and I must receive it in the Love of it, and then mix it with Faith,
H^b. 4.2. They had the Gospel preached to them as well as we, and The Word
preached did not profit them that heard it, why? because they did not mix it
with Faith in their hearts; What is this mixing the Word with Faith? Truly,
when the Lord persuades the Heart to receive whatever is spoken, as spoken from
the Lord to me, this Word the Lord does intend for me, and makes a particular
application of it, this is the proper work of Faith, to apply the word spoken
to our selves, as spoken from the Lord to us: And thus the word comes to be
effectual through the Spirit, either in a way of Conviction, or Conversion, or
for the Furtherance of the Salvation of the Souls of any. But thus much shall
suffice at this time.

The Holy Ghost convinces of Sin.
SERMON IV.
JOHN 16.9. Of Sin, because they believe not on me.


YOU have heard the scope of these words already, which in short is this.
Christ would here comfort his Disciples against their sorrow, which they had
for his going away from them; Because I said these things unto you, (says he)
Sorrow has filled your hearts. Now Christ is speaking here in a way of
Comfort, to sustain and support the hearts of his Disciples against that grief
and sorrow that did possess them; And how does he comfort them? He tells them,
that his spiritual presence shall be more advantageous to them than his bodily
presence could be: The presence of the Spirit which he would send to them
(says he) he shall be a Comforter to you. If I go away, I will send the
Comforter to you; and that shall be more than my bodily presence to you;
whereas, If I go not away, the Comforter will not come. Ay, but how shall the
presence of the Spirit be in stead of Christ's bodily presence to them, and
make up that loss to them? Christ tells them, for that wherein the presence of
the Spirit with them, after his going away, would be equivalent and
correspondent to his own bodily personal being with them. But wherein? He tells
them, namely, because when the Spirit comes, he shall co work with them in
their Ministry, so as their Ministry shall be made efficacious and effectual to
the furtherance of the Salvation of many Souls: The Spirit shall go along with
their Ministry; and this Christ gives in by way of Comfort to his Disciples.

Hence, we Observed the last time, That it is matter of exceeding great Joy and
Consolation to the faithful Servants of Christ, that through the operation and
co-working of the Spirit, their Ministry is made effectual for the good of
Souls. This is a great matter of joy and rejoicing; for observe it, Christ does
lay this down as a comfort to preponderate and outweigh their sorrow that they
had in their hearts, in respect of his going away from them. But I shall not
speak to any thing that was then spoken to.

But still it may be said, But how shall the Spirit concur with our Ministry to
make it effectual for the Conversion and Salvation of Souls? Says Christ, When
he is come he shall convince the World. The presence of the Spirit with your
Ministry shall convince the Men of the world: Convince them, Of what? Now here
he tells them.

You heard in the general from the 8th Verse, He shall convince the World of
Sin, and of Righteousness, and of Judgment. But now in these 9, 10, and 11
Verses, he comes to show particularly the work of the Spirit in convincing the
World, and he gives the reason of every particular that the Spirit shall
convince the World of. Of Sin, Because they believe not in me. And again, He
shall convince the world, of Righteousness, Why? Because I go to the Father,
and ye see me no more; And again, He shall convince the world of Judgment, Why?
Because the Prince of this World is judged.

I shall speak only to the first of these at the present through the Lords
assistance.

He shall convince the world of Sin; Of Sin, and this in order to their
Conversion and Salvation, Why? Because Christ speaks this by way of Consolation
to the hearts of the Disciples; now this would be matter of Comfort indeed,
that their Ministry should be made efficacious for the Conversion and Salvation
of Souls; Therefore this convincing the world of Sin, is in order to Salvation.

There are two Points to be spoken to from the Verse; But I shall only take up
one to speak to at present through the Lords assistance, and that is this.

Doctrine.
That it is the first work of the Spirit of God in order to the Conversion and
Salvation of any Soul, to convince the Soul of Sin.

I say, the first work of the Spirit of God in order to Conversion and
Salvation of Souls, is to convince of Sin. For, here Christ speaks of the work
of the Spirit, in order to Conversion and Salvation, and, what shall he do in
order to it? Says he, He shall convince the world of Sin; and this shall be
the first work that the Spirit shall do. He speaks of convincing of
Righteousness, and of Judgment; but the first work that the Spirit shall do,
shall be to convince of Sin.

There are four things that are necessary to be spoken to for the opening and
clearing of this great Truth and Point.

1. To show what the convincing work of the Spirit is, what it is for the
Spirit to convince a Soul of Sin, that we may understand it, and be clear in
it; for it is that which is in order to our Conversion and Salvation.

2. Show you, That the convincing of a Soul of Sin, is a necessary work in
order to Salvation; for here Christ speaks of the Spirits convincing the Soul
of Sin in order to Salvation.

3. That the Convincing of a Soul of Sin, is the work of the Spirit; no less
than the work of the Spirit. For, says Christ, The Comforter shall come, and
when he is come, he shall convince the world of sin.

4. Show you, That convincing a Soul of Sin, is the first work of the Spirit,
in order to the Conversion and Salvation of any Soul.

I suppose I shall not be able to go through all these things at present, but
to begin and go as far as we can. Well,

First then, Let us enquire what is the convincing of Sin, and wherein it lies?
You shall find in Scripture, that this convincing of Sin, is set forth by
various expressions, sometimes it is expressed by Pricking the heart, so Acts
2.37. When they heard this, they were pricked at the heart. Sometimes it is
called the wounding of the Spirit, so Prove. 18.14. Sometimes it is expressed by
the sticking of an Arrow in a man's Spirit, Psalm. 38.2. Thy Arrows stick fast in
me, says David; which is nothing else but the sense of sin, the guilt of sin;
Sometimes it is expressed by the breaking of Bones, Psalm. 51.18. That the Bones
which thou have broken may rejoice; It was upon the Conviction of his sin of
Murder and Adultery. And sometimes it is expressed by the smiting of the heart;
as it is said of David, 1 Samuel 24.5. when he had cut off the Skirt of Readiness
garment. His heart smote him, he was convinced of his sin.

But more particularly, Wherein does the Conviction of Sin lie? Now you shall
find that it lies especially in three things, or there are three things in a
real convincing of sin.

1. The first is a setting of sin before the Soul; the setting of it home upon
the heart, or the bringing of Sin to remembrance: setting of it before the
Soul, as David d th express it, Psalm. 51.3. says he, My sin is ever before me,
it is before my face; he was convinced of his guilt, and then he had sin set
before him. So when Nathan the Prophet came to David to convince him of his
sin, when he was impenitent, 2 Samuel 12.7. see there how Nathan the Prophet sets
his Sin in order before him, that he might well say, My Sin is always before
me. And Acts 2.36, 37. Peter, to convince the Jews of their sin, sets their sin
before them, and tells them what they had done, They had killed Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, the Lord of glory; and when they heard that, they were pricked
at the heart: So, that it is one thing in Conviction of Sin, when the Spirit
does convince of sin, he sets the sin before the Soul, or upon the heart; for
if so be sin be not set home, and brought before the Soul, there can be no
conviction of sin.

2. Secondly, There is this further in Conviction of Sin, namely, Sin is so set
home upon the heart, as that the heart is not able to avoid the Conviction: The
heart is not able to shift away from under the power of it, all the shifts and
endeavors of the Soul cannot get it off; when the Spirit sets home Sin upon
the heart, it is so set home, as that the Soul cannot now put it off, it cannot
shake it off: the Arrow is so shot, that the Soul cannot wriggle from it. It Is
true indeed, a guilty Conscience does not love to be convinced of Sin, and
therefore observe it, whenever the Lord goes about to convince of Sin, the Soul
does endeavor all it can to put off the blow, as you shall see now when the
Lord came to convince Adam, our first Parents of their Sin, Genesis 3.12, 13. They
had transgressed and thereupon hid themselves: well, the Lord called for them,
Adam* where art thou? at last Adam appears, and there the Lord to convince him
of his Sin, sets his Sin before him; What have thou done (says God)? have thou
eaten of the Tree that I forbad thee? He could not deny it: But, pray, observe
what evasions they had, if it were possible they would avoid the dint of the
Conviction; says Adam, It Is true, I have eaten of the Tree, but it was by
instigation of my Wife, The Woman which thou gave me, she gave me of the
^ree, and I did eat; and thus he avoided the power of the Conviction; Well, he
goes to the Woman, and said, What is this that thou have done? and she put it
off too; The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat; Thus a guilty Conscience will
shift off Convictions as long as it can. You shall see Aaron, when Moses was
absent forty days and from the people, Exodus 32.23, 24. Aaron and the people
made a Golden Calf to worship; when Moses came down from the Mount, he fell to
expostulating with Aaron about his Sin; he would convince Aaron of his great
Sin; says Moses, What did the people unto thee that thou have brought so great
a Sin upon them? Now mark, how Aaron would avoid the dint of this Conviction:
It is true, says he, he could not deny the thing, but let not the anger of my
Lord wax hot; thou know the people, that they are set upon mischief; it is
the peoples fault, says he, for they said, make us Gods that they may go
before us, for as for this Moses we know not what is become of him. And I said
unto them* whosoever has any Gold, let them break it off: so they gave it me:
then I cast it into the Fire, and there came out this Calf. What a pitiful
excuse was here? he did bur throw it into the fire and there came out a Calf;
See what shifts Good men will have sometimes (for Aaron wa a good man) to put
off the power and force of Conviction.

You shall see another Instance in Saul, 1 Samuel 15.9. There God had sent Saul
to cut off all the Amalekites, Men, Women, and Children, and Cattle and all,
Spare none, says God: Well, God give him victory over the Amalekites and he
made a great slaughter indeed, but Saul spared Agag the King, and some of the
best of the Cattle, at the 13th Verse, And Samuel came to Saul, and Saul said
unto him, Blessed be thou of the Lord I have performed the Commandment of the
Lord: The Lord knows, says he, I have done the will and Commandment of the
Lord, he would not be convinced at first; well, says Samuel, to convince him,
Verse 14. What means then the bleating of the Sheep in my ears, and the
lowing of the Oxen, which I hear? Well, Saul could not deny but there was some
of the Oxen spared, and the best of the Cattle spared, but he had his excuse
for that, verse 15. The People (said he) spared the best of the Sheep, and of
the Oxen, to sacrifice unto the Lord: Thus he would not be convinced: At last
Samuel was fain to fall upon him with down right blows, and thunder against him
to strike him down. I tell you, says he v. 22, 23. here is rebellion against
God, and rebellion is as the Sin of witchcraft, and stubborness is as iniquity
and idolatry: And at the last he was brought down, and fell under the
Conviction, v. 24. And Saul said to Samuel, I have sinned, and transgressed the
Commandment of the Lord, and thy Words; because I feared the people: But you
see what a deal of Do there was to bring Saul under the power of the
Conviction; he stood upon his Justification. Just thus it is with a poor
Sinner, as long as he can stand out against Conviction, he will put it off; as
it is with a Malefactor at the Bar, as long as he can, he will not be
convinced; he will plead, Not guilty; and justify himself, either by denying or
mincing of it, or one thing or other, till the Evidence come clear against him;
then his mouth is stopped; then he is convinced: Thus it is with a poor Sinner,
the Lord brings his sin before him, if he can he will deny it, and excuse
himself: But now when the Holy Ghost comes to convince of sin, he stops the
mouth, that he shall have nothing to plead to excuse himself: As, I remember,
it is the Apostles expression, Romans 3.19. That every mouth may be stopped, and
all the World may become guilty before God; so convinced, that the Sinner may
have nothing to say, to justify him before God. This is another thing in
Conviction; when Sin is not only set before the Soul, but so set home, that the
Soul has nothing to say to clear it self.

3. Thirdly, There is a third Thing in a true Conviction of sin; namely, When
the Soul is really convinced by the Spirit of sin, it has not only sin set
before it, and so set before it, as the mouth is stopped, and silenced, that it
cannot plead Not guilty: But, where there is a true Conviction of Sin, the
heart is affected with it, and afflicted for it. And this is intimated by those
expressions you heard before, whereby the Holy Ghost does set out Conviction of
Sin, as it is set out by the shooting of an Arrow. Now, if an Arrow stick in
the flesh, it will put it to pain, it will make the flesh ache; if there be a
Prick at the heart, you will certainly be sensible of it, if a Bone be broken,
there will be grief, and trouble, and affliction: Truly, thus it is in this
work of Conviction of Sin, when the Spirit does convince a Soul of Sin, it does
not only set sin before him, and also set sin so home, as the Soul cannot
justify it self, but now the Soul falls down under it, and is affected and
afflicted with it; and therefore hence it is, that sometimes when a Soul is
convinced of Sin, it is affected with trembling and astonishment. He even
trembles to think he should be guilty of such a sin; as I remember, it is said
concerning the Jailer, Acts 16.26. He came in trembling before Paul and Silas;
it is said, he sprang in, and came trembling; there was an Earthquake, and
that Earthquake was an Heart-quake to him, it made his heart shake, and he saw
himself in a damned condition, and now, says he, Sirs, What shall I do to be
saved? he came in trembling before Paul and Silas, saying, What shall I do? And
sometimes it is expressed by shame and blushing; the Soul is even ashamed and
confounded, when sin is set home, as you know it was the speech of Ephraim,
Jer. 31.18, 19. He was ashamed and confounded for his rebellion, he was so like
a Heifer, unaccustomed to the Yoke: he could not bear the Lords Yoke, and when
the Lord came to tame him, then he was ashamed, as Ezra said, I am ashamed and
blush before thee, Ezra, 9.6. And sometimes with grief, and sorrow, and
mourning; as when Paul had convinced the Corinthians of their sin in suffering
the incestuous person amongst them, without bearing testimony against him, 2
Cor. 7.11. What Carefulness, says he, it wrought in you? What Sorrow? what
godly Sorrow ye had amongst you? Ay, they were convinced, and then they mourned
and sorrowed. And so, sometimes the heart is as it were all a-mort, when the
Soul is convinced of Sin, the heart is even dead, and knows not what to do:
says Paul, When the Commandment came, Sin revived, and I died, Rom 7. I saw my
self a dead man, his heart was even dead. Well, thus you see what Conviction of
Sin is, and wherein it lies, it consists in these three, or these three things
do concur to a real Conviction of Sin, namely, A setting of sin before the
Soul, and so setting it home that the Soul cannot deny it, but must fall down
under it, and be affected and afflicted with it. Now, least any poor Soul may
have a stumbling Block laid before it, let me only intimate this: That there
are degrees of convincing of sin, all are not in a like measure convinced of
Sin, some are convinced more, and others less; as now, some that have had civil
Education, that have not lived in notorious and gross sins, and wickedness;
their Convictions possibly may be more silent, and not make so great a noise as
the Convictions of others do; as Lydia, she lived without breaking into
notorious and gross wickednesses, and you see there was no great noise of her
Conviction of Sin, though convinced of Sin she was; and there is a necessity of
that, as you will hear by and by, now others that have lived in scandalous
sins, notorious gross sins, in lewdness and wickedness, in opposing and
pers^cuting the Saints, and the people of God, and the like, their Convictions
ordinarily are more great, as in the case of Paul, Paul that was a Persecutor,
his Convictions were such, that it made the Country to ring: it was heard off
far and near; as Paul says himself to King Agrippa, These things were not done
in a corner: When God came to convert Paul, he first convinced him of his sin,
Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? says he, Who art thou Lord? he answered,
I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest; it was set home with power upon him.

Question.
But you will say, How shall a Soul know whether it have been sufficiently
convinced of Sin, and humbled for it as it ought to be? Because now here is the
stumbling stone that some weak and tender hearts are ready to lay before their
own faces; I have not been so convinced, and so humbled as others have been,
and therefore I question whether I have been truly convinced or humbled for Sin
or no, how shall I know whether I have been truly convinced of sin?

Answer.
The Truth is, It is not possible to determine a particular degree of
convincing of Sin for every particular person, and therefore I shall give you
this as a Rule to know when your convincing of Sin is sufficient; namely, then
convincing of sin is sufficient when as a Soul is so convinced of sin, as that
now it is wholly taken off from all hopes of being saved by any thing in its
self, and it is made now to look toward Christ, and the Righteousness of
Christ; though possibly in a weak manner, yet notwithstanding, it is taken off
from looking to any thing in it self, or hoping in any thing it self, to help
forward its own salvation: it is cut off from that by being convinced of Sin;
now I cannot help my self, I cannot save my self, by all that ever I can do,
What shall I do? as they in the Acts, Chap. 2. Sirs, What shall we do to be
saved? They were at their wits end, they saw nothing that they could do, could
save their Souls. And so the Jailer, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? This now
is the first thing, you see what we are to understand by this Conviction of
sin. When he is come he shall convince the World of sin.

2. But to come to the second thing, namely, to show you, That convincing of
Sin, is a thing that is necessary in order to Conversion and Salvation. That it
is necessary, does plainly appear thus, namely, Why else is it made to be the
work of the Spirit, if convincing of sin be not necessary, would the Spirit
convince of sin? Can we think, or say, that the Spirit would work or do any
thing that is not necessary.

Again, If so be that generally all that are converted and saved, have found a
work of conviction upon their hearts, then certainly it is necessary in order
to conversion and Salvation.

And again, (not to multiply things of this nature) If this work of convincing
of sin be not necessary, To what end else serves the Law? Says the Apostle,
Romans 7.7. What shall we say then? Is the Law sin? God forbid: Nay, I had not
known sin, but by the Law; I had not known Lust, except the Law had said, Thou
shall not covet. And at the 9th Verse, I was alive without the Law once, but
when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I died: Wherefore the Law is holy,
and the Commandment holy, just and good. The Law (says he) is good, the Law is
just and holy, it is not in vain; But, Wherefore serves the Law? It is to
convince of sin: Then conviction of sin is necessary: and so the Apostle to the
Galatians, Gal. 3.19. Wherefore then serves the Law? There Is the Question; It
was added because of Transgressions, till the Seed should come. And then at the
24th Verse, Wherefore the Law was a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ; to
prepare us as it were to come to Christ. Now therefore, if the Law be necessary
to discover sin, then the discovery and convincing of sin is necessary. But not
to stand upon this.

Question.
The great Question is, Upon what account, or in what regard is Convincing of
sin necessary in order to Salvation? This is a great Question, Upon what
account is the conviction of sin necessary, in order to the conversion and
salvation of a sinner?

Answer.
I Answer briefly, Upon manifold accounts and regards. I shall name some,

1. Convincing of sin is necessary in order to salvation, Because except a soul
be convinced of sin, it will hardly ever come to Christ. And, that is
necessary, for a Soul to come to Christ, that is necessary for salvation. Now a
Soul that is not convinced of sin, will hardly ever come to Christ, he will
make any shift in the world before he will come to Christ, Luke 8.43.44. It is
said of the Woman that had the Issue of Blood, At last she came to Christ; but
mark, she made all the shift she could, before she would come; she had it
twelve years, and she spent every penny she had, she spent all her Living on
Physicians, to cure her distemper, and when all was gone, and there was no
other way to help her, then she came to Christ: So, till a Soul be convinced of
sin, it will never come to Christ; this is the course of sinners, until they be
convinced of the necessity they will not come, John 5.40. Says Christ, Ye will
not come to me, that ye might have Life. No, the soul will look to find the
Life in its own hands, by its own works and endeavors, by its Prayers and
Duties --: He will not come to Christ that he might have Life; And therefore
when Christ does tender grace and mercy to sinners, Alas! they slight it and
despise it, because they have not been convinced. You shall see there, John
8.32, and so on, Christ is directing of the Jews how they might be freed from
sin, how they might have their freedom, Says Christ, If the Son therefore make
you free, you shall be free indeed. Now mark, What do they account of Christ's
freedom, or directions to come to him, to be made free? Verse 33. Say they, We
are Abraham's Seed, and were never in Bondage to any man, we are free enough;
they were never convinced of the bondage of sin, therefore now the offer of
Christ to free them, is of no account with them. The soul that is not convinced
of sin, cares not for Christ's tenders and offers of Grace, John 9.39, 40.
Christ is there directing the Jews to come to him to have their blind eyes
opened, they were spiritually blind, and says Christ, For Judgment am I come
into the World, that they which see not might see, and they which see might be
made blind. Well, those Jews they were not convinced of their spiritual
blindness, and therefore they make a tush at it, What? Do thou come to cure
our blindness? to make us see? Are we blind also (say they), they scorned his
words; because they were not convinced of sin, they cared not for coming to
Christ for any grace or any mercy, and therefore when Christ would have a Soul
to come to him for any grace or mercy, he takes this course with them, namely,
first to convince them of their sinful estate, Rev. 3.17, 18, 19, 20. Christ
does counsel them there to come to him for Eye Salve, that they might See, and
for Gold, that they might be rich, and for white Raiment, that they might be
clothed; but now before Christ does make this tender to them, he does first
take a course to convince them of their sin; Thou say, (says he to the
Church of Laodiced) that thou art rich, and want nothing; but I tell thee,
says Christ, that thou art poor, and miserable, and wretched, and blind, and
naked; and therefore now I counsel thee, to come and buy Eye Salve of me, and
Gold, and white Raiment. So that this is the way that Christ takes when he
would have a soul to come to him, he convinces him first of sin. Therefore this
is one ground or respect why conviction of sin is so necessary in order to
salvation, because else a Soul will never be willing to come to Christ.

2. Because, Unless a Soul be convinced of sin, Christ is not willing to come
to that Soul, to save that Soul. I say, Christ is not willing to save a soul
that is not convinced of Sin, and therefore says Christ (mark I pray) The
Whole need not the Physician, but those that are sick. Mat. 9.12. I came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: Christ came not to call them
that are no sinners to repentance, And who are these? Are not all sinners? Is
not every one a sinner? There is not a Just man upon the Earth, that lives and
sins not; But who are these that are Righteous here? I came not to call the
Righteous, but Sinners. Who are Sinners? By sinners here, he means those that
are convinced of their sinful estate; and those Righteous, that are not
convinced; they look upon themselves as Righteous, though they are as sinful as
any others; yet notwithstanding they not being convinced, they look upon
themselves as just and righteous; Now, says Christ, I come not to call the
Righteous, but I come to call Sinners to repentance: Sinners, those that are
convinced of sin, that are sinners indeed, and know themselves to be sinners; I
come to call them to repentance, to life and salvation; and mark, says Christ
again, Luke 19.10. I am come to seek and to save that which is lost; I am come
to them that are lost, I come not to seek and to save them that are not lost;
lost, you will say, Is not every sinner lost? says the Apostle, If our Gospel
be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. Is not every sinner a lost Creature? a
dead Creature? What, does Christ come to seek and to save every sinner in the
World? No, says he, I am come to seek and to save them that are lost, who are
they that are lost? it is true, all sinners are lost in respect of their state
and Condition, but every Sinner is not lost in respect of their sense of their
lost condition. I pray when do you look upon a Man or Woman to be lost? When
may one be said to be lost? I pray, mark, you may observe these three things in
it.

1. When he is gone out of his way, when he has missed his way whither he
intends to go, then he is lost, but not only so, But

2. When he has not only missed his way, and he is out of his way, but also
when he does not know the way, how to return into the right way, he does not
know the way back again; you will say, now the man is lost. But

3. Further, when a man comes to be sensible of this, that he is gone out of
his way, and he does not know which way to return home again, and he is ready
to sit down because he does not know which way to take, only says he, if I go
this way or that way, I may go further out of my way, therefore he is fain to
sit down, and knows not what to do, nor which way to take, such a man is lost;
but if a man be out of the way, and know the way back again, he is not lost; he
may find the way, or if so be he be not sensible he is out of his way, he is
not lost; but when these things concur together, then he is lost. Thus it is wi
h a sinner, when he comes to be convinced that he is out of the way of
Salvation, and he knows not how to come into the way, and he knows he is like
to perish in this state he is now in, now the sinner is lost; Now says Christ,
This is the poor Creature that I am come to seek and to save; when a poor
sinner is convinced of his sinful Estate and is so lost, now Christ comes to
seek and to save him. Now if a man or woman be not lost, Christ will not come
to seek and to save them That are lost, that is, those that are convinced of
their being in a lost Estate. And that is the second Reason or Ground why
convincing of sin is necessary in order to Salvation, Christ else will hardly
come to seek and to save such.

3. Convincing of Sin is necessary in order to Salvation, Because unless a Soul
be convinced of sin, if Christ should come to save it, it will not be willing
to accept of Christ, and receive Christ and Salvation by Christ, he will not be
willing withal; no, Christ came to his own, and his own received him not; He
came to the Jews that were (as it were) his own Country Men, but they would not
receive him: Why? they were not convinced; One that is not sick, will not care
for receiving the Physician, or for having the Physician to come at him, he
has no need of him: The Whole need not the Physician (says Christ) but they
that are sick. Truly, until a Soul be convinced of Sin, it is whole and sound
in its own Apprehension, and that Soul does not need the Physician: Let Christ
come and offer himself, and tender Life and Salvation, he does not accept of
it, he has no need of it; and hence it is that Christ tenders and offers
himself in the Gospel, and offers Salvation therein to poor sinners; and
People, because they are not convinced of their need of Christ, receive him
not: Christ comes near to them, and offers himself, and Life, and Salvation to
them, through himself, and by believing on himself; Ay, but they will not
accept him, nor receive him, they will not close with him; they will not own
him though Christ come so near to them: It Is true, Christ does not come so
immediately to save those that are not convinced, but he will first convince
them, and then save them. That is the third Argument upon which account
Conviction of Sin is necessary in order to Conversion and Salvation.

4. If a Soul be not convinced of sin, that Soul will be hardly taken off from
its sins; it will not part with its sins, and if it do not part with sin, it
cannot be saved; no man can be saved with his sins. I say, a Soul that is not
convinced of sin, will not really part with his sins; it is true, a Soul may
possibly be restrained sometimes, that it dares not venture upon those sins
that it did before, as possibly through some dread, or terror, anguish, or
fear: possibly the Soul has been amazed, through some eminent danger which he
has been in; possibly he has been sick to death, nigh to the grave, and has
seen the door of Eternity to stand open to receive him, he has been amazed,
and now, if the Lord please he may have his life, he will turn a new man, and
forsake those evil ways and courses he formerly lived in; or if he be in some
sudden danger, or accident, that he is amazed and affrighted: O now, he will
never do as he has done, but now, when the danger is over, and the fear is
vanished, he is the same man he was before. I could give you a sad story of
this, but that I would not take up time that way now, you know how it was with
Balaam, when Balak sent to him to curse Israel; Balaam met with a message from
God to the contrary, Do not go with him, says he, for it will cost you your
life, when the Messenger came; says Balaam, If Balak would give me his house
full of gold and silver, I cannot go beyond the Commandment of my God; yet
Balaam had an eye to the wages of unrighteousness, and he would try to go, and
at last ventures to go, he might be restrained a while, but he was not really
convinced of Sin, and on he would go, he would venture at last. Just as it is
with two Lovers, two young people fall in love, and their Parents are against
their proceedings, and their Parents threaten them, and charge them to come no
more at one another; but so long as their affections hold, they will find some
way or other to come together, and though they may for a time be restrained,
yet they will take some occasion or other to come together again. Thus it is
with a sinner, so long as his affections are not taken off from sin, and till a
Soul be convinced of sin, his affections remain to it, and though it may be
affrighted, and restrained for a time, yet it will return again: Just as it is
with a Bowl, it will run on so long as the force of the hand remains, but it
will return again to its natural Bias; so it is with a sinner, possibly he may
be under some restraint through some fright and amazement, by some eminent
danger it is in: but when that fear or fright is over, as long as the
affections hold, and were never disingaged and broken off from sin, the sinner
will return and be as eager and as violent upon his sins as before; but when a
Soul comes to be really convinced of his sin, and has it set home upon him, as
suppose it be the profanation of the Sabbath, or suppose it be disobedience to
Parents, or suppose this or that sin, if a Soul come to be really convinced of
it, its affections toward it are broken off, and then it will be ready to say
with Ephraim, Hos. 4. ult. What have I to do any more with Idols, he had been
convinced of it, and now, What have I to do any more with Idols? This is the
fourth Argument, whereby it does appear, that this work of Convincing of sin is
necessary in order to Conversion, and Salvation.

5. Convincing of Sin is necessary in order to Salvation, Because unless a Soul
be really convinced of sin that Soul can never love Jesus Christ, never prize
Jesus Christ: Unto them that believe, says the Apostle, he is precious, 1 Pet.
2.7. That is to you who have been convinced of Sin, and brought off from Sin by
the power of the Spirit, convinced of Sin, and drawn to Christ, by faith and be
ieving through the Spirit; now to you Jesus Christ is precious. O, when a Soul
comes to be sensible what a lost creature it is, how undone it is in it self,
it will think how much it is engaged, and beholden to Christ! O, this is he
that I am bound to love for ever; this is he that has done so much for me; if
it had not been for Christ, I had perished for ever! The Soul when it has been
convinced of Sin, and brought off from the love of Sin, and brought to lean
upon Christ by Faith, now Jesus Christ is lovely and precious to him; and hence
you may see, what is the reason that many Professors that have made a great
show in the world, and a great noise in the Churches, and yet they have little
love to Christ, and Jesus Christ is not very precious to them. And possibly
many complain of it, O that I could love Jesus Christ more (and it is a good
complaint I confess)! O that he were more precious to me! and what is the
reason that Jesus Christ is more precious to our Souls? and that the Soul can
love the Lord Jesus Christ no more? O! here is one great reason, possibly the
Soul was never really and truly convinced of Sin, the more really the Soul has
been convinced of Sin, the more dear and precious will Jesus Christ be to that
Soul.

6. And lastly. The last Ground and Respect, for which it is so necess^ry, that
a Soul should be convinc^d of sin in order to Salvation; Because, else if a
Soul be n t really convinced of sin, that Soul notwithstanding all his
Profession, will be very unstable in its Faith and Comforts: It will be
tottering and wavering, that Soul will never be rooted and grounded, but its
Comforts will be up and down: it will be like a house that is built upon a
sandy foundation, a light foundation, that has no depth, and you see the
danger of that house that is built upon the Sands, that has a shallow slight
foundation, it is in danger to tumble, especially when storms come, and great
Winds blow, as Christ speaks, Mat. 7. to our present purpose, says he, He that
hears my Words and does them not, I will liken him to a Builder that built
his house upon the Sands: And, says he, When the Wind blew, and the Rain beat
upon the house, it fell, because it wanted a good Foundation. Truly, so a Soul
that has no sure Foundation, that is, that was never really convinced of sin,
of his need of Christ, that Soul will be like a house without a Foundation, it
will meet with temptations, storms and tempests to try what ground it stands
on; and hence it is, that it comes to be so often tottering and shaking. I
remember a speech of a holy eminent Servant of Christ, to set out the necessity
of Conviction of sin, says he, The less Fine a man pays for his house, when he
enters, the more Rent he must pay afterward. He meant thus, the less Conviction
a man has of sin at first, that is the Fine, the less his Fine is, the more
Rent he must pay afterward, his meaning was this; the more he will be subject
to Troubles, and Doubts, and Scruples afterward. A Soul that has not a real
conviction of sin upon him, that Soul will be unstable, its Comforts will be
unstable, and though he may hold up his head, so long as all is calm, and clear
above him, but when the assaults of the Devil come, and the powers of Hell are
let loose upon it, to try its Foundation; if the foundation be not deep rooted,
all the building will come to nothing; it is like a Plant or Tree that is
planted but shallow in the Ground, and will be apt to wither, so Christ
compares it, Mat. 13.21. The Seed that fell upon the stony ground, sprang up
for a while, but when the Sun did rise, when temptations came, scorching
temptations, and tribulations, and trials came, they withered away, because
they wanted depth of earth for the root; they had no rooting, they were not
humbled and convinced of sin, they took up a Profession, and confessed Christ,
and professed Christ, but never were truly convinced of sin; and this is the
great reason why Professors are subject to so many doubts and scruples about
their condition, when they come into sickness and dangers, then they are ready
to question their condition; What is the reason? why possibly this may be one,
Because they were never convinced truly of sin by the Spirit of God. And
therefore you see now, upon all these accounts, That Conviction of sin is very
necessary for sinners, in order to their Conversion and Salvation.

So now, I have finished the second Thing propounded, I should now have come to
the third Thing, to show you, That convincing of sin, is the Work of the Spirit
of God. But that and some other things, I must leave till another opportunity.

The Holy Ghost convinces of Sin.
SERMON V.
JOHN 16.9. Of Sin, because they believe not on me.


YOU have heard the coherence of these words before, and therefore I shall not
trouble you with that; and the Point you may remember what it was, that was
last propounded from these words, Namely, That it is the very first work of the
Spirit of God, in order to Salvation, to convince the Soul of Sin.

For so Christ here is comforting of his Disciples against their sorrow upon
his departure from them; and he tells them, That he would send the Comforter to
them, and he tells them what the Comforter should do, he should assist them in
their Ministry, toward the conversion and salvation of Souls; and the first
thing he shall do, he shall convince the World of Sin, and then of
Righteousness, and then of Judgment; but this is his first work, to convince
the world of Sin.

There were four things propounded to be spoken to for the clearing of this
Point.

1. To show you what we are to understand by this Conviction of Sin, which is
the first work of the Spirit, and wherein it lay, and that you heard in three
things.

2. You heard the necessity of it; why this work of convincing of Sin is so
necessary in order to conversion and Salvation. You heard the necessity of it
in five or six things, upon which account it was necessary in order to
salvation, to be convinced of Sin. Well, there are two things yet remain to be
spoken to for the opening of this Point.

3. The third thing is to show, that this work of convincing of Sin, is the
proper work of the Spirit. Nothing short of the Spirit of God, can really and
truly convince the soul of Sin, in order to salvation. And then,

4. That it is not only the work of the Spirit, but the first work of the
Spirit, in order to Salvation.

These two things, I shall now proceed to, through the Lords assistance.

3. Well then, we are to fall upon the third to make it evident to you, that
the work of convincing of Sin, is the proper work of the Spirit of God. And how
does that appear? Briefly I shall give you two or three Demonstrations of it.

1. It appears from the opposition that is in every carnal heart to be
convinced of Sin. There is a desperate opposition in our hearts naturally, we
are utterly averse and unwilling to be convinced of Sin: We are loath to come to
the Light as Christ tells us, John 3.20. Every one that does evil hates the
Light, neither comes to the Light least his deeds should be reproved, lest he
should be convinced; It is the same word with this in the Text: He is loath to
be convinced of sin, it is the natural frame of our hearts to be averse and
opposite to conviction of sin; therefore there must come a stronger power, the
power of the Spirit, to this work of convincing of sin, else we shall never be
convinced; for, I pray mark, what this convincing of sin is; For a soul to
yield to the convictions of sin, is to yield to its own sentence of
condemnation; and do you think that any one is ready to yield to the sentence
of its own condemnation? Now if a soul yield to the conviction of sin, he
yields to the sentence of condemnation, For the soul that sins, shall dye:
And if a soul yield that he is guilty of this or that sin, now he yields to the
sentence of Death and Damnation; And do you think the soul will yield to the
sentence of Condemnation passed against it self? You see sometimes a Malefactor
at the Bar, Is he willing, think you, to be convinced of his crime which he is
accused of? No, he will stand out against it and deny it as long as he can, and
if he cannot deny it, he will mince it, and will not yield to the conviction so
long as he can possibly hold out against it, and this is the guise of our
hearts naturally, not to yield to conviction, but we will hold out against it
as long as ever we can, let any man come to us to convince us, and reprove us,
we will hold against it, and shift it off, and mince it, and avoid it all that
ever we can; this is natural to us, as it was with our first Parents, when God
called them to an account for their first sin, they shifted it off; Adam to his
Wife, his Wife to the Serpent, and would not willingly be convinced; Just, as
(I told you, before) it was with Saul, 1 Samuel 15. When Saul had disobeyed the
Commandment of the Lord in going against Amalek, God gave him a severe charge
to cut off all, Men, Women, Children and Cattle; Well, he cuts off the
generality of the People, but he spared Agag, and he spared the best of the
Cattle; Well, Samuel comes to him afterward, and Saul he comes boasting, says
he, Come thou blessed of the Lord, I have fulfilled the Commandment of the
Lord: have thou fulfilled the Commandment of the Lord, says Samuel? What
means then the bleating of the Sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the
Oxen? well, he would not be convinced, says he, It Is true, some of them are
saved alive for sacrifice for the Lord; he would not yield to the Conviction,
until such time as Samuel was fain to fall downright upon him, and then he fell
down under the Conviction, and confessed and acknowledged his Sin; Thus it is,
we are naturally averse to yield to the convictions of Sin. I pray, mind what I
say, take a notorious Sinner, one that is commonly known to be guilty of gross
sins, suppose drunkenness, or uncleanness. Come to this man and tell him, The
Word of the Lord says expressly, That no unrighteous person, that no unclean
person, no drunkard shall enter into the Kingdom of God. Can he deny the
Scripture? No, he cannot deny it; well, but then come and tell him, you are
guilty of drunkenness, you are guilty of uncleanness; and therefore the
conclusion is this, it will naturally follow from these two premises, That you
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Will he yield to the Conviction? No,
unless the Spirit of God come and make him yield to it, he will never yield.
Therefore I say, from that natural opposition that is in all our hearts against
this work of Conviction, it is therefore required that the power of the Spirit
be put forth upon the Soul, so Christ promises here; I will send the
Comforter, and he shall convince the World of Sin.

2. There is not only a natural averseness and opposition against it, in our
carnal hearts, but Satan also, the Devil, he will help the Soul to hold out
against the Conviction of sin as long as he can, he will keep the Soul from
yielding to it, for the Devil knows this, that when once a Soul is convinced of
sin by the Spirit of God, he is in danger to lose that Soul, he is in danger
that that Soul will make an escape; therefore he lays about him, and does all
that ever he can, to keep the Soul from yielding to be convinced of sin; just
like a Jailer, if he has a prisoner, whom he perceives has a mind to make an
escape, he will lay the more Irons upon him, and have the greater watch and
guard about him; so in this case, if the Devil see a Soul in danger to make an
escape he will clap on all the power he can, to keep the Soul from being
convinced of Sin; or like a Governor of a Town, if the Town be besieged, and he
perceive where the Enemy is like to make an Inroad, a Breach, to be sure he
will fortify that place; thus the Devil does when he discerns a Soul is in
danger to make an escape, to be delivered from his power, then his design is to
fortify and strengthen all that ever he can the Soul, against yielding to any
work of Conviction, and therefore we read, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. of strong holds,
fortifications, strong reasonings; says the Apostle, The Weapons of our
Warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong
holds. There are strong holds, and fortifications, that the Devil does make
round about the Soul, that the Soul should not be able to make an escape,
except there come a stronger than he; for the Devil is compared to a strong man
armed, and except a stronger than he come, he will keep possession; Now then
there must come a stronger than the Devil, and this is nothing less than the
Spirit of God. The power of the Spirit comes, and makes conviction to take
place on the heart, for the Devil will fortify and strengthen all that ever he
can, with reasons; as for your sins, when the Soul comes to be troubled at sin,
Why? you are none of the greatest sinners, there are hundreds, and thousands,
greater sinners than you are, and God is merciful, and gracious to sinners, and
God will pardon sinners that do repent, and, at what time soever a sinner does
repent -- And such kind of things as these are, whereby he strengthens the Soul
against yielding to Convictions of sin; and now the power and policy of the
Devil is beyond any ordinary created power, therefore there must be a stronger
power than is in the World that must be able really and truly to convince the
Soul, of Sin, and that can be no less than the power of the Spirit of God, and
this is the second Demonstration of it, why it must be the Work of the Spirit
to convince the Soul of sin*

Objection.
But you will say to me, But cannot the evil Spirit? may not the Devil
sometimes trouble a Soul about Sin, and set sin home upon the Conscience? and
if so, then it is not in the power of the holy Spirit only, but the evil Spirit
also may convince the Soul of Sin.

Answer.
Truly Brethren, that the evil Spirit, that the Devil may trouble a Soul about
Sin, and for Sin, I think it is out of question, by the example of Judas, that
had his Sin so set home upon him, that he could not live under it; nay,
Brethren, the evil Spirit may set home sin upon the hearts of Gods people, and
endeavor to overwhelm them: I remember what Job speaks, Cap. 6.4. The Arrows
of the Almighty are within me, and the poison thereof drinks up my Spirit,
the Terrors of God set themselves in array against me. -- So Job 13.26. Thou
writest bitter things against me, the terrors of the Almighty are upon me.
Brethren, Do you think now, that this was from the Spirit of God? the Spirit of
God, when once it comes to be a Spirit of Adoption, it never comes to be the
Spirit of Bondage again. So the Apostle says expressly, Romans 8.15. You have not
received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear, but the Spirit of Adoption. --
Now it is true, Job does ascribe it to God, yet it may be from Satan, because
Job did ascribe all that ever he met withal, to God. Satan was an Instrument
to raise a storm, to blow down the house where his Children were, yet says
Job: The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away; he takes notice of the
hand of God in it, so in this case; The Terrors of the Almighty set themselves
in Array against me: This may be from the evil Spirit which did become a Spirit
of Bondage to him.

Question.
But you will say then, How shall we know when Sin is set home upon the Soul,
whether it be from the evil Spirit, or from the holy Spirit of God? This is a
Question of very great concernment, I shall therefore desire (through the Lords
assistance) to speak something that way, and to offer some things to your
consideration about it, How you shall know when Sin is set home upon the heart,
Whether it be from the evil Spirit, or from the holy Spirit of God; for indeed
if it be from the Spirit of God, it is in order to Conversion and Salvation,
but if by the evil Spirit, it is in order to damnation.

Answer.
There are several things that I shall offer to your consideration about this.

1. The evil Spirit, when he comes and brings sin, and sets it before the soul,
commonly, he does it in a tumultuous way, he does it in a confused manner, to
put the soul into a hurry, that possibly the soul shall be mightily troubled
about sin, and cry out, O, I am a damned Creature, and I shall be damned in
Hell for my sins, and the wrath of God will abide upon me for ever for my sins,
and yet possibly, the soul does not know what particular sin it is; if you come
to particulars, and ask how you are guilty of this or that particular sin? O
yes, they are sinners, and they are guilty before God, but come to any
particular sin the soul will not fix there, but go from one to another, and
still the Devil keeps the Soul in a hurry and confusion, that one that hears
him speak sometimes, cannot tell what to make of his condition. O I shall be
damned for ever for my sins, and the wrath of God will abide upon me for ever,
and yet not convinced by the Spirit of God. The Devil does what he can to
overwhelm the Soul, as it was the case of Saul, 1 Samuel 28.5. Saul's heart did
tremble, he was put into an amazing frame, he was afraid, and his heart greatly
trembled, and afterward, at the 15th Verse, says he, I am sorely distressed,
the Philistims make war against me, and God is departed from me. I am sorely
distressed. Why? what was the matter? he could not tell very well what the
matter was, but the Devil had troubled his spirit, had afflicted him, he was
put into a sore affright, an amaze, and trembling, and he knew not what the
matter was, but God had cast him off, and forsaken him, and now he must lie
under the wrath of God for ever. Now the Devil to help him forward in his
despair, at the 18th and 19th Verses, he claps one sin upon him, Because thou
obeyedst not the voice of the Lord, nor executedst his fierce wrath upon
Amalek, therefore has the Lord done this thing unto thee. And says the Devil
to him, The Lord shall deliver you into the hands of the Philistims, and to
morrow shall thou and thy Sons be with me. And thus the Devil claps upon him to
confound him, and it is said Verse 2. Then Saul fell straightway all along upon
the earth and was sore afraid; his heart died in him like a stone, thus the
trouble upon his Spirit, being from Satan, it was in a kind of hurry and
Confusion, that one could not tell what to make of his condition, but now on
the other side, when the Spirit of God comes to convince a Soul of sin, it sets
sin in order before the Soul, first one thing and then another, Psalm. 50.11. I
will reprove thee and set thy sins in order before thy face; in an orderly way,
not in a hurry to confound and distract a soul, but I will set them in order
before thee, and so you may observe those that have been convinced of their
sins, their sins have been set in an orderly way before them, in the 2 Samuel
12.9, 10. When Nathan came to convince David of his sins, he set his sins in
order before him, first one sin, and then another sin, and so you may observe
in the Gospel that those that have been convinced of sin, the Spirit has been
an orderly Spirit, and has set sin in order before them. So that, that is one
thing, whereby you may know the difference between the trouble for sin that
comes from the evil spirit, and the convincing of sin that comes from the holy
Spirit of God.

2. Take another thing whereby you may see the difference, and that is in the
End or Design that Satan aims at in his troubling a Soul about Sin; What is the
Design? The great design of the Devil is to bring the Soul into despair, into a
desperate case, and so at last to make away it self, to dispatch it self, that
is the great end that Satan drives at in his troubling a soul about sin, and
with sin, to drive the soul into despair, to overwhelm the Soul, and cause the
Soul, if it be possible, to make an end of it self; that is the design of
Satan, he will so set Sin before the Soul, that it is so great that there is no
hope it should be pardoned; when he tempts a Soul to sin, he makes but a litte
matter of it, it is but a small matt^r, and it is but once, but when the soul
has once committed it, then his great design is to overwhelm the Soul, and to
set the sin before the soul, in such a manner, that it looks like the
unpardonable Sin. Well, Your sin is now unpardonable, and there is no hope for
you; and many times he makes souls believe that they have sinned against the
Holy Ghost, and now there is no hope for them: Just as it was with Cain. Genesis
4.11. Oh, says he, My sin is greater than can be forgiven. This now is the
design of Satan, to cause a Soul, if possible, to make a way it self; you see
how the Devil carried it toward Judas: Judas had committed a very great sin in
betraying the Son of God; Well, when he had sinned, the Devils design was now
so to set home his sin upon him that he could find no rest day nor night, till
such time as he had gone and hanged himself. It is the great end that Satan
aims at in his troubling a Soul about sin; his great design is to bring the
soul into despair, and so to make away it self.

Whereas now on the other hand, the great end of the Spirit of God is to make a
soul sensible of sin, so as to be humbled for it, so as to repent of it; It Is
true indeed, sometimes when sin is set home by the Spirit of God upon a Soul,
the Soul may be brought very low, may be much overwhelmed, and may possibly be
brought into a despairing, desponding condition, and may be ready sometimes to
make a way it self, to destroy it self, by the Devils setting in with it; yet
ordinarily the Spirit of God comes and prevents such things, where the
conviction begins from the Spirit, the holy Spirit does prevent such things,
the Soul is made to look up to God, as Jonah did, Chap. 2.4. I said, I was cast
out of thy sight, the Lord has rejected me: Yet, says he, will I look toward
thy holy Temple. The Spirit of God had convinced him of his sin, and though he
did seem to be cast out of God's sight out of his favor, and was thrown into
the belly of the Whale, yet the Spirit of the Lord would not suffer him to be
despondent and give over all as desperate; Yet will I look toward thy Holy
Temple. That is the second thing whereby we may discern the difference.

3. When the evil Spirit does set home a sin upon the Soul, it is to drive the
Soul further from God. When the Holy Ghost comes to convince a Soul of sin, it
is to draw the Soul nearer to God. You may observe it, that when ever the Devil
does set home a sin upon the Soul, it is to drive the Soul further off from
God. Take an Instance or two; as in the Example of our first Parents, Genesis 3.
The Devil had been busy with our first Parents, to bring them into sin, to
make them eat of the forbidden fruit; Well, when they had committed the sin,
though before he had told them it was for their profit and advantage, Their
Eyes should be opened, and they should be as gods, -- Yet when once they had
committed the sin, he sets it so home upon them, that they fled from the
presence of God, and hid themselves; they durst not appear before God, they
went and hid themselves amongst the Trees of the Garden, that God was fain to
call after them. And so you shall find in the example of Cain, Genesis 4. Cain,
when he had committed the sin of murder, and had killed his brother Abel, Verse
16. it is said there, That Cain went out from the presence of the Lord; he
departed from God, then he went away from God; But how could that be? Is not
God present every where? how could Cain go out from the presence of the Lord?
Why, he did not go from the essential presence of God, but from the presence of
God, that is, from the spiritual presence of God in his Ordinances, he did not
now draw near to God in his worship, but he went away from God, from the
Church, from the Ordinances, from the Means of Communion with God, for the
Ordinances of God: the Church of God, was in the house of his Father Adam, and
so they worshipped God in that family, but he went out from the presence of the
Lord when he had committed that sin; this is the design of Satan, when he can
overwhelm the soul with sin, his great end is, as to bring it to despair, so
also to drive it further from the presence of God. But now you may observe,
when the Spirit of God does convince a soul of sin, the Conviction does cause a
soul to draw near to God in holy duties, in holy Ordinances, and to draw near
to God for mercy and grace through Christ: so says the Psalmist, Psalm. 7.6.7
He was under a great trouble in his Conscience and Mind about sin, and he falls
a pleading with God; Will the Lord cast off for ever, says he, Will he be
gracious no more? and thus he falls on arguing and pleading, I will remember,
says he, the years of the right hand of the Most High, and so Psalm. 88. there
you have a sad Psalm, A soul that was mightily oppressed under the burden of
sin, and there he pleads Verse 10. says he, Lord, what good will my Life do
thee, if thou should cut off my days? shall the dead praise thee? And so he
goes on, pleading and arguing strongly with God, and so in the example of Jona,
Chap. 2.4, 7: I said I was cast out of thy Sight, yet will I look toward thy
holy Temple. When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the the Lord, and my
prayer came in unto thee toward thy holy Temple. He was so far from running
away from God, when his sin was set home upon him, that now he draws near to
God, and humbled himself, and sought the Lord, And my prayer came in unto thee
into thy holy Temple. That is a third differenee between the trouble that
arises for sin from the evil Spirit, and the trouble that arises in a soul,
that is convinced by the Spirit of God.

4. Commonly, When Sin is set home by the evil Spirit, and a Soul comes to be
troubled for sin by the means of the Devil, commonly you will find that that
Soul will be ready to rise up against the very Instruments that are the means
of his conviction: The Soul will rise up with indignation, against the very
Instruments that are the means to convince it of sin: I might give you many
Instances for this, Acts 5.33. at the 30th verse, Peter is endeavoring to
convince the Jews of their sin in murdering of Christ, The God of our Fathers
raised up Jesus, whom ye slew, and hanged on a Tree; and mark, verse 33. What
was the event of it? How did this work upon their hearts? Their hearts did rise
up with indignation against Peter, and the rest of the Disciples, that went
about to convince them of their sin. When they heard that they were cut to the
heart, and took counsel to slay them. They could not bear it, if it had been
from the Spirit of God they could not have took it so. They were cut to the
heart, and took counsel to slay them. So Acts 7.51, 52, 54. It is said there,
When Stephen went about to convince the Jews of that horrible sin of slaying
the Prophets; Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ear, ye do always
resist the Holy Ghost. Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted?
-- He set home their sin upon them, and how did they take it? verse 54. When
they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him
with their teeth. So far were they from falling down, and yielding to the
Conviction, that their Spirits do rise up with indignation against the
instrument that went about to convince them of their sin. You may remember the
story concerning Ahab; he had diverse Prophets that would not let him alone,
but would be telling him of his sin, and convincing him of his sin; The Prophet
Elijah, would be reproving him of his sin; and how did his heart rise up in
indignation against Elijah; and when he met with him, he gave him such a
gratulation as this, Have thou found me, O mine enemy? and, Art thou he that
troublest Israel? He could not endure to bear the Prophet Elijah, because he
troubled his Spirit by convincing him of sin; he called him, The troubler of
the Land; And, 1 Kings 22. You read of Micaiah, a Prophet of the Lord, and he
had been very bold and plain with Ahab, and told him of his sins; well, when
they there were in an exigency and strait, King Ahab, and King Jehoshaphat was
to go together to Battle to Ramoth Gilead, ver. 4. and 5. and Jehoshaphat would
have the Prophets called together, that they might advise and consult with
them, whether they should go to Ramoth-Gilead, or no; At the 6th verse, You
read there, that Ahab would call four hundred Prophets together, before he
would call Micaiah, but says Jehoshaphat, verse 7. Is there not here a Prophet
of the Lord besides; that we might enquire of him? Yes, says Ahab, there is
one Micaiah, but I hate him, why? says he, He never spoke concerning me* He
was always grating upon his Sins, to convince him of his sins, and now his
heart rises against him; this is the guise of the Soul, that is not convinced
by the Spirit of God, the heart will rise up against the Instrument and Means
that endeavor to convince them of sin. Whereas now on the other side, where the
holy Spirit of God comes to convince a Soul of sin, you will find the
contrary; the Soul will be ready to close with the very Instrument and Means
that does convince him of sin, it will embrace and love the instrument, you may
see it, Acts 2. When Peter and John and the Apostles dealt plainly with the
people, at the 22 verse, say they, Ye men of Israel hear these Words. v. 23.
Him, being delivered by the determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God, ye
have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. Say they, Ye have
killed the Son of God; There was plain dealing, and so afterward, and so
afterward, he tells them again, verse 36. Therefore let all the house of
Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus, whom ye have
crucified both Lord and Christ. Well, how did they bear this at their hands? v.
37. Now, when they heard this they were pri^ked at their hearts, and they said
unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, What shall we
do? Men and Brethren, not Enemies, no, but Brethren now; Ay, when the Spirit of
God convinces a soul of sin, by any Instruments, it will look at the
instruments rather as Brethren, than as haters of them; they will look upon
them in another manner, and give them other manner of Appellations and
Greetings, Men and Brethren. And truly Brethren, this is a good sign that the
Holy Ghost has been at work upon the heart, in a way of conviction, when as
the soul is ready to close with those that are the Means and Instruments of
convincing them of sin.

That is the fourth thing whereby we may come to discern the difference between
the trouble for sin, that comes from the evil Spirit, and that trouble that
comes from the holy Spirit, in a way of convincing of sin.

5. When Trouble for sin does come from the evil Spirit, ordinarily the heart
will be ready to murmur against God himself, secretly murmur against God
himself, and think that God deals very hardly with sinners, and very rigidly
to lay such heavy punishments upon sinners for small matters. (as they are
ready to think): What? afflict us here? lay such heavy punishments upon us
here, for a small sin? and then inflict eternal death too, and let the wrath of
God ly upon the soul for ever for sin; God deals very hardly for sin, the heart
secretly rises against God, and murmurs against God for it; as if God were
unrighteous and dealt very rigidly and severely, as Cain, Genesis 4. says he, My
Punishment is greater than I can bear, it is too great a punishment. And, I
remember, Ezekiel. 18.25. The Lord complains of the people, that they were ready
to murmur against him, as if his ways were not equal. The Fathers have eaten
sour grapes, and the Childrens teeth we set on edge; We are punished, say
they, for our Fathers sins; God deals unrighteously with us, and unequally with
us; that God is fain to clear himself; I tell you, says God, the Soul that
sins, it shall die. And, the Child shall not bear the punishment of his
Fathers: So they were ready to judge hardly of God, as if God were unrighteous.
And so I remember, Revel. 16.10, 11. And the fifth Angel powered out his Vial
upon the seat of the Beast, and his Kingdom was full of Darkness, and they
gnawed their tongues for pain. And what then? v. 11. And they blasphemed the
God of Heaven because of their pain, and their soars, and repented not of
their Deeds. When God comes to lay afflictions upon a soul, and sin is set home
by the Devil, they will be ready to blaspheme God, at least secretly in their
hearts, that God is a hard God, and deals very rigidly and severely; what, for
a small mat^er, to lay such heavy punishments upon us here, and eternal wrath
for ever? the Lord deals unrighteously. Whereas now on the other side, when a
soul is convinced of sin, by the holy Spirit of God, the Soul is ready to
justify God, though he do afflict: As I remember, Ezra 9.14. says Ezra there,
And whatever is come upon us for our evil Deeds, our God has punished us less
than our iniquities have deserved. God might have laid much more upon us. So
Nehem. 9.33. Nehemiah, and the rest there do acknowledge that the Lord was
righteous in all that was come upon them. Howbeit thou art just in all that is
brought upon us, for thou have done right --. So I remember David, when God had
convinced him of his sin of Murder and Adultery, Psalm. 51. he makes that as his
penitential Psalm, and says he, Verse 4. That thou might be justified when
thou speak, and clear when thou judge. Lord, says he, I will clear thee
whatever comes of me; this is the guise and frame of a soul, that is convinced
of sin by the Spirit of God; such a Soul will justify God, and acknowledge that
God is holy and righteous in all his dealings. So Psalm. 22.2, 3. There David
complains, that God had shut out his prayer; I cry night and day, says he, but
thou regardest not, but yet, says he; thou art holy, thou art righteous still.
Thus it is with a soul that is convinced by the holy Spirit of God.

6. You shall find another difference, When the evil spirit convinces a Soul of
Sin, and troubles the Soul about sin, you may observe there, the Soul is not
troubled for sin as it is sin; nor is it taken off from sin as sin, but only
troubled about the effects of it, but is not taken off from sin, no not from
any sin as it is sin; possibly such a Soul may be under restraint for a time
from his sin, or possibly he will never venture upon that sin again that his
Soul has been troubled about, and his Conscience so tattered and terrified
about, yet is not taken off from all sin. You know Judas was troubled for his
sin, the Devil had drawn him into sin to betray Christ, when he had drawn him
into the sin, then the Devil falls upon his Conscience, and drives him into
despair, even to hang himself. But it is likely, if he had lived an hundred
years after, he would never have done the like crime again, he would never have
betrayed his Master again; but yet he was not taken off from sin as sin; (if a
Soul be taken off from sin a^ sin, he will be cut off from all sin) for you see
he fell upon self murder for all that, and upon the sin of despair for all
that, so that I say, such a soul is not taken off from all sin.

Whereas now a soul that is convinced by the Spirit of God, it does cut him off
from all sin, that now a Soul does loath and hate every sin that he knows to be
sin, he will not meddle with it; Psalm. 119. says David, I hate every false
way, And, as Ephraim says, Hos. 14.8. What have I to do any more with Idols?
Never meddle with Idols more. Thus the Soul will be taken off from all sin,
will not venture upon any thing that is sin. That is the sixth.

7. Let me add one more, and that is this; A soul that is under trouble for
sin, from the evil spirit, the trouble will in time wear off, and will be
removed and healed, by some way or other that is not the right way of Cure. I
pray mind it; I say such a soul, though it may be under a great stroke, a great
wound for sin, if Satan do not prevail upon the soul to drive it to despair,
the wound will be healed by some means or other that is not the right way and
means, possibly sometimes it wears away by length of time, it vanishes and
wears off by length of time, by degrees; Just as it is with a Land-Flood, it
comes sometimes with great showers and storms, but it wastes away by degrees
insensibly; So in this case, you shall have some souls sometimes so afflicted,
and oppressed, and troubled for sin, that they cannot rest themselves, nor let
others rest with them, they complain of the burden of their sins, what
burdens they are under, and the burden wears off by degrees, their trouble of
Conscience wears off by degrees: But how? they themselves know not, nor their
friends neither; but had it been from the Spirit of God, it would not have worn
off so. Ahab was convinced of the danger he was in by the Prophet, 1 Kings 21.
The Prophet comes to him and threatens him from the Lord, that the Judgments of
God should fall upon him and his posterity Verse 21. That he would cut off all
the Posterity of Ahab, every one that pisseth against the wall. Ahab was now
convinced and troubled in his mind, and he would fain avoid the judgment, and
therefore he humbles himself in sackcloth, he was very penitent, insomuch as
the Lord took notice of it, and told the Prophet of it, verse 29. See thou
how Ahab humbles himself? So that Ahab was under a restraint for a time, for
about two or three years, that he durst not go to Battle; But look into the
beginning of the next Chapter; and it is said, in the third year, he would
venture to go out, when the troubles were a little worn off his spirit, then he
would venture to go out, and then he was slain; So, many a man or woman is
under very sore trouble of Spirit and Conscience for sin, and yet
notwithstanding the trouble may wear off again, and that is an argument it was
not from the Spirit of God; sometimes trouble about sin may wear away, it may
be diverted by the multiplicity of worldly business, he may thrust himself over
head and years in the business of the world, and so possibly may calm and quiet
his Conscience for the present, and if it be not from the Spirit of God
possibly it will never return again. You read of Cain, Genesis 4.17. He was
troubled in his spirit about his sin, and he went about the matters of the
world, about marrying of Wives, and building of a City, and by that means wore
away his trouble, you hear no more of him. Sometimes trouble is worn off by
merry Company, chearly Company, and by Music, and the like, and so drive away
their sad and melancholy humors; just as it was with Saul: We read of Saul
when the evil Spirit was upon him, he would call for one to play upon an
Instrument of Music to drive away the evil spirit; Ay, the trouble was from an
evil spirit indeed, and now therefore it must be driven away by a fit of
Music. Sometimes again you may be free from this trouble of spirit about sin,
by making restitution and satisfaction. Oh they have wronged such and such, and
this bears them down and oppresses them, the very thoughts of it, and they know
not what to do. Well, they will go and make restitution and satisfaction, and
so lick themselves whole, the trouble is over. And so sometimes they will ease
themselves of their trouble by performance of Duties, and by the reformation of
their Lives. We read of Herod, he was convinced of his sin of Incest in
marrying of his Brothers Wife. John Baptist convinced him of it, and told him
it was not lawful for him to have his Brothers Wife; and thereupon he goes to
hear John preach, and it is said, he reformed many things; he set upon a work of
reformation, Mark 6.12. He heard John Baptist gladly, and did many things, etc.
And there was an end of his trouble. Now I say, this is that I bring it for, to
show you that trouble about sin, that comes from the evil spirit, commonly it
is healed and cured by such means, as are not the right means for the cure;
whereas now, a Soul that is convinced by the Spirit of God, will never be cured
but by the same hand that wounded it; it will never be cured but by the right
plaster, the right ^alve; without the blood of Christ, and the righteousness
of Christ, applied by Faith, the Soul will never be cured.

I remember a Story of Mr. Bilney, that was burnt here at Lollards Pit, without
Bishops Gate, he tells a story of himself, and Mr. Latimer; this Mr. Latimer
was a young man, a man of very pregnant parts, but he was a Papist. Now Mr.
Bilney thought to circumvent Mr. Latimer, and to gain him by a wile, and so he
goes to Mr. Latimer, pretending himself a Papist, he would make Mr. Latimer his
Confessor, so he goes and confesses himself to him, and there he tells him how
he had been troubled in mind about his sin, and so troubled, says he, that I
could find no rest nor peace, till I came to the right cure: I was set says
he, to go a Pilgrimage to such a place, but my trouble continued, and I was set
to do such a Penance, and my trouble still continued, till such time as I read
in the new Testament, 1 Timothy 1.15. That Jesus Christ came into the World to
save sinners* whereof I am chief; and says he, when that was set home upon me,
then I was quiet and free from my trouble; Truly so it will be, a soul will
never come to a right cure, till such time as it comes to the righteousness of
Christ, and the virtue of the Blood of Jesus Christ, applied to the soul by
Faith, the soul will never come to any true peace or comfort. And thus now you
have seen some differences between the trouble of a soul about sin, that comes
from the evil spirit, and the convincing of a soul by the holy Spirit of God.

So now I have done with the third thing, namely, That it is the proper Work of
the Spirit to convince a Soul of sin, in order to Conversion. There is one
thing more remaining, and I shall briefly draw to an end.

4. And that is to show you, That as Convincing of sin is the work of the
Spirit, so also* It is the first work of the Spirit, in order to Conversion and
Salvation: for so the Point was laid down, That it is the first work of the
Spirit, in order to Conversion and Salvation, to convince a Soul of sin. Now
how does that appear? Briefly in two or three Words.

1. Thus, because, The Lord in the Work of the new Creation, does ordinarily
use the same Method that he did in the old Creation. You know in the first
Creation of the World, the first particular Work that God wrought was Light,
says God, Let there be Light and there was Light. Light is that whereby things
are discovered, light makes things manifest; So now God comes in the new
Creation, when he is about the great Work of the new Creation upon the Soul,
the first thing God works in the soul is to create Light, Light whereby the
soul may come to see and discern what is in himself, he comes to see and
discern sin, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.6. God, that commanded Light to shine
out of Darkness, has shined into our hearts; In the new Creation he does cause
a soul to see and discern its own unrighteousness, and there where true
righteousness is to be had, the righteousness of Jesus Christ (of which we may
speak afterward, if the Lord please). He shall first convince the World of
sin, and then of righteousness; but the first Work is to create Light in the
soul, and such Light as to discover sin; as Christ told Paul, when he called
him to preach the Gospel, Acts 26.18. says he, I have sent thee to turn people
from Darkness to Light. That is the first Work commonly the Spirit does, in
order to Conversion and Salvation, to bring in a light into the soul to
discover sin; the soul was in darkness before, and saw no great evil in sin,
but now there is a light brought in, whereby the soul is made to see and
discern sin, and so is convinced of sin.

2. It is the first Work of the Spirit in order to Conversion, to convince the
soul of sin, because, Till a Soul be convinced of sin, it will never much heed
the Gospel of Grace. Alas! the Gospel, and the glorious Grace that is held
forth in the Gospel, is a very slighty thing to a carnal heart, they make a
light matter of it, they do even mock at it, as a very simple foolish thing; as
in Acts 17. When Paul was Preaching to the Athenians, say they, What will this
Babbler say? v. 18. It is but a kind of babbling. So sometimes, some of your
learned Doctors have counted the preaching of the Gospel but prating and
babbling, so v. 22. When they heard (...) the resurrection of the dead, some
mocked --. They made a slight matter of it, and disregarded it; but now, when a
soul comes to be convinced of sin, then it will be ready to attend the Gospel,
the soul will then be ready to hear what God speaks in the Gospel. See that
example again, Acts 2. You read there, those that were converted by Peter's
Sermon, at first they did not regard what the Apostles said; say they, These
men are drunken with new wine, and they talk they know not what; but afterward,
they came to be of another mind, when Peter had preached to them, and the
Spirit had gone along with him to convince them of sin, then, Men and Brethren,
what shall we do? now we will hearken to you, and hear any thing you will say
to us: I say, upon this account, it is the first work of the Spirit to convince
the soul of sin, because the soul makes but a slight matter of the grace of God
in the Gospel, till it be convinced of sin, it will make but a mocking matter
of it: But when a soul comes to be convinced of sin, by the holy Spirit of God,
then the Word of the Lord will be precious to him, and then we will hear thy
Words for they are sweet.

3. And lastly, The Spirit does first convince the soul of sin, in order to
Conversion and Salvation, Because till such time as a Soul be convinced of sin,
the Soul is not fit to be married to Christ; There must be first a Divorce,
before there can be another marriage; if a woman be to be married the second
time, she must not marry whilst her Husband lives without a Divorce, so it is
in this case, a Soul cannot truly be married to Christ till such time as it be
dead to the law of sin. The Apostle speaks very elegantly to this purpose, Romans
7.1, 2. Know you not Brethren: I speak to them that know the Law; how the Law
has Dominion over a man so long as he lives; And so on. And at the 4 v. he
comes to make Application, Wherefore, my Brethren, ye also are become dead to
the Law by the body of Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to
him that was raised from the dead. You cannot be married to Christ, till such
time as you be clear from your first Husband, and how come we to be divorced
from the Law of sin, but by conviction of sin; when the Spirit of the Lord
comes to convince of sin, then there is a Divorce, then the heart is taken off
from sin. Indeed (as I told you before) if the soul be not convinced by the
Spirit, he is not convinced of sin as sin, but when the Spirit of the Lord
comes and convinces a Soul of sin, here is a Divorce, and now the Soul is made
fit to marry with Christ. And so you have seen the Point opened.

Application.
Now one word or two by way of Application, and I have done.

1. Then, Hereby we may come to discern, or have a near scantling about our
spiritual Estate, whether we have had the Work of Conversion wrought in us or
no.

I shall speak but a Word to it, and leave it to your further Consideration.
Consider whether the first step toward Conversion has ever been set; that is,
the Work of Conviction by the Spirit. Has the Lord by his Spirit ever
convinced you of sin? has the Spirit come and brought sin unto you, and set it
home upon you? has the Spirit of the Lord so set home sin upon you, that you
have not been able to make any evasion? for that (as you heard) is the nature
of true Conviction; and has the Spirit so set home sin upon you that your
heart came to be affected with it, and afflicted for it, that you are made to
humble your selves before the Lord under the sense of sin? Well, have your
souls ever been thus convinced of sin or no? if not, then you have not set the
first step toward Conversion. I pray mind it.

You will say, yes, I hope I have been convinced of sin, I have had some sins
so set home upon me, that I could not deny it, nor avoid it, but my heart has
been greatly afflicted under it, that I could not rest day nor night, and I
have been afraid I should have sunk into the bottomless pit.

But I pray consider, was this Conviction from the holy Spirit of God? you have
heard there may be a trouble for sin, that may come from the evil spirit. What
was it any other but the Conviction that may come from the evil spirit? yes,
you will say, I hope it is from the holy Spirit of God.

For that, you may consider those seven things, that were laid down to discover
when sin is set home by the holy Spirit of God, you may consider of them at
your leisure, when you are in private between the Lord, and your own Souls. But
let me only propound this one thing to you from them all, you say, you have
been convinced of sin by the Spirit of God, I pray mind it, for it is that that
does concern our everlasting state, our eternal Salvation, for if the first
step be not set toward our conversion, then we cannot expect that the other
steps are set, therefore I say, you that say, you hope you have been convinced
of sin by the Spirit, I pray consider, how was your Conviction healed? how was
your trouble taken off? Consider of it between the Lord and your own Souls, you
were troubled for your sins once, but how is it taken off? did it wither away
by degrees, like a land-flood, that makes a great noise for a time, but wears
away by degrees insensibly? Was it so with you? or was your trouble taken off
by making restitution, giving of satisfaction where you have wronged? or was it
by reformation and performance of duties, and so obtained the life by your own
hands (as the Prophets expression is) or was it by making application of the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ to your Souls, in a way of faith and believing?
Were you brought to that? Truly, if not, I cannot say, but that your Conviction
of sin might be from the evil spirit. Therefore consider seriously of it,
hereby we may come in some measure to discern about our spiritual Estate,
whether the work of Conversion be effectually wrought or no: Consider whether
this first step be set, namely, Convincing of sin by the Spirit of God, and
truly, if so be the holy Spirit have convinced you of Sin, I am apt to think,
that the Spirit will never leave till it has made through Work; says the
Apostle, Philip. 1.6. We are confident of this very thing, that he that has
begun a good Work in you, will certainly finish it to the Day of Christ. And if
the holy Spirit has begun to convince you of sin the Spirit will go on to
convince you of Righteousness too. That is the first Word of Application. I
have another and so have done.

2. It is to exhort and persuade you, that if ever the Work of Conviction
should come upon your hearts, and spirits, to take heed that you do not hinder
it, but further it what you can.

I confess it is irksome to flesh, and blood, our carnal hearts cannot away
with this Work of Conviction, but will avoid it, and escape it if possible. But
take heed you do not hinder it, but further it what you can, because else, if
it be from the holy Spirit of God, you do resist the Spirit, and go about to
quench the Spirit. Therefore you should do, even as old Eli advised young
Samuel, when the Lord began to call him, says Eli, When you hear the Voice
again, say, speak Lord, for thy Servant desires to hear. So I say to you, does
any word come to your Hearts, and speak to your Consciences, in a way of
Conviction of sin, do not drive it away, do not quench it, but say, Speak Lord,
for thy Servant desires to hear. And now plead with the Lord, do not now rise
up in your Spirits against the Instruments, that are means to convince you,
take heed of that, but rather ly low before the Lord, and bless the Lord that
any Word is spoken to you by way of Conviction, and never leave till such time
as you come to rest upon Christ, and his Righteousness, and upon the virtue of
his death, whereby he has made satisfaction to the Justice of God on the
behalf of poor sinners. I say, do not neglect, do not slight, or despise, or
quench, or check this Work of Conviction.

And so now I have done with this Point. The next Point is concerning the
Spirits convincing of the sin of unbelief. He shall convince the World of sin,
because they believe not on me. But thus much shall suffice for this time.

The Holy Ghost convinces of Sin.
SERMON VI.
JOHN 16.9. Of Sin, because they believe not on me.


WE have already handled one point from these words, which was this;

That the first work of the Spirit of God upon the heart, in order to
Conversion, is to convince the Soul of Sin.

Christ says here, that he would send the Spirit after his departure from
them; says he, I will send the Comforter, and this he spoke to support and
comfort the hearts of his Disciples against his absence, and therefore the end
of his Spirit was to cooperate with their Ministry, it was in order to the
Conversion of Souls; this is the matter of their comfort. Now this I have
spoken to at large before, but now to come to the second Note or Point, which
does plainly lie before us, which I shall desire to speak something to at
present, and that is this.

Doctrine.
That the great and special Sin that the Spirit of God does usually convince
People of in order to their Conversion, is their Unbelief, not believing on
Christ.

For so says Christ here, He shall convince the World of Sin. Of what Sin? He
tells them of their Unbelief. Of Sin, because they believe not on me.

That is, the great and special Sin that the Spirit of God is wont to convince
people of in order to their Salvation, namely, their Unbelief. It is indeed the
work of the Spirit to convince of other sins, as you heard before, but yet in a
special manner it is the work of the Spirit, to convince of this sin of
Unbelief; He is said so to convince of this Sin, as if there were no other sins
to be convinced off: he mentions no other sins; But he shall convince the World
of sin, because they believe not on me.

And this you shall find in part verified presently after Christ's Ascension
into Heaven. In a few days after Christ's Ascension into Heaven, he sent the
Holy Ghost, Acts 2. The Holy Ghost was poured down abundantly upon the
Disciples when they were met together, thereupon Peter preached a sermon to the
People that came wondering about him, and now Peter had experience of what
Christ here promised, says Christ, I will send the Spirit, and he shall
convince the World of sin by your Ministry; And at Peter's Sermon, there was
three thou-convinced at one clap, they were convinced of sin, not only of their
not believing on Christ, but of their murdering of Christ, that they had
Crucified the Lord of Life; and when they heard this, then by the power of the
Spirit, that went along with Peter's Sermon, it is said, they were pricked at
the heart and cried out, Men and brethren, what shall we do? They saw now a
need of Christ, and were glad now to receive Christ, and to believe in Christ.
Well, for the prosecution of this point, I shall desire briefly to speak to
three things.

1. Show you, That not Believing on Christ is a sin.

2. That it is not only a sin not to believe in Christ, but a great sin, one of
the greatest sins that a soul can be guilty of.

3 That it is the work of the Spirit to convince a Soul of the sin of Unbelief.

1. Then, that Unbelief is a sin: It is that which very few are sensible of,
they scarce look upon unbelief to be a sin; they look upon believing rather as
their presumption, and for their not believing, they look upon it rather as
their duty, as their humility. Now I say, Unbelief is a sin; Such as do not
believe on Christ, they are guilty of sin. But mark, I do not say, that every
one that does not believe on Christ is guilty of the sin of Unbelief: No, but
Unbelief is a sin only to them that have the Gospel preached to them, and
Christ offered to them; it is a sin to them not to believe on Christ, it is not
a sin to others; and though Heathens and Pagans shall be condemned and damned
in their unbelief, yet not for their not believing on Christ. Says Christ,
John 15.22. If I had not come and spoken to them, they had not had sin, that
is, they had not had the sin of Unbelief, they had not been guilty of that sin;
but now they have no Cloak, no excuse, for their sin. Look now as it is with
those that have not the Law written, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 2.12, 14, 15.
They that sin without Law, shall be judged without the Law: They shall not be
judged and condemned by the written Law, but they shall be judged and condemned
by the Law that is written in their hearts and consciences. So now here, those
that never had the Gospel preached to them, as a great many Nations in the
World, Pagans, Heathens, and Infidels, and Indians, they never had the Gospel
preached to them, Christ was never revealed to them, the Name of Christ never
sounded in their ears, now they shall not be condemned for their not believing
on Christ, it is not a sin to them. And therefore some tell us, there is a
twofold Unbelief. There is a Negative or Privative Unbelief, that is the
Unbelief of those that never had the means of Faith offered them, and it is not
a sin for them not to believe on Christ, because they never heard of him. But
when there is a Positive Unbelief (as they call it) that is, the Unbelief of
such as live under the sound of the Gospel, under the hearing of Christ. Christ
is preached to them, and held forth to them, and they are called upon to
believe on Christ, and yet they believe not; this is a Positive unbelief, and
this unbelief is a sin: And that it is a sin, let me give you two or three
Demonstrations.

1. It appears to be a sin, because it is the transgression of the Moral Law,
or the Law of the Ten Commandments. Where there is no Law, says the Apostle
there is no Transgression; Sin is not imputed where there is no Law, Romans 5.13.
But sin is a transgression of the Law, and this sin of unbelief a transgression
of the Moral Law, of the first Commandment.

Objection.
How so, you will say? Was believing on Christ then commanded to Adam in the
first Commandment?

Answer.
I Answer, Yes Virtually. The first Commandment you know was thus; Thou shall
have no other gods before me. That is, thou shall own the true God for thy God,
and no other. Now how do we own God? When we give him that worship that he
requires of us; now the first Commandment requires that we should worship God
with a natural worship, which is due to God from us as we are his Creatures;
that is comprised in the first Commandment; You shall worship God as God;
worship him, How? Obey him, fear him, love him, reverence him, believe in him,
put trust and confidence in him. The first Commandment requires that we should
yield obedience to God in whatsoever is required of us; Then this is virtually
required in the first Commandment. It Is our duty by virtue of the first
Commandment to believe in Christ. Now if it be commanded in the Law, then our
unbelief is a sin, because it is a transgression of the Law.

Objection.
But you will say (a little for the clearing of this) but this was inconsistent
with the state of Innocence, for Adam to believe on Christ as a Mediator, as a
Savior to save him from sin, because Adam was in a sinless condition, he had
no guilt upon him in his Innocence, it was then inconsistent with Adams state
to believe on Christ as a Mediator and Savior, then it seems Adam had no power
to believe on Christ, and if so, then certainly not believing on Christ, is not
a transgression of the first Commandment.

Answer.
For Answer to it let me briefly clear this in two things.

1. It is granted, it is true, that it was inconsistent with Adams state of
Innocence to rely upon Christ, and to believe on Christ as a Savior to save
him from sin, for he had no sin, he was Innocent, therefore it was inconsistent
with his state to believe on Christ as a Savior; yea, it was inconsistent with
the wisdom of God to require Adam to believe on Christ, to command such a duty
of Adam; yet notwithstanding, (mark I pray) Adam had a principle, and a virtual
power for to have believed on Christ, if God had required it of him; Though its
true it was inconsistent with his state, that God should require it of him, yet
Adam had this principle, this virtual power put into him with his first
Creation, in the image of God, He had this power put into him, that he had a
virtual power to obey God in every thing that he should require of him,
whatever God should reveal to be his will, he had power to believe it, and
yield obedience to it: Though it is true it was inconsistent with his State
actually to believe, yet he had a power to have believed on Christ, if God had
required it of him. For Adam had a power to do that which was inconsistent with
his state of innocence, as for example, Adam had a Principle and virtual Power
to show Mercy and Compassion to any that were in misery, but that was
inconsistent with his state, for there was none in misery then. There was no
need of the Compassion of Adam, yet Adam had a principle, a virtual power to
have done this; so in this case, though it is true, believing on Christ as a
Savior was inconsistent with his state, yet he had a principle, and virtual
power to have believed on Christ as a Savior if God had required it of him, Or
else it were not our sin now not to believe on Christ, if there were never a
power given to Adam in the state of innocence to have believed, if God had
required it of him, for we are now condemned for not believing on Christ, the
power being once given us: Though we have lost the power, yet that does not
excuse us for the sin of Unbelief. That is one Answer. But

2. Though it is true, Believing on Christ was not expressly required in the
first Commandment, yet notwithstanding, It was and is implicitly required,
namely thus, It was and is required in the first Commandment, that we should
yield obedidience of faith to whatever God should require of us; now then,
though Believing on Christ was not expressly required and commanded, yet
notwithstanding believing on Christ was implicitly required, thus, that when
ever God should reveal and make Christ known to us, when ever God should
command us to believe on Christ, this was required that we are bound by virtue
of the first Commandment to believe on Christ, though it is true it was
inconsistent with that state, yet notwithstanding it is implicitly required in
the first Commandment, as to instance, You know Gospel Worship, or the Worship
that God requires now in the Gospel, it is inconsistent with that Worship that
God required in the time of the Law, yet notwithstanding, Gospel Worship was
implicitly required in the second Commandment; now it is true, Gospel Worship is
not expressed in the second Commandment, yet notwithstanding it is virtually
employed, because we are bound by virtue of that Commandment, to worship God
with that Worship which God should institute or appoint; God has now appointed
Gospel Worship under the new Testament, and by virtue of the second
Commandment, we are bound to yield obedience to it now, though it was
inconsistent with the Worship in the time of the Law. So the fourth Commandment
requires that we should keep holy the Sabbath Day, the express letter of the
Commandment is to sanctify the seventh day from the Creation; now that we
should keep the first day of the Week for the Sabbath, under the Gospel, this
is not expressed in the fourth Commandment; yet it is implicitly required,
namely, that we should keep holy that seventh day that God has appointed, or
should appoint: If God do change the seventh day to the first day of the Week,
still by virtue of the fourth Commandment, we are bound to sanctify and
celebrate the first day of the week for the Sabbath: so now in this case,
though the first Commandment did not expressly require our faith in Christ, yet
implicity we are bound by virtue of that Commandment, to yield obedience of
faith to whatever God should reveal or make known to us, or command us to
believe any time afterward. So that now, if our believing on Christ be required
in the first Commandment, then unbelief is a transgression of the first
Commandment, and so a Sin. This is the first Demonstration.

2. It appears to be a sin, namely because, Not believing on Christ, is a
Transgression of the Commandment of the Gospel, Not only a Transgression of the
first Table of the Law, but it is a Transgression of the great Commandment of
the Gospel. Brethren, the Gospel is a Law, it is called the law of faith, Romans
2.27. Where then is Boasting? it is excluded, by what Law? of Works, nay, but
by the Law of faith, What is that; that is the Gospel. The Gospel is the Law of
Faith, wherein God requires our faith and believing on Christ, and therefore
faith is called the Obedience of Faith, Romans 16.26. But now is it made manifest
by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the Commandment of the
everlasting God made known to all Nations for the Obedience of faith. That is,
that the Nations should believe on Christ, and so yield obedience to the Gospel
by believing; it is the Command of the Gospel, therefore, now not believing on
Christ is a transgression of a Gospel Command. Where does the Gospel command
our believing on Christ expressly? why every where, to name but a place or two.
John 6.29. says Christ, This is the Work of God that ye believe on him whom he
has sent; This is the work of God, not only the work that God works in us,
that is not the meaning of the place, but this is the Work that God requires
and commands, the special work and duty that God requires, that you should
believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ. And you have a more express place,
1 John 3.23. This is his Commandment, that ye believe on the Name of his Son
Jesus Christ: This is the great Commandment of the Gospel, that we should
believe on the name of Jesus Christ, therefore now not to believe on Christ,
being commanded in the Gospel, is a transgression of the Commandment of the
Gospel, and the transgression of a Gospel Command is a sin as well as any
transgression of the ten Commandments. Now believing on Christ being expressly
required in the Gospel, unbelief is a transgression of the Command of the
Gospel, and therefore it is a sin: That is the second Demonstration.

3. Not believing on Christ appears to be a sin, though we make nothing of it,
because, God does inflict punishments for not believing on Christ. God does
punish men for not believing on Christ. Now God does never inflict punishment
for that which is no sin; punishment properly is the consequent and effect of
sin, where there is no sin, there is no punishment therefore when God takes
away the guilt of sin in Justification; then God pardons a soul, the soul is
free from all punishment for sin. There is therefore no condemnation, no real
punishment for sin to them that are in Christ Jesus. Now then that God does
punish for unbelief, though not total unbelief, it is apparent. You know Moses
was punished for not believing, and honoring of God by believing, at the
Waters Meriba, Numb. 20.12. And the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, because ye
believed me not to sanctify me in the Eyes of the Children of Israel, therefore
ye shall not bring this Congregation into the Land which I have given them.
Moses pleaded hard with God, that he might go over and see the good Land; says
the Lord, speak no more of it, I will not hear you in this thing, you shall see
it indeed but you shall not enter into it because you did not honor me by
believing. God punishes unbelief, and therefore unbelief must be a sin; and so
the Israelites, for their unbelief God did punish them, Psalm. 78.32, 33. For
all this they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous works, and what
follows? therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in
trouble. Therefore God punished them for their unbelief. So Heb. 3.17, 18, 19.
says the Apostle there, But with whom was he grieved forty years? was it not
with them that had sinned? why? what was their sin? was it not unbelief? and to
whom swear he, that they should not enter into his rest; but to them that
believed not? So we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief; so
that God does punish unbelief, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. Christ shall come in flaming fire
to render vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel; Now what is obedience to
the Gospel, but believing on Christ, which is the great Command of the Gospel.
They shall be punished with everlasting vengeance that do not obey the Gospel.
Therefore those things do evidently demonstrate that not believing on Christ is
a sin. That is the first: But,

2. Unbelief is not only a sin, But it is a very great sin, It is one of the
greatest sins, one of the special sins of all other sins. It is the Saying of a
Reverend Holy Man, says he, The Sin of Unbelief, it is a greater sin, than
Adultery, than Blasphemy, than Murder, than Sodomy, nay, says he, it is greater
than all these sins put them all together. And methinks, Christ here in the
Text expressing and making mention of this one sin, above all other sins that
the Spirit shall convince the World of, does evidence the greatness of this
sin; when Christ says, He shall convince the World of sin, he does not say he
shall convince the World of Murder, or Adultery, or Sodomy, or Blasphemy -- but
of Unbelief, he only mentions this to imply, that this is the most provoking
sin of all, and so Christ speaks, John 15.22. If I had not come and spoken to
them, they had not had sin, they had had no guilt of sin at all, in comparison
of this sin of unbelief, if Christ had not come and preached the Gospel to
them, they had not had sin, that is, no guilt at all in comparison of this
guilt of not believing on Christ, this is the sin of all sins, this not
believing on Christ when he is preached and set forth. And how does that appear?

To make it a little out that not believing on Christ when the Gospel is
preached and Christ is tendered, and held forth, that now not to believe on
Christ is a very great and special sin, one of the greatest of all other sins.
Though for the generality those that do look upon unbelief as a sin, yet they
look upon it but as a small matter, and they are but little humbled for the sin
of unbelief, they can be humbled for other sins, and acknowledge other sins,
but as for this sin of unbelief, it is very rarely laid to heart in any manner,
as it ought to be, because people do not look at this sin of unbelief as the
great sin, as the sin above all other sins. Now a little to demonstrate this,
that if the Lord please by his Spirit to go along and concur with it, we may be
convinced of the greatness of this sin, or else it is not all I can say can
convince us of the greatness of this Sin.

1. It appears from hence that the sin of unbelief is a great sin, namely, From
the greatness of the Punishment that God does inflict upon men for this sin.
God does punish all sin, but now as for the Sin of unbelief, God does visit
that, and punish that with the greatest punishment, and that argues it is a
great sin: God is a righteous and just God, and he never punishes a sin beyond
what it deserves, says the Apostle, Romans 2.6. He renders to every man
according to his works. Now he renders to unbelievers (to them that do not
yield obedience of faith to the Gospel, that are not brought by the Gospel to
believe on Christ) he does render vengeance with a witness unto them, as the
Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. Christ shall come in flaming fire, Christ will
appear all in a light fire, to render vengeance upon them that obey not the
Gospel; he does not say to render vengeance upon them that are adulterous or
unclean (though he will render vengeance to them) but here will be the
vengeance of all vengeance to them that live under the Gospel, and have been
entreated and persuaded to accept of Christ, and do refuse it, he shall come in
flaming fire to render vengeance to them. Mat. 11.22.24. Christ is there
upbraiding those places where he had been preaching the Gospel, and they had
not received it, Verse 21. Woe unto thee Chorazin, Woe unto thee Bethsaida, Woe
unto thee Capernaum, Those were the places that had been lifted up to heaven in
regard of the means of Salvation, Christ came himself, and preached the Gospel
to them, but now says Christ, Woe unto you, I tell you, it shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of Judgment than for you; You know
Sodom was given to most desperate and abominable wickedness, the sin of Sodomy
had its name from Sodom, and God did visit the sin of Sodom with an exemplary
Judgment from Heaven, fire and brimstone from Heaven, and Sodom went down into
Hell: Ay, but says Christ, their Hell will be a lighter Hell, a lesser Hell, a
more tolerable Hell, than the Hell of those that have lived under the Gospel,
under the preaching of the Gospel, where Christ has been revealed and held
forth, and yet have not yielded obedience of faith; I tell you, says Christ,
It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha, in the day of Judgment, than
for those places. And I remember what Christ spoke in the Parable, Luke 12.46.
about that Servant that said in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, and
thereupon fell to eating, and drinking, and abusing his fellow servants, The
Lord of that Servant will come in a day that he looks not for him, and in an
hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his
portion with unbelievers, he does not say he will appoint him his portion with
murderers and unprofitable Servants, but amongst unbelievers, as if the portion
of unbelievers was the greatest portion of wrath of all others, he will appoint
him his portion with unbelievers. Brethren, from the very vengeance and
punishment that God does visit and punish unbelief withal, we may easily
conclude and gather, that unbelief is one of the greatest sins.

2. That unbelief is such a great sin (and Oh! that the Lord would open our
Eyes, that we may see it and be made sensible of it), it appears, (though
people are least sensible of it) Because it is that which does cast the
greatest reproach upon God of all other sin, It casts the greatest reproach
upon the God of truth, it strikes at the very Being of God, though people do
not consider it; I say, unbelief, or not believing on Christ, it strikes at the
very Being of God, he is a God of Truth: Truth is the very essential Property
of God, it is his very Being, his very Essence, for he is a God of Truth, and
in comparison of him, all men in the World are liars, Let God be true, and
every men a liar, Romans 3.4. He is so infinitely true, that he is Truth it self;
and it is impossible for him to lie, as the Apostle says, Tit. 2. God must
cease to be God, if any untruth should be found in him; and yet now mark,
Unbelief does cast so great a reproach upon God, as to say, God is a liar; You
have it expressly, 1 John 5.10, 11. He that believes not on the Son of God,
has made God a liar, because he believes not the record that God has given
of his Son; Now what is the record that God has given of his Son? Verse 11.
This is the Record that God has given to us, Eternal Life, and this Life is in
his Son. Here is the Record, that God from Heaven does hold forth in the
Gospel, here is eternal life, and Salvation to be had through Jesus Christ to
every one that does believe; this is the great Truth that the Gospel does hold
forth, now such as do not receive this Truth and Testimony, Unbelievers that
remain in their unbelief, they go on every day to make God a liar.

Question.
But you will say, how do we by unbelief make God a liar?

Answer.
How? briefly thus, When a Soul goes on notwithstanding God holds forth this
Record, that here is Eternal Life to be had by believing on Christ, this is the
great Truth that God does bear witness to in the Gospel, now when people do no
more regard this so great Truth, though it be daily held forth to them, yet
they regard it no more than they do the Words of one that they know to be an
arrant Liar. Now one that is known to be a liar, if he should promise a man
never so much, he would make no great matter of it, he promises to furnish him
with money at his need -- but he does not trust to it, he knows he is a liar,
and therefore he is fain to provide for himself, as well as he can. Thus it is,
God does promise eternal life to the soul that does accept of Jesus Christ, if
you will believe on Christ here is eternal life for you, this is the great
Truth that God does bear witness to in the Gospel, now this Gospel is preached,
and published, and proclaimed. Now when people have no more regard to this
great Truth of the Gospel, than they have to the words of a liar, then they
make God a liar; they say this is a lie, let God say what he will, I will not
believe a word of it, but we will look for salvation another way, we will shift
for our selves as well as we can by our own duties and services, we will find
the life in our own hands; so long as any poor soul goes on in a course of
unbelief, he goes on continually to say that God is a liar. O Brethren! would
it not make your ears tingle, and your hearts ache, to hear a man go up and down
the streets, saying, God is a liar, I will not believe one word that he says;
you would say, if the man were in his wits, it is pity that he is suffered to
live, thus to blaspheme the true God; Why truly, this is the case and course of
every one that lives under the Gospel, under this Record that God does bear
concerning Jesus Christ, and eternal life to be had in him, and yet they go on
in a course and state of unbelief, and make nothing of all this, they do
proclaim and say that God is a liar, and I do not believe one word that he
says what desperate and horrible blasphemy is this? It may be you make no
great matter of this, but notwithstanding thus it is, the Holy Ghost says, He
that believes not the Record that God has given of his Son, he makes God a
liar. And is not this a great sin? to strike at the very Being of God; for if
God be not a God of Truth, he must cease to be God.

That is the second Demonstration, That Unbelief as it is a sin, so it is the
greatest of sins. But then,

3. Unbelief appears to be a great sin, Because it is that whereby people do
despise with the greatest despite the greatest kindness and favor that God can
show to poor creatures; they do as it were spurn and kick away the kindness of
God, with a spurn of the foot. God in the Gospel does hold forth the greatest
kindness, and favor, that can be shown to poor sinners, he offers to them life
and salvation, peace, and pardon, and reconciliation. -- Now for persons not to
regard this, O! it is a despising with the greatest despite, the highest
kindness and favor that God can show to poor sinners. I pray do but consider
three or four things, that you may see what a high contempt it is of the
greatest kindness that can be shown to poor creatures.

1. Consider but the State and Condition of those to whom God does offer and
tender his Grace in the Gospel? What are they to whom God proclaims his Gospel,
and offers pardon, and reconciliation, and peace, and life, and salvation? Who
are they? A company of poor condemned creatures, that are under the sentence of
eternal death and condemnation, poor hopeless, and helpless, undone creatures;
We are all under a sentence of eternal death continually, so long as we are in
a state of unbelief. The soul that sins it shall die: God has pronounced
this sentence upon every sinners head; Now that God should offer and tender,
and show himself ready to show kindness unto poor undone creatures, poor
condemned creatures, condemned to eternal death, and for such poor creatures to
slight this kindness, Is not this a sin and provocation with a witness? Is it
not a great kindness for a King to show such favor to a poor condemned
creature, that is ready to the Gallows, if the King should send him his pardon?
It would be counted a kindness and a favor indeed. Truly Brethren, we are all
condemned creatures, sentenced to eternal death, now that God should be pleased
to have any intendment of good will and favor toward such as we are,
especially if you consider the state of Angels, that fell, and are under a
sentence of eternal condemnation, that God should leave them hopeless, and
helpless for ever, pass by them, and show favor to poor sinful mankind, here
is a favor and kindness indeed: We might all have perished, and God had lost
nothing at all, he had been infinitely glorious and just for ever. And then
again.

2. Consider how God has set his infinite Wisdom on work to contrive and find
out a way, to manifest his goodness and favor to poor sinners, which all the
Angels in Heaven could never have done, that there should be a way found out to
save sinners, that have infinitely offended and wronged the justice of God, and
yet the justice of God not suffer! here is the infinite wisdom of God set on
work to find out this way. Brethren, there was a great deal of the Wisdom of
God seen in the contrivance of the World, and of the creatures, framing of the
Creation. Says the Psalmist, speaking of the creatures, In Wisdom have thou
made them all, Psalm. 104.24. Ay, there is much of the Wisdom of God seen in the
creation of the World. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, Ay, but Brethren,
in the work of the redemption of lost man, showing grace, and favor, and
kindness to poor undone creatures as we are, herein appears the manifold Wisdom
of God. Ephesians. 3.10. To the intent that now, unto the Principalities and Powers
in heavenly places might be made known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of
God. Here was Wisdom and manifold Wisdom, Wisdom upon Wisdom, to find out a way
for God to show kindness and favor to poor condemned creatures as we are. And
then

3. Consider further that you may see the kindness of God about the salvation
of man. Consider that God should make it known that he is freely and fully
willing to save undone creatures, that he is willing to save any poor sinner
that is willing to venture on Christ, to lay hold on him by Faith; it was the
great intendment of God in sending his Son from Heaven to be made a man, and to
be made under the Law, and to suffer the wrath and Curse of God for the
transgression of the Law, to make peace and atonement for sinners, here is now
the manifold Wisdom of God, the wonderful Wisdom of God, and that God should
reveal this, and make this known unto poor sinners, that God is freely willing
and fully willing that poor sinners find grace in his sight, that they might
have pardon and reconciliation, whosoever they be that will believe on Christ,
and accept of him. And not only so, But

4. Consider that God should send his Servants, and Messengers about, up and
down the World, for that end, that he might show favor and kindness to poor
sinners, he sends them in his name to publish and proclaim his Grace, to make
known his everlasting Gospel unto poor sinners. Go, says Christ, Mark 16.16.
Preach the Gospel, and tell them, He that believes shall be saved, and he that
believes not, shall be damned. There will be his punishment. Now Brethren put
all these together, here is kindness and grace indeed; that God should have
favor for poor undone sinful creatures as we are, that are sentenced to
eternal death, and that he should come and offer it and tender it as he does.
Now consider what a sin it is, not to receive it, not to embrace it, and accept
of it* but to slight it, and refuse and despise it, as every unbeliever does.
God comes and offers eternal life and salvation in the Gospel, if you will
receive it, you shall be saved; if you do venture your souls upon it, you shall
be eternally saved: now for poor creatures, as it were, to kick this away with
the foot, to spurn at this grace and kindness of God, to cast it behind your
back as not worthy the regarding, you will say, certainly, this cannot be but a
very great and high provocation: As now, suppose, the King should send a pardon
to a poor condemned Malefactor, and he should take the pardon, and cast it
behind his back; you will say this man's case is very sad. This is the case of
every unbelieving soul; the pardon that God offers in the Gospel, he makes a
very wisp of it, and casts it behind his back. Now consider, if this be not a
sin; does not this deserve condemnation with a witness? This is the
condemnation, -- That is the third.

4. Let me name one more, that if the Lord please to open our Eyes, we may see
a little more into the evil of this sin of unbelief. Our not believing on
Christ, is the highest Contempt put upon the eternal Son of God that can be; In
refusing and slighting of Christ, we trample upon the Blood of the infinite,
and eternal, and beloved Son of God. You will say, that is a sin with a witness
indeed, if a man should have taken the Blood of Christ, that ran out of his
side, and stamped it under his feet in disdain and contempt, you will say, that
man's sin is a very great sin. Brethren, those that have Jesus Christ offered,
and tendered to them, (as Jesus Christ is tendered and offered to every sinner
that sits under the Gospel) there is his Blood offered and tendered to us; now
if we refuse it, we do as it were trample upon the very Blood of the Son of
God. It Is the expression of the Apostle, Heb. 10.29. Who have trodden under
foot the Son of God, They trample the very Blood of the Son of God under their
feet. Brethren, Jesus Christ in the Gospel comes and tenders himself, he
tenders his Blood, the price and merit of his Blood, here is peace, here is
pardon and reconciliation with God, here is eternal life and salvation, the
very price of my Blood. Now for us to make nothing of all this, to make no more
of the Blood of Christ, than we would do of the Blood of a Beast, certainly
this cannot but be a very high Provocation. I remember the Parable, Mat. 21. of
a Vineyard that was let out to Tenants, so the Master of the Vineyard sent in
season for the fruit of his Vineyard: well, it is said, v. 31. The husbandmen
took his Servants and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another; at last
says the Master of the Vineyard, I will send my Son, they will reverence my
Son; and at v. 38. When they saw the Son, they used him as despitefully and
shamefully as the other. What shall become of those husbandmen that instead of
reverencing his Son, they cast him out of the Vineyard and slew him? It Is said,
v. 40. When the Lord of the Vineyard comes he will miserably destroy those
husbandmen. Why, Brethren, this is the case of every unbelieving soul, the Son
of God comes and tenders his Blood, here is my hearts blood, the price of my
Blood which I have shed, he tenders it to us to accept of it, to accept of
peace, and pardon, and salvation, which is the price of my Blood, and we make
no account of it, is not this a high provocation? and do we not deserve to be
miserably destroyed?

So now you have seen the second thing opened, That unbelief is not only a sin,
but it is a great sin; one of the greatest sins of all others, And O! that we
had eyes to see it. But then,

3. Thirdly, To show you, that it is the work of the Spirit in order to
Conversion, to convince a Soul, as of other sins, so especially of this great
sin of unbelief. I shall briefly name two or three things to show you what the
Spirit does in order to the convincing of the soul of this great sin of
unbelief, you shall find usually that the Spirit in convincing a soul of
unbelief, in order to conversion and eternal salvation, it usually does these
three things.

1. The Spirit does come and reveal to the Soul the great evil of the sin of
unbelief, sets it before the soul, and makes it to see it, therefore the Spirit
is called the Spirit of Revelation, because it does reveal the Gospel, and the
great sin that is against the Gospel. Ephesians. 1.17. That God would give unto you
the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation. Brethren, it is not natural Conscience
that can convince a man of the sin of unbelief. A natural Conscience may
possibly help to convince a soul of other sins, it may check the soul for other
sins, as Murder or Blasphemy, -- For indeed a natural Conscience is ready to
accuse of sin, Romans 2.15. Their Consciences in the mean while, excusing or
accusing one another. Natural Conscience may accuse for some sins, but not for
this sin of unbelief. The Law may help a soul to be convinced of some sins that
are expressly against the Law, but the law cannot convince any man or woman of
unbelief, no, though it is true as I said before, That believing on Christ is
virtually required in the first Commandment, yet it is not expressly commanded,
but only implicitly, and virtually, therefore it is not in the power of the law
of the Commandments to help to convince a soul of the sin of unbelief, no more
than the second Commandment is a means and instrument to convince us of our
neglect of Gospel worship, because it is not expressly commanded there but
implicitly and consequentially; Therefore I say it must be the work of the
Spirit alone, to convince of the sin of unbelief. The Law and Conscience may
help to convince the Soul of other sins, but none but the Spirit of God can
convince the soul of the evil of the sin of unbelief. This is the first thing
that the Spirit does in the soul, in order to the convincing of it of the sin
of unbelief, namely, to open the eyes of the understanding, and to reveal and
discover to the soul, the evil that is in the sin of unbelief.

2. Another work of the Spirit in order to it is this, namely, to cause the
Soul to understand and know plainly that all his best duties and services that
he can perform in this World cannot be acceptable unto God, nor make his person
acceptable without faith in Christ. Truly this now is the work of the Spirit to
convince a Soul of this, to discover this, that it is not all my duties, and
services, and performances, that can procure my acceptance with God without
faith in Christ. Brethren, this the Holy Ghost speaks in Scripture, and this
the Holy Ghost makes a soul sensible of, That without faith it is impossible to
please God. The soul, it may be, is ready to think that he can please God with
the performance of duties and services, -- But when the Spirit of God comes to
convince the soul of the sin of unbelief, it shows him that all these things
are not pleasing to God, but are displeasing to him without faith in Christ;
neither our persons, nor any thing we can do, can be accepted of God without
faith; Ephesians. 1.6. says the Apostle, Wherein he has made us accepted in the
Beloved, Our persons are accepted in the Beloved, and our services are accepted
in the Beloved, in Christ, and through Christ; otherwise nothing can be
accepted and pleasing to God that we can do; and hereby now, by the operations
of the Spirit, the Soul comes to see the sad and miserable Estate of unbelief.
That is the second.

3. Another Work that the Spirit does in order to convince a Soul of the Sin of
Unbelief, is this; namely, to cause the Soul to see plainly, that it has been
out of the Way of Salvation all this time. The Soul has gone on it may be in a
course of duties, and services, and performances, it has been careful and
strict to walk exactly, to wrong no body, to be diligent in its calling, to be
careful in all its dealings, to be abundant in duties and services, giving
attendance to the Word, waiting upon God in every Ordinance. The Soul goes on
in this way, and thinks now it is in a way of salvation. I would not discourage
and dishearten any from going on in such a way, but still without faith this is
not the way, we are out of the way of salvation, and we are all of us naturally
inclined to seek for salvation in this way, in walking exactly, and being
conscientious in the performance of duties, and being diligent in our vocations
and callings, this was the way wherein the poor Israelites did miscarry, and
perish. Says the Apostle, Romans 9.30.31. What shall we say, that the Gentiles
which followed not after Righteousness, have attained to Righteousness: but
Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to the
Law of Righteousness; wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it
were by the Works of the Law. Ay, they went about, says the Apostle, to
establish their own righteousness, and so would not submit to the Righteousness
of God. They went about to establish their own Righteousness; truly this is
natural to every one, to walk on in the way of the Covenant of Works, to look
for life in that way that Adam should have found life in if he had continued in
his obedience; I say, it is natural for every one to walk on in such a course,
to expect eternal life and salvation in that way, whereas when the Spirit of
God comes to convince a Soul of the sin of unbelief, it makes the soul to see
it has been out of the way of life and salvation all this time; I have taken a
wrong course all this time, and now the Soul begins to be amazed to think he
has lost all his time and all his labor, and now the Soul sees that this is
not the way to life and salvation, but the way of salvation is in the way of
believing on Christ, and now the soul is set in that way and course of
believing on Christ, and this is the Word behind us, which the Prophet Isaiah
speaks of, Isa. 30.21. Thou shall hear a voice behind thee, saying, this is the
way walk in it. The Spirit of the Lord comes and whispers in our ear, and tells
us this is the way of life and salvation, you will never find life by your own
doings, but this is the way walk in it, if you would find life. Thus the Holy
Ghost does ordinarily those three things in order to the convincing a Soul of
the sin of unbelief. So now you have heard the Point opened and cleared. Now to
make a little Application in a word or two, and so I have done.

Application. 1.
Hence we may see the reason why so many Professors do see so little evil in
the sin of unbelief, why and whence is it that so many Professors are so little
sensible of the sin of unbelief; though unbelief be such a great sin, the
greatest of all sins, as you have heard, though it be such a sin as to make God
a liar, and it does kick and spurn away the loving kindness of God, and by our
not believing we put the greatest contempt upon the Lord Jesus Christ the Son
of God that can be, yet I fear there are very few Christians do really and
truly see the greatness of this sin, they can be humbled for other sins, and
confess how they have provoked God by slighting and despising his Word, by
being formal and careless and wanton, -- and profaning Sabbaths and
Ordinances, -- but this sin of unbelief is little laid to heart, there is
little real humiliation for that, and what is the reason? because it is the
work of the Spirit of Christ only to convince of this sin. And therefore as we
do desire more and more to see the evil of this sin of unbelief, truly we had
need to look up for the Spirit to discover it to us, that all that we can do
can never please God, unless we do believe on Christ, whatever prayers we make,
whatever duties we perform, yet all does not please God, but we must be
accepted only by faith in Christ, and it is the work of the Spirit to show us
how we have been out of the way of salvation all this time; I have gone on in a
course of duties and performances in a way of moral Righteousness, but I have
been out of the way of life and salvation all this time. If the Spirit do not
convince us, we shall never be convinced of this sin of unbelief, it is not all
that I have spoken, nor all that all the Saints in the World can speak in
laying open this sin of unbelief, that can convince us of it, except the Spirit
of the Lord come and convince of this sin of unbelief. Therefore look up for
the Spirit, and wait for the Spirit to be given out to convince us of this sin
of unbelief. That is the first.

2. To end all, hereby we may come in some measure to discern our spiritual
estate and condition, whether we be in a way of salvation or no, Brethren, you
may see it plainly in the Text, says Christ, I will send the Spirit, and he
shall convince the World of sin, of this sin of unbelief in order to salvation.
Well then, Consider, I pray seriously between the Lord and your own souls,
whether or no you have been convinced of sin, and especially of this sin of
unbelief, has the Holy Ghost discovered the evil of this sin to you? I pray
consider seriously of it, for this is the work of the Spirit in order to
salvation to convince of this sin of unbelief.

Objection.
You will say, Well, I hope the Lord has been at work upon my soul, I hope the
Spirit has been convincing me of sin, I think I have been convinced of many
sins, I hope the Spirit has made me to see my original sin, and has convinced
me of the sins of my youth, the Lord has written bitter things against me, and
made me to possess the iniquities of my youth, he has brought to my
remembrance how I have been disobedient to my Parents and Superiors, the
Spirit, I suppose, has convinced me, that I have been given to lying, to
purloining, defrauding, and stealing, from Parents and Masters, and I have been
convinced of Sabbath-breaking, etc. --

Answer.
But I pray consider, have you ever been convinced of this sin of unbelief; I
pray consider it seriously, what of the evil of unbelief has the Spirit
discovered to you? I tell you Brethren, if so be you have not been convinced
and seen something of the evil of unbelief, truly you have cause to question
whether ever the Spirit of God has been at work upon you in order to
salvation. Let me tell you plainly, and I pray bear with me, you may have been
convinced of sin, and yet the Spirit has never been at work upon you in order
to salvation. No, when the Spirit does work in order to salvation, it does
sooner or later convince of this sin of unbelief. Therefore if you be persuaded
that the Spirit has been at work upon your hearts in convincing you of sin in
order to salvation, then wait for it, and look that the Spirit shall discover
this sin of unbelief to you; wait for it, for the Spirit will go on if he have
begun a convincing Work in order to salvation, and eternal life, he will
convince you of the evil of unbelief sooner or later, you will be brought in
some measure to see the real evil and sinfulness of it, therefore look and wait
for it, and then also wait for the work of the Spirit to convince you of
Righteousness, for so it follows in the next words; I will send the Spirit, and
when he is come, he shall convince the World of Sin, because they believe not
on me; And of Righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye see me no more.
But thus much shall suffice for this time.

The Holy Ghost reveals Christ's Righteousness.
SERMON VII.
JOHN 16.10. Of Righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more.


YOU have heard before, That the first work of the Spirit of God upon the Soul,
in order to Conversion and Salvation, is to convince it of Sin, and in a
special manner of the sin of Unbelief. And when he is come, he shall convince
the World (says Christ, in the former Verse) of Sin: Because they believe not
on me. Now then, where the Spirit begins to work in order to Salvation by
convincing of sin, he goes on also to convince of Righteousness: And so I shall
fall immediately upon the Point before us, which is this,

Doctrine.
That when the Spirit of God does begin to work upon a Soul, in order to
Salvation, by convincing it of Sin, he goes on also to convince it of
Righteousness.

When he is come, he shall convince the World of Sin, says Christ; Ay, but he
does not stop there, but goes on also to convince of Righteousness. Brethren,
it is the first work of the Spirit of Christ to convince us of our own
Unrighteousness, and his next work is to convince us of the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ.

I confess I had it in my thoughts to have spoken to some other subject at this
time, but casting about and considering with my self what might be of most and
greatest concernment, the Lord was pleased to turn my thoughts again upon this
Subject; for verily if it were the last Sermon that ever I should preach to you
in this world (as the Lord knows whether it be or no) if so be that any of you
were going out of the World, and I should be called to speak to you, I do not
know what I should say, that is of more or greater concernment: If I were
immediately to go out of the World, and were to preach my last Farewell Sermon,
I know not what Truth to commend to you of more concernment than this, of the
Righteousness which the Spirit does convince the world of, in order to their
Salvation.

Now that I may open it to you, if the Lord please, and the Lord open our
hearts that we may understand it. I shall only speak to these three things.

1. To show you in the general what we are to understand by Righteousness.

2. To show you more particularly what this Righteousness is, which is the work
of the Spirit to convince us of. And,

3. Show you, How, or in what way usually the Spirit does convince a Soul of
Righteousness, or what work the Spirit does in a Soul in order to the
convincing it of Righteousness.

I shall bound my discourse in speaking to these three particulars if the Lord
please.

1. Then, What are we to understand by Righteousness in the general; for that
will make way for our understanding what this Righteousness is. In the general
then, Righteousness is nothing else but a perfect exact conformity to the Law
of God, or to the revealed Will of God; an exact conformity to it both in Heart
and Life: That is Righteousness in the general. I say, a perfect conformity to
the whole Will of God revealed, not only in the outward conversation, but in
the inward frame of the Heart and Soul. You know when Adam was at first
created, when he came immediately out of the hands of God, he was made
perfectly righteous, God made Man upright, that is, Righteous: Well, wherein
did that Righteousness of Adam consist? What was the Righteousness that Adam
was created in? It is said, He was made in the Image of God. Now wherein did
the Image of God in Adam lie? What, only in the conformity of his outward
actions to the Law and Will of God? No alas! that was the least part of the
Image of God in Adam: but Adam was made in the Image of God Upright, and
Righteous, and Holy in his inward man, especially in his Soul, he was made
exactly conformable to the Will of God in every thing that he required of him,
and therefore now when Adam did sin and fall, he lost the Image of God, he lost
that Righteousness that was in his inward man, and you see, after his fall it
is said, That every imagination of the thought of man's heart were only evil,
and that continually, Genesis 6.5. Not only every action that he did was evil, no,
but the very thoughts of his heart, the inward frame of his heart and spirit
was only evil, and that continually, therefore on the contrary, his
Righteousness did consist in the conformity of his inward man to the Law and
Will of God, 1 John 3.7, 8. says the Apostle, He that does righteousness is
righteous; he that commits sin is of the Devil, but he that does
righteousness is righteous. Every sin is a transgression of the Law, so that
now when a man or woman is exactly conformable to the whole Will of God, not
only in his outward conversation, but also in his very thoughts and frame of
his heart, then he is said to be perfectly righteous, this is perfect
Righteousness. For, Brethren, a man may possibly be outwardly conformable to
the Letter of the Law, and yet not be righteous in the account of the Holy
Ghost; as the Pharisees, you know, were very righteous in respect of the Letter
of the Law, Ay, but says Christ, they are inwardly unrighteous, and therefore
he tells them, They were like whited Sepulchers which appear beautiful
outwardly, but inwardly are full of corruption and putrefaction; therefore
says Christ, Mat. 5.18. Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
They were very righteous and exact as to the Letter of the Law, and therefore
says Paul, when he was a Pharisee, Touching the Righteousness of the Law,
blameless. The Pharisees were exact as to the Letter of the Law, but still they
did not look to their inside, to their heart, there they were unrighteous: so
that by this you see what is meant by Righteousness in general, It is to be
perfectly and exactly conformable to the whole Will and Law of God revealed
both in heart and life. That in general.

2. But, Let us in the second place enquire a little more particularly, What is
this Righteousness here which Christ says, the Spirit shall convince the World
of? What Righteousness does Christ here mean? Brethren, It cannot be meant of a
man's own Righteousness that the Spirit does convince of; for the Spirit does
rather convince men of their own Unrighteousness; therefore it cannot be a man's
own Righteousness. Therefore says Paul, I would not for all the world be found
in mine own Righteousness, Phil. 3.9. Neither is it that Righteousness which is
called the Righteousness of the Law, for that is still the same with a man's
own Righteousness, which is when a man is obedient to the Letter of the Law, as
the Apostle speaks in that third of Philip. 9. And be found in him, not having
on my own Righteousness, which is of the Law. -- Well, what Righteousness then
is it which Christ here speaks of, when he says, The Spirit shall convince the
World of Righteousness; What Righteousness is it?

In brief, It is that Righteousness which is called the Righteousness of God,
in opposition to a man's own Righteousness. The Righteousness of God, as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 10.3. And so in other places; The Jews being ignorant of
the Righteousness of God, went about to establish their own Righteousness. So
that the one is set in opposition against the other: A man's own Righteousness
and God's Righteousness is contrary, distinst, and in opposition to one
another. The Righteousness of God is that Righteousness which God himself does
require in order to our salvation; and it is that righteousness which God will
accept of, and no other righteousness for our salvation; and this Righteousness
is also called, The Righteousness of Faith, Romans 10.16. So Romans 9.30. He
calls it, The Righteousness which is of Faith, because it comes in, in a way
of faith and believing.

Question.
Now you will say, Wherein lies the difference between the one Righteousness
and the other? That we may understand things as we go along. Wherein lies the
difference between that which is called our own Righteousness, and the
Righteousness of the Law, and that which is called the Righteousness of God and
the Righteousness of Faith? What, does the Difference lie here, namely, that
our own Righteousness, or the Righteousness of the Law, must be exactly
conformable and agreeable to the whole Will and Law of God to a Tittle, and the
Righteousness of God not so? No, Brethren, The Righteousness of Faith is an
exact conformity to the Law of God to a tittle as well as the other. What says
the Apostle? Do we make void the Law of Faith? God forbid, says he, Romans 3.31.
No Brethren, the Righteousness which God does require for our Salvation is a
most exact complete Righteousness to every tittle of the Law; One Iota or
Tittle of the Law shall never perish; Heaven and Earth shall fail first. We
cannot be saved by any Righteousness short of a most exact and complete
conformity to every tittle of the Law, Well, What Righteousness then is it?

Answer.
I answer in a word, It is the Righteousness of Jesus Christ in our Nature* I
say it is that Righteousness that Jesus Christ fulfilled in our humane Nature,
he was made of a Woman, and made under the Law, and being made under the Law,
he was in our Nature perfectly to fulfill the whole Law, every tittle of it,
and so he did, and therefore you may observe, from his very conception to his
death, he was perfectly conformable to the whole will of God; in his very
conception, he was conceived and born without sin, says the Angel to the
Virgin Mary, That holy thing that shall be born of thee, -- he was holy in his
very Conception, Conceived by the Holy Ghost, and he was a Lamb without spot,
we were all conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity, but Christ was
without sin in his very conception, and that is much for the comfort of
Believers, to think: Our nature is stained and polluted by sin, how shall we be
accepted of God? why here is the humane nature of Christ without spot, and we
shall be accepted for his sake, and Christ in the whole Course of his life was
altogether without sin, he knew no sin, as it is expressed, 2 Cor. 5.21. He knew
no sin, that is, no sin of his own, he had sin enough laid upon him, imputed to
him, but he had no sin of his own, there was no guile found in his mouth, he
did always those things that pleased the Father, John 28.29. he never spoke one
idle word; no, but says he, Whatever I spoke I had it by Commmandment from my
Father, he was blameless in his whole life, and therefore when he came to lay
down his life, to resign up himself to his Father, he appeals to his Father,
whether he had not done all the Work he had given him to do, I have finished
the Work (says he) which thou gave me to do, and now I come to thee. Nay,
Brethren, he was righteous and holy not only to his death, but also in his
death, he was obedient and conformable to the will of God, therefore it is said,
Phil. 2.8. He became obedient to the very death, Thus I say Christ was
perfectly righteous. Now it is this Righteousness of Christ in our nature that
the Spirit convinces the World of, that a soul must look to be accepted and
saved only for the sake of this Righteousness of Christ. Well, Brethren, let me
clear it to you by two or three Arguments, for truly these things may be matter
of temptation to us sometimes, when we set upon believing in Christ's
Righteousness. The Soul may say, May I ventur^ my soul upon the Righteousness
of another? may I not possibly miscarry? am I sure that God will accept of me
for the Righteousness of another --? Well to give you two or three Arguments
briefly upon Scripture Ground, to prove to you, that if ever we be accepted of
God it must be through the Righteousness of Christ.

1. The Holy Ghost does plainly and expressly hold forth this to us in
Scripture. See a few Scriptures for it, Isa. 42.21. The Lord is well pleased
for his Righteousness sake. A very gracious and blessed word, The Lord is well
pleased for his own Righteousness sake, not for that which is our own, for you
know Gods Righteousness and our own Righteousness are two distinct things, and
contrary, but the Lord is well pleased for his own Righteousness sake, the
Righteousness of his own Son, and that is his own Righteousness -- the Lord is
well pleased for that. Isa. 45.24. Which is a Prophecy concerning Christ,
Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I Righteousness and Strength, even to
him shall men come, and all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed; and
then in the next verse, In the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be justified,
and shall glory. In the Lord, and in him alone have I Righteousness and
Strength, in Christ have I Righteousness, there is all my Righteousness, shall
the soul say. Jer. 23.6. A Prophecy concerning Christ too, Behold the days
come, says the Lord, that I will raise up unto David a righteous Branch, and a
King shall reign and prosper, -- This is plainly spoken concerning Christ: now
mark what follows at verse 6. In his days Juda shall be saved, and Israel shall
dwell safely, and this is his Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our
Righteousness. The very name that Christ shall be called by, is, The Lord our
Righteousness. I might give you Scriptures also out of the new Testament, take
but one place, 1 Cor. 3.30. He is made of God unto us Wisdom and Righteousness.
-- God himself has appointed and ordained Jesus Christ to be unto us
Righteousness, and therefore we may be confident of it, that it is through the
Righteousness of Christ that we must come to be accepted of God and saved, and
not by our own Righteousness.

2. Take this further Ground, and that is, because, The best Righteousness of
the best Saints that are or ever have been in the World, all will fall short of
Righteousness. Take the best Saint, and the best Righteousness of the best
Saint, the best duties that ever the most holy Saint did perform, yet all will
fall short of righteousness. Therefore the Church is not afraid nor ashamed to
acknowledge, Isa. 64.6. All our Righteousnesses (for so it is in the plural
number) All our Righteousnesses are as filthy rags, loathsome and abominable,
in the eyes of the Lord. You see the best of Saints have a knowledge of their
sinfulness. Says Paul, Romans 7. he speaks largely to it there, verse 23. I see
a Law in my members warring against the Law of my mind, against the Law and
Will of God, and bringing me into Captivity to the Law of sin. So Eccles. 7.20.
There is not a righteous man upon the earth, that lives and sins not. And
the Apostle John speaks a plain and bold word, 1 John 1.8* 10. If any man
says, he has no sin, he is a liar, and the truth is not in him, and he
deceives himself. So then our own Righteousness will not do, that is imperfect
and defective, therefore if ever we be saved by Righteousness, it must be by
the Righteousness of another, which is a most perfect Righteousness; and what
Righteousness can there be perfect, but the Righteousness of the Son of God in
our nature? the Righteousness of an Angel would not serve our turn, it must be
the Righteousness of one in our nature, and this must be the Righteousness of
Christ, for there is no other can serve our turn, to make us accepted of God to
eternal life; no other Righteousness does fulfill the Law of God in our nature,
but only the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, therefore, I say, it must needs be,
that it is the righteousness of Jesus Christ in our humane nature for which we
must be accepted of God. And this is the righteousness which the Spirit of God
is said to convince the World off.

Objection.
But you will say, If so be that every believer be made perfectly righteous by
the righteousness of Jesus Christ, then how comes it to pass that believers
cannot be Mediators for others, and make others righteous, for if so be, we
have the very righteousness of Christ upon us, or we cannot be saved, then as
the righteousness of Christ makes others righteous, why may not the
righteousness of godly Parents make their Children to become righteous by their
righteousness, it being the righteousness of Christ, why should it not be
imputed to their very Children? What is the reason that believers being made
righteous by the very righteousness of Christ, that they should not also by
that righteousness, make others righteous.

Answer.
For Answer, plainly in a word, the reason is because, Believers though they be
made righteous by the very righteousness of Christ, yet notwithstanding they
are not made righteous with that righteousness, in that manner that Christ was
righteous, Christ was righteous inherently in his own person, but now the
righteousness, that we are made righteous withal, it is ours only by
imputation, That, look now, as it was with Christ, Christ was made sin for us,
says the Apostle, that is, he had the sins of all believers imputed to him, he
was made a sinner by Imputation. Now the reason why Christ did not make others
sinners, by the sin that he had, as Adam made his posterity sinners, the reason
is because Christ was not a sinner as Adam was, that is, not Inherently in
himself, but by way of imputation. So now, we are righteous by Christ's
righteousness only in a way of imputation, and therefore we cannot derive and
communicate this righteousness to another. I say, here is the reason of it,
That though we be made righteous with the perfect righteousness of Jesus
Christ, yet we are not thereby made Mediators, and able to impute righteousness
unto others, to make them righteous with our righteousness.

Objection.
But then there is another Objection for the clearing of this. You will say if
so be that a believer be made righteous with the perfect righteousness of Jesus
C^^ist, then I pray, why should a believer be called upon to seek and follow
after righteousness? is not the righteousness of Christ enough? is not that
perfect enough? shall we add any thing to the righteousness of Christ? that
will make the righteousness of Christ to be imperfect. Now if so be that you or
I or any believer be made righteous with the very righteousness of Christ,
which is a most perfect and complete righteousness, then why should we need to
seek after any further righteousness? You know the Holy Ghost in Scripture
calls upon Believers to follow after righteousness, as the Apostle calls upon
Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.11. Follow after Righteousness. What? had not he
righteousness enough, if he had the righteousness of Christ on him? what, shall
a man or woman need any further righteousness than the Righteousness of Christ.

Answer.
For Answer, briefly, It is true we shall not need any further righteousness
than the righteousness of Christ for that end that Chaists righteousness is
for. I pray mind it and understand it, I say, No believer does need any further
righteousness, than the righteousness of Christ, for that end Christ's
righteousness is imputed to us; and what is that? namely, To make us accepted
of God, and to procure and obtain forgiveness of all our sins, and eternal
life, and salvation for us; This is the end of Christ's Righteousness, and why
it is imputed to us. Now it is true, we need not to follow after any other
righteousness for those ends, for then we derogate from the Righteousness of
Christ.

Question.
But why then you will say, are we called upon to follow after Righteousness?

Answer.
Why, in short, for I must not enlarge, we are to follow after righteousness,
to be exactly righteous in our lives, and dealings, and conversations, and to
be obedient in duty, and diligent in waiting upon God in his Ordinances; we are
thus to follow after righteousness, not that we may be accepted of God for any
thing that we can do in this world, not that we may be saved for any thing we
can do or suffer here; we may do and suffer very much, and yet be damned for
all that, but, We are to follow after righteousness and holiness, partly by a
way of thanksgiving unto God, for his grace and goodness to us, partly in a way
of obedience to the Will of God, and also that we may maintain our peace that
we have with God by walking closely, and uprightly with him. He that walks
according to this rule, peace be upon him. Now by walking sinfully and
unrighteously we lose the sense of our peace with God, but now by walking
uprightly and closely with God, we come to maintain the sense of our peace; and
I might further add, By this means we come to enjoy more communion with God, by
waiting upon God in holy duties and ordinances, this is the means whereby God
comes to meet with us, and manifest himself to us, but this is not to obtain
salvation for us, or forgiveness of sins, no, that is the work and power of
Christ's righteousness alone; therefore I say, though a Believer be made
righteous with the perfect righteousness of Jesus Christ, yet it is the duty of
Believers to follow hard after righteousness. So now, you have heard the second
thing opened, namely, what that righteousness in particuiar is which Christ
speaks of, when he says the Spirit shall convince the World of righteousness,
that is, of this righteousness of God, this righteousness which is by faith,
the righteousness of Jesus Christ in our nature, this is the righteousness
which the Spirit convinces the World of in order to salvation.

3. But then you will say in the third place (to come to that) But how does the
Spirit convince of righteousness in order to salvation? You have heard what
Bighteousness in general is, and what this righteousness in particular is. Now
to show you, that it is the work of the Spirit to convince of righteousness.
Now what does the Spirit do in order to the convincing a soul of this
righteousness in order to its salvation? Briefly this, I shall desire to open
to you in two or three particulars.

1. The Spirit in convincing a Soul of righteousness takes the Soul off from
resting upon or closing with his own righteousness, not from seeking and
following after its own righteousness, but from resting and trusting, and
leaning upon its own righteousness; from looking to be accepted of God to
salvation upon the account of its own righteousness. This the Spirit of God
does take a soul from, in order to convincing it of righteousness. Truly
Brethren, this is the rock that we are all of us naturally prone to dash upon,
and to split upon; we are all of us naturally prone to seek after acceptance
with God upon the account of our own righteousness, to run on in the way of the
Covenant of Works, to seek for salvation in that way that Adam should have been
saved in if he had stood. Do, and Live, be obedient to the Will of God, be
exactly righteous, and you shall have life, this is the way that Adam should
have had life in, if he had continued in his obedience; but now this way of the
Covenant of Works is nulled, and we cannot look for salvation in that way, but
we are all of us naturally prone to run on in that way, to look for the life of
our souls merely by our own righteousness; This was the stumbling stone that
the Jews stumbled at, this was the great rock of offense, Romans 9.31, 32, 33.
says he, The Gentiles which followed not after righteousness, have attained
righteousness, but the Jews which followed after righteousness, have not
attained righteousness, why so? because the Jews stumbled at that stumbling
stone, they sought after righteousness by the works of the law, they sought to
be righteous with their own righteousness, and therefore mark what he says,
Chap. 10.3. They being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God. This is natural to us to look to be accepted of God for
our own righteousness, and truly it is a very hard thing for a soul to be taken
off from that, and therefore hence it is, that the people that are morally
righteous, and not so notoriously wicked and profane as others are, are
ordinarily harder to be convinced and converted than others are, so that as
Christ says, Mat. 21. Publicans and Harlots shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven before you, speaking to the Scribes and Pharisees that were exact to the
letter of the law. I say we are all apt naturally to stick there, and to run
upon the rock of our own righteousness, just as the Apostle speaks of himself
when he was a Pharisee, Philip. 3. I was (says he) concerning the
Righteousness of the Law blameless, but afterward when the Spirit of the Lord
had convinced him of his own unrighteousness, and the righteousness of Christ,
at the 8 and 9 Verses, Now says he, I would be found in him not having on my
own righteousness which is of the Law, that righteousness that I had when I was
a Pharisee; I would not be found (says he) having on my own righteousness, but
that righteousness which is by faith in Christ Jesus. Now I say we are very
hardly brought off from our own righteousness, to close with this righteousness
of Jesus Christ: but now it is the work of the Spirit in convincing a soul of
righteousness, to take the soul off from its own righteousness, and therefore
the Spirit is fain to take pains with the Soul, to show it that all its own
righteousness will come to nothing. And therefore do but observe the way and
method of the Spirit of God, what the Spirit of God does ordinarily when it
takes a Soul off from its own righteousness: The Spirit of God comes therefore
and causes the Soul to see, not only its own sinfulness by notorious open
wickedness and profaneness that it has lived in, it does not only convince the
Soul of its profaning of Sabbaths, and its disobedience to Parents, and lying
and stealing, -- and pilfering and dishonesty, -- when a Soul sees that then it
cannot be accepted of God for its own righteousness. And not only so, but the
Spirit of the Lord does discover to the Soul the secret evils of his heart,
inward sins that never saw the light of the Sun, that the World never knew of,
The Spirit of the Lord comes and convinces of those wickedness^s, that there is
such and such wickedness in the heart, secret pride, and secret malice, and
secret envy, and secret hypocrisy, and secret unbelief, and the like, and now
how can the Soul expect to be saved of God for its own righteousness? What? is
this the righteousness (says the Soul) that I look to be accepted for? And not
only so, but the Spirit also does discover to the Soul the unrighteousness of
its best duties and services, those things that men are apt to think that God
should accept them for; now the Spirit comes and opens the understanding, and
makes the Soul to see the imperfection and weakness of the best duties and
services; as the Church says, All our very righteousnesses are as filthy rags,
and O! can I expect to be accepted for these prayers, and these duties and
services that are so filthy, and so defective, and so impure! When the soul
comes to be made sensible of these things, how can it expect to be accepted for
its own righteousness. Nay Brethren, the holy Spirit does usually discover to a
Soul not only the sinful fa^^ings that are in his best duties and services, but
also the sinful frame of the heart and spirit, that there is a sinful frame of
wickedness within, a law of rebellion and enmity against the will of God
within, though possibly it has never broken out, but there is a sinful frame
of heart within, that every thought and imagination of the heart is only evil
continually; and out of the heart proceeds all manner of abominations, evil
thoughts, murder, and theft, and blasphemy, and all manner of wickedness. Now
Brethren when the Spirit of the Lord comes and opens a man's heart to himself,
that he sees the very frame and disposition of his heart is set against God,
and the will of God in every thing, then the Soul must needs be convinced that
it can never be accepted of God for its own righteousness, the Soul sees that
it has no righteousness at all in it self to rest upon. And not only so, but
the Spirit of the Lord in this convincing a Soul of righteousness, discovers to
a Soul that this is not the way, where by it can look for acceptance with God
by all that ever he can do, it is true indeed this was the way that Adam in his
innocence should have found life and salvation in, but since the Fall, that
Covenant is broken and nulled, and now God has no where promised to give life
and salvation in the way of that Covenant, no God has nulled that way of
Salvation by our own works and doings, that if so be now it were possible a man
or a woman to be perfectly obedient to the whole law, yet he may go to hell,
and be damned for all that, because now God is not bound nor engaged to bestow
eternal life and salvation upon man in that way, God is not bound to that
Covenant, nor will ever save a Soul in the way of that Covenant. Now it is the
work of the Spirit to discover this to a Soul, that this is not the way for me
ever to attain salvation, it must be in another way and by another
righteousness, and hereby a soul is taken off from leaning and resting upon its
own righteousness, and from ever looking for salvation by any thing it has
done or can do, though it should do never so much; nay, and let me add this
further, that when the Spirit of God does thus take a soul off from leaning and
resting upon its own righteousness, yet notwithstanding the Spirit of the Lord
does put the Soul upon seeking and following hard after righteousness and its
own righteousness too. Ay Brethren this is now a Gospel-Mystery that flesh and
blood can never attain to; for our carnal hearts are ready to argue thus, if we
cannot be saved by our own righteousness, then we need not to follow after it,
and so grow loose and carnal and careless and slighty, neglecting duties, or
else being formal in them. But now the Spirit of God does teach the Soul and
lead it in this middle way, in this strait and narrow way; every soul that the
Spirit of God does convince of righteousness in order to salvation, he does
teach him, and instruct him in this, that though he shall never be saved by all
that ever he can do, yet the Spirit leads him on in a way of holiness and
righteousness, very exactly, to be careful to walk with God in obedience to the
Lords will and command. And the Holy Ghost does write a Law of obedience upon
the heart, and therefore those that draw such conclusions from this doctrine of
the Gospel, they do not understand the Gospel, nor this convincing work of the
Spirit, which is to convince us that we are not to look for salvation by all
our own righteousness, and yet convinces us of the necessity of following hard
after righteousness. This now is the first thing that the Holy Ghost does in
convincing a soul of righteousness to take the soul off from resting and
leaning upon its own righteousness.

2. But Secondly, Another thing that the Spirit does in order to the convincing
a soul of righteousness is this, namely, The Spirit does usually discover to
the Soul what this righteousness of Christ is, by which it must look for
acceptance with God to Salvation: The Spirit does usually reveal this
righteousness to the soul, therefore says the Apostle, Romans 1.17. The
righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, It is the work of the
Spirit of God to reveal this righteousness, to open it, and cause the Soul to
understand it, and therefore the Spirit is called the Spirit of Revelation,
Ephesians. 1.17. The Apostle prays there, That God would give them the Spirit of
Revelation, in the knowledge of Christ; because it is the work of the Spirit to
reveal the righteousness of Jesus Christ to the Soul, and cause the soul to
understand it in some measure, but still the soul is sensible of its own
ignorance and blindness, and possibly more afterward than before. But in some
measure there is a discovery made of this righteousness of Jesus Christ to the
soul, and in order to this there are several things that the holy Spirit does
discover to the Soul concerning this righteousness of Christ, namely, It is the
Spirit that discovers to the Soul the Perfection of this Righteousness, that
Christ's righteousness is a most perfect and complete righteousness, without any
blemish, without any defect or imperfection. The Spirit shows to the Soul that
Christ has fulfilled all righteousness; he was obedient to every tittle of the
Law, there was no defect, no blemish at all in Christ's life all along, neither
in his outward nor inward man, from his very conception all along throughout
his life to his very death; the Spirit of the Lord does make a soul to
understand this in some measure, it discovers the righteousness of Christ to be
a perfect and complete righteousness; that though my own righteousness be full
of defects and imperfections, yet the righteousness of Jesus Christ is a
perfect righteousness. That is one thing that the Spirit usally does in this
convincing of righteousness, it discovers to the Soul that this righteousness
of Christ is a perfect and complete righteousness.

And not only so, but further, the Spirit discovers to the soul that it is not
only a perfect but an all-sufficient righteousness; the righteousness of Jesus
Christ is not only a perfect righteousness, exactly perfect to every tittle of
the Law, but an all-sufficient righteousness; that the righteousness of Christ
is able to save a World of sinners, he was able by his righteousness to be a
propitiation for the sins of the whole World; 1 John 2.1, 2. He is the
Propitiation not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole World; that
is, for the sins of all the Elect throughout the whole World, for all that were
Christ's seed, Christ's posterity; that now as all Adams posterity were made
sinners by the imputation of Adam's unrighteousness, so now Christ's
righteousness is sufficient to make all his posterity, all his seed, to make
them all righteous in the sight of God; because now this righteousness, it is
the righteousness of the Son of God, of that person that is the eternal Son of
God, of that person that is very God equal with the Father, the same Essence
with God. Now this is the righteousness of God; as the Apostle calls the Blood
that Christ shed, the Blood of God, Acts 20.28. So now this righteousness of
Christ is the righteousness of God, as it is usually called in the New
Testament, because it is the righteousness of that person which is God. Now
this makes his righteousness to be an all-sufficient righteousness. Now then I
may venture my Soul upon this righteousness, if it be an all-sufficient
righteouness, and the righteousness of God, then it is such a righteousness as
is sufficient to save to the utmost all that come to God by him, and it is an
everlasting righteousness, it will serve from the very beginning to the end of
the World, to make poor unrighteous Creatures to become righteous in the sight
of God, and to be accepted of God to eternal life and salvation; nay; and then
further, the Spirit of God goes on to discover and reveal this, namely, that
God is ready to accept of this righteousness in the behalf of poor sinners,
here is now the mystery of the Gospel, for truly this is a hard thing for flesh
and blood to be persuaded of, that I can be made righteous with the
righteousness of another, that I can be fed with the meat that another eats,
that I can be made warm by the clothes that another wears, that I should be
made righteous with the personal righteousness of Jesus Christ. Brethren, this
is the work of the Spirit of God to discover and reveal this to the Soul, that
God will accept of the righteousness of Christ on the behalf of poor sinners;
He was made sin for us that knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Well, this, the Spirit of God does
discover and reveal to the Soul, when he comes to convince it of righteousness.
Nay, and let me add further concerning this righteousness, namely, the Spirit
does discover to the Soul the way whereby he may come to have an interest in
this righteousness, the Spirit does discover that to the Soul, namely, that it
is in a way of faith, and believing, and leaning, and resting upon the
righteousness of Christ, that Whosoever believes on him shall not perish but
have everlasting life, and Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to
every one that believes, Romans 10.4. This is the work of the Spirit to discover
this to the soul, when he comes to deal with the soul to convince it of
righteousness in order to salvation. This is the second thing that the Spirit
does, first it takes us off from our own righteousness, and then it reveals and
discovers to the Soul this righteousness of Christ, what it is, and which way
it is to be attained. But then,

3. A third Work that the Spirit does, which is the upshot of all, and that is
this, when the Spirit comes to convince a Soul of righteousness in order to
salvation, then, The Spirit does convince powerfully and effectually, that is,
the Spirit comes powerfully, and persuades the Soul to close with this
righteousness. This is to convince of righteousness in order to salvation, so
to convince as to persuade and prevail with the soul to venture to close with
it; this is the way whereby a Soul comes to have an interest in Christ's
righteousness, by faith and believing on Christ, and it is the work of the
Spirit so to convince, so powerfully so as to prevail with the Soul to give the
venture: Well, I will venture my Soul upon it, if I perish I perish, I will
venture my Soul upon this righteousness of Christ; the Spirit secretly
persuades the heart, so as now the Soul is made to say with the Psalmist, Psalm,
71.16. I will go in the strength of the Lord God, I will make mention of thy
righteousness, even of thine only; When the Spirit comes thus to convince
effectually, so as to persuade the Soul to venture to lean upon Christ's
righteousness only to be accepted of God to salvation, then the soul does make
mention of Christ's righteousness, and that only: well, I will venture to rest
upon that alone, and then surely shall one say, In the Lord have I
righteousness and strength, then the soul shall be made to say, there is all my
righteousness* I have none of my own that I dare venture on, but I do now
venture to lean the weight of my Soul upon this righteousness of Christ, and if
I perish, I perish. This is now the convincing work of the Spirit to convince
of righteousness. So now you have heard the point briefly opened, namely, That
it is the Work of the Spirit in order to Salvation to convince the Soul of
righteousness. Now then briefly for the Application of it in a Word.

Application.
Here then we may come to understand whether or no the Spirit has been at work
upon our souls in order to salvation. It is a great Question (I suppose you
will think it so, when you come to ly upon your deathbeds) whether or no the
Spirit of God has been at work upon my heart in order to my salvation? Well
you see it is the work of the Spirit, in order to Salvation, to convince of
sin, and to convince of righteousness; then consider, I pray consider seriously
between the Lord and your own souls, and let us not willingly deceive our own
souls, Has the Spirit of the Lord ever been thus at work upon my heart? has
the Spirit ever come and convinced me of sin, and of righteousness? For if the
Spirit of the Lord has ever convinced you of sin in order to your Salvation,
it will go on also in the Work of Conviction to convince also of Righteousness.
Therefore, I say, I pray consider of it seriously.

Objection.
You will say, Well, I hope the Spirit of the Lord has been at work upon my
heart, I hope I can say my heart has been deeply troubled about my sin, and I
have gone and confessed my sin unto God, and I have begged earnestly in prayer
for the pardon of my sins.

Answer.
Well, a man or a woman may do all this, and yet come short of this convincing
work of the Spirit which is in order to Salvation. Therefore consider further,
I pray, for as you heard the last time, usually when the Spirit does convince
of sin in order to Salvation, it convinces the soul especially of unbelief;
and indeed till a Soul come to be convinced by the Spirit of the sin of
unbelief, his conviction of sin may be no argument to him that the Spirit has
been at work upon his heart in order to salvation. Indeed when a soul comes to
that discovery, that the soul is convinced of the evil of unbelief, then there
is the greatest hopes that such a Soul is not like to miscarry; for I am
persuaded, that the Spirit of the Lord never convinces a Soul of the evil of
unbelief, but it is in order to his salvation; you shall never have a carnal
heart to understand the evil of unbelief, that is the work of the Spirit of
God. Now consider, I pray, has the Lord discovered to you, and convinced you
of sin, especially of the sin of unbelief.

Objection.
You will say possibly, I hope the Spirit has been at work upon my heart in
order to salvation, for I know thus much, I am persuaded that without the
righteousness of Christ I can never be saved, I can never be saved by mine own
righteousness I know that, and I know that I must have the righteousness of
Christ imputed to me by faith, or I cannot be saved.

Answer.
But Brethren, I pray consider of it, for here may be only a mere notional
knowledge, a mere conviction in the notion only; you may be convinced that this
is a truth, that there is no salvation but by Christ, A man or woman may be
convinced of this notionally, he may have this knowledge in his head, that the
only way whereby I must attain to salvation must be by the righteousness of
Christ, by believing on Christ, but I pray consider whether the Spirit of the
Lord has thoroughly convinced you of the righteousness of Christ.

Question.
You will say, How shall I know that?

Answer.
Briefly by these two things.

1. When the Spirit of the Lord does convince a Soul of righteousness in order
to Salvation, it does (as you heard) take a Soul clear off from its own
righteousness, and not only so, but it leads the Soul to follow after
Righteousness still, after our own righteousness too. This is the work of the
Spirit, the Evangelical work of the Spirit to take a Soul off from its own
righteousness and cause it to lean only upon Christ's righteousness, and yet to
follow hard after its own righteousness; it is a mystery to the World; ay, but
the Spirit of the Lord does lead a Soul in this way, whereas now one that has
but a notional conviction of the righteousness of Christ, and that his own
righteousness cannot save him, alas! he will be ready to be formal and slighty
in looking after his own righteousness, he will be formal and careless in
duties and ordinances, -- or else he will be ready to neglect them; he thinks
under a notion of Christ's righteousness, that he shall be saved by the
righteousness of Christ, and so he neglects following hard after his own
righteousness. Brethren, this is that the Spirit of the Lord does, when he
convinces a Soul of the righteousness of Christ in order to Salvation, it still
causes the Soul to follow hard after its own righteousness, though not to be
accepted of God for it, not to be saved by it, but for such ends as I told you
of before. This is the way now that the Spirit of the Lord does work upon the
Soul in, in order to its salvation. And then

2. Again, this also the Spirit is wont to do, when he convinces of
righteousness, he does convince effectually and powerfully, (as I told you) he
does so convince the soul of the Righteousness of Christ, as to persuade the
soul to venture to lean its everlasting condition upon it, to lean there, to
rest there; I say, this is the work of the Spirit. And let us consider with our
selves, I pray, whether the Spirit has been thus at work upon our hearts in
order to salvation.

Well, to conclude and take my Farewell of you; As we desire to obtain life and
salvation through the righteousness of Jesus Christ, take but only these three
words which I shall leave with you and so have done. It Is a matter of
everlasting concernment, closing with this Righteousness of Christ, fall short
of the Righteousness of Christ but a hairs breadth, and you fall short of
eternal life and salvation: for, There is no Name under Heaven, whereby you can
be saved, but by Christ, and his Righteousness; this is the new way of the
Covenant of Grace, to be saved for righteousness indeed, and a perfect
Righteousness too (as perfect as ever Adams was) but not for our own, but for
the perfect righteousness of Jesus Christ: therefore I say, let me commend but
three Words to you, and so I have done.

First, Study earnestly and diligently to understand this Righteousness of
Christ; though possibly you may think you do understand it in some measure, yet
there is a great deal more of it to be understood, it is a great Deep, a great
Mystery, therefore still let us be much in the study of this Righteousness of
Christ.

Secondly, Beg and pray earnestly for the Spirit to be given out unto you to
convince you of this Righteousness more and more, to convince you effectually
and powerfully, so as to enable your souls to venture to lean upon it.

Thirdly, And then endeavor every day frequently to be exercising your selves
in leaning and resting the weight of your Souls upon this Righteousness of
Jesus Christ; do not only beg for the Spirit to convince us of this, but let us
be endeavoring to exercise our selves frequently in leaning the weight of our
Souls upon the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, to be accepted of God to eternal
life.

I will repeat them again, and then have done.

First, Be very diligent in stud^ing to understand what the Righteousness of
Christ is: Our eternal life is in it; as Moses said, Set your heart to this
Word, for it is your Life. So I say, this is your life, this Righteousness of
Christ, therefore set your heart to study it, make it your work and business to
study to understand still more and more of this Righteousness of Christ.

Secondly, Beg earnestly for the Spirit of Conviction, that Christ would send
down his Spirit to convince us of this Righteousness, to convince us
effectually and powerfully of it, so as to be enabled to rest upon it.

Thirdly, Let us be exercising our selves frequently in leaning, and resting
the weight of our Souls upon this Righteousness, giving up our selves
frequently, day by day, to lean and rest the weight of our Souls upon the
Righteousness of Christ for acceptance with God to eternal life and salvation.

Well I have done, only this Word I shall add in a Word, He that has ears to
hear, let him hear.

Thirsty Sinners invited to Christ.
SERMON VIII.
JOHN 7.37. In the last day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood, and
cried, saying; If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink.


YOU have heard before the Words that Christ spoke when the Pharisees and
Rulers sent Officers to take him at the 30 Verse. At the 33 and 34 Verses, he
told them that whatever their design should be to take him, Yet notwithstanding
says he, yet a little while I am with you, and whereas you are now desirous to
be rid of me, Ere long I shall go away, and you shall see me no more, and
though you may desire it, You shall seek me, says Christ, and shall not find
me, and where I am, thither you cannot come; Now mark what an effect these
words had upon them, what use did the Jews make of that word of Admonition that
Christ gave, and that gracious Counsel he gave; instead of making a good
improvement. See v. 35.36. they made use of his words to scoff at and mock him,
say they, Yet a little while and he will go away; will he go to the dispersed
among the Gentiles? speaking in derision and scorn, will he go among the
dispersed Gentiles? Christ spoke plain enough, if they had not been maliciously
blind, Yet a little while (says he) and I go to him that sent me, and so they
made a mere mock. So that here we may take notice, that, Malicious minded men
in stead of receiving any Word of Counsel, and advice, will be ready rather to
rail, mock, and scoff at them who give it. And so here to the Jews it was a
word of Admonition that Christ gave, but they fell a mocking and scoffing at
him; And so it was of old, 2 Chronicles. 14.20. you read there, how King Jehoshaphat
sent about Priests and Levites throughout the Cities, out of Compassion to
their Souls, to teach the Word among them, and to put them in mind of their
duty, and it is said, they mocked those that came, they mocked the messengers
of the Lord, for the words which they brought were for the welfare of their
Souls. And so you read concerning the Lords Prophets that he sent to Juda, 2 Chronicles. 36. It Is said, They mocked at the Lords Messengers till there was no
remedy. And so, Acts 17. Paul was preaching of the resurrection of the dead,
and it is said they mocked, Many mocked and scoffed at him, v. 32. And when they
heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked, and others said, We will
hear thee again concerning this matter. And thus it has been, and so I say, as
Paul in the Galatians, Even so it is now, and so it will be. And it may be of
support unto the Servants of God that give words of Admonition, Reproof, and
Reprehension, Let them be satisfied in this, that though they be mocked, it is
no more than was the Lot of the Servants of God of old before them. Well, but
mark now how Christ does go on for all this, he was not discouraged, he does
not turn his back upon them, because they mocked and scoffed and jeered him,
but mark he goes into the Temple, and falls a preaching gracious Words unto
them, as in the Text; In the last day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood
and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. Here was
the Sermon that he preached after that derision that he met with from the Jews;
I say, the words that I have read are the Sermon that Christ had preached in
the Temple, as you may see recorded by the Evangelist. Concerning this Sermon
take notice of two or three things.

1. First of all, Here is set forth the Time, when it was that Christ preached
this Sermon: It Is said, the last Day, that great Day of the Feast, what Feast?
why the Feast of Tabernacles, that Christ did preach this Sermon, and it is said
the last Day, and great Day of the Feast. Observe it, the Feast of Tabernacles
was not kept only one day, but many days, even seven days together. Levit.
23.34. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the Children of
Israel, the fifteenth day of the seventh Month shall be the Feast of
Tabernacles for seven days unto the Lord, the fifteenth day of the seventh
Month, that is our September. Now for these seven days, the first and the last
were kept in a solemn manner; in the other days they did servile work, but not
on the first and last day, and so in Nehemia's time, they kept the last day of
the Feast very solemnly, Nehem. 8.18. And they kept the Feast seven days, and
on the eighth day was a solemn assembly, according unto the manner. The last
day, then the people came generally into the Temple to hear the law read unto
them, and therefore that last day was called the great day of the Feast, for
the people on the morrow were to depart into all parts of the Country, as they
came from all parts; so here, on the last day, on the great day of the Feast,
Christ preached unto them on this subject.

2. Secondly, It Is set forth by the Manner of it, in what manner Christ did
preach this Sermon to them, There is a double circumstance in the preaching of
this Sermon; It Is said Christ stood, but ordinarily Christ is said to sit down;
As he sat down in the ship, but here it is said he stood, that he might be
better heard and seen of the multitude. And another thing about the manner of
it, is, He stood and cried with a mighty voice, he did extend his voice, so as
all might hear, there being a great concourse of people, and likewise
intimating that he was not afraid of the people; he goes up into the Temple,
and there he cries it, intimating also that the matter was a weighty matter,
which he had then to speak unto them, as if he had said, now take this word
with you, it is a matter of great concernment. And that is the third thing here
in the Text.

3. Thirdly, The matter of his Sermon when he stood and cried so, what did he
speak or say? why, this it was, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and
drink. This was the sum of his Sermon that he stood up and cried or preached
unto the people. Wherein we have these two Particulars.

1. A gracious Invitation to all that are athirst. And

2. A gracious Promise, that if they did come, they should drink. The Rabbis
amongst the Jews recorded of this Feast, that in this last day, they were wont
to go and power abundance of water and wine (in a way of rejoicing) upon the
Altar, and therefore Christ in allusion to that (speaking to them) says, If
any man be athirst, let him come unto me, and drink. Briefly to take up what I
conceive to be Christ's meaning in this place. There is a great deal of the
Gospel here in these Words, in this general Proclamation, If any man be
athirst, let him come to me and drink. Then know,

Doctrine.
That such as being athirst do come unto Christ, they shall certainly be
supplied unto the full, and that most freely.

Whoever being athirst does come to Christ, he shall have a supply, he shall
have a full supply, he shall not only taste or sip, but drink a full draught,
his belly full, so filled, that as the Word says, Out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water; and not only so, but he shall have a full supply most
freely, drink most freely he does not desire money or price, but according to
that Proclamation which you have to this purpose, Isa. 55.1. Ho every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy and
eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money and without price. Come, and ye
shall drink freely and that for nothing, without money, and without price. And
so Revel. 22.17. And the Spirit, and the Bride say, Come, let him that hears
say Come, And let him that is a thirst come; and whosoever will, let him take
of the water of life freely, And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come, this is
held forth freely, to drink freely, and it shall cost nothing; As now a man
that should hold forth proclamation to all that would come to him and drink
what they would, they might come, and should drink freely without charge to
them; So here, our Savior Christ clearly holds forth Grace and Salvation
freely, whosoever comes they shall have it freely. Briefly to open the point,
and show,

1. What manner of Thirst it is that Christ speaks off, What thirst is it?

2. What is that same coming? Or how may a man that is athirst, how may such an
one come? you will say, suppose it be a thirst after the water of life, how may
I come, or in what way may I come to Christ? And then

3. Show you, That those who being thirsty do come to Christ, they shall
certainly be supplied to the full, They shall have drink given them freely,
most freely. I shall desire to have respect to the season and apply my self
accordingly to show you what we are to understand by this same thirst, If any
man be a thirst let him come and drink, What manner of thirst is it?

1. We are not here to understand it to be a bodily thirst, but we are to
understand it of spiritual thirst, a thirsting of the Soul, as David says, My
Soul thirsts for thee O God, for the Living God, Psalm. 42.2. There Is a thirst
of the Soul, as well as a thirst of the Body, and the thirst of the Soul is set
forth by the similitude or resemblance of the Body, and so by what this thirst
of the body is, we may the better understand the resemblance of the thirst of
the Soul. There are three things in a bodily thirst.

1. There is a sense that the body feels of want, there is not only a want of
moisture but the body is sensible of it, it is such a want as is an afflictive
want, in the want of it the body stands in need of a supply, and so you may
read concerning Hagar, the water being out, she did not know what to do for
water, and away she goes crying for her child, and her child cries too, and so
even ready to perish for want of water. And so Sampson, after he had made a
great slaughter of the Philistims, says he, What shall this victory do me
good, if I want water? so that it is the sense of the want of something that is
needful, and as there is a sense of something, so an ardent and vehement
desire, and longing after the fulfilling of that desire, as you read of Sisera,
Judge. 4. That great General begged a draught of water being very thirsty.

2. In the thirst of the body, there are not only longing desires, vehement
earnest desires for a supply, but it is altogether unsatisfied, till it has
some thing of water or moisture to supply it is thirst. As the Israelites, they
must have water whatever comes of it, they must have water, and Moses smites
the rock, and fetched water out of it for them. Why

1. First of all, In the thirst of the soul, the soul is sensible of the want
of some spiritual good thing, he is not only wanting it, and without it, but he
is sensible of it: In this thirst of the soul, there is a deep sense of the
want of some spiritual good thing, Psalm. 63.1.2.3. David being banished from
the Tabernacle, from the public worship, O! says he, My Soul thirsts for
God; He wanted the Ordinances, as he used to have had them, that I may see thy
glory in thy Sanctuary. In Isa. 41.17. When the poor and needy seek water, and
there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst (a gracious promise) see
what want there is, when the Soul is in such a case, being so sensible that it
is even faint and failing, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will
not forsake them. And then again,

3. As with the body when it is athirst, it does vehemently and strongly desire;
so now in this same thirst of the soul there is an ardent, an earnest and
strong desire after that which it finds it stands in need of, Psalm. 42.1.2.
David does express the thirst of his soul, as the Heart that is wearied, and
tired, and just spent in hunting: O it longs and thirsts after the water brooks
for its refreshment, so does my Soul after thee O God; O when shall I come and
appear before God! So Psalm. 63.8. My Soul follows hard after God, it was when
his soul was thirsty; in the beginning of the Psalm his soul was thirsty for
God, and v. 8. My Soul follows hard after God, more than a man that is
athirst follows hard for the satisfying his desire of thirst. So when the Soul
that has wanted some spiritual good thing (being athirst) has longed
vehemently, and strongly, and been very earnest for it. And then again

3. When the soul is spiritually thirsty, it is not satisfied with any thing
short of that which it finds it stands in need of, of that spiritual good
thing, of that spiritual mercy; As Abraham, he was athirst, his soul was
athirst for the accomplishment of the Promise; well, Abraham goes a long while
before the accomplishment of the promise, twenty years or better, and in the
mean while God gives Abraham other Promises, but yet he is not satisfied; says
God to Abraham, Behold Abraham, I am thy shield, and thine exceeding great
reward; what could Abraham desire more than God to be his great reward, even
all; and yet says Abraham, Lord, what will thou give me? and I go childless;
nothing else but what God promised him will satisfy him. When the soul is
athirst, nothing will satisfy but what it is a thirsting after: One thing have
I desired, and that will I seek, it is that which I have thirsted after, and
longed for, and nothing shall satisfy me till I have my longing; I have made it
the main of my desires, and I will still desire it, even as the Woman of
Canaan; she desired mercy for her Daughter that was possessed of a Devil, she
had other mercies, yet she would not be satisfied without she had that mercy.
And this is the nature of a thirst; Why now says Christ, If any be a thirst,
let him come to me.

Objection.
But you shill say, What is the Object of this thirst that he thirsts after, or
for? what is it? for the thirst of the body, water, or some moisture for the
body? But now what is the Object of this thirst? must Christ supply a man with
whatsoever he thirsts for? suppose he thirsts for a great deal of the world, or
suppose he thirsts for health, and strength, or the life of a friend or
relation, or suppose it may be for some spiritual mercy, the performance of
spiritual duties, and the like, whatsoever a man thirsts for, must it be given
him?

Answer.
It is true indeed, it is not here expressed for whatsoever a man does thirst, I
suppose Christ does not mean whosoever thirsts for the World, or worldly
Comforts, or for spiritual gifts, etc. for carnal ends, but Christ means such
mercies and blessings as do accompany and necessarily tend to the salvation of
the soul; if any man thirst for such a mercy, for that which he calls in the
next verse, the Water of Life, Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water, who thirsts so; and he does more plainly express it, Verse 39. This he
spoke of the Spirit, Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living Water, that
is, whosoever is athirst for spiritual mercies, whosoever is athirst for saving
sanctifying grace, he that is athirst for the Comforts of the Spirit, for the
saving graces thereof, as faith, meekness, humility, and patience, as the
Apostle reckons diverse fruits of the Spirit, Galat. 5.22, 23. Whosoever does
long, and is sensible of the want of these saving blessings, and mercies,
pardon of sin, and assurance, etc. whosoever is sensible of these wants, and
longs for a supply of them, and is unsatisfied without them; Whosoever he is
that is thus, Let him come to me. Now, I say, this same spiritual thirst of the
Soul is very necessary, else the Soul will hardly ever come to Christ for to be
supplied: Like as it is with a man that has no ailment at all, at lest no
sense of it, tell him of a Physician, he will not stir a step after him for
cure: Those that are truly thirsty, and have not wherewithal to supply
themselves, they are they that will come to Christ. And hence it is that when
Christ would stir up those of Laodicea to come unto him, he does it by showing
them their spiritual wants; Thou say, says he, that thou stand in need of
nothing, that thou art full and stand in need of nothing; But I say, says
Christ, that thou art blind, miserable and naked. First Christ does convince
them (as it were) of their need of a thirst, and then holds forth the Water of
Life. Here Is the first thing opened. What we are to understand by this thirst.
They who are truly thirsty, let them come to Christ: But,

2. What is this coming to Christ, or how may the Soul come unto Christ, to
drink of the water of life? As I said before concerning thirst, it is not a
thirst of the body, but a thirst of the soul: In what way may the Soul be said
to come unto Christ? Briefly three ways the Soul that is athirst may be said to
come to Christ.

1. First, We are to come to Christ in the way of his Ordinances, attending
upon his Word, to hearken to Christ there; Let him come to me in the way of
mine Ordinances; As in Scripture phrase, in that place before mentioned, Isa.
55.2, 3. Coming is an hearkening diligently, enclining the ear; Come unto me by
enclining of your ear; Jesus Christ is usually to be found in his own way in
his ordinances, Mat. 28.20. Lo I am with you always, even to the end of the
World, yea in his Ordinances, in the administration of the Gospel, I am with
you. Then come to the place where Christ is, or where he may meet with you.
Received you the Spirit by the hearing of the Law, or by the preaching, of
Faith? that is the Gospel; Ye received the Spirit, says the Apostle Paul, by
having the Gospel preached; he compares the preaching of the Law, and the
preaching of the Gospel, and calls the preaching of the Law the Letter, and the
preaching of the Gospel the Spirit. To come to Christ, to wait upon Christ in
his own way, where he gives out this water of life; he that receives of this
water of life, must be found in the way where Christ comes, as Zaccheus was,
when Christ said to him, this day is Salvation come to thy house. This was
beyond his desire, and beyond his thirst: Would you come to Christ, come into
his Galleries, come into my sister, my Spouse. Would you come to Christ? come
where he is, and see, he walks in the midst of his golden Candlesticks, there
wait upon him in the way of his Ordinances, and here what he will say unto you
for a supply of your wants.

2. Secondly, Come unto Christ in a way of Asking, by asking of him the waters
of life, So we are to come, and this is called a coming to the Lord in the
Hebrews, He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Chap. 11.6. He that comes to God,
how? in a way of prayer, and so to seek grace to help in a time of need; come
in a way of prayer. And see how he directed the Woman of Samaria, Christ asked
her a little water, and she denied him, well says Christ, If thou had asked
of me, I would have given thee living water, how would he have given her living
water? why in a way of asking.

3. Thirldy, We are to come in a way of Faith, And so says Christ here in this
Text, If any man thirst, let him come and drink, that is, he that believes in
me, and so this coming to Christ is expounded to be believing, John 6.35. He
that comes unto me shall never hunger, and he that believes in me shall never
thirst. Look now as unbelieving is a departing from the Lord, Heb. 10.38.39.
Take heed, if any man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him; But we
are not of those that draw back, but of them that believe to the saving of the
Soul. O! an evil heart of unbelief is a departing from God; and so then by
believing, the soul is said to come to God, to draw near to God. But what is
that coming unto Christ, or believing in Christ, whereby the Soul shall be
fully satisfied? is it a believing that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, the
Savior of the World? the very Devils do believe this; No, but briefly, This
Believing is, namely, The Souls rest, and relying, and trusting upon Christ for
acceptance in the sight of God, for remission of sins, for Salvation, and
eternal life. Trusting and relying upon Christ and his merits for Salvation, a
putting confidence in the Lord. Now when the Soul does rely and venture through
a Word of invitation in the Gospel, through Christ's invitation does adventure
to rely upon his merits, to be wholly accepted in the sight of God. This now is
a coming to Christ. And now says Christ, If any man thirst, Let him come unto
me and he shall drink. Let not any here move contention, and say, what do you
bid us come to Christ, why this holds forth free Will? Why, know that such
exhortations usually and frequently are in all the duties, that the Holy Ghost
requires of us, which he knows we have no strength to do; the Lord calls us to
pray, and it is our duty so to do; and to believe, but we have no strength and
power of our selves, but we must not stand upon cavelling and say, it is but a
folly for us to be striving, seeing we can do nothing, but it is our duty to be
doing what lies in us to the performance, and wait upon the Lord for his coming
in with power to enable us to perform; as Lazarus, when he was in the grave,
Christ called and with his word power was given forth, and he came out. So now
we should endeavor to rely and trust upon Christ in his grace, and in his
promise to have a supply of this same Water of life, and not to give over and
cavil. That is a third, to show what way the Soul that is truly a thirst should
come to Christ. Then

3. Thirdly, Such as being athirst and do come to Christ, they shall certainly
be supplied, They shall certainly have a full supply, and it freely given them,
for so says Christ, If any man thirst let him come and he shall drink freely;
He does not expect any thing, or hold forth any price, but they, whoever come,
shall drink freely, they shall certainly have a full supply, and be supplied
freely; and he speaking it, spoke in the hearing and audience of many
thousands. I shall speak a Word of Application.

Application.
This may help us to discern, whether we have ever been made to drink out of
the Well of Salvation. Whether ever we have been made to drink of the waters
which Jesus Christ has given forth: and to go no further than the Text, there
are two things that may help us to discern it, and one is this.

1. That if ever the Soul has drank of the waters of life that are held forth,
then it was once athirst for Christ; for here the offer that Christ makes is to
thirsty souls, and those who thirst not will not care for coming. And

2. Not only thirsty, but they must also come to Christ. And therefore briefly
to hint what I have spoken before.

1. Consider whether you have been truly thirsty, and by that you may see and
know whether you have truly drank of this water of life. Consider it every one,
has my soul been truly thirsty? the soul that is truly thirsty is really
sensible of some spiritual want, that he wants some spiritual mercy, so
sensible as to be spiritually affected, yea afflicted with the sense of it: As
a man that is thirsty for water, he is so sensible that if he have it not he is
afflicted for it; why so, let every soul consider, well, has my soul ever been
really sensible of the want of some saving mercy, or truth? has my soul been
ever sensible of it? I pray consider it with your own souls, what saving grace
is it that your souls have been sensible for the want of? even afflicted for
the want of it? if ever you have been very greatly thirsty in your bodies, you
have been very sensible. I pray consider, can you remember that ever your souls
were really sensible so as to be afflicted for the want of some spiritual
saving mercy from God?

2. Again, Consider, If you have been thirsty, Whether you have ever found that
same strong ardent, and longing desire after a supply of that spiritual want
you are in? As pardon of sin, or saving grace: Have your souls not only been
affected, but afflicted from the sense of the want of Grace, being ardently,
vehemently, and earnestly longing after it: Can you remember at such a time
your body was thirsty, and you longed for water, and could have drank puddle
water by a good token, and cannot you remember that your souls have been
longing, vehemently longing, most earnestly longing after, and panting after
this spiritual water of life, and to have been altogether unsatisfied, without
you might have that spiritual grace and mercy, which you have longed for: If a
man be thirsty, he will not be satisfied with a song, you may sing him a song,
but that will not satisfy him, and give him what you will he must have that
which he longs for, and that which he desires, or nothing. And has it been
thus with your souls? consider what I say; can you say, you have longed for
this grace and the other, for saving grace and the like, well, but have you not
been satisfied with something else? for I say, if we had not had in some
measure a supply, our souls would still have been thirsty, and never satisfied
without that we have found a need of. And then take that along with all, viz.

3. Consider whether ever you have truly come to Christ. Suppose you have
longed for this and that mercy, and have been unsatisfied for want of this
mercy, consider of it, did you ever truly come to Christ? have you ever been
athirst? have you ever come to Christ in his Ordinances for a supply? why, yes
you will say, you have come to the Ordinances to hear the Word preached; Ay
Brethren, you may come to hear, and yet not come to Christ; have you ever come
to hear the Word from the sense of the want of some spiritual saving grace,
that he would supply to you? it is ordinary for every one to come, except they
are such as are desperately wicked and profane, but thus we are to come, and
have we ever come thus to Christ? even as the Saints have been wont to come to
the Ordinances, with a sense of their spiritual wants, I will hearken and hear
what God the Lord will speak to me, for he will speak peace: He wanted peace,
and he had the sense of the want of peace upon him, now says he, God will
speak peace. So Psalm. 73. The good man was under a great temptation, and it was
even too hard for him, and he was even ready to cry out of the temptation, and
murmur, and repine against God, well he now goes unto the Lord in the way of
his Ordinances, and hearkens what God will give unto him, to answer his
temptation, and then his temptation was answered in his waiting upon God in the
sense of his spiritual wants for a supply. And so have you even come thus to
the Lord in the way of his Ordinances? when you came this day before the Lord,
can you say (between the Lord and your own Souls) that you came upon the sense
of some spiritual want for your Souls unto the Lord in this Ordinance? Why
Brethren, it is a rare thing for to come to Christ in the way of his
Ordinances, in the sense of the want of some spiritual mercy. But,

4: Again, Consider, Have you ever come to Christ in a way of prayer? to ask a
spiritual mercy and blessing. It Is true inded, you will say, you go to God
every day for the pardon of sin, and assurance of it; you go every day, but now
have you come to the Lord and asked this spiritual mercy, and the other, as a
thirsty man that is even ready to perish for want of drink, and to take nothing
in a way of satisfaction (whatsoever you have besides) without you have that
you are so sensible of.

5. And then, Consider, Whether you have ever come to Christ in a way of Faith.
There is the coming to Christ indeed, if ever you would drink of the water of
life, you must come in a way of faith. Though you have come to the Word, and
come in a way of prayer, yet have you come in a way of faith? relying, and
resting, and rolling upon Christ in a way of Faith, to be accepted of the
Father through him, and so for remission of sins, and whatever saving benefit
you stand in need of. Have you ever came to Christ thus? relying upon him in
his word, in the invitation he makes there, and in his promise? this is the way
to come to Christ; He that believes on me, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living water. Let us consider of it between the Lord and our own souls,
whether ever we have come to Christ and so drank of the waters of life? if we
have not been thirsty, though we may have seemed to be so, yet if we have not
really come to Christ, we fall short of what we might have expected to have met
with.

I thought to have pressed the invitation on poor souls, that they might come and
drink of the water of life, but the time is past.

Thirsty Sinners invited to Christ.
SERMON IX.
JOHN 7.37. In the last day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood, and
cried, saying; If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink.


THE Point or Truth that was before us from these words was this; namely, That
such as being thirsty, and come unto Jesus Christ, shall certainly have a full
and free supply.

Or, as you may take it in the words of Christ, If any man be a thirst, let him
come to Jesus Christ and drink. This Jesus Christ did speak, and cried it in
the hearing of many thousands, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me
and drink.

You have heard what it is to thirst, and what this thirst is, it is a thirst
of the soul which Jesus Christ here speaks of, If any man thirst, it implies
these three things.

1. There is a sense, even an afflictive sense of something that it sees a
necessity of: As it is with the thirst of the Body, if one be truly thirsty he
does not only want water, or want drink or moisture, but is sensible of it, and
is afflicted with the sense of it. So now, this same thirsty soul it has a
sense of spiritual want, and is afflicted with the sense of it. You may see
David cries out saying, I am in a place where no water is. And, Psalm. 63. My
soul thirsts for God. And the Prophet Isaiah says, The needy seek water, and
their tongue fails for thirst. There is an afflictive sense upon the soul from
the want of some spiritual good.

2. There is not only a sense of want, but there is also an ardent and vehement
desire of a supply. And,

3. The Soul is not only lodging and desiring, but is unsatisfied with any
thing short of that it desires.

Several other particulars were insisted upon, and I came to a third, which now
I shall desire to speak to through the Lords assistance. Viz. That such as do
come to Christ shall have a full supply.

Every soul that does come to Christ shall be filled; He that comes to me,
shall not only have a taste, but shall have a full supply; Let him come unto me
and drink; He shall not only have a full suyply but a free supply; Christ does
not require any thing at all, Whosoever he be that comes unto me, he shall
drink, he shall be freely supplied. Rev. 22.17. Let him that is a thirst, come:
And whosoever will, let him come, and take of the waters of Life freely. And
Isa. 55.1. Ho every one that is a thirst come ye, to the Waters: He shall be
made to drink, and be supplied with all spiritual, heavenly, and eternal
Blessings. Jesus Christ he is a full supply, and though we may have a Notion
that in Jesus Christ there is a full supply, yet we have a Principle and Notion
in us, that we have some supply in our selves; A Popish Principle, Christ may
supply us in part, but some from our selves; and therefore we have a Notion, as
if we should go unto Christ with money in our hands, to buy it of him.
Therefore a little to clear these things, viz. To demonstrate,

1. That Jesus Christ will certainly give a full supply.

2. That there is a full supply that Christ will give out, not a part only, but
a full supply to all that come to him.

First, That Jesus Christ will give out a full supply of all spiritual
Blessings: Whatsoever good things the soul can stand in need of, or can
possibly desire; Jesus Christ will give out a full supply unto all them, even
every of them that comes to him.

1. The first Demonstration is taken from The Incomprehensible Fullness that is
in Jesus Christ. He is a full Fountain, not as a Pail or a Bucket drawn from a
Well, but he is a full Fountain; now from out of a fountain ^here is a full
supply to be had, a man may drink as much as ever he will, as much as ever he
can hold; Now Christ is a full Fountain, see what is said concerning Christ,
Zech. 13.1. In that day, there shall be a Fountain set open to the house of
David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. And
so, Coloss. 1. It pleased the Father, that in him all fullness should dwell,
even all fullness: Now if Christ be a fountain, a full fountain, there is
fullness of supply to be had in him: Now all fullness of blessings are in Jesus
Christ, he is a fountain of all spiritual things that are needful for the
salvation of a poor soul, and there is a fullness of Spirit in Christ, John
3.34. For God gives not the Spirit by measure to him, And so Coloss. 2.9. it is
said, It pleased the Father that the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him as
Mediator, the fullness of the Deity, the fullness of the Spirit.

2. And then, as there is a fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him as
Mediator, and a fullness of the Spirit, so there is also a Fullness of all gifts,
and of all graces in Jesus Christ, John 1.14. He is the only begotten Son of
the Father full of Grace and Truth. And so in him are hid the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, they are all hid in Christ, he is the fountain of them;
and the Apostle has another full expression Ephesians. 3.8. Unto me who am less
than the least of all Saints is this grace given, that I should preach among
the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ: Unsearchable riches that can
never be drawn dry. The fullness of the Spirit, the fullness of all Grace
dwells in him.

3. Thirdly, There is a Fullness of Righteousness and Satisfaction in Jesus
Christ, so as to make a poor sinner to be accepted as righteous before God, and
discharge it of all sins, as the Angel told Daniel, Chap. 9.24. To make an end
of Sins, and to bring in an everlasting Righteousness, a righteousness that
will serve to all eternity for all, from the beginning to the end of the World;
and though the Saints are striving after a measure and fullness daily, yet
notwithstanding there is a fullness in Jesus Christ, the blood of Jesus
cleanses from all sin, there is merit enough, and virtue enough. 1 John. 2.5.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but
for the sins of the whole World. There Is righteousness, and satisfaction, and
merit enough for all. And

4, Then there is a Fullness of power to give out, and to communicate unto
others. See John 5.26, 27. For as the Father has Life in himself, so has he
given to the Son to have Life in himself, and has given him authority to
execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of man. As the Father has life in
himself, so there is fullness of power and authority given out unto Jesus
Christ, to give out to whom he will, and he gives and communicates as being
full of the Spirit.

1. He communicates of the Spirit and Holy Ghost to whom he will, He gives the
Spirit, and therefore promises it to his Disciples, John 16.7. When they heard
of his departure from them, that night he should be betrayed, Christ having
given them a hint of it, they were troubled, and says Christ, Because I tell
you the truth you are grieved, yet nevertheless it is expedient for you that I
go away, and that you be deprived of my presence, for when I go away, I will
send the Holy Ghost, the Comforter unto you. And so the Apostle Peter Acts 2.
When the Holy Ghost fell upon the twelve with fiery tongues, the people
marvelled at it, and thought they were drunk with new wine, no says Peter,
These are not drunken with new wine, as you suppose, this is an effect of the
Promise as to the latter days, according to Joels Prophecy. And

2. Again, He communicates of the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit. The Graces of
the Spirit are given out by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4.8. When he ascended on high,
he led Captivity Captive, and gave Gifts unto men, And so the Apostle says,
Grace and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. He gives
Gifts and Graces.

3. And so again, Christ does communicate and give out Forgiveness and
Remission of Sin. He has power and authority to give out that, as Mat. 9. When
they brought the Palsy man, and Christ saw their faith, says he, Son be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, and certain of them thought he had
blasphemed, well says he, That I may show unto you, that I have power on earth
to forgive sins, I say unto thee, Son, take up thy bed and walk. And so, Acts
5.31. Him has God exalted with his own right hand, to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give unto Israel repentance and forgiveness of sins. And

4. Again, Jesus Christ does communicate Peace and Consolation, Peace with God,
and true Comfort. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ. And so in another place, If there be any consolation in
Christ Jesus, -- taking it for granted there is consolation in Jesus Christ,
and all true consolation comes from him. And so as our sufferings abound, so do
our consolations abound much more through Jesus Christ our Lord. Again

5. It is Jesus Christ also that does communicate and give out eternal life, to
whom he will: Says he, My sheep hear my voice and they follow me, and I give
them eternal life. Brethren, Christ has power and authority to give out all
spiritual blessings, a fountain having all fullness, so they that come to Christ
for a supply come to a full fountain. Brethren, if so be that Jesus Christ were
full of the Spirit, and full of grace, -- yet if he were not full as a
fountain, he could not communicate; look now, as it is with a bucket, though it
may be full of water, yet notwithstanding it has not the fullness of a
fountain, as it does supply any it has so much the less, but Christ now being
a fountain-fulness, though he communicate never so much, yet still there is the
same fullness, as now go to the sea, all the rivers in the World are filled with
the sea, and yet the sea has never a whit the less; and so the Sun has given
out its light day by day, four thousand years together, and yet the Sun has
never the less light in it, because it is the fountain of light; So Christ,
(now) being a fountain has never the less in communicating, still as much
grace, as much holiness, as much righteousness as before. And so the Saints
some of them have been full of the Holy Ghost (as Stephen) though yet
notwithstanding, their fullness is not the fullness of a fountain, and so they
cannot supply the want of others; As the wise Virgins, when the foolish Virgins
wanted Oil and their lamps were out, they would have had oil of the wise, but
say they, we have none to spare, none to communicate, why? because they have
not a fountain. But still now in Jesus Christ there is a fullness, as a fountain
of all grace whatsoever. That is the first Demonstration.

2. Secondly, Take another withal, and that is this, to show that there is a
full supply in him, because, All that come to Jesus Christ are near to him, nay
they are united to him, They are made near unto God, being united unto Christ,
and thereupon they have a communication of his fullness from Union, for Union is
the cause of communication; as now if the Branches of a Tree be united to the
tree, they communicate and partake of the trees root, sap, and nature of it;
Says Christ, I am the Vine, ye are the Branches, why now the branches of the
Vine partake of the Vine; look now as it is with the members of the natural
body, being joined, they do communicate and participate with all the members;
as the Head, it is the seat of all the sensitive or animal Spirits, and the
head being united to the body, there is a communication of all the senses, from
the head to every member according to its capacity, why now, Jesus Christ, he
is the head, we are his members, flesh of his flesh, bone of his bone, we are
members of him being joined to him, and they that are joined to the Lord are
one Spirit, we are by faith joined to the Lord, and Jesus Christ is said to
dwell in us by faith; there is a nearer union that the believing soul has with
Jesus Christ, than any member has to the natural body, than any branch has to
a natural tree, yea, than our souls and bodies have to each other, John 6.56.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him.
Now the nearer we be to a fountain, the nearer a suply, suppose one were in a
fountain of water, he must needs have enough, suppose a man were in the body of
the Sun, he must needs be supplied with light; Now the Soul that comes unto
Christ, and is in Christ, it is in the fountain of living water, and being in
the fountain, it must needs receive a full supply, unto all its wants, I say a
very full supply. That is a second Demonstration.

3. Thirdly, To take up one more, I say we shall have a full supply, because,
This same Fullness is communicated and given to Christ by the Father as
Mediator, for this end and purpose, to give out and communicate to us. For
Brethren, this fullness that is in Christ is communicated unto Christ as the
fullness of the Godhead; for it seems to be an improper speech to say that the
Father is the fountain of the Deity, but the Father communicates to the Son in
regard of the Personality, now Jesus Christ has all fullness as Mediator to
communicate and give out, not to keep it to himself, and hold it to his own
proper use only, But look now as it is with the Fountain, the Sea has not its
water for it self, but to communicate unto rivers, so God has made the Sun to
be light, not to be light to it self only, but to communicate and give light to
the World: why now there is a full supply in Jesus Christ, he being filled with
all fullness, (from the Father) for this end, to give out to others, to
communicate; From his fullness we have all received Grace for Grace, he is full
of grace and truth, Ay, but to what end is he full of grace and truth; that we
might receive from his fullness grace for grace, and therefore says the
Psalmist, When he ascended on high he led Captivity Captive, and received gifts
for men, even for the rebellious, He received them for men, for rebellious men,
for enemies unto God, to give out and communicate of grace as he was Mediator,
and therefore now Jesus Christ gives out grace freely and largely, because it
is for that very end he had all fullness given to him, so that now there is a
full supply to be had for all that come to Christ, Christ will fully supply all
that come to him to drink of the water of life, and he has never a whit the
less: And O Brethren that you were fully persuaded of this truth, that he is
the fullness of all grace, that so we might know whether to go to be supplied in
all our spiritual wants, for we are ready to go to other things rather than to
Christ, to our Prayers, and Duties, and the like, but these are to be used only
as Conduits, to convey suppply to us, but not as the supply, but to look unto
Christ who has all supplies, that we may go unto him to supply us, who only is
able to supply us, and fill us to the full with all grace, whatsoever we stand
in need of, and then again, we shall not only have a full supply, but we shall
have a supply freely, Christ will not ask any thing at all of any that comes to
him, but they shall be supplied freely from his fullness; as if you should go to
a fountain of water, and be filled, there is none will require or demand any
thing of you, so the Sun it communicates it is light without money or without
price, so it is here, when we are sensible of our own unworthiness, and have
nothing to carry, and nothing to give, no money, nor no price to carry in our
hand, yet may we come to Christ, for he is a full fountain, and gives out the
water of life freely. I shall demonstrate that Jesus Christ does give out
freely as well as fully, not only fully, but also freely, to all that do come
unto him for this water of life, that so we may be established in this truth.

1. Because, If it were not so, there is no creature, neither man nor woman,
could ever come to drink of this water, if it were not free as well as full,
For no sinful creature has any thing to give, that is worth one drop of this
water of life, it has no ability to give any thing, and therefore if it were
not free none should partake of it; Who has first given unto the Lord, and it
shall be recompensed him? who? he means none, For of him, and through him, and
from him are all things, to whom be glory for ever. And you have the Prophet
David encouraging his people to be liberal in contributing toward the building
of the Temple, and they were so, insomuch as David's heart was refreshed
therewithal, says David, All that we do give, or can communicate, (though the
people have given very liberally) yet says he, all is thine own, All that Gold
and Silver that we gave for the building of the Temple is all the Lords own,
^^ey had nothing of their own, it was the Lords. And so when the Lord gives out
any Spiritual good thing, why? what have thou to give unto the Lord? yea
nothing at all, for what have thou that thou have not received? not the least
drop of good but it is from the Lord; if my life should ly on it for a drop of
living water to be fetched in of my self, it could not be, or if it were to be
had with a good wish, says the Apostle, I can neither do nor will any thing,
nay says he, I am not able to think a good thought, therefore if my life did
ly on it, for one good thought, I should not obtain it, 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we
are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God. Yea when we have done all that we are commanded to do or
suffer, yet this will not purchase one drop of it, Luke 17.10. So Romans 8.18.
For I reckon, that the Sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. And therefore I say, that
it must needs be free, else never a man or woman could be able to partake of
one draught or dram of this water of life, if it were not free.

2. Again, Because of that delight, pleasure, and complacency, that Jesus
Christ does take in giving out this water of life, There is never an hungry man
takes more delight in eating of his meat, than Jesus Christ does in
communicating of this water of life, an hungry man shall not need to be bidden
to eat his meat, and says Jesus Christ, My meat is to do the will of him that
sent me, and so he invites all to come unto him; And you Women who know how to
give suck to your little children, they being brought to you and making means;
the mother having a full breast, shall she need to be hired to suckle her
children? yea she is pained till she be delivered of her fullness, Isa. 66.11 So
^t is with Jesus Christ, he has full breasts always, and it is delighting to
him to communicate. Indeed I told you before the Head is the fountain of the
animal parts, and the head freely gives out to the senses, and if there be an
obstruction to any of the rest of the members, then it causes pain in the head:
Why, Jesus Christ he is the head of the body, and he does as freely, and with
as much desire, and delight, and readiness, communicate unto any of his
members, even as the head is ready to communicate unto the body. And so you
that keep shops, what keep you shop for? is it not that you desire to part with
your commodities freely for a price? and never any Shopkeeper is more free, and
ready to part with any of his commodities for a price, than Jesus Christ is to
give out his water of life without price, I counsel thee to come and buy of me,
Rev. 3.18. (to buy is to receive of him) to come and buy wine and milk without
money and without price, Isa. 55.1. Again

3. Because of his free invitation to all comers to drink, He comes among
thousands to proclaim this his readiness, and freeness to give out of this
water of life. Suppose you should be at a dinner or supper at a Friends house,
and being there should offer for your dinner or supper, would not he take it as
a disparagement unto him: why so I say, if Jesus Christ should require any
thing for what he gives out, as a price, and should not give it out freely,,
might not these many thousands that heard of his kind proffer, cry out against
him? why all those Texts that you read of, wherein he invites poor sinners to
come unto him and that freely, if he were not now free to communicate, would
not these words and scriptures witness against him? O my people, testify
against me, says the Lord in Micah, Jesus Christ does challenge any man to
testify against him for his unfaithfulness toward him or them, and therefore
hence it appears that Jesus Christ is ready and free to give out a full and
free supply unto all that come unto him, he will give out freely without money
or without price. One thing more I should have spoken to by way of Answer to an
Objection, What? are all comers unto Christ to be supplied? why then, what is
the reason that so many real believers make so many complaints, and are under
such great wants, they want this, and that, and the other, and scarce any but
want some measure or other, sensible of their own wants of this grace or the
other, and I have such a hard heart, and such a dead heart, and such a carnal
heart, how then is it, that if all that do come unto Christ shall be supplied,
what mean these complaints? This I should have spoken to, and the Application,
but the time is spent.

Thirsty Sinners invited to Christ.
SERMON X.
JOHN 7.37. In the last day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood, and
cried, saying; If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink.


AS You have heard, you have here a gracious invitation that Jesus Christ does
give unto poor sinners that stand in need of the Water of Life; that stand in
need of Eternal Life: He makes a loud Proclamation, If any be a thirst, let him
come unto him. And you have also a gracious Promise that is annexed unto this
Invitation, sc. That they shall drink. If any man thirst let him come unto me
and drink. You have heard the Point opened.

That any one, whosoever he be, that comes in a thirst to Christ, shall be made
to drink abundantly, he shall have a full and a free supply of the Waters of
Life.

First, You have heard what we are to understand by this same thirst. If any
man be a thirst.

Secondly, We have opened and shown what is this same coming unto Christ.

And the last day, we came to speak of a Third, and that was to show what
Christ here means in this Promise, when he says, They shall drink. If any man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink. Ay drink, drink of the Water of Life,
drink of whatsoever is necessary and good, or desirable for their everlasting
salvation; That is meant by this same drinking of the Water of Life; Drink in
of the Spirit and eternal blessedness, as you may see in the following words;
He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water. This he spoke of the Spirit.

Now in this Promise here wherein Christ says, they shall drink; It implies
and holds forth two things.

1. It holds forth a full supply, they shall have a full supply, not only a
taste or a sip, but they shall drink and have a full draught; they shall have
their bellys full.

2. It holds forth and implies, That he will let them have of the Water of
Life, and not only so, but they shall have it freely, they shall have a full
draught of the Water of Life, a full supply without any price or money; He
requires nothing but only coming, if they come they shall have it.

Reasons 1.
Christ is a full Fountain, he has all fullness in him, and fullness as a
Fountain has, and therefore can supply all Comers. There may be fullness of
water in a Pail, but that will not supply all comers, but as he is the Fountain
of the Springs, he can supply all comers, he is the fountain of all fullness,
for all fullness is in him, and as he has all fullness given unto him, so God
the Father has put all fullness into Christ the Mediator, to give out and
communicate unto those that come unto him for a supply, and he will do it, for
he came from heaven to do his Fathers will, as Mediator, he is filled with all
fullness, not for himself to keep it to himself, but it is put into him to that
end, to communicate, derive, and give out; As the light of the Sun is not put
into it, merely that it should keep it to it self, but to communicate thereof
unto all that shall come into the World; And so the Sea is the fullness of
water, and that gives out of it self freely, and the cause why the water is put
into the Sea is, that it may fill the Rivers and Springs; And so it is with
Christ, It pleased the Father that in him we should have all fullness, that so
through his fullness we might receive grace for grace. There is fullness of
Wisdom in Jesus Christ, and fullness of Righteousness, Holiness, and
Sanctification in him, God has filled him with this fullness, and why so? as
the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 1.30. to this end, to communicate, He is made unto
us of God, or, Who of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption: And so he has made him to be thus unto us,
that from his grace he might fill those that come unto him. He is the fountain
of life, and wherefore has God put the fountain of life in Christ? what? to
keep it to himself? no, but to communicate, John 10.10. I am come, says Jesus
Christ, that you might have life, and that you might have it more abundantly,
more abundantly, than ever you had in all the time of the Law; the Son has
life in himself for this end and purpose, that he might give out life, not to
have it to himself, and keep it to himself, but to give out as a fountain, and
so, John 9.39. It is said he is come for this end, To give light to those who
are blind, and that they that see not, might be made to see. And then a

Reason 2.
Why it must needs be so, that they shall have a full supply, is, Because that
those that come to Christ are very near unto him, united to him, and are in
him, and so no condemnation to them that are in Christ; and therefore they must
needs have a large supply and communication from Jesus Christ. Suppose that a
man were in the Sun, the very fountain of light* if he be near the Sun he has
much light, but if he be in the Sun, then a more large fullness of light; and so
they that come unto Christ, they are near Christ, they are nigh unto him, John
6.56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in
him, He abides in me, and dwells in me. The Soul therefore that comes to
Christ, must needs have a full supply.

Again, This full supply that is given out unto Believers, it is given out not
only fully but freely, Says Christ, I do not ask any thing at all, but
whosoever comes he shall have his fill, he shall have a full supply, and that
freely, he shall drink and that freely, only do but come, and you shall drink,
and thy soul shall live, Revel. 22.17. And Whosoever will let him come and
drink of the water of life freely, And so Isa. 55.1. Ho every one that
thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy and
eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money, and without price; Without any
price at all, it is only coming, and that to every one that comes to him, it is
most free. You have had two or three Demonstrations, (I shall but briefly name
them and so proceed) to show and satisfy your hearts in this, that Jesus Christ
requires nothing of any soul that comes to him, for the giving out of a large
supply.

1. If Christ should require any thing, and should not give out freely, there
is not a soul that ever was in the World, or ever shall be in the World, that
had or has wherewith to purchase any thing, or any one drop of the water of
life: For we cannot as much as will, or think, or speak of our selves, not so
much as to have a good thought. And

2. Jesus Christ will have it so, because it is his pleasure and delight.

3. It must needs be so, because of that Invitation that Jesus Christ does here
make unto poor souls that come unto him. Thus far I have proceeded. Before I
come to the Application there is only one thing would be cleared as an
Objection by the way, and that is taken from the Saints.

Objection.
Do we say there is such a fullness in Jesus Christ? and will he give out a
large and full supply unto all that come to him, and that freely? How can this
stand with the experience of them that are true believers that truly come unto
Jesus Christ? They are so sensible of their own wants, weaknesses, and their
own defects of grace, as what more frequent complaints? and who do more
frequently complain than true believers? And there is never a true believing
soul that comes to Jesus Christ, but is sensible of some defect or want, or
other, and has not attained to perfection, and the more, and nearer he comes
to Christ, still the more sensible of his defects and wants: O! none so weak as
I am, none so poor in grace as I am, none so weak in faith, so wanting in love,
in humility, in patience, and in meekness as I, and O! none has such a cold
heart, such a dead heart, such an unfruitful heart as I have: You will say,
where is this same full supply then? Shall all that come to Christ have a full
supply? how can these things be? What shall we say then? that those that make
such complaints as these are not true believers? no, God forbid. Or shall we
say that this Truth that Jesus Christ has spoken is not truth? why? where is
then this same full supply? how can this stand to be a truth? that all that do
come to Jesus Christ shall have a full supply, and shall drink abundantly, and
shall drink freely, when he says, Every one that comes unto me shall drink of
the water of life, and that freely. Do not many believers fear that their sins
will be their ruin? and fear condemnation sometimes? Now how does this stand
with this full supply, which is to be had in Christ? I shall clear this by
answering to two or three things.

Answer 1.
First. Every believing soul that comes to Jesus Christ has drunk such a
draught of this same water of life, that he is freed for ever from
condemnation, He shall never die, or perish, or be condemned for sin, no, he is
freed from all condemnation, the poorest, the weakest, the meanest has drunk a
full supply, that it shall never perish by its sins, it is passed from death to
life, there is no condemnation, none unto them (now) that they are in Christ
Jesus, no condemnation to the poorest and meanest believer, and now all their
sins are forgiven, there is a full forgiveness, those sins shall never be laid
to their charge; And as the Holy Ghost says, I will be merciful unto their
unrighteousness, their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more, And
the blood of Jesus Christ is able to cleanse us from all our sins. It Is true
indeed, a believer that has drunk of this same water of life, and that is
freed from all his sins, he may be possibly be exercised with fears, and
possibly his Assurance, and his Apprehension of his Justification to himself
may have some cloud upon it, he may be excercised with clouds, may fear his
going down into the pit, though there is no real ground of it, for indeed he is
freed from all the guilt of these, for he is now passed from death to life,
John 11.26. He that believes in me shall never die, that is, his very temporal
death shall be but as a sleep to him, the sting is taken out, and he shall
never die eternally, And so therefore to clear this Objection, there is never a
believing soul that is come to Christ, but has drunk such a draught of the
water of life, that he is passed from death to life, and shall never see death
or condemnation. That is one.

Answer 2.
Secondly, Every Soul that is come to Christ, (though in respect of his
Sanctification, of sanctifying and saving grace) he is not perfect, he has not
drunk such a draught but he desires more, and may desire more, yet
notwithstanding, that draught that he has drunk is such a draught, as he shall
never be thirsty more, so as to be wholly destitute of this same water of life,
as he was before. Christ says, John 6.35. He that comes to me shall never
hunger, he that believes on me shall never thirst; He shall be carried on, as
he shall never decrease, so as to be destitute, but shall grow up, as the grain
of mustard seed Christ makes use of by way of Parable, likening the Kingdom of
Heaven to a grain of mustard seed, and to a little Leaven which never leaves
spreading, till it has spread all over, and the grain of mustard seed, it
grows and springs up further and further, till it become a tree for the fowls
in the air to lodge in; so our inward man is renewed day by day, as it will
spring up, increase, and grow more and more, though yet he that has drunk of
the Spirit, has not the full perfection of it at once, but may desire more,
yet notwithstanding he has so much as he shall never be dry again, that is,
wholly destitute, but shall grow up, and increase and spring. And let me add
only a third thing.

Answer 3.
You will say, The Saints have not a full draught and full supply, because they
complain, I answer, that though here they be in a state of imperfection, and
stand in need of a daily supply, (being sensible of their own defects and
weaknesses) Yet every believing soul has drunk so much of the water of life,
as now he has right and title unto the Inheritance of Glory, where there is
such fullness of joy, as he shall be satisfied, and shall not be able to desire
any more, Psalm. 16.11. Thou will show me the path of life, in thy presence is
fullness of Joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. They shall
have joy as much as they can hold, every vessel shall be filled with glory so
full as it can hold no more, they shall enjoy as much as ever they are able to
hold or contain, every vessel shall be full of glory. The beginnings of
eternal life are here, and though possibly they may be made to drink tears here
in abundance, yet notwithstanding they have the beginnings of eternal life and
glory, and when they come once to enjoy the consummation of it, they shall not
be able to desire one draught, one jot more, so, He that believes on me, out
of his belly shall flow rivers of living water, springing up unto eternal life.
So much for that Objection. Now for the Application of the Point.

Use 1.
You see what Christ says in the Text, That man that comes unto me shall
drink. My drift in this Application shall be to press this Invitation of Jesus
Christ. Be it known unto you Men and Women, young men and old, and children,
that are capable of knowledge, Know it, that Jesus Christ does invite every one
of you that stands before him in this Ordinance, to come unto him and draw
water out of this Well of salvation. It is a strong invitation that whosoever
comes to him shall drink of this water of life; Let me say unto you as Moses
said unto the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.46. And he said unto them, Set your
hearts unto all the Words that I testify among you this day, Set your hearts to
this Invitation of Jesus Christ, to the Word that is now sounding in your ears,
for it is your life, Jesus Christ does bring eternal life to your doors, to
your hearts, do not look upon them as if they were words of course and wind, as
if there were no truth or reality in them.

Brethren, I suppose now, if a friend should invite you to a Dinner or a
Supper, you would believe that he were real, and you are ready to accept of his
invitation, because you think he means, as he says; Why so now, be it known
unto you that Jesus Christ does make an invitation to all here, every one in
the Congregation this day, to come unto him, and you shall have a supply of
this water of life. Suppose now, that Jesus Christ were here present speaking
these words, as he did with his own mouth in the hearing of thousands, and
suppose now, that if Jesus Christ were here in his bodily presence, do you not
think you should believe? and give entertainment to what he spoke? behold Jesus
Christ now speaks in his Word to all that are here present (as he spoke to all
that were present then) and makes proclamation, saying, Is any man athirst? is
there any that do desire this water of life? that do desire to have their sins
pardoned and forgiven them? that do desire to be freed from condemnation, that
do desire to be adopted Sons and Daughters of God, to have peace with God, to
have comfort and consolation in life and death, and to have everlasting,
eternal glory, when life shall be no more? Know, Jesus Christ holds forth all
this, whatsoever is requisite to eternal life, Jesus Christ does invite you to
this, and holds forth and promises to give a full draught of it to all that
ever will come to him; Therefore let no poor soul lay impediments and blocks in
its own way to hinder him from coming unto Jesus Christ.

Objection.
But may one say, I am afraid that I should presume, if I should come unto
Christ, and therefore I dare not venture.

Answer.
O! let not any soul think so, nor say so to hinder any of your souls from
coming, Know it, that if Jesus Christ had made no invitation to you to come,
then you might very well say, it is presumption indeed for me to come, but Jesus
Christ invites thee (himself) in his Word and Promises, that if you do come you
shall have of this water of life, and that freely. Suppose a great rich man
should invite a poor man to his Table, and he comes being invited, will ye say
this is presumption, when he spoke to him himself, and if he should not come,
it is rather a slighting and despising his favor and love. Why Jesus Christ
holds forth a free invitation, tenders it, and promises it to any one soul,
that will come unto him upon his invitation, and therefore let nothing stave
thee off, seeing he has made a full and free invitation unto every one to come
indeed.

Objection.
But alas! I do not know that I am invited! Christ invites me? what me? I am
altogether unworthy to be invited to partake of this water of life, alas! so
poor a creature, so ignorant, and so blind, and so without strength as I am?
unable to perform any duty, no strength, and nothing at all to commend me unto
the Lord, or why the Lord should give me the least drop of the water of life,
and therefore certainly it is not to me, Jesus Christ does not invite me.

Answer.
I say, Let not this Impediment ly in thy way, because we have no strength, or
ability to do, or to please, or to serve him in any way, why, alas! do you
think now that Jesus Christ calls for any price? invites people, and then they
must bring money in their hands? No Brethren, you are much mistaken, Jesus
Christ does invite to come without money, or without any price: Whoever you be,
though you be never so weak and unable to perform any duty, or service, and
never did any thing for the Lord, yet you should come. And Brethren, the more
unfit we are in our selves, and the less we have of our selves, and the more
sensible we are of our own unfitness, this should rather be so far from
hindering, and discouraging us, as that it should encourage us to come, why?
because that having nothing, and Christ being the fullness of all, we should go
unto Christ for all, as Rev. 3.18. says Christ, Thou art poor, and naked,
blind, and miserable, and have nothing, wherefore come to me, I counsel thee to
come to me for Ey salve, and for raiment, gold, and treasure, and riches, --
Why here now is Christ's argument on the contrary, Why Brethren, he fills the
hungry and the empty with good things, and they are to come to Christ. Jesus
Christ invites such poor souls as have nothing at all, no ability at all, a
poor blind creature, if one be more blind and unable, and more ignorant than
another, here is the invitation, that Jesus Christ does make this day to such a
poor soul, that he shall, if he come, he shall drink, and he shall have of this
Water of Life.

Objection.
But another Objection is, Alas! I am a poor old creature, an old man, or an
old woman, that have lived without God, and without Christ all this time, and
have slighted the offers of grace, and all the invitations of Christ in his
Gospel. And also a poor old sinner, and will Jesus Christ invite me? I possibly
have been a drunkard, and an old drunkard, and a swearer, and a blasphemer of
the name of God, and the ways of Christ, and can I think that ever Christ
should entertain me when I come?

Answer.
Why now mark what I say unto you in a word from the Lord; Let not any one here
except himself, and exclude himself, if Jesus Christ do not except and exclude
him; look into the invitation, does Jesus Christ exclude, and say, Let every
one come to me, except he be an old drunkard, or an old swearer? no, he does
not say so, he excludes none; See how the Words run, if any man will come he
shall drink, if any man, without exception, can you have it spoken more full,
or in plainer terms? If any man will come unto me, he shall drink, John 6.35,
36, 37. says Jesus there, I am the Bread of life, he that comes unto me shall
not hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst, but I said unto
you, that ye also have seen me and believe not: All that the Father gives me
shall come to me, and him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out, Let him
be what he will, whatsoever he be; never such an old sinner, and therefore, why
should a poor soul make this exception in his coming to Christ. Now, know it,
if there be any such a soul in the Congregation, that has lived so many years,
and all his life long has been in sinful courses, the invitation is to him,
and to all others, that If any come to me, says Christ, I will give him the
water of life.

Objection.
But to object further, Alas! I have no strength nor power, and I am unworthy
to come, and therefore it is but a folly to make such an invitation unto me,
and I have no power.

Answer.
You have heard before what it is to come to Christ, viz. To venture, and cast
your self upon Christ's invitation in his promise, and the soul now venturing to
lean upon Christ's word, and to trust Christ upon his word, and to expect what
Christ holds forth in his word, this is a coming unto Christ, you know what the
Prodigal was* and when the Lord sees a poor soul afar off, he meets him, and
strengthens him, and encourages him, and leads him by the hand, and
upholdeth him.

Objection.
Ay, but you will say, Alas! I am willing to come to Christ, but I have no
word, and a soul cannot come to Christ unless the Lord gives out some promise
secretly to draw the heart to Christ, and I cannot remember that ever the Lord
spoke to me whereby I should ever come.

Answer.
Well, Suppose you cannot remember that ever you had any word, or promise given
out to draw or persuade your heart to cast it self, and to adventure upon
Christ, yet behold! here is a word from the Lord this day, which he causes to
be proclaimed in your hearing; Jesus Christ holds forth unto you this day,
whoever you be that comes, he shall drink, and shall drink abundantly, and most
freely, drink of the waters of life, and shall never perish, but shall live for
ever, and therefore from this time forward, let not any soul say, well, the
Lord has not this day holden forth any word to me, know it, the Lord speaks to
you, even to one and to another this day, If any man be athirst, let him come
unto me and drink. Have you any thing more to object? think with your selves
what it is?

Objection.
Ay, you will say, there is one thing more, and that is here in the Text, If
any man be athirst, let him come, and I cannot say, I am athirst. There are two
things in answer to this.

Answer 1.
The Promise that Christ makes here of giving the water of life, is not so much
to the thirsty, as to the comer, Whoever he be that comes to me shall drink,
it is true indeed he says, every one that thirsts let him come to me and drink;
Why ordinarily men and women, poor sinners are not ready to come to Christ,
without they be made very thirsty, and see their necessity, ay, but
notwithstanding says Christ, If any man do but come (whoeuer he be) if he does
but come, and so, Whosoever will, (whosoever he be) let him come and take of
the water of life freely. The Promise is made not to thirsters only, but to
comers, and be sure, if you come, he will give you to drink fully and freely,
Rev. 22.17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that hears
say, Come, and let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will, let him come
and drink of the water of life freely. Remember, the Promise is not to the
thirsty alone, but unto the comer, therefore venture to come, and you may be
sure Jesus Christ will give you to drink of the water of life.

Answer 2.
But then again, you say, you do not thirst, Can any soul here before the Lord
say, that you have no need of the water of life, that you have no need of, nor
desire everlasting life, that you have no need to have your sins pardoned, is
there any soul in the Congregation that can say, that there is no need, then
you may stand off, and say there is no invitation made to me, but I dare say
for every one in the congregation, that he would willingly die the death of the
righteous, and therefore, let every poor soul know whatsoever is spoken to one,
is spoken to every one; Jesus Christ has made this invitation, if any man do
but come to Christ, do but venture upon Christ, that is the way, he shall drink
of the water of life; and what shall I say more for the clearing of this? do
you not think that Jesus Christ says true? or that he is to be believed in
what he speaks? never an one surely, but will say that Jesus Christ is to be
believed, and that they do believe that he speaks truth, why, then Jesus
Christ's invitation is to every one in this Congregation to come unto him, and
therefore why should any stand back, and hold off from coming unto Christ? If
the Lord would persuade your hearts to come unto Christ, it would be the
happiest day, that ever your eyes saw in this World, if the Lord would persuade
your hearts hereto, you should find that Jesus Christ would be as good as his
word, that you shall drink of this water of life, and partake of it for ever
and ever, and shall never see death, eternal death.

Objection.
There is one thing more, Possibly you will say I do not very well understand
how I may come to Christ in a way of faith and believing, how or which way does
the soul come to Christ in a way of faith and believing? as that the soul shall
certainly have of this water of life, and that Christ will give of this water
of life.

Answer.
To open this a little. This same coming to Christ (I would speak it as plainly
as possibly I could, and not as a riddle, or fancy, or notion) It Is an
hearkening to Christ in a Word of Promise, and the soul is therein to venture
it self, and rely on or upon him in that Word which he holds forth, and when
the soul does venture and close with all, this is now a coming unto Christ;
when the Lord gives out an invitation, a gracious Promise, which holds out
mercy and eternal life, and in the hearing of it the Lord persuades the soul of
the truth and reality of it, it is persuaded to trust in it, to rely upon it,
and to expect an accomplishment and performance of it. And because I would not
speak it as mine own words alone, I speak it as the Virgin Mary did when the
Angel came to her, Luke 1.38. Then said Mary, Behold the Servant of the Lord,
be it unto me according to thy Word: This was now a believing, a trusting, and
a relying on the Word of the Lord, she was a Virgin, and the Angel answered her
in that, as she had no more to say, but to rely upon the Word of Promise,
Behold the Handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy Word; whence
was it? it was from this speech, the holy confidence and expectation of the
fulfilling of that promise to her. And so, effectual calling is an hearkening
unto the Lords call, the soul being persuaded to receive the Word, closing
with, returning answer to the Word, then the soul is effectually called. So
also there is an ineffectual Call, unto which the soul does not answer, but
looks upon the Word of the Lord by his Servants, as words of wind, and words of
course, but as this same accepting of this gracious invitation, and promise
which he holds forth, is effectual calling, why so, the neglecting of these, I
say, is a refusing to hear him that speaks from Heaven. Take heed that you do
not refuse him that speaks from Heaven, that is, now when the Lord speaks in
his invitation by gifts and outward calling; this invitation being propounded
and made, and men make light of, it is an ineffectual calling; so now when upon
the invitation of the call of the Lord in his promise, there is an yielding
obedience unto that call in faith, it is called the obedience of Faith, Romans
16.26. When the soul does yield unto the Lord in the voice of the Promise,
close withal, and receive and embrace it, looking upon it as worthy of all
acceptance, receiving it with both hands, as it were; when the soul does thus
venture to rely upon the Word, venturing it self upon the Lord in his Promise,
that if I perish, I will perish there, I will venture my self upon the Lords
Word and Faithfulness. This is effectual Calling, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know, says
Paul, in whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that he will keep that good
thing which I have committed unto him against that day; I have committed my
soul concernments unto him, and I trust them in his arms. When the soul does
venture thus upon the gracious Word of invitation, does receive it, and
commits it self unto the Lord in it, this is a closing with Christ, and the
anwer of the heart unto the Lords call; and this is a coming unto Christ. So
that when you venture upon the Lord in his Word, you close with him in it, it
is soon said, yea soon done, the soul may come, and close with Christ in the
Promise, and that soon too, so pass from death unto life: Therefore ask your
own hearts in the Presence of the Lord, seeing Jesus Christ does make such a
gracious Invitation for to come unto him, and venture upon him in his Word,
whether it can be free and ready to say, now Lord let it be according to thy
Word to me: say in this manner, as in the presence of the Lord, Lord, upon this
gracious invitation of thine in the Gospel, I desire to rest and hope upon the
faithfulness of thy Word, and to accept thereof, and trust in it; Can you say
it in the presence of the Lord, you, whosoever you are that seem to be afar
off, though possibly you might have had some glimmering hopes, hoping
sometimes, that the Lord would be merciful to you, and presently fearing your
eternal condition. Well, I speak it to you that are old men and women, and
possibly old sinners, that have lived in sin all your lives long, and possibly
are even hopeless in your selves, and ready to cast out words of despair, and
so in a hopeless condition in your selves, to you the Lord this day calls to
come in unto him, and to hearken to this invitation, and if you now come unto
him, you shall have of the water of life. And you young Men and Maids, (I would
leave out none, who are capable of partaking of this water of life) consider
the Question again, Are you willing to be saved? Let your hearts speak it out
between the Lord and your own souls, upon this Word of thy grace unto which
thou have invited me, this gracious Promise, I do now commit my soul to thee,
and rely upon this thy Word of Grace, and rely upon thy faithfulness to
accomplish it to me; and have your souls thus answered unto the Lord? let it be
unto me according to thy Word: let me say it in the name of the Lord unto you,
This day is salvation come unto thy soul, this day has Jesus Christ given
eternal life unto thy soul, this day the Lord has taken thee into Covenant
with himself, and has vouchsafed thee to be his. And I speak it in the
authority which Jesus Christ has given me in his word, even every one that
thus comes to Christ, accepting of this his gracious promise, I say it, thy
sins are forgiven thee, relying upon him in the Faithfulness of his Word, and
Promise, I say, the Lord Jesus Christ has forgiven thy sins, and you may go
home, and record it for a Memorial, that this day, at such a time, the Lord
has drawn out my soul, to make a close with himself; and now eternal life is
come unto thee, the Lord has forgiven thy sins, and now thou art passed from
death to life. Let me make the offer again unto such poor sinners as have held
out all this time, and have not laid hold upon this gracious invitation, made
by Jesus Christ, that will yet venture the Lord, persuading your hearts, though
possibly you have been enemies, and opposers, and possibly might come to oppose
and catch, and though never so far off, and lost in your selves, yet
notwithstanding hearken to this invitation, that if the Lord does persuade your
hearts to say solemnly and seriously, Lord, upon this Word of thy gracious
Promise and Invitation, I do now desire to trust and to venture upon thy Word,
and do expect the performance and accomplishment of thy Word, that now it may
be given out to thee, that so you also might be brought in unto Christ, to
partake of this water of life.

Use 1.
A Word of Exhortation, to you who are come to Christ. Go away now (even as the
Virgin Mary) and say, My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit rejoices
in God, my Savior, for he has regarded the low Estate of his poor creature:

It is said that the Eunuch went away rejoicing, after that Philip was caught
away by the Spirit, and so has every Believer cause to do.

Use 2.
Another Word is, That you would go unto God with a holy boldness, as to your
God and Father, for such special mercies, as you desire to have at the Lords
hand.

Now as the Holy Ghost says, Seek the Lord, while he may be found, and draw
nigh unto him, while he is near. The Lord is near to you, do do you draw near
to him with a humble and holy boldness, as to your God and Father, and you may
ask what you will, and now beg that the Lord would establish his Work of Grace
in your hearts, and now ask for this and that mercy, and for your relations,
even what you will. In Genesis 17. Abraham falls down in a begging posture (God
having made a Covenant with him) O Lord now that Ismael might live in thy
sight; so say I Go to God, and desire some special mercy this day, now while
the Lord is nigh.

Use 3.
You who are brought near unto God, has the Lord spoken to you? Take heed that
you do not stop your ear unto what God speaks, and return again to folly.

Look that you do not walk as the Gentiles did, in the vanity of your minds,
Ephesians. 4.17. Now you must take heed that you do not walk in the same vanities, in
your foolish pastimes, in your vain conversations, take heed you do not walk
after the course of the World: If the Lord has taken you out of the World,
called you unto Christ, you are now to walk in a diligent performance of all
duties unto the Lord, walk close with God in your particular Callings from the
heart, take heed that you walk exactly, and inoffensively, keeping a good
Conscience.

Use 4.
And lastly, That still upon all occasions you would be coming to Christ.

We are not to content our selves with once coming unto Christ, and there is an
end, but we must come daily, even every day: When you find your hearts out of
frame, when you are straightened, and dead-hearted, come to Christ, even every day
by virtue of this Promise, through this Word, leaning and resting upon Christ,
and O remember this blessed Word, this blessed Word of the Lord Jesus Christ,
wherein he has said, If any man thirst; let him come unto me and drink. --

FINIS.

