THE MYSTERY OF INIQUITY UNFOLDED: OR, The False Apostles and the Authors of
POPERY compared, in their secular Design and Means of accomplishing it, by
Corrupting the Christian Religion, under pretense of Promoting it.

John 7.18. He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory.

1 Timothy 6.5. Men of corrupt minds, and destrtute of the truth, supposing that
gain is Godliness.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St
Paul's Churchyard. 1675.

THE PREFACE.
THE design of the following Discourse is to show that Popery is founded in a
like worldly corrupt Interest as the way of the false Apostles was, and carried
on by a like Art. And if it shall appear to be so indeed, there will be no
great cause to marvel, why the many worthy endeavors of the Advocates of the
Protestant Cause to convince the Papists of being guilty of corrupting the
Christian Religion, should prevail no more upon them than they have done; for
such an Interest whilst adhered to, does obstruct the operation of all such
Truth on the Mind and Will, as tends to oppose or undermine it. So that upon
the former supposition, we may well conceive, that the reason why the
endeavors of the Persons aforesaid have prevailed no more upon the Gainsayers,
is not the weakness of their Cause, nor weakness in their managing of it, nor
yet the strength of their Adversaries Arguments in opposing them: but the true
reason will be found to lie in the prevalence of a carnal, worldly corrupt
Interest. For that which was the reason why the Holy Apostles could not recover
the false Apostles nor those that stuck to them, from their Errors and
Corruptions, we may well conceive to be the reason likewise, why the Advocates
for Reformation have recovered no more than they have done of the Papists
neither from theirs, which were introduced into the world, and persisted in
upon the same or like carnal reason and motive, as the Corruptions of the false
Apostles were.

Now our Adversaries themselves cannot but grant that the reason why the Holy
Apostles prevailed no more upon the false Apostles and their followers than
they did, in managing the Christian Cause against them in corrupting the
Christian Religion, was neither the badness of their own, nor goodness of their
adversaries Cause, nor the Holy Apostles weak managing of their Cause: and if
none of these were the reason, what else could it be in probability, but the
false Apostles love of, close adherence to, and fast holding of such a corrupt
Interest, as could not be upheld but by corrupting the Christian Religion? And
if the Holy Apostles who were extraordinarily assisted in delivering and
speaking Truth, and who had their Doctrine extraordinarily confirmed with
Signs, and Wonders, and diverse Miracles, could not for all that prevail with
the false Apostles to confess and relinquish their Errors, so long as a Worldly
Interest was upheld by those Errors, and was dearer to them than the Truth it
self; it is then no wonder at all if our Protestant Advocates, who do not
pretend to compare with the Apostles, have prevailed no more neither than they
have done, (though their Cause be never so good, and so well managed,) to bring
Popish Guides to acknowledge and relinquish those Errors of theirs, by which
their corrupt Interest is supported and maintained, if that Interest is dearer
to them also than that Truth that opposes it, and fights against it, is, as
there is too much ground to suspect it is.

Some perhaps may be under a temptation, to have the more favorable opinion of
Popery, for that there have been men of great Parts and Learning of that way;
who upon that account may perhaps be thought as able as their Adversaries to
discern Truth from Error. But if those, who so think, will but consider, that
those Learned men have still had a strong byas of a corrupt Interest to draw
them aside; they may easily relieve themselves against such a temptation. For
the greater parts such men have, as have espoused a corrupt Interest, and are
strongly bent to defend it, the less likely are they to be overcome merely by
Truth: Because it has always been too common with such men to employ all their
Parts and Learning to the uttermost, not indifferently and impartially to seek
Truth for Truths sake, but to make the best they can of the Cause they have
undertaken, and with all possible Art to dress it up, that neither they, nor
any of their party may fall into dislike of it. Which was the reason why the
learned Scribes, Lawyers, Pharisees, and Rulers among the Jews, stood it out
against Christ, when the more illiterate and meaner sort that were not under
such a temptation of a worldly interest as the others were, nor had such parts
to strengthen themselves in their opposition as the others had, were sooner
brought to receive Christ and submit to his Doctrine. Of such as the former
sort our Savior said, how can ye believe which seek honor one of another, and
seek not the honor which comes from God only? Joh. 5.44. The experience of
such a thing as this, doubtless occasioned that saying of St. Paul, 1 Cor.
1.26. You see your calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh
are called, nor many mighty, nor many noble.

Besides, as the Love of a corrupt Interest in men calls off their thoughts
from an impartial enquiry after Truth, especially such Truth as opposes it; so
it corrupts the mind and clouds the understanding of Learned as well as
Unlearned, in making a Judgment of what is Truth and what is Error, in those
things wherein such an Interest is concerned. It Is said a Gift blinds the
wise and perverteth the judgment of the righteous, Exodus 23.8. It hinders a man
from enquiring impartially into the right of the others cause against whom he
has received a bribe: and causes him with as much partiality to consider his,
from whom he has received it, and is a byas as well as a cloud upon his mind
in forming a judgment upon the Cause before him: by reason of all which he
gives judgment against the truth and equity of the Cause. And there is the same
reason why a corrupt Interest otherwise, should hinder a right judgment and
determination in matters wherein that Interest is struck at, as there is, why
the corrupt Interest of a bribe should hinder it, in a man otherwise knowing
and wise.

Our Savior says, if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of
darkness: if therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness? Mat. 6.23. If the governing principle in man be corrupt, as it is
when that which is predominant is covetousness or the love of the world, (of
which he there speaks) the issues of it can be no more pure than the streams
that flow from a corrupt Fountain: that corrupt governing principle will still
be turning men aside in particular actions of their Lives, and in making a
judgment of those things wherein their corrupt Interest is opposed, or
immediately or remotely struck at. For men cannot serve God and Mammon (as
there it follows) they cannot be faithful to God and his Truth, where a love to
him and a care to please him, do not bear a greater sway than love to Mammon or
any other worldly concern does.

Add we yet to all this one consideration more, and that is, That when men have
more love for, and pleasure in unrighteousness, for worldly advantage sake,
than love to Truth for Truths sake, and what attends a sincere receiving of it,
the Scripture has told us, that for that very cause God shall send such
(learned men not excepted) strong delusions, that they should believe a lie; to
think and believe verily they have fast hold of Truth, when yet they have but a
lie in their right hand, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. God in just judgment giving them
up to an injudicious mind to call evil good, and good evil.

These things show how little in reason the consideration of the learning and
parts of any of the Popish party ought to weigh with those who upon the account
of them are inclined to entertain any whit the more favorable opinion of their
way, when they consider as they ought, that their Learning and Parts are in
conjunction with a corrupt Interest.

As for the Laity or Common people of the Popish persuasion, I will not say,
that a worldly corrupt Interest does so much prevail on them immediately, to be
or to continue to be what they are in point of Popery, as it does with their
Clergy; but at the Second hand it does prevail on them also. For they acting
by an Implicit faith, believing as their Churchmen believe, and seeing not
with their own, but with their eyes, and taking all on trust from them, and
giving up themselves entirely to their Conduct; it follows necessarily, that if
a corrupt Interest misguide their Guides, they also must needs become seduced
by means of it. So that what was said to the people of Israel of old, is truly
applicable unto them: O my people, they which lead thee cause thee to err. But
that will be no excuse to them who suffer themselves to be so misled: For if
the blind lead the blind, you know who has said, they both shall fall into the
ditch.

Now if Popery shall be found indeed to be founded in a like secular carnal
corrupt Interest as the corrupt Doctrine and Practice of the false Apostles
was, (and whether it be or no, I leave you to judge by what the following
discourse offers you) then that alone would be enough to blast the Reputation
of it for ever in the minds of all such as have judgment in Spiritual things.
For by this very thing did St. John discriminate the false Teachers and
Degenerate Christians and their way, from the Orthodox and Sincere, and their
way.

They, (says he) are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the
world hears them. 1 Jo. 4.5, 6. They are of the world, i. e. they were men of
worldly minds, and such as chiefly designed a worldly Interest, they were such
as did mind earthly things, as it is elsewhere expressed, Phil. 3.18. therefore
they speak of the world, i. e. the Doctrine which they taught, so far as it was
False, was calculated to promote a worldly corrupt Interest: And the world
hears them, that is, earthly minded men, pretenders to Religion, received
their Doctrine as falling in with their worldly design. But we, says St. John,
are of God, he that knows God, hears us, i. e. received their Doctrine
which drew men off from the world to God: He that is not of God, hears not
us: Hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of error: behold here a
plain Discrimination of who, and whose way is of God, and whose is not, with
whom the Spirit of Truth is found, and with whom the Spirit of Error.

If the Authors of Popery then, and their followers, have adopted into their
Religion as a part of it, any corrupt Doctrine or Practice for worldly
advantage sake, as the false Teachers of old did; then they, we see, as well as
those false Teachers, are marked out by St. John, as being not of God, but of
the world, and as men that are misguided by a Spirit of Error. And although by
wresting the Scriptures and corrupting the Word of God, they think to color
over and patronize their corrupt Doctrines and Practices, just as the false
Apostles before them did; yet their Arguings thence, are but of the same nature
with the Reasonings of the false Apostles in like cases, which were, as St.
Paul calls them, but perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, destitute of
the truth, supposing that gain is godliness, 1 Timothy 6.5.

I have in the following Papers showed how St. Paul's Complying with the Jews
in some Rites of the Jewish worship, upon account of Expedience, was quite of a
different nature from the corrupt Complyances of the false Apostles and their
party And from that prudential and expediential compliance of his, I have in an
Appendix by parity of Reason argued the expediency of yielding to the use of
some things in or about the external form of Gods Worship, which are neither
directly commanded nor forbidden by God, when circumstances render such a
yielding necessary to prevent Divisions in the Church, and the bad Consequences
of them, and to preserve Peace and Charity in it, and the better to further the
free course of the Gospel. And this I have done the rather, lest any should
think that such a yielding as aforesaid, should be of like nature with those
corrupt compliances of the false Apostles and their Party, which are
represented to view in the following Discourse.

As for those who have hitherto escaped the snares of Popery, the proper use of
the ensuing Tract for them, is, to fortify them against all Temptations of
turning Papists, of what nature soever the Temptation may be: Always
remembering, that such as follow the false Apostles in corrupting the Christian
Religion to avoid Persecution, or for any worldly advantage whatsoever, must
expect to share with them in their fate also, of whom it is said, their end
shall be according to their works, 2 Cor. 11.15.

And since you will find by the process of the Discourse before you, that the
Corruptions both in Faith and Practice, first in the false Apostles and their
followers, and after them in the Papists, did arise and spring out of an
inordinate love of the world: the consideration thereof may serve as a Sea-mark
to warn us to take heed of that Rock upon which so many professors of
Christianity have made shipwreck of it. This running into the Spirit of the
World, has always been fatal to the Churches: As it laid waste at last the
once famous flourishing Churches of the Apostles own planting; so it has since
deprest and kept many others very low in their Spiritual state, and is of ill
abode, as to their future standing. And there is so much the more danger of
falling into an undue and destructive love of the things of this world, because
we have need of them, daily use them, familiarly converse with them: and
because men generally are very unable to discern the parting difference between
a lawful and unlawful degree of love to them, and so are very apt insensibly to
pass over from the one into the other. And therefore there is great reason to
be jealous of our affections in this respect, and diligent to observe their
motion and manner of operation toward the world, and continually to be
following them with considerations, that all the things of this world are at
best but Temporal, and useful only for a little season, and that our main
Concern lies in the things of another world that are for Eternity; in
comparison of which, the things of this World are of no weight, when a judgment
and estimate of both is rightly made. By the Knowledge, Belief, and practical
consideration of this it was, that the Holy Apostles and all sincere Christans
then, did overcome the world, when their worldly and spiritual, their temporal
and eternal Interest came in competition. This is the victory that overcomes
the world, even our faith, says St. John, 1 Ep. 5.4. And though our outward
man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day, while we look not at the
things which are seen, but the things which are not seen; for the things which
are seen, are temporal, but the things which are not seen, are eternal, says
St. Paul, 2 Cor. 4.16, 18. And it was by that says which is the Substance or
confident expectation of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen,
by which Abraham, Moses and the rest of those Worthies in elder times, became
such famous instances of overcoming the world, as they were, Heb. 11. And our
blessed Savior for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross and
despised the shame, yea and contemned the Grandeur of the world too, when he
was tempted thereby to that which was incongruous to the end of his coming.

If any shall think the publishing of these papers might well be spared,
considering the many transcending pieces against Popery which are already
extant; I confess I should have thought so too, (especially considering the
Author) had it not been that the way of proceeding against Popery used therein,
by comparing it with the corrupt Religion of the false Apostles, has not, so
far as I have observed, been much made use of by others, unless only in some
glances which look that way. And yet what can expose Popery more to the
dislike, even of every vulgar apprehension, than to discover its likeness to
the Religion of the false Apostles, who preached Christ indeed as these of this
way also do, but they did it not sincerely, but added to, and mixed with the
doctrine and Religion of Christ, and that as necessary to Salvation, things of
quite a different nature and contrary tendency, even as these likewise do,
Phil. 1.15, 16.

Besides, as by discovering the true nature of the corrupt Religion of the
false Apostles and their Proselytes, (a thing which is endeavored in the
following discourse) we may take measure of, and estimate the nature of Popery
when we find, as we may, a likeness between them; So perhaps the Readers of
more ordinary Capacities, may find such further benefit thereby, as to come to
a better understanding of many places and passages in the Holy Apostles
Epistles, relating to the way of false Teachers, as, without knowing in some
measure what the corrupt Principles and Practices of the false Apostles were
and their ill effects in the Churches, can hardly be understood. And if that
may, though nothing else should, be gained thereby, yet that alone I hope would
in some measure recompense the pains of such Readers in perusing the said
discourse: From which I shall detain them no longer, this being all I have to
say by way of preface; craving their pardon for the length of it.

THE MYSTERY OF INIQUITY UNFOLDED.
BY a collection of sundry passages scattered up and down in the Writings of
the Holy Apostles of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, it may easily
be discerned how and for what end, and under what pretense the false Apostles
in the Primitive times corrupted the Christian Religion. And by comparing
here-with the Christian Religion as now corrupted by Popery, together with its
end and design, and the pretense under which it has been managed by the
Authors of it, and Guides of the people of that persuasion, those that halt
between two opinions in the Case to be enquired into, and that have any desire
to be led into the way of Truth on which hand soever it falls, may easily come
to a clear Resolution and full satisfaction, who are in the error, the Papists
or the Protestants.

In order to the Comparison thus to be made, and to the satisfaction that is
thereby to be attained, I must represent to you from the Scriptures these two
things.

1. What the design of the false Apostles was in managing the Christian
profession to so ill purpose as they did.

2. In what way and by what means, they carried on their design. After I have
done this I shall draw the Parallel between the false Apostles and Authors of
Popery, and show how the Authors of Popery have followed the false Apostles in
both End and Means.

S. 1. I shall begin with the first of these, and show what the design of the
false Apostles was in managing the Christian profession so unchristianly as
they did. And to make way for the better understanding of that, I shall briefly
touch upon the Rise of them, and the occasion of it. The sincere profession of
Christianity being attended at the first, and for a long time after, with sore
persecution; there were some of that Profession, and probably Teachers too, who
being neither willing wholly to relinquish it, nor yet to suffer so much as a
faithful and thorough adherence to the doctrine and precepts of the Gospel did
expose men to; did cast about how they might retain a profession of the Gospel,
and yet avoid any great or considerable suffering for it: And in conclusion
resolved upon this, viz. to Comply with their Adversaries in some things
pertaining to the Religion and way which they professed, (of which I shall speak
more particularly afterward) whereby they took off the keenness of their
opposition, and provided for their own ease and security. Some pretenses they
found out for so doing, wherewith they endeavored to satisfy themselves, and
others (as well as they could) whom they labored to draw in to make a party:
Just as St. Paul foretold the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, saying: Of your
own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples
after them, Acts 20.30.

And being opposed herein by the faithful Apostles, they used all the art they
could to defend and justify what they had done, and had persuaded others to
do. And to render the opposition they had herein from the holy Apostles the
less available in the eyes of others, they sought by one means or another to
disparage them, and to undermine the authority and reputation they had in the
hearts of the Christians. And by these means they corrupted and drew away many
after them; and that not of the more ordinary Disciples only, but probably many
of those also who were become preachers of the Gospel; whereof it may be Demas
might be one, who as St. Paul said, had forsaken him and embraced this present
world. And indeed this Contagion spread so fast, and prevailed so much, that
St. Paul complained, saying, all seek their own, and not the things of Jesus
Christ, Phil. 2.21.

Thus having given you an account of the Rise of the False Teachers in the
Apostles days, I shall now give you a more particular and full account of their
design. And their Design as I have already intimated, was worldly: it was to
Secure and Procure a worldly corrupt interest. It is not unlikely but that at
the first their design in complying so much as they did with the professed
enemies of Christianity, was only to avoid those sufferings for the Gospel
sake, which the sincere Christians were exposed to and underwent, both in their
persons and estates. But afterward when they had carried away many by their
deceits, and were become the Head and ringleaders of a Party; a farther
worldly advantage offered it self and came in prospect, (which we may well
conceive they were not so dull as not to perceive, nor so careless and
negligent as not to pursue) and that was an opportunity of Gain, of making
merchandise of the seduced Christians; (besides the opportunity of gratifying
their ambition in becoming the Head of a Party.) As the false Prophets of old,
and the corrupt Priests, when by prophesying and preaching pleasing things to
the people, they found no small benefit in the liberal gifts and rewards that
course did procure, were encouraged to make a trade of so doing (in which
respect those Prophets were said to divine for money, and those Priests to
teach for hire:) even so the false Apostles also perceiving that to be a
thriving way, applied themselves to preach for Doctrine such things as pleased
the unsound and timorous professors of the Gospel, and so made their carnal
ends on them. They taught things which they ought not, for filthy lucre sake,
as St. Paul says, and thereby subverted whole houses, Tit. 1.11. They found
that the preaching such loose Doctrine in point of compliance as tended to ease
the professors of Christianity of the burden of persecution, was very gainful;
it gained them many Proselytes, for they came in by whole households we see; and
it gained them much of filthy lucre also. For their Proselytes grew very kind
to them for teaching them an easier and safer way of professing Christianity
than they knew before. Yea, so it was that the poor deluded people became so
much their servants upon account of that satisfaction they took in that new
discovery, that St. Paul upbraided some of them with it in these words: Ye
suffer if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take of
you, if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face, 2 Cor. 11.20.

The design of these men to be a worldly and fleshly design, is plentifully as
well as plainly discovered in the Epistles of the Apostles. The sincere
Christians indeed ventured all their worldly concerns, and sacrificed all their
worldly interest upon the service of the Gospel, their holy profession, and
their own Souls: but these men as St. Paul characteriseth them, were enemies to
the Cross of Christ, they were such as made their belly their God, and minded
earthly things, Phil. 3.18, 19. They were enemies to the great duty of taking
up the Cross and suffering for Christ, earthly things having more of their
heart than he had. These who by their pleasing doctrine aforesaid, caused
divisions and offenses among the Christians, contrary to the Doctrine which
they had learned from the true Apostles, were such as served not the Lord Jesus
Christ, whatever they pretended, but their own bellies, Romans 16.17, 18. And St.
Peter describing them, says, they had hearts exercised with covetous
practices, having for saken the right way, and going astray, followed the way
of Balaam the son of Bosor who loved the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.14,
15. They ran greedily after the way of Balaam for reward, as Jude has it,
verse. 11. And through covetousness with feigned words, they made merchandise of
the people, whom they deluded, 2 Pet. 2.3.

Now in case of Persecution, it is true indeed that when Christ sent forth his
Disciples as Sheep among Wolves; he advised them to be wise as Serpents, but
innocent as Doves: to use as much prudence for the avoiding of persecution as
would consist with innocence, Mat. 10.16. And no doubt but that the sincerest
Christians were willing enough to make use of all the prudence they had to shun
persecution so far as lawfully they might. But yet were still careful to
preserve and maintain their own innocence and integrity in all they did in that
kind, and not in the least to betray the Cause of Christ: And therefore they
could say in those suffering times; This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and Godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom (as
the false Apostles) but by the Grace of God we have had our conversation in the
world, 2 Cor. 1.12. But the false Apostles and their followers, used so much
subtilty and carnal policy to avoid the Cross, as that the wisdom of the
Serpent did devour the innocence of the Dove. They made themselves friends of
the world indeed by unlawful compliance, and by adulterating the Christian
Religion by impure mixtures: but then they thereby made themselves enemies to
God, as St. James says, in betraying his Truth and Cause, James 4.4.

By the way then we may see by what has been said, how dangerous a thing it is
inordinately to desire and love the friendship of the world and the
accommodations of this present life: it is we see that which has betrayed
multitudes, otherwise in a hopeful way of Salvation, into cursed and
destructive Practices. They that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare,
and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition: for the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some
coveted after, they have been seduced from the Faith, and pierced themselves
through with many sorrows, says St. Paul, speaking of those corrupt Christians
whose inordinate love to the things of this world, drew them into such sinful
Compliances to preserve them, as were inconsistent with Christianity in the
truth and power of it, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.

Love not the world nor the things of the world, says St. John to those who
were in danger of being corrupted by the false Apostles through love to the
world: for if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For
all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father but is of the world, 1 John 2.15, 16.
Here Is a brief description of that love of the world which is disallowed by God
and a snare of death to men. The lust of the Eye is covetousness; which is a
transgression of the rule of righteousness or moderation in desiring or
getting; or the rule of Piety or Charity in keeping the things of this world.
The lust of the Flesh is a transgressing of the Laws of Sobriety, Temperance
and Chastity, in using them: And the pride of Life is, a transgression of the
Laws of Modesty and Humility in using undue means to draw honor and esteem
from men. Now then when St. John says, if any man love the world, the love of
the Father is not in him, his meaning seems to be this; that when any man lives
in the breach of any of Gods Commandments, in Coveting, Getting, Keeping, or
Using the things of this world; that is the man that so loves the world, as that
the love of the Father is not in him. For as the love of God, according to this
Apostle, consists in keeping his Commandments, as he says, Chap. 5.3. This
is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments; So the not loving the Father
but the world, consists in the breach of his Commandments, in Coveting,
Getting, Keeping, or Using the friendship or the things of the world. And thus
the false Apostles were lovers of the world. They were willing to be for God
and the Gospel, so long and so far as their being so did not deprive them of
their worldly accommodations; but wherein it did, so that they could no longer
serve two Masters, God and Mammon, without faultering with one of them; then
and in those particular cases when such a Competition did occur, they were wont
still to cleave to their worldly interest, but to turn their back upon God and
the Gospel. For which cause they were compared to Esau, and styled profane
persons like him, Heb. 12.16. For as Esau preferred so inconsiderable a thing
as a mess of Pottage, because of the presentness of the satisfaction he
expected thereby, before the far more desirable privileges and benefits of
Birthright and Heirship, because they for a great part at least were not to be
received till afterward: So these lovers of, and designers for this present
world, did choose ease and other worldly accommodations, because present, rather
than the better hope of eternal life, because absent and to come. This was the
root of bitterness in the persons of Seducers, against the springing up of
which among the Christians, the Author of this Epistle had cautioned them, v.
15. At that time when the case was so, that all that would live godly in Christ
Jesus must suffer persecution, there was no way of retaining a profession of
Christianity and their worldly ease and enjoyments too, but by corrupting the
Christian Religion, and making it another thing than the Author of it had made
it; which was the thing the false Apostles labored to bring the Christians to,
under delusive pretenses, that they might save themselves from suffering: which
brings me to what is next to be discoursed, and that is to show how unworthily
these false Teachers corrupted the Christian Religion to attain their worldly
end and base design.

S. 2. The next thing then which, as I said, I proposed to show, was how, in
what way, and by what means the false Apostles carried on their worldly design,
of which I have been speaking: how in particular they ordered things in their
profession of Christianity, so as to secure their end, and to serve their
design for this world. In doing of which I shall show first, that to this end
they corrupted the Christian Religion by their sinful mixtures. Secondly, that
they did this, and carried on their whole design for the world under a
Religious pretense.

First they corrupted the Christian Religion on purpose to serve their design.
They corrupted it partly by adding other things to it which were of a contrary
nature; and partly by sinister and corrupt interpretations of the Christian
Doctrine, and of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, to countenance those
additions, either as lawful, or as necessary. And thus they abused the
Scriptures touching the use of the Law of Moses, by misconstruction and
misapplication. They would be esteemed for judicious teachers of the Law, when
they understood not what they said; nor whereof they affirmed, 1 Timothy 1.7. They
taught Circumcision and the observation of other Rites of the Law of Moses to
be necessary to the Salvation of Christian Gentiles, when their doing so served
their carnal design, though otherwise they made no conscience of keeping the
Law themselves. For neither they themselves who are circumcised keep the Law;
but desire to have you circumcised that they may glory in your flesh, said St.
Paul of them, Gal. 6.13. but more of this afterward. St. Peter also tells us
that they wrested things in St. Paul's Epistles, and other Scriptures to their
own destruction. They walked in craftiness and handled the word deceitfully, as
St. Paul reflects it upon them, in 2 Cor. 4.2. and so he does again when he
says, we are not as many which corrupt the word of God, 2 Cor. 2.17. By an
unkindly violence which they offered to it, they made it seemingly, and in the
eyes of weak and injudicious and credulous persons, to countenance what they
did in prosecution of their carnal design. And although these false appearances
were but slight, and such as had nothing satisfying in them to an unprejudiced
and discerning mind, yet they would serve for demonstrations and pass for good
proof with those who were willing and desirous to have those things prove true,
which the false Apostles pretended to be so. Like as when the false Prophets of
old prophesied falsely, the people loved to have it so, because it was for their
carnal interest to have that prove true which they prophesied. But this only in
general.

But to come more particularly to the business, and to show how they corrupted
the Christian Religion to save them from suffering, and to compass their
farther ends. The sincere Christians were in great danger of suffering the loss
of all the things of this world for Christ and the Gospel sake, from two sorts
of enemies to Christianity, the unbelieving Jews, and the unbelieving Gentiles.
To avoid which, the False Apostles taught themselves first, and others after,
somewhat to comply with these Enemies of Christianity, in mixing somewhat of
their Rites and Usages with it, on purpose to take off the edge of that
Opposition and Persecution they before suffered from them, and by degrees
thereby to reconcile them to themselves, and to their Religion.

This Device of theirs occasioned those jealous apprehensions St. Paul had of
the Corinthians, after the False Apostles got among them, which he thus
expresses, in 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. I am jealous over you with godly jealousy: for
I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to
Christ. But I fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ.

S. 3. First, for the unbelieving Jews, they, we know, were fierce Enemies
against all that professed the Christian Religion, laboring to raise
Persecution against them every where. To take off the edge of which, as I said,
the False Apostles became Factors for Judaism, and so fell to persuade the
believing Gentiles to mix and compound Judaism and Christianity together, as an
Expedient both to save themselves from Persecution, and to win their
Adversaries to a liking of Christianity. Of this attempt we read in Acts 15.1.
Certain men which came down from Judea taught the brethren, and said, Except ye
be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved. And again, ver.
5. There arose certain of the sect of the Pharisees, which believed, saying,
That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of
Moses. That such a thing as this was done, to avoid Persecution from the Jews,
appears from Gal. 6.12, 13. As many as make a fair show in the flesh, they
constrain you to be circumcised, only lest they should suffer persecution for
the cross of Christ. That they did it not so much out of Conscience, as for
this politic end, appears by ver. 13. For neither they themselves who are
circumcised keep the law, but desire to have you circumcised, that they may
glory in your flesh, as having now made them as well Proselytes to the Jewish
way, as before they were to Christianity.

That this way of compliance in the Christians with the Jews, was effectual to
secure them from Persecution from the Jews, appears likewise from Gal. 5.11.
And I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, then is the offense of the cross
ceased. Upon this account doubtless it was, that some corrupt Christians
pretended themselves to be Jews, who were not, but were of the synagogue of
Satan, as we read Rev. 2.9. and 3.9.

Now this way of joining and commixing Judaism and Christianity together, set
on foot by false Teachers, under the Pretenses aforesaid, took dangerously
among Professors of Christianity; which was the occasion of those large
Discourses touching Justification by Faith, without the Works of the Law, which
we have in St. Paul's Epistles both to the Romans and Galatians. The plain
meaning of which was, That the observation of the Law of Moses in the Jewish
way, was not necessary to Salvation in Christians, as the false Apostles had
taught it to be; and that it was unnecessary for the Gentile Believers to be
brought over to it; and that the Religion revealed and prescribed in the
Gospel, called The Faith, and this alone, without adding Judaism to it, was
both necessary and sufficient to Salvation. And, by the way, those that from
the Apostles Reasoning hereabout, would oppose the Works of Evangelical
Obedience to Faith, in the Point of Justification, do greatly mistake the
Apostle in his design and way of Reasoning.

S. 2. Secondly, the false Teachers, to avoid Persecution, and the loss of all
for the Gospels sake, from the Heathen or unbelieving Gentiles, struck in with
them also in part, and taught the Christians, that it was lawful for them to
comply with their Idolatrous Neighbors, so far as to go with them to their
Idol-feasts, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols, so long as they did not
intentionally, and in their minds, do it in any honor to the Idol, but kept
their mind to God. Some such as these were in the Church of Pergamos, Revel.
2.14. I have a few things against thee, because thou have there them that hold
the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumbling block before the
children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit
fornication. Such also were in the Church of Thyatira, ver. 20. I have a few
things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezabel, which calls
her self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce my servants to commit fornication,
and to eat things sacrificed unto Idols.

That this was taught and practiced as lawful, so long as it was not done
intentionally to honor or worship the Idol, as the Infidels did, I gather from
St. Paul's Discourse in 1 Cor. 8. In ver. 1. he says, Now as touching things
offered to Idols, we know that we all have knowledge. Knowledge of what? This
he delivers more expressly in ver. 4. We know that an Idol is nothing in the
world, and that there is none other God but one. This it seems was that which
they pleaded in justification of their Practice of going to the Idols Temple,
and of eating of things sacrificed to the Idols: They knew that the Idol was
nothing, and therefore did not intend any worship to it in what they did. The
Apostle supposes this to be true, and grants indeed, that they, and all
Persons generally, that owned the Christian Faith, did know that an Idol is
nothing, and that there is no other God but one, and that therefore probably
such could not be supposed to eat of the Idol-sacrifice with intent to worship
the Idol: But yet this Knowledge was not universal, among all without
exception, that had begun to own Christianity; as he shows in ver. 7. saying,
Howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge: for some with conscience of
the Idol unto this hour eat it as a thing offered unto an Idol, and their
conscience being weak is defiled. And so argues the unlawfulness of their
Practice, upon the account of scandal to weak Brethren, to the end of the
Chapter. But in the tenth Chapter, where he reassumes this Business again, he
argues plainly, That whatever their knowledge or intention was, yet that by
that Practice they had communion with the Idol or Devils, to whom indeed the
Offering was made. See from ver. 14. to ver. 22.

It was for this Seduction by false Teachers, that St. Peter and Jude do so
earnestly inveigh against them, as following the way of Balaam for reward, 2
Pet. 2.15. Jude 11. And Balaams way, we know, was to teach Balac to draw the
Israelites to Idolatry and Whoredom, by enticing them to eat with the Moabites
of their Idol-sacrifices, Numb. 25.2. and 31.16. And it was against this
Seduction by false Teachers, that St. John admonished the Christians, when in
the close of his first Epistle he said, Little children keep your selves from
Idols.

How far this device of sinful compliance with Unbelievers, both of Jews and
Gentiles, did succeed to draw them over to them, to become such Christians as
themselves, I know not; which yet doubtless was one thing they promised
themselves in it: yet it is very probable they found by experience, that their
complying with the Heathen, in going to their Idolfeasts, did procure them much
ease, as their compliance with the Jews had done, either in freeing them from,
or greatly abating that Persecution, which before they were exposed unto by
professing the Gospel; which was another thing they promised themselves in it.
And there are two things especially which make this probable. The one is, in
that this Device of Compliance took with the Christians, and prevailed so much
in the several Churches, as by the Scriptutes already quoted we see it did. The
other is, in that St. Paul brings in the Corinthians applauding themselves in
their happy condition, since the time their new Teachers came among them, to
teach them a more easy and safe way of professing the Gospel, than Paul had
done, in 1 Cor. 4.8, 10. Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as
kings without us: We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ: we
are weak, but ye are strong: ye are honorable, but we are despised: even unto
this present hour, we both hunger, and thirst, are naked, and buffeted, etc.
They had Halcyon days now, as they thought, in comparison of what they had
before. And it appears, that this Church of Corinth especially, was infected
with this contagious Disease, in that St. Paul has it so often up, arguing
against it, warning them of it several times, and in both his Epistles to them.
And the ease they found by it, was in all likelihood, as I said, the temptation
by which it prevailed so much among them as it did.

S. 5. Other things also they did, in corrupting the Christian Religion, to
ingratiate themselves with the Enemies of it; whereof Worshipping of Angels I
may name for one, against which the Apostle warned the Christians in Col. 2.18.
saying, Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility and
worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen,
vainly puffed up with his fleshly mind. Whether this was done and taught in
compliance with those Heathen who followed the way of Platonic Philosophy in
this, as some think; and St. Paul had said before, in ver. 8. Beware lest any
man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit: or whether to draw near to
the Pagans, who had their Demons, their Baalims, or Lords, to whom they
addressed themselves as Mediators to their Superior Deities, I shall not
determine: But I think there is little question to be made, but that this their
falling back to the Rudiments of the World, as well as other their
Sophistications, was to serve themselves in their worldly design.

S. 6. Furthermore, They denied the Resurrection of the Body, in compliance
with the Enemies of Christianity. The Pagans, and likewise the Sadduces, which
were a prevailing Sect among the Jews, held no Resurrection of the Body after
death. And we find that this Heretical Opinion was set on foot in the Church of
Corinth, by some among them, 1 Cor. 15.12. How say some among you, that there
is no resurrection of the dead? And we have little reason but to think, that
those who did put it on foot there, did so, the more to curry favor with the
Opposers and Persecutors of the Christians, who professed a belief of the
Doctrine of the Resurrection; because that for the same reason they did unduely
comply with them in other things, as I have showed. And because this was so
manifestly contrary to the Gospel, which yet they professed, that in denying
that, they did in effect deny the Gospel; therefore to bring themselves off
from this self contradiction in their Profession, when they felt themselves
hard pressed with it, they fell to quibling with this Doctrine of the
Resurrection, and to put mystical Interpretations upon it, (as some in our days
have done) saying, That the resurrection was past already, as Hymeneus and
Philetus did, in 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. They taught it seems, That what is so often
affirmed in the Gospel touching the Resurrection, was to be understood of a
Resurrection then already past.

S. 7. Again, To increase their Party, and to strengthen their Interest, they
broached Doctrines of Libertinism and Licentiousness, which is a course that
usually proves too successful in drawing corrupt Men to be on the side of such
Teachers, and for the sake thereof, to espouse other of their Opinions. Such
Men will run after such Teachers, heaping to themselves, as St. Paul says,
teachers after their own lusts, 2 Timothy 4.3. St. Peter speaking of this course
of theirs, in 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. says, When they speak great swelling words of
vanity, they allure through the lusts of the flesh those who were clean escaped
from those who live in error: While they promise them liberty, they themselves
are the servants of corruption. As in the things beforementioned they
corrupted the Christian Religion in point of Worship; so in this, under
consideration, they corrupted it in point of Manners.

Fornication was held a thing lawful among the Gentiles ( Acts 15.29.) and the
false Teachers, to make themselves Friends of the World, taught the Christians
to esteem it lawful too, Rev. 2.20. Thou suffer the woman Jezabel, who
calls her self a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit
fornication, etc. And so again, in ver. 14, 15. Thou have them that hold the
doctrine of Balaam, etc. so have thou also them that hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. This sort of Men had eyes full of adultery,
beguiling unstable souls, as St. Peter says, 2 Pet. 2.14. They crept into
houses, and led captive silly women, laden with sins, and led away with diverse
lusts, 2 Timothy 3.6.

They taught it also to be lawful to cast off Obedience and Subjection to
Governors, both Masters and Magistrates, under pretense of their Christian
Liberty by the Gospel; which was a Doctrine very taking with many, especially
Jews, many of whom were otherwise of themselves, upon all occasions, forward
enough to cast off the Roman yoke. Upon this account these Seducers were said
to despise government, and to speak evil of dignities, 2 Pet. 2.10. Jude 11.
And to perish in the gainsaying of Core, who, as we know, opposed Moses and
Aaron in their Government. Against this Seduction St. Peter cautions the
Christians, 1 Pet. 2.16, 17. when he says, As free, and not using your liberty
as a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God. Honor all men. Love
the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King. And so does St. Paul, 1 Timothy 6.1.
Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their own masters worthy of
all honor, that the Name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed.

S. 8. Furthermore, they grew to this at last, that if all their other
Compliances would not secure them from suffering Persecution for owning the
Name of Christ, they taught, That then, in case of necessity, and before a
Judge, it was lawful, and matter of liberty, to deny Christ in word, provided
they did but inwardly retain a belief in him in their hearts. Of these St.
Peter speaks, saying, There shall be false teachers among you, who privily
shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, 2
Pet. 2.1. And St. Jude says, ver. 4. That there were certain men crept in
unawares, turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, and denying the only
Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

And thus we see how the false Apostles, and their Followers, by complying with
the unbelieving Jews on the one hand, and Gentiles on the other, corrupted the
Christian Religion, out of a carnal worldly design, quite contrary to the
Doctrine and Practice of the true Apostles, whose Exhortation, as they said,
was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile, as the others was; but as
they were allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so they
spoke, not as pleasing men, as the other did, but God, which tried their
hearts. Neither at any time used they flattering words, nor a cloak of
covetousness, as the other did, 1 These. 2.3, 4, 5.

S. 9. But possibly this may rise in the minds of some, as an Objection, That
St. Paul himself did in many things comply both with the Jews and Gentiles. For
does not he himself say, That unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might
gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as under the Law, that I might
gain them that are under the Law; to them that are without Law, as without Law,
to gain them that are without Law; and that he became all things to all men, 1
Cor. 9.20, 21? And if Paul were not to blame in doing so, how came the other to
be so faulty by reason of their compliances? But, in answer to this, let it be
considered, that the difference between the compliance of St. Paul and that of
the false Apostles, was vastly great.

First in the end of it, The governing end of the false Apostles in their
compliance, was earthly, worldly, carnal, as I have showed: but the end of St.
Paul in his, was purely spiritual, it was for the furtherance of the Gospel and
men's salvation thereby. This appears from that place, and those very words from
which the objection is raised. When he became as a Jew to the Jews, it was to
gain the Jews: and when he became as without Law to them that were without Law,
it was to gain them: And, as it follows in the 22. and 23. Verses, I am made
all things to all men, that I might by all means save some: and this I do,
says he, for the Gospels sake.

Secondly, The difference was vastly great in the nature of their compliance as
well as in the end. The false Apostles complied with the Gentiles in the Rites
of their worship and corruption of manners, to the apparent breach of the Laws
of God, the doctrine of Christ, and precepts of the Gospel. But St. Paul in his
compliance with them went not at all beyond those holy bounds. For he says,
that when he was as without Law to them that were without Law, yet he was not
therein without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ, ver. 21. It Is true,
the false Apostles or their Proselytes, did report of Paul (and it is like it
was from his compliance for the Gospel sake that they did so) that he should
say, Let us do evil that good may come, but St. Paul rejected it as a
slanderous report of them whose damnation is just, Romans 3.8. They really did it
themselves, but would have fastened it upon him.

St. Paul's being as without Law to the Gentiles which were without the Law of
Moses, was but his encourageing and strengthening them in that opinion, that
there was no need that the believing Gentiles should be circumcised or keep the
Law of Moses, as some would have had them: And he blamed Peter as not walking
uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, when he did otherwise, and
compelled the Gentiles to live as did the Jews, Gal. 2.14.

And then as for Paul's becoming as a Jew to the Jews that he might gain the
Jews; it is true, when he saw that his indulging the use of the Jewish Rites
only among the Jews, as things lawful but not necessary, would further the
success of the Gospel in propagating the Christian Religion among them, he
yielded to them therein, as in Acts 21. And for the same cause circumcised
Timothy: for his Mother being a Jewess, and Paul having a mind to have him go
forth with him in the work of the Gospel, he took and circumcised him because
of the Jews which were in those quarters, who otherwise would probably have
opposed that undertaking, or at least would not have accepted of his service.
Acts 16.3.

But the false Apostles to pacify and to gratify the Jews who raised
persecution against Paul and others for taking in the believing Gentiles into
an equality with the believing Jews, without being circumcised, did teach that
it was necessary that the believing Gentiles should be circumcised, and observe
the Law of Moses, and that they could not be saved without it, as I showed
before. And in this St. Paul was so far from complying with the Jews, as the
false Apostles did, that he strenuously opposed them in it, testifying to those
believing Gentiles that were in this ensnared by the false Apostles, or in
great danger of being so, saying, Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing, Gal. 5.2. And again, ver. 4.
Christ is become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the
Law, ye are fallen from grace. And therefore when some of these false brethren
were privily and unawares brought in to spy out the liberty which was used in
owning and receiving the Gentiles without Circumcision, and to try if they
could bring them into bondage by procuring Titus, who was a Greek, to be
Circumcised; St. Paul says, That to these they did not give place, no not for
an hour, that the truth of the Gospel might continue with them, Gal. 2.3, 4, 5.
Implying plainly that such a compliance with the Jews in yielding Titus a
Gentile to be Circumcised, considering the circumstances under which the false
Apostles urged the Circumcision of the Gentiles, would have tended to a
corrupting of the Gospel in the minds of the Christians, and have ministered an
advantage to the false Apostles.

And now I suppose it appears that the compliance in Paul with the Jews and
Gentiles, differed as much both in the nature and end of it from the compliance
of the false Apostles, as Vice and Virtue differ. And that they did differ, the
false Apostles understood well enough, and therefore hated Paul and the sincere
Christians as their opposites, and joined with their persecutors in persecuting
of them; still the more to ingratiate themselves with them. These were of
those, as I suppose, that, St. Paul said, Preached Christ of envy and strife,
of contention, and not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to his bonds,
Phil. 1.15, 16. Of these it was, as I apprehend by the scope of the place, that
St. Paul said; But as then he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him
that was born after the spirit, even so it is now, Gal. 4.29. Of these St. John
speaks, as I take it, when he says, He that says he is in the light, and
hates his brother, is in darkness until now, 1 John 2.9. and cautions the
brethren that they be not as Cain, as some false Christians were, who slew his
brother because his own works were evil and his brothers righteous, 1 John 3.12.

S. 10. Having showed how the Christian Religion was corrupted by the false
Apostles on purpose to promote their secular design, I might now show yet a
little further, how lamentably the Apostolical Churches were in a little time
overrun with it, and many of the Members thereof sowred with this Leaven, as
St. Paul feared they would, when he said in reference to those corrupters, A
little Leaven leaveneth the whole lump, and wishes that they were cut off that
troubled the Church, Gal. 5.7, 8, 9. Probably this their being neither directly
and wholly Christian, nor Jew, nor Pagan, but a mixture of all, to keep fair
quarter with all, was the crime of the Church of Laodicea, in being neither hot
nor cold, neither fish nor flesh, as we say, neither Christian, Jew, nor Pagan,
but a composition of all together, and yet thought themselves in a brave
condition, rich and increased in goods and had need of nothing. Just as some of
those in the Church of Corinth upon the same account thought themselves to be,
as St. Paul represents it in 1 Cor. 4.8. Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye
have reigned as Kings without us. They applauded themselves in that they had
found out, as they thought, a wiser way of being Christians, than the Apostles
and others had done: for they, as they thought, could hold the faith of the
Gospel, and their worldly enjoyments too. Whereas others which they thought
more imprudent in professing the Gospel, exposed themselves to the spoiling of
their Goods, and the loss of all things. To such as these it was, I conceive,
that St. Paul says thus, in 1 Cor. 3.18. Let no man deceive himself: if any
man among you seems to be wise in this world, (mark that, wise in this world)
let him become a fool that he may be wise. That is, let him become such a
Christian as those who by a faithful and close adherence to the doctrine and
precepts of the Gospel, exposed themselves to the loss of all in this world,
and were counted fools for so doing, by the false Apostles and their adherents;
that he may be wise to purpose, wise for the world to come. So here, in Revel.
3.18. Christ in opposition to this carnal conceit of the Laodiceans of their
being rich, counsels them to buy of him Gold tried in the fire that they might
be rich in deed, and not in conceit only. That is, as I conceive, that they
would not shrink at the fiery trial as St. Peter calls it, which his faithful
followers patiently endured for his sake, and which being endured would make
them spiritually rich indeed, rich in the experimental knowledge and proof of
their own sincerity and fidelity to Christ; and thereupon rich in their
assurance of their title to the reward promised to those that overcome; and
consequently rich also in that consolation, peace, and joy, which such a
knowledge and experience would furnish them withal, far beyond all men's worldly
enjoyments could afford them when preserved with their faultring and double
dealing with Christ in their profession of his Religion. For as the sufferings
of Christ abounded in his faithful followers, so their consolation also
abounded by him, as those who experienced it did testify, 2 Cor. 1.5. Who
therefore gloried in tribulations of that kind, Romans 5.3. And therefore well
might St. Peter say, that this trial of faith, this proof of the goodness of
faith, this spiritual gold, by enduring the fire, is much more precious than
that of Gold that perishes, though it be tried with fire, 1 Pet. 1.7. And
proportionably they are much more rich that have abundance of that, than they
that have abundance of this.

All this serves to demonstrate the wisdom and goodness of that counsel of
Christ to the Laodiceans, to buy of him Gold tried in the fire that they might
be rich, and not to decline doing so, that they might retain their worldly
riches. And so does that of buying of him white raiment to cover the shame of
their nakedness. By which I understand, such an outward conversation in divine
worship and manners, as is called by St. James, a being unspotted of the world,
and as is opposed to such an one as is described by garments spotted by the
flesh, in S. Jude, of which some professing Christianity, were guilty by their
compliances with the Heathen in their evil customs, to curry their favors as
well as to gratify their own lusts. The other part of our Lords counsel to
them was, to anoint their eyes with eye salve that they might see, that is,
make a right judgment of the nature of Christianity, and see things a far off
in the other world, to govern themselves by their concernment in those things,
and not still remain like those who are blind and cannot see a far off, as St.
Peter describes them, 2 Pet. 1.9. but govern themselves only by the sense they
have of present things, nigh unto them and just before them, as bruit beasts
do, to which they are compared in that respect, when it is said; In what they
know naturally as bruit beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves, Jude
verse. 10. And by understanding the meaning of this counsel of Christ to them,
we may understand the nature of their disease to which this counsel was applied
by way of remedy. Their great distemper lay in two things; First, in their
carnal compliance for fear of suffering: by reason of which compliance they
were neither hot nor cold, neither through Christians, nor through Pagans, nor
Jews, as I said, but like Ephraim of old, a Cake half baked, or a speckled Bird
of several colors, to which Israel was compared in their declined condition.
Secondly, in applauding themselves in that they had by this means found out a
way of being good Christians, as they thought, without exposing themselves to
suffering for it, and as if they had been in a happier condition than others
that had not done so: Whenas by that means, and for that very reason, they were
miserable and poor, and blind, and naked, and loathsome to Christ, and ready to
be spewed out of his mouth; far from such a happy condition as they fancied
themselves to be in.

This also, probably, was the condition of the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.1.
except the few names in it that had not defiled their Garments with those
pollutions into which the false Teachers had enticed others. For though they
had a name to live, from that profession of the Gospel which they made, yet
were in a manner dead, by degenerating and going back again in part into
Gentilism or Judaism, from which they had been delivered.

The loss of first love in the Church of Ephesus also, as it is very likely,
befell them by the deceiving of the false Teachers we speak of, that drove a
worldly design in professing the Gospel, so as that it might not be too costly
to them. This St. Paul had foretold, when he said to the Elders of that Church,
in Act. 20.29, 30. I know this, that after my departure shall grievous Wolves
enter in among you, not sparing the flock: also of your own selves shall men
arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them. And he
admonished them in his Epistle to them, Chap. 4.14. That they would be no more
children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by
the slight of men and cunning craftiness, whereby they lay in wait to deceive.
And again, Chap. 5.6. Let no man deceive you with vain words, etc. Meaning
doubtless in all this, to arm them against, and take them off from the
insinuations and temptations of false Teachers, to draw them into sinful
complyances to escape persecution.

Another hint of this nature we have in the close of his Epistle to them, Chap.
6.24. where he says, Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity, or with incorruption, as it is in the Margin: that is, without
mixing his Religion with any thing foraign to it, or inconsistent with it, for
worldly ends as some had done.

Our Savior in Revel. 2.3. commends them for that at first they had born and
had patience to suffer, and for his names sake had labored and had not
fainted. But then in the 5th. ver. he calls upon them to remember from whence
they were fallen, and to repent and do their first works. They were now fallen
from that love and zeal for Christ, which at first they manifested to him in
suffering for him, called here their first love, which now they had lost: and
had now found out an easier way, but withal an impurer way of owning Christ
and professing his Gospel. Which change he admonishes them to repent of, and
to return to their first love and zeal in keeping close to the truth and purity
of the Christian Religion, whatever the Issue of it might be as to this worlds
concerns: for these were their first works, as appears by what was said before
of them in the 3d. verse. And those Christians that kept to this whatever it
cost them, were such as were said to be Virgins, Virgin Christians that had not
violated their chastity to Christ, but followed the Lamb only whithersoever he
went, though he led them through fire and water, Rev. 14.3.

I the rather think that corrupt compliances through fear of suffering, were
the faults of those Five of these Seven Churches which came under reproof;
because that, for which the other Two of Smyrna and Philadelphia are commended
and not censured at all, was their courage for, and constancy in the truth of
the Gospel, in the midst of danger, impoverishing and trouble, because of it.
Rev. 2.9, 10. I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, but thou art
rich. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer. Rev. 3.8.10. Thou have
a little strength, and have kept my word and have not denied my name. Because
thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of
temptation that shall come upon all the world to try them. Besides, the promise
in the close of every one of the Seven Epistles, made to him that overcomes,
together with the other subject matters of them, argues that the being overcome
and prevailed with to do unworthily through fear of suffering, was the sin of
some, and the temptation dangerous to all of them.

S. 11.2. Having showed you how the false Apostles carried on their design of
securing their worldly concerns in their profession of the Christian Religion,
by corrupting it: I shall now come to show how they did it under a show and
pretense of Religion: which was the last thing I proposed to insist on
concerning them and their ill design. This course taken by them of setting off
what they did herein with a show and pretense of being very Religious in it,
was nothing but what our Savior had foretold would come to pass, premonishing
his Disciples to take heed of being deceived hereby, when he said, Beware of
false Prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are
ravening Wolves, Mat. 7.15. They could not carry on their design alone without
making a party among them that professed the Gospel, nor that, but under a
Religious pretense. And a party they did make to join with them in it, by such
means as I shall now briefly instance in.

1. They did it by obtaining the reputation among many, of being the Ministers
of Christ, yea, perhaps of being the Apostles of Christ, which indeed some of
them pretended themselves to be. Which was of great advantage to them; it being
no hard matter for them to corrupt those with whom they obtained such a
reputation, and to draw them in to fide with them in their design. For when
once the people came to esteem them, the Ministers and Messengers of Christ, as
well as Paul and other Apostles; the false Apostles then came to have a great
advantage thereby of drawing them off from those that were the Ministers of
Christ indeed, and of bringing them under their own conduct; because their
doctrine tended to secure them from that persecution and loss of worldly
enjoyments, which the doctrine of the true Apostles, when followed, exposed
them to. And if the people could be brought to give as much credit to the
doctrine of the false Apostles as to that of the true, as they must if they
believed them to be true Apostles, though they were not: then they could be in
no doubt which to follow, for they would then certainly follow them, who, as
they believed, taught them how to keep this world, and yet obtain that which is
to come too, rather than them who taught them to run almost a certain hazard of
this, that they might obtain the next. And it was because of this advantage,
that they had the persons of the false Apostles in admiration, Jude 16. Now
that they pretended themselves to be the Ministers of Christ, and not only so,
but that they were esteemed so to be by a party, appears by that of St. Paul,
where he says in his own vindication thus: Are they Ministers of Christ? I am
more, 2 Cor. 11.23. They preached Christ indeed, as St. Paul says; but it was
of envy, strife, and contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to
my bonds, Phil. 1.15, 16. They envied him the honor and respect he had among
the Christians, by preaching Christ and Salvation by him to them; and so they
preached Christ and Salvation by him too; but yet in a way of opposition to
Paul, by preaching Christ insincerely, mixing other things with his doctrine,
that were more gratifying to the flesh, and thereby drawing off the respect of
the Christians from Paul to themselves, which if effected, must needs add
affliction to his bonds. They zealously affect you, but not well, says St.
Paul, yea they would exclude us that you might affect them, Gal. 4.17.

And that they might not be thought inferior to the Apostles of Christ, who
were extraordinarily sent, and of a higher standing than any other in the
Evangelical Ministry; they also, some of them, pretended themselves to be the
Apostles of Christ, that they might put the more glorious color upon their
design and arts of deceiving. Such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, says
St. Paul, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13.
Nay, it should seem some of them did not only pretend to an equality with Paul,
but also to a more unquestionable Apostolic authority than was in him. For
they called St. Paul's Apostleship into question, and sought to undermine the
reputation of his Apostolical authority. Upon this account, and for this cause
it was that Paul was constrained to vindicate his Apostleship to the
Corinthians, as he did in 1 Ep. Chap. 9. Ver. 1, 2. Am I not an Apostle? am I
not free? have not I seen the Lord? are not you my work in the Lord? if I be
not an Apostle to others, yet doubtless I am to you, for the Seal of my
Apostleship are ye in the Lord. See farther for this, 2 Cor. 10.8. and 11.5.
and 12.11, 12. and 13.3.6. They insinuated that Paul had not seen Christ, as
those that were truly his Apostles had, and that he had received the Gospel
which he preached, but from men and not immediately from Christ, and that
therefore he might be mistaken. In opposition to which, it was that St. Paul
said; I certify you brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, is not
after man: for I neither received it of men, neither was I taught it, but by
the revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.11, 12.

But though too many were so weak as to be deceived with these men's great
swelling words, yet there were others that were too wise to be imposed upon by
their pretensions to Apostleship. And such were those of the Church of Ephesus
for a while at least, till they fell from their first love. Thou have tried
them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and have found them liars, says
Christ to the Angel of that Church, Rev. 2.2. As for such as were deceived and
did take them to be what they pretended themselves to be, Apostles; and upon
that account could give as much credit to what they said, as to what Paul said:
it was no marvel if they thought themselves in a better condition by their
coming among them, than they had been in by following Paul; in as much as they
taught them an easier and cheaper way of being Christians, than he had done, as
I have often said. And that they did think themselves in a happier condition,
appears by that representation of their thoughts which St. Paul made when he
said, now ye are rich, now ye are full, ye have reigned as Kings without us, 1
Cor. 4.10.

S. 12.2. And to gain yet the more credit among the Christians, whom they
labored thereby to seduce, they pretended to promote the ends of the Gospel,
holiness and righteousness, in what they did and taught. For the Gospel is so
express for these, that the professors of it could hardly be cheated and
corrupted in there profession of it, but under a pretense of promoting these.
And therefore there is no question but that these false Apostles talked as high
for holiness and righteousness, and made as great a noise about it in sound of
words and name of the thing in general terms (as seducers use to do) as the
true Apostles themselves. And therefore St. Paul says that they transformed
themselves as the ministers of righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.15. They were for a
form of godliness in profession, though they denied it in the power and
practice of it, 2 Timothy 3.5. They were wells and clouds without water, as Peter
and Jude describe them? they in profession promised the furtherance of Religion
and virtue, as wells promise water and clouds rain: but they were but as empty
and deceitful wells and clouds in this.

Nay they did not only pretend to holiness and righteousness as well as the
true Apostles, but they pretended to more strictness in some things than the
Apostles themselves. They pretended to go farther in mortification and
self-denial, than the Apostles did, in imposing upon themselves and others
abstinence from some meats, and from Marriage: forbidding them to marry and
commanding them to abstain from some meats, was part of the doctrine of these
seducing Spirits. 1 Timothy 4.18. Touch not, taste not, handle not, said they:
which things, says St. Paul, have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship and
humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of
the flesh, Col. 2.21.23. They pretended that St. Paul and such as he, walked
but according to the flesh, in comparison of themselves who lived a more
abstemious and mortified Life, as they would have others to think.

I think to be bold, says St. Paul, against some, who think of us as if we
walked according to the flesh, 2 Cor. 10.2. Let no man judge you, says he, in
meat or in drink, or in respect of an Holy day, or of the New Moon, or of the
Sabbath days, Col. 2.16. They were for judging the Christians that followed
St. Paul, as not so tender and conscientious about these things, as they
themselves pretended to be. For that we see has been and indeed still is the
manner of Seducers, to pretend to great strictness in some little things which
are not necessary in themselves; thereby to gain a great reputation among
people of weak minds, for holiness, mortification and strictness of living,
when in the mean time they are deeply culpable in other things of moment, in
the eyes of those of more discerning Spirits. Like the Pharisees who were for
tithing Mint, Anise and Cummin, and for diverse washings, when they omitted and
passed over the weightier matters of the Laws, Judgment, Mercy, and the Love of
God; yea and made void the Commandments of God, that they might establish their
own traditions.

By reason of these and other like pretensions, they came at last to Separation
it self, and withdrew themselves from Communion with the Orthodox Christians,
as if they had not been Spiritual enough for their Communion. They went out
from us, says St. John, 1 John 2.19. These are they who separate themselves,
sensual, not having the spirit, says St. Jude, ver. 19. And yet in this state
of Separation, they were so far from becoming a more pure and Spiritual
Community, as that they were indeed the Synagogue of Satan, as they are styled,
Rev. 2.9. as being most impure, both in principle and practice; and were really
Spots in the Christian Feasts of Charity, before they separated, Jude 12. And
therefore it seems somewhat strange that they should fancy themselves to be
more Spiritual than the Orthodox Christians. But it seems they esteemed
themselves more knowing than others in Evangelical Mysteries, and valued
themselves by that knowledge, and so came to arrogate to themselves the Title
of Gnostics, or the Knowing men. For they to reconcile that which was indeed
their corrupting the Christian Religion with that Religion it self, would needs
understand the Christian Doctrine in a more mystical sense than the Apostles
and Orthodox Christians did. By which, and by wresting the Scriptures of the
Old Testament to an undue sense, they perverted the Gospel of Christ, making it
another thing, another Gospel (as St. Paul phraseth it) than it was in it self,
Gal. 1.6. And by reason of these Mystical Speculations (which they esteemed for
Divine Illuminations) they conceited themselves to have fellowship with God,
even then, when in point of practice they walked in ways of darkness; as we may
perceive by what S. John suggesteth concerning them, when he says, If we say
we have fellowship with him, God, and walk in darkness (as they did) we lie and
do not the truth, 1 John 1.6. Which plainly intimates, that they grounded this
persuasion of their having fellowship with God, upon somewhat abstracted from a
good and holy life, (which is the proper end and use of Divine Knowledge,
without which it will do them that have it no more good than it does the Devils
when they have it,) and what could that be but an opinion that their bare
knowledge and belief of things, invested them with that privilege? As too many
in like manner now a days hope to enjoy partnership or fellowship in the
righteousness of Christ, merely upon account of their belief or Orthodox
opinion, though of impure lives. And truly well might St. Paul say in reference
to these Gnostics, and in this very respect; if any man think that he knows
any thing (and values himself by that knowledge) he knows nothing yet as he
ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2. These mystical and unintelligible speculations, they
called Science, though falsely, as St. Paul says: and these they opposed to the
plain and intelligible doctrine of the Apostles, (as the Quakers in like manner
do theirs) in doing of which, they erred from the faith, as we are told, in 1 Timothy 6.20, 21. -- avoiding profane and vain babbling, and oppositions of
Science, falsely so called: which some professing, have erred concerning the
Faith.

Now when they had obtained a reputation among simple people, of being the
Ministers of Christ, the Apostles of Christ, and of being for holiness and
righteousness, and more strict and abstmeious in some things than the true
Apostles were, and more sublime and spiritual: how easy a matter was it then
for them to mould the poor simple and deluded people into what form they
pleased, especially in things that tended to their ease in the flesh?

And no doubt but as they pretended to Apostolical Authority and to greater
strictness of life in some things, than they would acknowledge in the holy
Apostles themselves; So they would pretend likewise that such complyances with
the Jews on the one hand and with the gentiles on the other as they advised to
and practiced, did tend to the propagating of the Christian Religion; and that
by such complyances they might gain upon their neighbors and friends to come
more easily over to them in the acknowledgment of Christ and profession of the
Christian Religion. And therefore, as it seems, they taxed St. Paul with
imprudence in preaching the Gospel, and managing his Ministry in so blunt a
manner as they thought he did, to the exasperating of all sorts against him.
For St. Paul represented the thoughts that such had of him, as had been
corrupted by the false Apostles, when he said; We are fools for Christ's sake,
but ye are wise in Christ, i. e. in professing Christ or the Gospel of Christ,
1 Cor. 4.8. They thought it seems that he had not been so prudent in managing
the Christian cause, as their new Teachers had taught them to be. For since
they had met with those wiser methods, as they were taught to esteem them to
be, they had reigned as Kings, free from those disturbances, oppositions and
sufferings, which Paul's way of professing the Gospel had exposed them to. And
thus by good words and fair speeches, they deceived the hearts of the simple,
and caused divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine they had once
learned, Romans 16.17, 18.

S. 13.3. When they had gained the reputation aforesaid among the simple and
carnal minded Professors of the Gospel, they could by virtue thereof easily
incline them without any great scruple, to do any thing they would have them,
to procure fair quarter from the Unbelievers among whom they lived. And
therefore to give themselves and their seduced adherents the greater liberty
and ease in their minds to do such things as they did in prosecution of their
worldly design, without any great scruple, they broached among them the
doctrine of licentiousness under the notion of Christian liberty. They turned
the grace of God into lasciviousness, as S. Jude speaks, ver. 4. Of these and
the course they took in this kind, St. Peter likewise speaks thus, in 2 Pet.
2.19. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of
corruption.

By these and other Scriptures it should seem, they spread some such Doctrine
as this: That the Grace of God in Christ was so large, that if men did but
believe in Christ, they were in no danger of damnation, though they used a
greater liberty than such as Paul would allow of. They thought it seems, that
faith without works would have saved them: a conceit which St. James opposed
them in, saying, What does it profit my brethren, though a man say he has
faith and has not works? can faith save him? Jam. 2.14. And St. Paul gives
this character of those false Teachers who did resist the Truth preached by the
Apostles, just as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, viz. that they were men
of corrupt minds, reprobate, concerning the Faith, 2 Timothy 3.8. They held and
taught corrupt notions concerning the doctrine of being saved by Faith in
Christ.

And when once they persuaded the people to believe such a doctrine as tended
to Liberty and Licentiousness, and yet undertook to secure them of Salvation
all the while, upon account of a notional Faith in Christ; what would they
stick at, and what would they not do, under the notion of furthering and
promoting the Christian, the Catholic Cause, either to secure or procure their
worldly enjoyments, and to gratify their various lusts? Many when they
perceived that by the doctrine of Faith in Christ, men were freed from the Law
of Moses, in many of those things which before Faith came, the Jews were bound
to observe, they were willing to understand, that this doctrine of the Faith of
the Gospel gave them a greater Latitude in other things also than indeed it
did. And this opinion as we may well suppose, occasioned such cautions as
these: Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty, only use not liberty as an
occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5.13. As free, and not using your liberty as a
cloak of maliciousness, 1 Pet. 2.16.

Nay, some it seems went so far as to think they might do things in their own
nature evil, so long as they did them for good ends; to sin that grace might
abound: and would have fathered this opinion on the Apostles also, Romans 3.8. As
we be slanderously reported, says St. Paul, and as some affirm that we say,
let us do evil that good may come.

From such Libertine doctrines as these false Apostles broached under the
notion of Evangelical privileges; and to procure the more Converts to the
Christian profession, sprang, as it is very probable, those cursed practices
which turned to the reproach of Christianity, and to the hindrance of its
progress, of which we read in 2 Ep. of St. Peter, and in the Ep. of Jude and
other places.

It Is true they were not probably so bad at first as they were at last, but
were led from one error to another, till they arrived at last to monstrous
heights of wickedness: as we have also seen some in our days have done, who
began but in Antinomianism at first; Evil men and seducers, says St. Paul,
(speaking of those false Teachers,) shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and
being deceived, 2 Timothy 3.13. 2 These. 2.10, 11.

S. 14. Shall I now need after all that I have said touching the design the
false Apostles drove and the manner how, to say any thing farther to unfold the
working of the Mystery of Iniquity in the Apostles days? Seeing all upon the
matter, which I have hitherto said, tends, as I apprehend it, to show what we
are to understand by those words of St. Paul in the 2 These. 2.7. For the
Mystery of Iniquity does already work. However take this farther account
briefly; In a Mystery there is one thing hid under another: So that the inward
and more secret part, is hardly discernable but to considering men. So it was
here in the business before us: The worldly design of the false Apostles and
their corrupting the Christian Religion to accomplish it, were obscured and hid
under a show and profession of Christianity and Religious pretenses, as that
the Gospel did allow of what they did, and stood in need of some things they
did, to promote it.

Before the Gospel came, the Iniquity of the Gentiles, abominable Idolatries
and gross impurities both in worship and manners, was openly professed and
practiced. But when the Gospel by coming among them had prevailed against these
things, and had turned them from dumb Idols to serve the living God: Then Satan
who, as St. Paul says, can transform himself into an Angel of Light, did by
his ministers labor to corrupt and entangle again, those who were once clean
escaped from them who lived in error, the error of Gentilism: but not so as
to profess Gentilism again, but under a show of Christianity to return to it in
part. The Devil was too subtle to appear so openly as to tempt them to return
to downright Gentilism again in the grossest kind. For the Gospel had come
among them with such demonstration and power, by the signs and wonders, and
mighty deeds which did accompany it, and by that means had so triumphed over the
Religion of the Gentiles, that the Devil could have little hope of prevailing
with them to return to downright Gentilism again, who had been but lately so
convinced of the truth and excellency of the Christian Religion, as to be
brought to renounce Gentilism and to profess Christianity. But he thought it
best as the case stood, to go another way to work with them, and to put them
upon corrupting the Christian profession by degrees, by mixing something of
Gentilism with it under the notion of being consistent with it; yea as tending
to promote it, by reconciling the heathen to it by meeting them half way. And
that wherewith the Devil, in temptations of this kind, baited his hook, was by
insinuating that by this means they might keep fair quarter with their Infidel
neighbors, render themselves in some sort friends to the world, stave off
persecution, and retain their worldly possessions, together with their
Christianity. This I apprehend to be the Mystery of Iniquity of which the
Apostle speaks as then already working.

But when the Apostle says, the Mystery of Iniquity does already work,
referring to the time then present, he implies that the spreading and more
eminent prevailing of it, was to be expected afterward in time then to come:
and to this agrees the scope of the place as well as the form of words and
manner of speaking there used. For when he says, only he who now lets, will
let, until he be taken out of the way; it is evident that the more general
spreading and prevailing of this Mystery, was for the present hindered, by that
which in time would be removed, and that then it should get up to its height. I
will not undertake positively to determine who or what is meant by the he which
the Apostle says now lets. But this I say, that if the false Apostles
corrupting the Christian Religion for worldly advantage, under pretense of that
Religion, was not a Mystery of Iniquity, and such a Mystery of Iniquity as was
then working, then I confess I cannot imagine what was. But if it were, then
that which then hindered all such as professed the Christian Religion (as the
corrupt Christians did) from rising to any considerable greatness in the world,
must in all probability be it which did then let or hinder that mysterious
design managed under pretense of that profession from coming to that growth
which afterward it came to, when that impediment was removed out of the way.
And what did or could so much hinder such as professed Christianity, from rising
to worldly greatness, as the then Roman power as Heathen? which was so far from
preferring men for the Christian profession sake, that it did depress and keep
them under upon that very account. And if that were it which did let (and you
see what reason there is to think it was) Then the first Bishop of Rome as
Popish, and those that succeeded him, (who when the Roman power as heathen was
removed, and now become Christian, did by advantage of that and by corrupt arts
under religious pretenses, rise to that greatness in the world as to cause the
world to wonder after them,) do fairly seem to be prophetically pointed at by
the Apostle, as those which should carry on the Mystery of Iniquity to a
greater height and prevalence, when that which hindered was taken out of the
way, than it could reach to in the Apostles days.

But I need not lay the stress of proving the Authors of Popery to be the
Actors of the second part of the Mystery of Iniquity, upon this contexture of
Scripture I have been beating upon: for the thing, I suppose, will appear
evident enough of it self, if there had been no such thing written as what we
have in 2 These. 2. For if they out of a worldly design have corrupted the
Christian Religion under pretense of Religion as the false Apostles did, Then
they must needs be found workers of Iniquity in a Mystery as well as they. And
whether they have or no, comes next to be enquired into: which brings me to the
Second part of what I was to discourse, and that is to justify my comparing
the Authors of Popery with the false Apostles, in managing a carnal and worldly
design in corrupting the Christian Religion under pretense of practicing and
promoting it.

S. 15. To prepare my way to this, I shall premise for our better
understanding; that though the design and practice of the false Apostles and
the Authors of Popery, agree in the general nature of them; yet they differ in
some circumstances. But then that wherein they do differ, does not tend to
extenuate, but to aggravate the iniquity of the design of the Authors of
Popery, and to render it more criminal than the same design was, whiles, and as
it was managed by the false Apostles. The false Apostles acting their part in
times of open opposition against Christianity, and of persecution for so much
as but confessing the name of Christ, were under a sore temptation of doing
what they did at the first, only to save their lives, and to preserve and get a
livelihood in the World. Whereas those that gave the first rise to Popery,
taking their turn in the world in Halcy on days and peaceable times, when
persecution for confessing Christ, was not only ceased, but them when the
profession of Christianity was grown into honorable request with High and Low,
they were under no such temptation of doing what they did in the way of their
design, either to save their lives or livelihood, or to obtain an honorable
estate, becoming Bishops of the Churches of Christ, being therein prevented by
the bounty of Christian Emperors. But their design and the m^^ns used to effect
it, was founded in an excessive thirst and exorbitant desire after greatness
and worldly domination exceeding all bounds of moderation. And this difference
renders the iniquity of the worldly design in the false Apostles, but little in
comparison of what it was in the Authors of Popery. Solomon says, Men do not
despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry, Prove.
6.30. They pity such as through a kind of seeming necessity are drawn to do
that which yet is no wise-justifiable under such a Circumstance, when the same
thing done by another under no such temptation, is looked upon with indignation.

To acquaint you then with the first rise of Popery as founded in a worldly
design, as at the first I acquainted you with the rise of the false Apostles
and their corrupting the Christian Religion founded in a design for this world:
I must first represent to you the ill use which some of the Bishops made of
that peace and prosperity which the Church of God at last came to enjoy, when
the Emperors and Rulers of the world became Christians themselves, and employed
their power and greatness to encourage and farther the profession and practice
of Christianity. For when the Bishops of the Churches came not only to be
protected in the discharge of their Function by public Authority, but also to
be greatly honored, and highly advanced for their Profession and Function
sake; some of them were not able to stand under so great a weight of honor as
was cast upon them, without being puffed up and transported with Pride and
Ambition. And this Pride and Ambition put them upon striving and contending for
precedence, pre-eminence, and superiority of Jurisdiction, which settled at
last in a claim of Supremacy, made by the Bishop of Rome in arrogating to
himself the Title of Universal Bishop, over all Bishops and Churches in the
world. And out of this pretended headship grew by degrees, the whole body of
Popery, by which the Christian Religion has been corrupted.

This exorbitant Power, claimed by the Bishop of Rome, could not be upheld and
maintained without the assistance of such other Bishops and Presbyters as were
willing to own and defend this headship. Nor could that be expected without
their sharing in the worldly advantages to be obtained thereby: Nor could that
grandeur which they designed for themselves, be maintained without a suitable
Revenue: Nor such a Revenue be raised, had the plain, honest, and moderate
methods of Christianity been observed in it. For if those methods could have
been observed, and their turn served thereby, they would never have been at the
trouble of inventing and defending new ones.

That these ends designed therefore might be served, certain additions to, and
corruptions of the Scriptures and Christian Religion, were pitched upon as the
likeliest means to obtain them: but yet to be managed so, as that the people
might be persuaded that those additions and corruptions were either parts of
Christian Religion, or necessary means to promote it. And these additions and
corruptions are the things which we call Popery, and not any other things
though held and done by Papists, which yet are agreeable to the Scriptures, and
which other Christians hold and do as well as they. I do not say, nor indeed
think that the first Authors and beginners of Popery, had in prospect, or did
practice all the additions and corruptions which afterward were found out by
their successors, as necessary to secure and uphold the Usurped Power and
Greatness. No more did their predecessors the false Apostles begin with all the
evil devices which they were afterward led to, to carry on their design.

I shall now therefore come to instance in some of those additions, and to show
how they fall in with this worldly design projected by the Authors of Popery,
and how like they look to what was designed and done by the false Apostles. It
may be every one of those additions in difference between Protestants and
Papists, may not directly tend to promote their worldly design, though many of
them do remotely, which do not immediately: But yet that will afford them no
relief though so it should be: Because when men invent some errors, for no
other reason but because they are serviceable to them in their carnal and
corrupt designs; it is not unusual for God then to give up such men to other
absurd opinions and practices, though not serviceable to them in any such way.
Because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, (but
the love of some errors, instead and under pretense of truth, that they might
compass and bring about their worldly design) therefore, and for this cause,
God shall send them strong delusions that they should believe a lie, that they
all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, says St. Paul, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12.

I intend not to dispute the several points in difference between Papists and
Protestants, or to prove them to be such additions and corruptions as I term
them to be: for that has been done many a time over sufficiently and
abundantly already by Reformed Authors. But methinks it should go as far and
signify as much with the Popish Laity, if not much more, as a just and full
confutation of those additions as erroneous would do, when they shall come to
see how they have been abused and imposed upon by their Leaders and Guides, and
made to believe and do such things for the saving of their Souls, as have no
such tendency, but the contrary: and by dancing after their Pipe have been made
use of as Engines, merely to work their ends and to serve their carnal design
by them: to squeez and drain them to fill themselves: or as men make use of
horses to carry them out of the dirt and to ease themselves by their labor.
Which puts me in mind of the woman that sat upon the Beast, having upon her
forehead a name written, Mystery Babylon the great, etc. Rev. 17.3.5. All that
I would desire of the Laity is, that they would see with their own eyes, and
use their own reason in the things I shall now lay before them, and not suffer
their Clergy to blow out the Candle, or to hoodwink them, while they play
tricks and pick their pockets.

In giving instances of the Popish corruptions, by which the design of
domination and worldly greatness has been begun and carried on by the Romish
Bishops and their Seconds and assistance, under a Religious pretense, I shall
begin with that which was laid as the foundation of the Papal fabric.

S. 16. First then they would bear the world in hand that the Bishops of Rome
successively, are St. Peter's successors, and as such are invested with a kind
of Apostolical Authority, and their See the Apostolical See; and that as St.
Peter was superior to all Bishops and Presbyters in jurisdiction; so they, as
his successors, are so too: Yea, that the Bishop of Rome, for the time being,
is Christ's Vicar on Earth, and visible Head of the Church.

Which claim of theirs puts me in mind of those who said they were Apostles but
were not, but were found liars, Rev. 2.2. And if it shall be affirmed that the
Bishops of Rome are successors of these in their design and pretense; they
themselves have given a more cogent proof of it, than ever they did of being
St. Peter's successors in such headship and power as they pretend to.

But as the false Apostles by pretending to be Apostles indeed, when they were
nothing less, did procure to themselves such a reputation with those that were
deluded by them, as did greatly advantage them in that worldly design which
they undiscernedly carried on under that pretense; just so have the Popes, by
making their deluded adherents believe that they are St. Peter's successors,
Christ's Vicars and head of the Church, raised to themselves such a reputation
as is greatly advantageous to them also in the like but greater worldly design
of theirs.

For as the Proselytes of the false Apostles were by their delusive persuasion,
made not only plyant, but even zealously active in serving them in their
design; so have the deluded adherents of the Popes been in like manner, in
serving them in theirs. Into what mould may not such men cast the people, when
they have insinuated themselves into their opinion, to be such mavelous men
as they pretend themselves to be? The Galatians though after the false Apostles
had corrupted them, began to look upon Paul with a jealous eye, as if he had
been their enemy, by exposing them to that trouble in professing the Gospel,
which the other taught them how to avoid: yet so long as they retained that
veneration for him which sometime they had while they esteemed him the
undoubted Apostle of Christ; they could, if it had been possible, have plucked
out their very eyes to have given him, as he says, Gal. 4.15, 16. And when the
false Apostles were taken for true ones, they had such an interest in the
deluded people thereby, as that they did even what they would with them. Which
made St. Paul say, ye suffer if a man bring you into Bondage, if a man devour
you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt himself, 2 Cor. 11.20. Words
doubtless applicable to the Popish Laity upon as great reason, as ever they
were to the deluded Corinthians: So great is the power of false opinion, when
men, whether false Apostles or Popes, are taken to be what they least are.

Besides, as this lofty claim and high pretense of supremacy and headship over
the whole Christian world, prepared the Popes way for commanding and doing what
he pleased among them that received and owned him in that capacity: So it was
the direct road to the highest pitch of Vain Glory; that is, of being esteemed
and honored for what he is not; since all m^n are wont to proportion the
honor they give to men, according to what they esteem them to be. And honey is
not sweeter to the mouth, than honor and glory is to ambitious minds. And
therefore if Diotrephes loved to have the pre-eminence, and the false Apostles
thought it a prize worth striving for, to be counted the head of a small party,
when but low and kept under in the world; how was his Holinesses fancy tickled,
may we think, with the contemplation of being Universal Head of the whole
Christian World! And what would not ambitious men give or do for such a
purchase, and to keep it when they have it? Simon Magus we know would have
purchased the power of working Miracles as the Apostles did, with money: but
for what end? but that he might not be outdone by the Apostles, and so lose
that high esteem he had among the people whom he had deceived with his Magic,
as if he had been the great power of God, even as the Popes have done by their
Arts. I appeal to the Papists themselves: is it not apparent that honor from
men was a great part of the prize for which the Bishop of Rome ran, when he
first laid his design for Universal Bishop, and to bring all others under him?
And has it not been a sweet morsel to his successors for the time being, to be
adored by the people as St. Peter's successor, as Christ's Vicar and visible head
of his Church, and to be saluted with the appellation of The most Holy Lord the
Pope, and to have Kings do homage and kneel to them, yea, and to kiss their
very feet? That Pope understood well enough what he said, when he said, What
need of the Net when the Fish is caught? Certainly this seeking and receiving
honor from men at this rate by the Popes, has been no very good argument to
prove themselves St. Peter's successors, who was so shie, as we know, of being
worshipped by Cornelius, and of receiving too much honor from men when he had
wrought a Miracle indeed: for he said, Ye men of Israel why marvel ye at this?
or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though we by our own power or holiness
had done this? Act. 3.12.

Unity in Religion indeed has been pretended as the reason of the necessity of
such an universal visible Headship, as the Bishops of Rome have claimed: But
unity of Consent and endeavor in the people to honor them as such, and to
maintain them in that magnificence which has followed that pretense and claim,
has doubtless been at the bottom when the other has been at the top; as is
visible in the effects of it. If this were not so, they would never so
patiently endure those many differences and bitter contests about Religion as
they do, which are among the several Orders of men under their Government,
provided they do but all agree in owning the Pope and his claim of Succession,
Supremacy, and Universal headship: Whereas let any but whisper any thing
against this, and he shall quickly find a watchful eye over him, and a heavy
hand upon him. So that it is self-interest which is the White aimed at, that
still governs in the use of what power and pre-eminence is obtained, though
other things, to cover the design, are pretended.

S. 17.2. Another of their corruptions, is a pretense to an Insallibility in
the Popes, in their Decrees, Canons, Constitutions and Determinations, derived
from St. Peter, by virtue of their succeeding him. Not that it can be
reasonably thought that they can in earnest believe any such thing concerning
themselves: For several things uttered and done by them, or some of them, have
bewrayed their own misgivings as to this, as I could show: However they think
fit to set a good face on it outwardly to the world, as being a thing necessary
and useful for the carrying on of their worldly design. For by persuading the
people to believe such a thing concerning them, they get a great advantage to
make them become perfectly their creatures. For if the people be made to
believe that the Popes are Infallible and cannot err in the things aforesaid,
then they can have no pretense to dispute any thing imposed upon them by them,
but according to their own belief, must become perfectly Vassals, and yield
absolute obedience to them: A thing, than which, what could be more cunningly
contrived by the Popes and their Confederates, to serve their ends upon the
people?

S. 18.3. And because several Religious Orders of men were thought as necessary
to support this Ecclesiastical Monarchy, as the Janissaries and Bassa's are to
support the Turkish; therefore some things likewise were thought necessary to
procure reverence and respect to the Popes dependants in their several Orders
and Degrees, to the end the people might stand the more in awe of them, and be
the more ready to yield Obedience to them in execution of the several Offices
and Orders they have received from the Pope their Head. One of which is a power
of Absolution and Forgiveness of sins, vested in their Priests. Another is a
power of making a God for the people to worship, by Transubstantiating the
Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, into the Real Body and Blood of Christ: And
who would not be glad of the favor of such wonderful men, and do any thing to
please them? And by Auricular confession to a Priest, another of their
corruptions, they lay the people under their mercy, being thereby masters of
their Secrets, besides the advantage of giving intelligence in special cases,
which must needs keep them in a continual awe of them. And by their receiving
the Sacrament in both kinds, when the Laity are suffered to receive it but in
one, (another of their corruptions) a great and sacred difference forsooth is
put between the Clergy and Laity. And besides, the effect of the peoples
public Devotions, is made to depend upon the intention of the Priest, another
corruption; and therefore no need of having their Divine Service in the Vulgar
tongue, another corruption likewise added to that: All still tending to make
the people the more dependant upon the Clergy, and the more governable by them
in all things, while they live, and to be in the better disposition to be
directed and prevailed upon by them in disposing of a good part of their
Estates to the use of the Church, when they die.

S. 16.4. Although the Scripture says, that every one shall bear his own
burden, and give an account of himself to God: and though Christ has said Search
the Scriptures, and the Bereans for doing so were highly commended; yet in
contradiction hereto, the doctrine of Implicitie faith is set on foot; by which
men are taught to believe as the Church believes, i. e. as their Priests
believe, they believing what the Pope, or the Pope and a General Council of
their own, have defined for matter of faith. And this also is one of their
corruptions; and the forbidding the Laity to read the Scriptures without
license from their Bishop, is another; and so is their Tenent that Ignorance is
the mother of devotion. And what is their end in these things? Unity in the
faith, and to keep people from running into heresy, is pretended: (and is not
putting out a man's own eyes that he may be led by another, a good expedient not
to miss his way?) but their end is to secure their corrupt principles and
fraudulent arts from being inquired into by the people; and that the Laity may
depend upon them as infallible Oracles, even in those things which are imposed
upon them under one Religious pretense or other, when in truth it is but to
serve the Pope and his Clergies interest, and to work their ends upon them
undiscovered. It is that the people might entirely and tamely resign up
themselves to them, and be wholly at their dispose in what they would have them
believe and do, though otherwise it should seem to them never so unreasonable.
And therefore Bellarmine (de Romans pontif. l. 4. c. 5. fin.) was not ashamed to
affirm, that if the Pope should err in forbidding Virtues and commanding Vices,
yet the Church were bound to believe Vices to be good and Virtues bad, unless
she should sin against conscience. But when the blind that are led and the
blind that lead, are both in the ditch, it is not their saying they were led
thither, will help them out.

S. 20.5. Furthermore, although Christ upon occasion of the two disciples
desiring of him that they might sit the one on his right hand and the other on
his left in that temporal Kingdom they fancied he was to have, said to Peter
and all the Apostles, Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise
dominion over them, and they that are great exercise Authority upon them, but
it shall not be so among you: I say, though this be so express as you see, yet
notwithstanding the Pope as pretended successor to St. Peter, claims a
Supremacy over Kings, and a privilege to be appealed to as the last and
highest Tribunal upon earth. And in case any Kings turn heretics to him in
denying his Claim and casting off his yoke, he takes upon him a power to
chastise them; to excommunicate them, and then to depose and dethrone them, and
to dispose of their Kingdoms, and to absolve their subjects from the duty of
their allegiance to their natural Prince.

And for what reason is this swelling power of overtopping Kings assumed? The
pretense is, that the Pope as head of the Church being Superior to all
Christian Kings, as being but members of that body whereof he is head, they
upon that account are under his conduct and government in using their secular
power for the interest of the Christian Religion and Catholic cause, and for
the chastising of such as are heretical, or undutiful and disobedient. This is
the Pretense; But the true design is to render the Pope the more magnificent
and venerable, the more awful and terrible in the eyes of all, and to lift him
up to the highest pinnacle of worldly Pomp and greatness attainable in this
world, and to use the power and interest of such Kings to support and secure
him in his Pontifical Chair of State, and as executioners of his wrath and
displeasure against all that shall but peep and mutter any thing against him,
or any of his decrees or orders, or give him the least disturbance.

That this is the design, though the other be pretended, appears in that the Pope
is well enough contented that these Kings should tolerate or connive at any
wickedness in their Dominions, though never so dishonorable to Christ and
Christianity, and destructive to his Religion in the power of it, provided they
be but tender of his Interest, and will not connive at any Affronts put upon
his Government as Papal. Men may do what they will, provided they meddle not
with the Popes Crown or the Monks bellies, was the saying of Erasmus.

S. 21.6 Again, as the Popes do claim a supremacy over Temporal Princes for
themselves, so they do a privilege and exemption for their subordinate Clergy
from the Temporal power; Council. Trid. Sess. 25.
as holding immediately under their Ecclesiastical Head, the Pope: which is
another device to strengthen their Interest. For hereby all his Clergy are the
faster tied and engaged to their grand Master the Pope, and at the greater
liberty act securely in abetting his Interest and serving his designs, as
occasion and opportunity serves.

S. 22. 7. As the false Apostles broached Doctrines tending to Licentiousness,
to increase their party and strengthen their Interest: so the Authors and
Founders of Popery have set on foot certain corrupt doctrines, good for nothing
but to increase their party and wealth thereby, and to strengthen their
Interest. Such is that of a pretended power vested in the Pope, and from him
derived to every Priest, of absolving men and forgiving their sins upon such
easy terms as the confessing them to the Priest, and doing such slight
Penances, as he out of his Indulgence to them, if they please him, is pleased
to appoint.

And which is yet worse, if worse can be, viz. the Doctrine of the Popes power,
not only of granting Indulgences for Sins past, but also Dispensations to
commit them for time to come. And that such a power is pretended to, we learn
from Authors of their own. Espenseus has told us, that They allow not only the
Laity, but also their very Clergymen to dwell with Whores and Harlots, and to
beget Bastards, for a certain Tax. Comment on Tit. p. 478, 479. Also, De
Continentia Lib. 2. Cap. 7. And the Princes of the Roman Empire assembled at
Noremberg, in the years 1522, 1523. complained that the Popes sucked the marrow
of the peoples Estates by Indulgences, and that they heightened the imposture
by their hireling Cryers and Preachers, and that Christian piety was banished,
while to advance their Market, they cried up their Wares, for the granting of
wonderful peremptory pardons, not only of Sins already committed, but of Sins
that shall be committed. So that by the Sale of these Wares, as they said,
together with being spoiled of their money Christian Piety is extinguished;
while any one may promise himself impunity, upon paying the rate that is set
upon the Sin he has a mind to commit, Fasciculus rerum experendarum, fol. 177,
178. And if the people can believe that the Pope has power by his
Dispensations to bear them out for money in such Immoralities, they may as well
believe also that he has power to dispense with their taking of such Oaths,
and entering into such Obligations which they never intend to keep, or to do
any other thing as bad, especially if it any way tend to the advancing of the
Catholic Cause. And if so, by what Test can they be discovered to be really
what they are, when they have a mind to conceal it? or what security can such
Oaths or other Obligations be to Protestant Princes, of their true allegiance
to them?

And what is said in this is the more considerable, it we add thereto those
other two loose Doctrines of theirs, the one touching the lawfulness of their
breaking Faith with Heretics, such as they esteem Protestants to be, and the
other the Jesuitical Doctrine of Equivocation with mental Reserves. Wherein
also they exactly follow their Leaders, the false Apostles. For they, as I have
showed, thought, or at least taught, that in some cases they might deny Christ
in word, so they did but retain a belief in him in their hearts; and partake
with Idolaters in their Idol Sacrifices, so they did but retain in their minds
a belief that there were no other Gods but one, and intended not any honor to
the Idol.

The very complexion of these, and such like Doctrines, shows them to be
calculated, not to promote Religion and Virtue, but to hook in filthy lucre, to
gratify any that will but be for them, in giving scope to their Lusts, and to
set men free from all ties of Religion and Conscience, when they stand in the
way of their Cause and Interest. That which the Prophet of Old from the Lord
charged upon the Priests, then when he said, They eat up the sin of my people,
and set their heart on their Iniquity, Hos. 4 8. falls upon these men. For as
those were desirous to have the people sin that they might have the more
Sin Offerings: So these are willing, we see, that the people should have
liberty allowed them to sin, provided they will but buy the more Indulgences
and Dispensations.

And such likewise is their doctrine of Assuring men of pardon when they are
going out of the world, though they have lived never such wicked and vicious
lives before, upon condition of Contrition and Confession to a Priest: Yea upon
condition of that Confession and Attrition alone: which, as they define it, is
a grief for sin arising only from a fear of Hell. And I should think no wicked
man that believes or fears that there is a Hell, can lightly be without such a
sorrow at last. And if men could be made to believe or hope that they may keep
their sins and yet be pardoned, at least upon such easy terms as we see they
are taught to believe they may, it would then be matter of wonder that there is
no more, rather than that there are so many Papists in the world.

Such doctrine as this is, doubtless, the reason, why now and then some
profligate persons, and so many Thieves and Murderers, when condemned to die,
turn Papists, that were no better than practical Atheists before.

S. 23.8. And yet lest their loose principles and practices should render them
too much suspected for Irreligious, they, just as the false Apostles before
them, would seem to be even more devout in some things than the purer
Christians that oppose them in their carnal designs. And therefore they have
imposed upon themselves and their Votaries certain things, as parts of
Religion, which God has not made so, and are more careful to observe them,
than what God has commanded; as the Pharisees before them were, in reference
to their traditions. Such is their abstaining from some sorts of meats upon
such and such days; not upon a Civil account, which may lawfully be done, but
upon a Religious account. And it is well if, at least, many of them do not make
more conscience of eating flesh on a Friday than to swear or lie. The
exercising certain severities upon their own bodies at certain set times of the
year by way of Penance: the restraining those that are in Religious Orders from
Marriage: the Vows of Poverty and Single life, are also things of like nature
with those which the false Teachers in the Apostles times imposed upon their
Proselytes, as I have showed. And so was the worshipping of Angels, a thing
which these Popish Christians also teach. Nay they pretend to make show of such
great love to Christ more than others do, as that for his sake they worship
such as are related to him, as the blessed Virgin Mary and other Saints: And
not only so, but to worship his very Picture, and to have in sacred esteem the
very Relics of his servants, or those which they esteem to be so: Like the
Pharisees of old, who builded the Tombs of the dead Prophets, and garnished the
Sepulchers of the Righteous that were dead; when at the same time they
persecuted those that were living, as these also have done.

By such arts as these they have made a covering, such as it is, for their
Irreligious designs, by which they have deluded people of gross minds that are
influenced by sense in the way of Religious worship, as Superstitious and
Idolatrous persons always have been, but have misapprehensions of the Nature
of God, and of that Spiritual worship which is agreeable to his Nature and
acceptable to him. Which also makes them think that the eating of Christ's
Flesh and the drinking of his Blood in the Sacrament in a natural and proper
sense, is that which is available: like the Capernaumites, who said, how can
this man give us his Flesh to eat? understanding him in a gross sense, when he
had said to them, The bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for
the life of the world: And except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink
his blood, ye have no life in you, Joh. 6.

Moreover, to raise yet the greater opinion in the people of the goodness of
their way, they ingross the whole of true Christianity to themselves, stiling
those and those only of their way, the Catholic Church; denying Salvation to
belong to those that are not of it, accounting them Heretics. Herein likewise
following the guise of the false Apostles and their Disciples, who labored to
ingross to themselves the name and reputation of the most Knowing and most
Spiritual, separating from the rest of Christians, as if they themselves only
had been the true Church, thereby to put the better color upon their
corrupting the Christian Religigion, and the worldly end for which they did it.

S. 24.9. And then to fill the Churches treasuries, and to draw to themselves
the wealth of the world, and thereby to support all their glory and grandeur,
and to glut themselves with sensual pleasures and delights, they have used
other methods and Arts also. One of which is the doctrine of the Merit of good
works; For when the people are made to believe that they may by good works,
Almsdeeds, and Donations to pious uses, make satisfaction to God, procure
exemption from Purgatory, and merit Heaven; and by abounding in them may
supererogate; and not only merit enough for themselves, but have to spare for
others; Then it is no hard matter to persuade them to be very liberal and kind
to their Ghostly Fathers while they live, being to them in Gods stead to pardon
them, and to leave a considerable part of their estates to the Church, when
they die.

The forbidding Marriage to the Clergy serves to the same end also; which may
be one reason of that restraint. For when they, especially those of the higher
degree that have great Estates, can leave no Children lawfully begotten to
inherit; who is likelier to be their Heir than the Church? especially
considering that the Canon Law allows not Regular Bishops to dispose of their
Estates by Will.

Another device to get money, is the Tax of the Apostolick-Chancery; a grant by
several Popes of Pardons, at such and such a price for thousands of years,
though their sins be of a deep die. It is true, there are, I must needs say,
very good peniworths to be had, if the Ware be not counterfeit: One may have
that for 18 Pence, 2 Shillings, or half a Crown, that a man would give all he
is worth for, be it never so much, were he sure he should not be cheated in his
purchase. But as for all those that have faith enough to believe the
Infallibility of the Popes, in assuring them of Pardons at such cheap rates,
(and if they question it in this, they may question it in all the rest,)
methinks there should not one of them fail to buy one of these Pardons that can
go to the price of them: and who cannot? And if so, who can count the vast sums
of money which we may reasonably conceive this device will bring into the Popes
Exchequer from age to age?

Another Engine for the same purpose, is Shrine Oblations: that is, the
Offerings which the people make when they go on Pilgrimage to visit the Shrine
of such or such a Saint, whether voluntarily, or in a way of Penance. And the
Treasuries of the Shrines of some eminent Saints, are upon this account so
rich, as that it is said they may vie it with the Treasuries of Great Princes.

Another Screw is, Commutation of Penances; that is, the buying off the doing
of such or such Penance, for so much money as the Confessor or Ghostly Father
shall be pleased to excuse them for: and he knows well enough how to put the
price according to the ability of the purchaser; and so he does also how to
make the Penance greater or lesser as he pleases. And this falls out so often,
and with so many in all Popish Countries, that the Income thereby must needs be
very great, besides the ordinary Tithes they receive.

The fictious doctrine of Purgatory, to name no more, is, I assure my self,
none of the least of the Artifices of the Founders of Popery, to accumulate a
prodigious mass of wealth: of which Doctrine and device, take this brief
account. First, The people are made to believe, that though God pardons Mortal
Sins to the truly penitent, so as to free them from Eternal Torments; Yet since
they have much Venial Sin and Corruption, in which oft-times they die, not
having made sufficient satisfaction by Penances enjoined them here, they must
expiate these, and satisfy for them, by suffering the pains of Purgatory. And
farther, they must believe also, that the Church has a Treasure or stock of
Merits arising out of Works of Supererogation done by such as have merited more
than enough for themselves, the overplus still running into the common stock:
and that the Pope, and Priests from him, have the power of disposing and
applying these out of the common stock to particular persons that need them.
And farther, they are taught to believe that this Treasure of the Church is not
drawn out and distributed but by Indulgences: and that since these Indulgences
are for the relief of the Churches Indigences, they are not to be obtained
without being purchased. Now when the poor deluded people are made to believe
all these idle Fictions for real Truths, and come to have their Consciences
awakened on their Deathbeds; what will they not give to obtain these
Indulgences, and for Masses to be said, and Prayers to be made, that they may
be delivered from Purgatory, a place of Torment little less than Hell. Skin for
skin and all that a man has, will he give for his Life; how much more for his
Soul! So that the fruit and effect of this device, as we may well conceive, is
no small or inconsiderable thing. And therefore it was no less truly than
wittily said, The fire of Purgatory keeps the Popes Kitchen warm, and makes his
Pot to boil.

I shall instance in no more: but these I have named are some of the Arts, and
part of the Craft in the Mystery of Iniquity, by which, Demetrius like, they
get their wealth. And truly so vastly great has been the Annual Income of the
Court of Rome from all Nations of their Communion, that according to the
account given from amongst themselves, by Matthew Paris for one, ( M. Par.
Hist. An. 1252.) its yearly Revenue from England alone, by one way and another,
more than I have named, amounted to no less heretofore, than twice so much as
the then Kings Revenue. No marvel then if the Bishops of Rome, and their
Cardinals, formerly poor Priests and Deacons, are now become Illustrious, and
for Pomp and Magnificence, able to vie it with great Princes, and to raise
their Families, Nephews and Nieces, to Dignities and Fortunes very great, as is
well known to the World.

S. 25. And now I having made this Comparison between the salse Apostles and
Founders of Popery in their worldly design and cursed means of accomplishing
it; all that I shall desire of the Lay Catholics, as they call themselves, is,
that they would but bestow so much consideration upon what is here offered, as
by which they may come to make an impartial judgment whether or no I have
wronged the latter by comparing them to the former. And if I have not, as I
doubt not but they will find I have not, if prejudice and prepossession do not
make them err in judgment, as too frequently it is wont to do; Then methinks I
should not need to use one word to persuade them to desist from following their
guides any longer blindfold by an implicit faith; for their own Interest both
spiritual and temporal, which uses to be most prevalent with men, will prompt
them to this. Can they possibly think it safe for them to commit themselves to
the conduct of those, who directly follow the track, and tread in the steps of
the false Apostles, who for self ends and worldly advantage, Avarice and
Ambition, betrayed the Religion of the holy Jesus, and the Souls of men?
Solomon says, In vain is the net spread in the sight of any bird. And will
they be more silly than the fowls of the Air, in not endeavoring to make
their escape when the Snare is discovered to them? Remember this and show your
selves men, may be said to them, as once it was by the Prophet to others.

But we know the manner of these men's Guides; either they will not suffer them
to read discourses which detect their fraud: or if they happen to hear or see
any thing of that nature, they can, as they would have them think, blow off all
with one blast of their mouth. I do therefore heartily wish that the Laics I
speak of, would at last be so wise for their souls as to consider, That when
their Clergy, whom they follow by an Implicit faith, do make their defense
against us in what we charge them with, they are then concerned in point of a
Carnal self interest: and where that rules and is predominant, it still obliges
men to put the fairest color they possibly can upon their Cause, though never
so bad, without regard to truth; that not being the thing they strive for, but
their selfish interest. And it is the manner of such men, when they have done
so, to glory over their Adversaries from the teeth outward, as if they had laid
them dead at their feet: When at the same time inwardly they feel themselves
struck to the very heart by the clear evidence and unresistable force of their
Adversaries reasonings. And the reason of their doing so is, because they find
that thereby they can preserve their interest among the people that have given
up themselves to them, and pinned their faith upon their sleeves; this course
of theirs serving their end as effectually as a real confutation would do.

And herein also they as evidently follow the steps of the false Apostles, as
in any of those other things I have instanced in. For although they, the false
Apostles, could not stand before the powerful conviction of the faithful
Apostles, but found their hearts to sink within them, as to the Cause they
maintained, as knowing in their consciences they were not able by the strength
of truth to defend it against the assaults of the holy Apostles: yet then they
would in face and outward appearance, glory and boast, as if they had the
victory, and all because they had no other way to hold their party to them and
to carry on their design, which they were resolved to stick to, whatever was
said against it: and also because they found that this course of theirs would
do them as much service as a demonstration would do among their credulous
followers, who hung upon their lips, and were willing to take all they said
upon trust, as suiting most with what they liked best. See for this the 2 Cor.
5.12. We commend not our selves again unto you, says St. Paul, but give you
occasion to glory on our behalf, that you may have somewhat to answer them
which glory in appearance, and not in heart: meaning the false Apostles,

All that I shall add is only to observe from what was last delivered, That the
false Apostles even then when they set the best face upon their Cause, and
gloried over their opposers, and carried it outwardly with never so great
confidence and boasting; yet since their own corrupt Interest was concerned in
the Contest, there was just cause for their followers to suspect what they
pleaded in their own defense, and that it was wisdom in them that did so, and
folly and unhappiness in those that suffered themselves to be imposed upon and
deluded thereby, without looking more narrowly into the matter themselves, as
those did who tried them that said they were Apostles but were not, and found
them liars, Rev. 2.2. And if so; then in as much as a Corrupt self interest of
Popish Guides is also concerned in and depends upon the cause they labor to
defend, as I have showed; those who have committed themselves to their Conduct,
have no more reason to be confident of the goodness of their Cause upon the
account of the confidence and boasting of those who undertake to defend it,
than the followers of the false Apostles had in reference to their cause: But
in point of greatest prudence are concerned to look upon all they say with a
jealous eye, and with the greatest care and diligence to scan the matter
themselves, and to search the Scriptures themselves, and impartially to
consider as well what is said against them and their Cause, as what is said for
it and them, and not carelessly or desperately to venture their souls upon such
men's confident pretenses, whose Corrupt interest it is to deceive them.

APPENDIX.
WHat you shall find in this Appendix was first intended to be brought in by
way of Digression at the close of the Answer to an Objection from St. Paul's
Compliances, at the end of the 9th. Section of the foregoing Discourse, to
which it properly relates. But its running out to such a length as it has
done, has altered that intention, as tending to too great an interruption in
the line and method of that Discourse. And I have the rather thought it meet to
add this to the whole Discourse, lest any should think a compliance in the use
of some undetermined circumstances in the administration of Gods Public
Worship, should be of like nature with the corrupt compliances of the false
Apostles and their party, discovered in the said Discourse. That which I have
to add therefore upon the foresaid occasion, take as follows.

From what has been said in the foresaid Section touching St. Paul's
Compliances, somewhat may be observed which may be of good use to Christians in
many dubious Cases. There I have showed how that St. Paul sometimes withstood
the use of Circumcision, and sometimes yielded to it.

The reason of which did arise from the different circumstances that did attend
the use of the same thing upon different occasions. When it was urged upon the
Gentiles as necessary to their salvation, St. Paul withstood it: But to avoid
stumbling in the believing Jews, who were not as yet satisfied touching its
cessation, and to prevent a breach in the Church, and to gain the more upon
such as were inclinable to Christianity, he yielded to the use of that and
other like things among them.

I think we may safely suppose that St. Paul knew well enough when he did so,
that Circumcision was not in it self, or by positive command necessary to the
Jews under the Gospel, by the taking place of which it was abolished; for he
said, Circumcision is nothing, 1 Cor. 7.19. Nor was it simply unlawful in it
self; for if it had, no Circumstance could have sanctified it or made it
lawful. So that when he yielded to it, it was upon account of Expediency by
reason of circumstances attending it, which made it expedient; such as was the
Peace of the Church, and the better propagation of the Gospel. And yet when he
yielded to it upon the account of Expediency, we may well suppose it was not
wholly and altogether expedient without any inexpediency at all, but only more
expedient than inexpedient. For otherwise it may well be thought, that his
yielding to the use of it somewhat tended to nourish the opinion the Jews had
of its perpetuity under the Gospel, and to minister some advantage to those who
taught a necessity of it unto Salvation, and could not be very grateful to the
believing Gentiles who opposed it, nor to St. Paul himself neither. So that in
some respect it was inexpedient to yield to it when he did yield to it, but in
other respects more inexpedient to withstand it and not to yield to it.

From all which we may observe, that when two Inexpediencies come in
competition, the one attending the doing, and the other the not doing of the
same thing, so that there is a necessity to yield to one of them in doing or
not doing of it, then that which is least inexpedient, is to be yielded to. Or
which is the same; that when all circumstances are considered, then that which
has more of expediency than inexpediency in it, is to be chosen. Just as on
the other hand, when two Precepts, the one moral, the other but positive, come
in competition, the less is to give place to the greater.

To fit these general Rules to particular cases requires some skill: but if
these things were well considered and practiced, it would go a great way
toward the lessening those undue distances which are among us. As for
instance: Suppose some circumstances in the external form of our Public
Worship, established by Law, were so inexpedient as some deem them to be; Yet if
they would but lay aside Prejudice, Partiality, Passion, and Interest of
Parties in making a judgment of things, by what has been fairly argued from
Scripture by many, to satifie doubtful minds concerning them, I am very
confident they might easily come to plenary satisfaction in their own minds
touching this one thing, viz. That to bear with those things for the peace of
the Church, and the Interest of Religion in general, is not so inexpedient as
it is by dividing the Church, by forsaking that Worship, to expose our Religion
to the scorn and contempt of Atheists, Infidels, and Papists, and to occasion,
alas, too many others to become such: and as it is, to confound and unsettle
the minds of well meaning, but injudicious people, and to betray them into the
hands of seducers: and as it is to divert men's minds from the serious
consideration, study, and practice of the weightier matters of Religion, and to
engage them in contentious janglings, and uncharitable revilings and
censurings, to the destruction of true Piety, and placing Religion much in
Opinion, and in being of a different form and party: and lastly, as it is, to
expose us all to the danger of the breaking in of Popery, by strengthening their
hands who are of that way, and by weakening our own, and by encouraging them in
hopes of success by our Divisions, to practice upon us, and by all their Arts
to improve the advantage we put into their hands by our distractions: and yet
these, and such like, have been the effects of dividing our Church.

And if to bear with those external circumstances of Worship, for the sake of
the peace and edification of the Church and securing to us our Religion, be not
so inexpedient, as it is to draw on us the foresaid bad effects of our
divisions by withdrawing from the worship it self, for the sake of those
circumstances; Then the Rule before laid down, and according to which St. Paul
acted, shows which of these inexpediencies (in case both should be such) is to
be yielded to, and born with, that the other may be avoided.

Now that to bear with the foresaid Circumstances of worship, is not so
inexpedient, as it is to cause divisions and the Consequents of them by
forsaking the worship for their sake, will easily appear by this, viz. In that
the Lord has not declared himself against the former, as he has done against
the latter. Although God has expressly appointed the substantial parts of his
worship, as the ministration of the Word, Prayer, and Sacraments, yet he has
not so expressly appointed the external form, method, manner and circumstances
of Administration, as whether it shall or shall not be administered according to
the external circumstances required in our Liturgy; but has left things of
that nature to be ordered by general rules of Education, Comeliness, and Order,
according to the best skill and prudence they have, into whose hands the
providence of God has put the ordering of affairs of that nature. And although
the external form of administration of Gods public worship may be
comparatively better in one Nation or Church than in another (when but all one
in substance) as it would be in particular congregations also, if all Ministers
were left to their own liberty therein; Yet the meanest of them would not be
unlawful, so long as nothing is done in opposition to any divine precept, or to
the defeating of the end of the external administration of Gods public
worship. But God has not left men to any such latitude to cause or not to
cause divisions and offenses in the Church, as he has for them to use
different forms and circumstances of forms in his public worship: and
therefore there cannot be the like reason to pretend Inexpediency in submitting
to them, as there is in causing divisions and offenses in the Church by
forsaking the public worship upon account of them. If the honor of God and
good of men had been as much concerned in the external form of his worship, in
not having it in this way but in that, as they are in men's keeping the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace, we have all reason on our side to think he
would then have been as particular and express for this form and against that,
as he has been for the peace, unity, and charity of the Church, and against
their contraries and their contrary effects, which yet he has not been.

What God said to the Jews, when he found them hot for Sacrifices, but cold and
careless in the moral part of Religion, may with a little variation be very
aptly applied to our case in hand. I spoke not unto your Fathers nor commanded
them in the day that I brought them out of the Land of Egypt, concerning burnt
Offerings or Sacrifices. But this thing commanded I them, saying, obey my
Voice, etc. but they hearkened not, etc. Jer. 7.22, 23, 24. For when our Lord
Christ sees us more nice about forms of worship, and more zealous for this and
against that, than we are for peace and Charity, and the honor and safety of
our Religion and the good of other men's souls, which are greatly wronged and
endangered by our divisions, may he not as truly say, When I gave forth the
Gospel, spoke I a word to my Disciples to be hot for that external form of
worship you contend for in opposition to that you contend against? But this I
said, have Salt in your selves and peace one with another: let all your things
be done in Charity, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace: that no man put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his brothers
way, that none occasion be given to the adversary to speak reproachfully; and
woe to the world because of offenses, and woe to him by whom the offense comes:
and yet you have not been curious, nice and cautious in these as you have been
about the other. Which if true, what account can be given for our breaking the
Church in pieces and exposing our Selves, our Religion and the Spiritual and
eternal concerns of others, to such damage, perils and hazards as have been
mentioned, and all for the sake of that which he commanded not? I say commanded
not, definitively.

For doubtless they have been under a very great mistake who have asserted that
nothing is to be done in the worship of God which he has not commanded, if
they mean it not only of the intrinsic matter and substance of his worship,
but also of all external circumstances of administration, as appears, I
suppose, by what I have already said, and by a due consideration of those very
Scriptures upon which that opinion is supposed to be founded. Such as Deuteronomy.
17.3. Jer. 7.31. and 19.5. and 32.35. Levit. 10.1. compared with Chap. 16.12.
and Chap. 6.12, 13. Where when some have been censured by God for doing what he
commanded them not, it was in reference to false worship in the Substance of
it, done in opposition to what he had otherwise expressly appointed and
commanded, but never in reference to undetermined Circumstances of the
administration of the true worship. And therefore these Scriptures when duly
considered, are without any color of reason or truth alleged against the
lawful use of undetermined Circumstances of administration of the Substance of
Gods worship. An opinion doubtless it is no less dangerous than false. For
since it cannot be conceived (as I suppose) how the public worship other than
the use of the Lords prayer, and the reading the Scriptures, and the reciting
some words of Scripture in the administration of Baptism and the Lords Supper,
(if so much) can possibly be managed without doing something therein in
reference to external administration, which is not particularly determined and
commanded in the New Testament, such a position as that must needs tend not
only to fill men's minds with endless scruples, and their mouths with endless
disputes, but also to interrupt and put a stop to the administration of Gods
public worship, should it be admitted.

Even under the Mosaical dispensation, when things pertaining to the worship of
God were far more minutely determined than they are under the Gospel, many
things were done of a religious nature, and some of them more immediately
respecting the worship of God, which yet were neither commanded by God, nor the
doing of them censured by him, so far as appears, so long as any thing
Commanded by him was thereby neither opposed nor justled out, nor any thing
done in the name or under pretense of things appointed by him, which were not
so, as the Pharisees did, when they taught for doctrine the commandments of men.

Of things of this nature, these following are instances. The rearing of an
Altar by the two Tribes and half, for a sign or witness that they and their
posterity were people of the God of Israel, and to prevent Apostasy in their
posterity, Josh. 22.25.34. The erecting of a stone by Joshua for somewhat a
like purpose, Josh. 24.26, 27. Solomon's hallowing the middle part of the temple
for sacrifices, 1 King. 8.64. The keeping of the Passover fourteen days, by
order of King Hezekiah and with the advice of the Heads of the people, though God
had appointed but Seven, as also the Levites then helping the Priest in the
Priests appropriate work, 2 Chro. 30. The observation of the days of Purim:
The anniversary fasts of the 4th. 5th. 7th. and 10th. month: The building of
Synagogues for public worship, and appointing governors therein, and the
ordering what prayers should be made, and how and after what manner the Law and
Prophets should be improved to common benefit by reading and exhortation, and
what discipline should be used therein: The determinate hours of prayer in the
Temple, Act. 3.1. The altering the gesture and some other things, in eating the
Passover, from what was used in the first Institution, and conformed to by
Christ himself under that alteration: The seast of Dedication, which Christ
graced with his own presence: The admitting of Proselytes by Baptism as well las
by Circumcision: a practice which our Savior was so far from testifying his
dislike of as a humane invention, that he chose the same rite by which to
initiate his disciples.

These things, with what was said before, if there were no more to be said in
the case, would be enough to show that it is no just exception against our
external form of public worship, in that it is not expressly and particularly
commanded in Scripture; for if it were, it would be a just exception against
every external form of public worship whatsoever; because there is no one in
particular commanded with exclusion of all the rest. Which still plainly
renders it a thing more inexpedient, (yea and much more than so) to be
accessory by rending from the communion of the Church, to the bringing on us
all those sad effects of our divisions, which every good man is sensible of,
than it is or can be to bear with what does not so well please them in our form
of worship as somewhat else different therefrom would do.

Methinks it should make such as are more considering men among those that
divide the Church by withdrawing from her communion, to be very jealous of the
expediency of their practice, when they consider that before men took this
liberty, there was little of the sad effects forementioned visible among us,
but since that, those bad effects are grown notorious and formidable; and
that is no honor to Separation that it has brought forth such fruit: they may
know what it is by what it has done, by its fruits ye shall know it.

And therefore such as would be loath to lie under the guilt, unrepented of, of
being accessory to the drawing on us the sad events we speak of, had need to
examine again and again whether the grounds upon which they have made or
encouraged those divisions, which have been the cause of them, be such as will
abide the trial before God: and whether they have any ground to think that what
they contend for, in case they could obtain it, would ever countervail, or
compensate the damage which Religion in its reputation, and the Souls of men
have already sustained and are like farther to suffer, by the course they have
taken to effect it.

And when ever they do enter into such consideration, it will doubtless be
their wisdom not to flatter themselves with conceit (as I fear some do) as if
they are not, nor can be accessory to the bringing on us these sad effects of
our divisions, but that they are wholly owing and imputable to our Governors,
who, as they perhaps suppose, have given them just occasion of withdrawing from
communion in the public worship by making the terms of it so difficult and
unsatisfactory as they have done. For though that which they surmise should be so
far true, viz. That the conditions of communion are made more uneasy unto some
than they need to be, yet it will not follow but that though the Governors in
some respect do ill in doing so, the people may do very well in submitting to
them, though less pleasing to themselves, rather than by causing divisions, by
not submitting to them, to draw on such things as may well displease them much
more than the uneasy terms of Communion need to do, as long as they are but
only less desirable and not absolutely sinful in themselves, as doubtless those
in question are not: For if they were, it would be wonderful that so many wise,
inquisitive and good men as well of the old Nonconformists as others, as since
the Reformation have submitted to them, should not be sensible of it; No not
after all that could be said to work such a sense in them by such as have
turned every stone to do it. And it is not altogether inconsiderable to
remember, that however the case is now, yet in the Apostles days they were
such Christians as were less knowing in the right use of their Christian
Liberty, that caused troubles in the Church about things indifferent in their
own nature, Romans 14.

These things I have noted upon this occasion, for no worse end than to
satisfy the Scrupulous, That although they should not or could not be
persuaded that our external form of public worship is best in it self, yet
that to conform to the use of it under present Circumstances, is not only
lawful, but also very much better than to be accessory to all the evil effects
and consequences of our divisions and causeless Separations; and that there is
upon account of the danger of being so, much more cause to scruple
Nonconformity than Conformity to our form of public worship. But if all the
arguings and reasonings which have been used by many shall still fall short of
their desired effects to close up our unhappy breaches, and to heal our
divisions; the consequences of them are so dreadful, that I could then heartily
wish, that if the Higher powers think it fit, and rather than the wounds of our
Church should be still kept bleeding to the exhausting of her strength and the
endangering her very life and being, that a Sacrifice were made of some such
things as can least be born with and best spared, to the public peace and
tranquillity of the Church, if that might procure it; Peace and Edification
being the ends unto which all External circumstances of order are to be
accommodated by way of means.

Thus much I thought good to add, touching the point of Expediency from St.
Paul's example.

THE END.

