THE Whole Duty OF DIVINE MEDITATION, Described In all its various Parts and
Branches. WITH MEDITATIONS ON Several Places of Scripture.

By the Author of The Whole Duty of Man.

Psalm. cxix. 16. I will meditate on thy precepts, and have respect unto thy
ways.

London, Printed for John Back, at the Black-Boy, on the Middle of
London Bridge, 1694.

LICENSED, December. 20. 1693.

THE PREFACE.
THE Whole Duty of Prayer, having met with so good a Reception in the World, I
have, at the Request and Importunity of some Friends, recommended to the Press
this remaining Tract, bearing the Title of the Whole Duty of Meditation, by
that Reverend and Worthy Author of the Whole Duty of Man.

The Subject I need not commend, for it carries its Worth along with it; and to
every Christian will appear both pleasant and profitable: For by Meditation,
the truly Religious may converse with the Almighty, and from the Throne of
Grace find Help and Comfort in time of Need; to those which are Aerie, and are
the Darlings of the World, this Gift may procure a well-compos'd Mind. For if
he who by often looking on a Ring with a Death's Head, at last grew sober; who
knows but by often Meditating, their Hearts may be brought into a more serious
and heavenly frame?

The Royal Prophet styles Meditation the Food of the Soul, Psalm. 63. 4. My soul
shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, while I meditate on thee. The
Heart never willingly fixes upon Heaven, till the Almighty is the Treasure of
it; for where any Man's Treasure is, there will his Heart be also. Now, it
cannot easily meditate, but where it does delight. Psalm. 119. 97. Love is the
Weight of the Soul; it readily moves to its beloved Object. Mary will not
depart from the Sepulcher where Christ had lain, before she had made Enquiry
where she might see him whom her Soul loved.

It is the Duty of every good Christian, to observe the Prophet David's Rule,
Psalm. 16. 8. to set the Lord always before him, that he may be in his fear all
the day long. There is nothing more unstedfast than the Mind of Man; and
therefore nothing can so well compose it, as True Sanctity; which brings such
great Advantages, that with holy Job, it makes the Soul both serious, and
willing to acquaint it self with God, that it may be at peace, Job 22. 21. He
is the Rest of the Soul; and the more it knows of him, the more desirous it is
to reside with him, that it may know more: The more it tastes of his Favor,
the more it longs after his Glory, as Moses did, Exodus 33. 17, 18.

What the Philosopher said of all Knowledge, is true only of the Knowledge of
God; that it is Quies Intellectus. And therefore our Savior calls it Eternal
Life, John 17. 3. in which alone the Soul does rest. Now, one excellent Means
of fixing the Heart on God, is Meditation; whereby the highly Pious summons
together all that is within them, to bless his Name, Psalm. 103.

Meditation is the Wing of the Soul, which carries the Affections thereof to
Things Above. By this, with Moses, it goes up to the top of Mount Pisgah, to
take a Prospect of the Promised Land. It is, as Clemens Alexandrinus says of
Prayer, a Conversing with God. And as St. Chrysostom says of Faith, so may we
of Meditation, it makes God, and Christ, and Precepts, and Promises, ours, by
giving us a fuller Possession of them.

Hereby we hold fast what we have learned; we awaken our Faith, inflame our
Love, strengthen our Hope, revive our Desires, increase our Joys in God; we
furnish our Hearts, and fill our Mouths with Materials of Prayer; we slacken
our Affections from the World, we pre-acquaint our selves with those Glories
which we yet but hope for, and get some knowledge of that Love of Christ which
passes Knowledge.

The Necessity, Excellency, and Usefulness of this Christian Duty, the Reverend
Author of this Tract has Elegantly described; which is therefore worthy
Perusal of such as desire to acquaint and furnish themselves with so excellent
a part of Christian Skill, whereby we may be filled with the Fullness of God,
and be always able continually to say, My Heart is fixed, O God, my Heart is
fixed; I will sing, and give Praise.

G. B.

Advertisement.
THere is lately published, The Whole Duty of Prayer: Containing Devotions for
Every Day in the Week, and for Several Occasions, Ordinary and Extraordinary.
By the Author of The Whole Duty of Man. Necessary for all Families. The Third
Edition.

Printed for John Back, at the Black-Boy, on the Middle of London Bridge.

THE Whole Duty OF DIVINE MEDITATION.
SECT. I. What Meditation is.
FIRST, Divine Meditation differs from Occasional, by these Examples: When you
hear the Hour of the Day or Night, think with thy self, What Thoughts, O my
God, have I had of thee, this Hour? I am now nearer the silent Grave, and know
not how soon I may be arrested by the Hand of Death.

THESE are like Ejaculatory Prayers; which though they are as Parenthesis in our
Worldly Employment, yet they signify more than all the rest of the Business we
are employed in; but Meditation is of longer Duration than solemn Prayer upon
Ordinary Occasions.

II. SECONDLY, It differs from Study: For Study consists of those things that
are most knotty and difficult, and generally such as afford little Spiritual
Nourishment; but the Subject of Divine Meditation, concerns our Eternal
Happiness: The End of Study is Knowledge, but the End of Meditation is Sanctity.

III. THIRDLY, It differs from Contemplation: For Contemplation is applicable
to the Beatifical Vision, where the Angels behold the Face of the Almighty: Now
Meditation is like Fire kindling; and Contemplation, the flaming of it when
fully kindled: The one is like the Spouses Seeking of Christ; and the other,
like her Enjoying of him.

IV. FOURTHLY, To conclude; Meditation is, a a serious and solemn considering
of Heavenly Things, to the end we may understand how much it concerns us, and
that our Hearts thereby may be raised to some holy Affections and Resolutions.
Now there are Four kinds of Solemn Meditation, according to their several
Subjects.

V. FIRST, Some Solemn Meditations are, upon the hearing of Sermons: which is a
very useful and necessary Practice amongst Christians; and it is better to hear
one Sermon, and meditate on it, than to hear two, and meditate of neither. Now,
to prescribe a Method for Meditating on Sermons, is neither necessary nor
possible; since the Methods of Sermons are various, therefore the Mediators
are to observe the Method of the Sermon they meditate upon; and the Fruits of
such Meditations, is to work those Truths, Advices, and Motives, etc. upon our
Affections, that are proposed to us in the Sermon.

VI. THE Second kind of Solemn Meditation, is, when upon some Providential
Occasion, spiritual Distemper, or Temptation, we retire, and pour out our Souls
in Prayers, Soliloquies, etc. Which connot but in a very large sense be styled
Prayer, being mixed of such variety, as sometimes speaking to the Great Majesty
of Heaven, and humbly acknowledging how we stand affected to Him and his
Ordinances; sometimes we examine our Soul, chiding, encouraging, or instructing
it; sometimes we reason with our selves, what holy Resolutions we design to put
in practice, and what we intend to supplicate the Almighty. Many Instances of
this nature you may find in Psalm. 42. and other Psalms which cannot properly be
called Prayers, but Solemn Meditations.

VII. THE Third kind of Solemn Meditation, are those that are upon Scripture,
which is the Word of God, and his words are pure, even as the silver tried
seven times in the fire, Psalm. 12. 6. Our Savior's Precept, is, That we should
search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39. And St. Paul bids us prove all things, 1
These. 5. 21. And if we meditate on God's Word, which is the Golden Rule of all
our Devotions, we shall acquire that Peace to our Souls, which the World cannot
give, nor none upon Earth can take from us; for all his Promises are Yea, and
Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20.

VIII. THE Last kind of Meditation, is, upon some Practical Truth of Religion;
which is, the planting and nourishing of all true Virtue among Men; to grow in
grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. to cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh
and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. And endeavoring to take hold of St. Paul's pressing
Argument to his Corinthians, to be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord; then this Assurance will infallibly appertain to us, That
our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

SECT. II. That Meditation is a Duty.
THAT Isaac did not neglect Solemn Meditation, is evident, by reason he went
out into the Fields to perform it; and to show that it was a Set-Duty, it is
said, that he went ont to meditate. And God commanded Joshua to perform this
Duty, as a chief means for the keeping of the Law, Josh. 1. 18. And indeed we
ought not to forget so important an Exercise; for the Occasion of Sin, is the
want of Consideration, and not want of Knowledge: Isa. 1. 3. For, who is there,
almost, in the World, that knows not but that he must die, but how few are they
that consider it? Deuteronomy. 32. 29.

II. NEXT, The Necessity of Meditation is very material: For none can enter
into a State of Conversion, who thinks it insignificant. To confirm which, we
have it recorded in Scripture the Story of the Prodigal Son, who listed himself
in Harlots company; but upon his submissive return, was received again into his
Father's favor. Now, this is the Method of the Converted: First, He hears the
sacred Truth of God's Word, and is convinced by it. Secondly, He considers and
meditates upon it, and sees how much it concerns himself. Thirdly, He is
affected with them; and being thus affected, it raises holy Resolutions of
better Obedience.

III. BUT some will object and say, I am Illiterate, and cannot attain to it,
and therefore I must relinquish it, and leave it to the Learned, who is best
able to perform a Duty of so great Importance. To which I answer, as in the
Mathematical Science; He that is a rational Man, and does but improve his
Reason, though he has neither Tongues nor Arts to assist him, may understand
and grow to an extraordinary Excellency in any Art* if he has God's Assistance,
and does but exercise and improve it, he may reap the Benefit and Fruit of
Meditation.

IV. OTHERS will object, and declare, It is a very hard Duty. To which my
Replication is this; That the harder any thing seems, it is the more excellent
when it is attained; but the Obstacle is apparent, and inferrs it not to be
consonant to our perverse Wills and Affections; and the more dissonant any
thing is to that which is Evil, the more congruous it is to sublimer Actions:
For it cannot reasonably be expected that any Duty should be performed at the
first, with much facility. For Example; the Seven Liberal Sciences, which are
of great Excellency in Temporal Enjoyments, are not so easily attained without
Solicitation and Sedulity.

V. NOW the reason is evident; for this Duty is powerful in mortifying
Corruptions: dulcified things nourish and pamper the Body, and bitter things
gives a purgation: Therefore, if you will only perform those Duties that are
pleasant and delectable, they will only nourish, not purge out Corruption.
Therefore implore the Almighty to inflame your Hearts with his divine Love; and
then this Duty will not only be facile and delightful, but will so affect the
Undertaker, that it will be very difficult to avoid a Duty of so great
importance; for it is as great a difficulty to take our Affections off from
what we admire, as it is to place 'em upon what we abhor: For, bid the
covetous Person forsake his Gold and Silver, and bid him entertain the Thoughts
of Things Celestial, and he will find an equal Difficulty in both.

VI. INDEED, the Love of the Almighty, and Desire of Spiritual Things, are
acquired by Meditation; and when once our Hearts are inflamed by that Exercise,
then our Meditations are inflamed by Love: For, as Sparks of Fire (...) is
first blown up before the Flame increases; so the Difficulty of Meditation
appears at the beginning, when there is but, as it were, a Spark of divine Love
in the Heart, it will require some Pains, by Meditation, to blow it up to a
Flame; but afterward the Heart will be so fervent with these Conflagrates of
Love, that it will so inflame all the Thoughts, and create in us not only
Facility, but a Necessity to meditate on Things Spiritual.

VII. Now some will object, If it be a Duty so Necessary, how comes it to pass,
that it has been so geeerally Neglected by most Christians? To which I answer;
That it has been practiced by many in ancient Times, and by many modern
Christians. The Sacred Scriptures inform us, and it is evident that the Psalms
of the Royal Prophet, are frequently digested into Meditations: But this being
a Private Closet-Duty, the Omission nor Performance of it could not be taken
notice of; and so the Omission of it could not be reprehended, nor Performance
observed. Lastly, The Directions and Instructions for Meditation, have been
generally very abstruse and intricate.

SECT. III. Rules and Directions for Meditation.
AS to the Place, that must be apart, remote from Society and Disturbance; the
Patriarch Isaac went into the Fields, our Blessed Savior into a Garden; and
the Prophet David advises us to enter into our Chamber, and be still, Psalm. 4.
4. And Christ commands us, to enter into our Closet, and shut the door. Now the
reason of the Privacy is this, that we might receive no Interruption, or any
Distraction, nor be forced to break off abruptly before the Duty be ended;
next, that we may be recluse from the Observation of all Mortals that we may
neither be heard nor seen; for there are diverse Gestures and Expressions, which
are not requisite or necessary for any but God and the Soul to be privy to: Now
what Place soever you find to be necessary for this important Duty, be
sollicitous to make choiee of.

II. As for the Time; the best Opportunity is in the Morning: for the First
Fruits of the Day being Holy, all the rest are Sanctified. Moreover, our
Thoughts being then not polluted with worldly Affairs, they are not so liable
to distraction: and the Body it self is more serene than after Meals; and this
Duty requires a vacuity in the Stomach; not only because the Head will be more
perspicuous and apt for Meditation, but also, because many Passages of
Meditation require so much Attention of the Mind, and Fervency of Affection,
that they do hinder Digestion: And this Duty being performed in the Morning, it
will have an influence upon the whole Day. But this Rule is not universal; for
we read, that Isaac went forth in the Evening to medirate, Genesis 24. 63. And if
the Subject of your Meditation be a Sermon, then perhaps the properest time is
immediately after the hearing of it, before your Affections cool, or your
Memory fail you.

III. FOR the Duration; considering the Parts of Meditation are so many, as
Preparation, Considerations, Affections, Resolutions, and the like: And not one
of these are to be past slightly over; for Affections are not quickly raised:
nor are we to cease blowing the fire, if it flame, until it be well kindled;
Half an Hour may be reckoned to be the least for Beginners, and an Hour for
those that are Proficients in this Duty.

IV. But in this Particular, there is Two Rules especially to be observed:
First, That as we ought not to desist from our Prayers before that temper and
frame or heart is wrought, which is suitable to the Requests of our Petitions;
so we should not desist in our Confession of Sin, till our Hearts are truly
sensible, and humbled for Sin; neither should we slacken our Praises, until our
Hearts are filled with holy Admirings, and inflamed with the Love of the
Almighty. Now, the End of Meditation, are Affections and Resolutions, therefore
we should not desist till those are effected.

V. SO in Private Prayer, when we find our Hearts enlarged by the Effusion of
the Spirit of Supplication upon us, we are not to desist, unless by our
persisting in that Duty, we omit another to which we are more particularly
obliged at that juncture; so in Meditation, when we perceive the Heart
affected, we are to continue it: But this Caution must be observed, That in our
Enlargements, we must not continue them longer than while they flow freely,
without much Straining and Compulsion: for Honey which comes freely from the
Comb, is pure; but forced by Heat and Pressure, is not so well relished. Now,
if the Heart is dead, we must use our utmost diligence to awaken it; and when
once our Hearts are inflamed, and enlarged by holy Affections in an
extraordinary manner, it is but an impediment to our Affections to return to the
Meditation of those Points that raised them.

SECT. IV. Of the Subject and Method of Meditation.
FIRST, Avoid Controversy, for that will convert Meditation into Study; and
nice Speculations, for they are sapless without Nutriment: besides, being so
light, they fluctuate in the Brain, and want ponderosity to sink them down into
the Heart; and inddeed, were they admitted, they are so insignificant, as the
Heart, by its reception, could acquire no Affectation. But let the Subject of
your Meditation be the plainest, powerfullest, and usefullest Verities of the
Almighty, as Death, Judgment, Hell, and Heaven; the Mercies of God, our own
Sins, and the Love and Sufferings of a crucified Savior, Contemplate on that
which is most suitable to your Spiritual Wants; as in the time of Desertion,
meditate most of the Love and Mercies of God, and thy own Unworthiness, etc.

II. NOW the Rules for Meditation are these Three: 1st. Preparatory. 2dly. For
the Body of the Duty. And, 3dly. The Conclusion. In our Duty of Preparation,
besides the choice of the Subject, we are to be convinced and affected with the
Presence of the Deity, and to use fervent Prayer for the Divine Assistance.
Secondly, For the Body of Meditation, it consists of Three Parts: The First is,
Consideration; which is, the convincing our Hearts of several Verities
appertaining to that Subject whereof we meditate.

III. IF the Subject of our Meditation be Death, the Considerations may run
thus: Alas, O my Immmortal Soul! the Manner, Time and Place where we shall
expire, we are ignoraut of; generally Men's Lives come to a period sooner than
they expect; and certain it is, whenever that Hour or Minute approaches, we
must bid adieu to Honors, Pleasures, Riches, Friends, and at last, our own
frail Bodies, etc.

The Second Part, is, Affections; whether it be Love of God, Christ, or
Spiritual Things; despising of the World, admiring of the Omnipotency, or any
other Spiritual Affection. The Third Part, are, Resolutions to perform that
which is agreeable to God's Command, and to desist from all manner of Evil.

IV. NOW that this is the most proper and genuine way of Meditation, evidently
appears: First, Because it is not Artificial, and such as requires Learning, as
those Instructions are which advise us to consider the Efficient, Final,
Formal, Material Cause of Defunction, with the Adjuncts, Concomitants, and
Concatenations, etc. which though they, perhaps, may please the Learned, yet
such difficult words astonish the Ignorant. Now, this is the Method by which
every one that is brought home to God, is converted.

V. AND the first thing in Coversion, is, our being convinced of some Truths;
which Conviction raises Affections: For if the Verities of the Divine
Omnipotence end in Conviction, and go no further; nay, if they end in
Aflections only, and never arrive to Resolutions of shunning Evil, and
performing of Good, Conversion can never be perfected. As for Example: One is
convinced that he is a miserable, undone Wretch, by reason of Original and
Actual Abomination: Upon this Conviction, Fear and Sorrow are excited; yet if
these do not operate in us a fixed Resolution of forsaking those Sins, we are
yet in our Sins, and unconverted. Thirdly, There are several things for the
concluding of Meditation, which I shall treat of in its proper order.

SECT. V. Of being affected with the Divine Presence.
WE are to consider, God is present in all places, as really and Essentially as
he is in Heaven: For, Omnipotency did not create Heaven for his Confinement,
but to manifest his Glory; for the Heaven of Heavens are not able to contain
him; neither is the Almighty included by, nor excluded from any place: And
though Jacob said, Surely the Lord was in this place, and I knew it not, Genesis
28. 16. yet we must not imagine that Jacob was ignorant of the Verity of it,
but did not actually consider it; but the the Psalmist, in the 139th. Psalm, is
perspicuous in explaining and clearing up the Omnipresence of the Almighty.

II. NEXT, we must consider, That the Almighty does more peculiarly observe his
Servants, while they are performing of heavenly Duties: Yet this is to be
understood, not as if God observed us more at one time than another, in respect
of his Omnisciency; but we may infer That God is much more offended with us,
if our Deportment and Frame of Heart, be more irreverent and unholy in the Duty
of Prayer and Meditation, than in the Duties of our particular Calling.

III. WE may consider with our selves, That Christ does actually behold us,
especially in these Duties of Sanctity: For it is not the remoteness of Place
that does obstruct Christ's Omnisciency, and exact observing of us. Little did
Nathanael think that Christ saw him under the Fig Tree: Nathanael did not
perceive Christ, neither then was he corporally present, yet Christ beheld
Nathanael when he prayed. So Christ beheld St. Stephen before the Heavens were
opened, and the opening of the Heavens was not; that thereby Christ might be
enabled the better to behold St. Stephen, but that this holy Proto-Martyr might
thereby be the better enabled to discern that Christ looked on him.

IV. AND without all controversy, the Almighty observes and knows with what
Reverence, Faith, and Love, we address our selves to him; for else our Prayers
would be fruitless, and our Faith ineffectual: For, how could he distribute to
us according to our Faith, if he knew not the extent of it? If the inferior
frame of our Hearts were not observed by Omnipotency, we may then infer, that
an Hypocrite which can utter extraordinary Expressions, should acquire more by
his Addresses to the Almighty, than a true Nathanael, in whom there is no guile.

V. Suppose that thou had lived in that Age when Christ was upon Earth, or
that he were corpotally present now, near thy Habitation; consider with what
Joy, Reverence, Alacrity, and Assurance, thou would address thy self to him
for the Pardon of thy Sins, or for any other Mercy thou stoodst in need of:
After the same manner thou may now address thy self; his remoteness from
thee, in respect of a Corporal Presence, does not diminish his Power to discern
thy Wants, or give an Audit to thy Petitions; nor his being now glorified, does
not derogate his Benevolence to grant thy Requests, than if he were corporally
present, in the Room with thee in the form of a Servant, as he was once at
Jerusalem.

VI. THE Glory of Christ does not slacken his Love and Goodness; for Christ is
the express Image of his Father, and God's Attributes are all consonant: The
Majesty of Heaven does not set Limits unto his Goodness, and make that finite;
nor does his Bounty make his Omnipotency less glorious: His Goodness makes his
Deity more amiable, and his Omnisciency makes his Mercies more wonderful; so
neither does the Exaltation of Christ, excite him to abate or diminish his
Goodness to any that serve him, according to his divine Precepts.

VII. BUT if in any method his Love is mutable, it is by an Augmentation: For
when our blessed Lord was in the flesh, you must have approached him by Faith,
or expected no Mercy; and by Faith, though he is inthroned in Heaven, you may
obtain Mercy in time of need. Thus you may ponder upon any of these
Considerations, until your Heart be so convinced of, and affected with the
Presence of God, that you thereby may be the better fitted for the carrying on
the Duty of Meditation more effectually.

SECT. VI. Of Preparatory Prayer Before Meditation.
THE next Preparatory Consideration is, Prayer; which thou may perform to
this or the like purpose.

LORD, my design, at this time, is not to be sequestered an Hour from worldly
Enjoyments, for that were to be guilty of a Cessation, and to increase the
number of my Sins, not my Graces; but my Solicitation, at this time, is, to be
so convinced and affected with those spiritual Verities revealed in thy Sacred
Word, that I may fully resolve, by thy Strength and Power, to reform my Life:
for I can neither understand the things that belong to my Peace; not
understanding them, be convinced of the Certainty and Verity of them.

II. NAY, Lord, though my Understanding is illuminated, yet without thee my
Affections cannot be enflamed: I can neither know, resolve, nor perform any
Good without thee; for from thee proceeds both the Will and the Benefit of thy
good Pleasure. Lord, I humbly implore (...) to replenish me with thy Grace,
that I may be conscientious in performing this Duty with my whole Strength, and
not negligently, and inconsiderately. And, Lord, do thou illuminate me, and
convince me with thy Sacred Truths, and so affect my Heart with the Love of
Sanctity, and a Detestation of all Sin and Wickedness, that I may thereby be
fully and firmly resolved (notwithstanding all the Oppositions that the Flesh,
the World, or the Devil can procure) to run the ways of thy Commandments with
joy and celerity.

III. AND, Lord, grant that when thou have operated in me the Will so to
perform, give me also the Benefit, and let me not trust to the Strength of my
Resolutions. but to the continual gracious Assistance of thy holy Spirit for
the Performance of those Duties that through thee I shall resolve to pursue.
Grant this, O holy and blessed Father, even for the Merits of thy dear Son, who
has commanded me to approach to thee in his Name for any Mercies I stand in
need of. O let these my Petitions reach thy merciful Ears* even for his sake
who is my only Lord and Savior, Amen.

IV. THIS or the like Prayer thou art to send up to the Throne of Grace: But
this must be done with thy whole Heart; for thou must believe, that it is by
the Strength which thou shall acquire from God, by Prayer, whereby thou shall
be enabled to perform this or any other Duty profitably; for it is he that
teaches us to be Proficients. Now, he that begins a holy Duty without God, will
end it without him also. It is a pernicious thing to imagine that we can by our
Natural Parts, Learning, or by the strength of Grace already received, without
the Almighty's further Assistance, perform any thing that can please him, or
edify our own Souls; for though our Mountain be made strong, yet if he
withdraws the Light of his Countenance, we are in Obscurity.

V. WE may with much more reason declare, Now the Sun is in his full Meridian,
and the Air is so serene, that now we can transact well enough for a space,
though that Solar Luminary be eclipsed; than to testify, though our Hearts be
never so much inflamed with the Love of the Almighty, now we are so supplied
and inflamed with his divine Love, we can subsist by our own Strength, and for
the present we want not God's further Assistance; afford us but Subject Matter
to meditate of, and we shall be of Ability to continue and increase our Flames.
Do not possess thy self that it is a Burden, but a Mercy and Privilege, that
Omnipotence has necessitated and commanded thee always to extract Strength
from Him.

SECT. VII. Of Consideration.
FIRST, Our Considerations must be plain, not intricate and abstruse; for the
main Scope of Meditation being the affecting of our Heart, and reforming of our
Lives. Next, they must be certain and evident, not controversial and dubious;
for the Effect of Meditation is not peculiarly to increase our Knowledge, but
to improve it. Neither let Considerations be curious and nice Speculations:
Neither make choice of those Books to assist thee, in this Duty, which are
embellished with Rhetorical and Eloquent Expressions* which appear, in the eye
of the World, to be witty, but are indeed very empty: for Verity, indeed, is
many times lost in those Allurements; and entangles the Mind, by disingaging of
it, from serious Consideration: As many Dishes become unsavory, by having too
much Cost bestowed, and so lose their Virtue before they reach the Stomach.

II. THE Be fixes not upon the freshest colored Rose, or fragrant's Smell;
but on the Herb Thime, which is of slender beauty. Besides, Eloquence in this
Duty, may please some Persons, as Pictures in Books please Children, who while
they gaze upon them, neglect their Learning; even so, while we are affected
with Elegancy of Speech, we stray from the performance of conveying the Verity
of what we ponder of, to our Hearts: As in the Disease of the Bladder, the
skilful Physician, to perform a Cure, administers those Remedies which may
soonest reach the Part affected; for if they meet with any Obstruction, they
lose their virtue, and are insignificant: so if our Understanding should
explicate the Eloquence, or search out the Meaning or Certainty of the Verity
it considers, any long season, the Heart will prove cool and unaffected; and be
under the same Circumstance with those Musicianers that were to play there
Consort before a great Emperor, but were so long a Tuning their Instruments,
that he would not stay to hear 'em.

III. THE next Rule, is, If any doubt arises upon an evident Truth, in which
the Devil is apt to cast in Scruples; then act as the Archangel did with him,
enter the Lists; and perhaps when you have examined the Matter, the Cloud may
vanish, and the Sun shine in its full Meridian; by which resistance Satan will
take flight: but if he still persist, and your Blasphemies are not removed,
then dispute no more, but use the Arch-Angel's words, The Lord rebuke thee,
Satan. To this purpose, it is requisite to be well grounded in the Verity of
God's Word, which is the Sword of the Spirit, by which our Savior silenced
Satan in all his Temptations: We must not dispute with that Enemy by Humane
Reason, but we must put on the whole Armor of God, if we will be able to stand
in the Day of Temptation, and when all is done to stand.

IV. OUR next Rule, is, Not to over-multiply our Considerations; but when, by
considering the Truths of God, we find our Hearts ardently affected, then we
are to make a Progression. But this Caution is observable, That when we find
our Hearts, never so little affected, we must desist in our Considerations: The
Be will not leave the Flower, while any Honey is to be extracted. And it is a
Temptation which Christians ought to take notice of, That Satan is ready to
make us hastily pass over Duties, before we have extracted half the strength of
'em: For when we are confessing our Sins, and our Hearts begin in the least
measure to be humbled, they are often filled with such Joy, as may be suspected
to proceed from him, or our corrupted Hearts.

V. CORN, when it springs too fast, and grows rank, the Husbandman cuts it
down. A Corrosive applied to eat dead Flesh, must not be removed when it begins
to smart: And Wheat in stony Ground soonest springs up. Our Considerations must
take deep root, and not entertain Affections and Resolutions when the Heart has
newly received any Impression: But this we must remember, that if our
Affections be much inflamed when we begin our Considerations, we are to yield
to the Inspirations of God, and be guided by it: for this Method here proposed,
is not to limit the extraordinary Operations of God's Spirit; but if our Hearts
be only a little excited, we must not leave blowing the fire so soon as it
begins to kindle; for green Wood will suddenly extinguish, unless it be
thoroughly kindled.

SECT. VIII. Affections and Resolutions.
WITHOUT Knowledge, we cannot consider: and Consideration raises Affections;
and Affections produces Resolutions; and the Effect of Resolution is Action,
and a through Reformation of our Lives and Manners. Now, our Affections may
vary according to the Subject of our Meditation: for sometimes we admire the
Goodness, Majesty and Wisdom of the Almighty; another time we are amazed at our
own Folly and Madness, in living so contrary to our own Principles; and that
those sacred Truths revealed in God's Word, which we might improve to our
Eternal Salvation, should be laid by, as useless; as if one should have in his
possession an excellent and effectual Receipt for the Stone, and yet lock it
up, and make no use of it.

II. SOMETIMES we despise the World, and with Job, abhor our selves in Dust
and Ashes: sometimes we affect Sorrow, Joy, Love, Fear, etc. of which we may be
furnished out of the Book of Psalms, which were indeed but David's Meditations,
though not in this Method. Now, when our Affections are much excited, we may
make a progress to Resolution.

III. NOW your Resolutions must be fixed; not vain and frivolous, but serious
and resolved* Purposes. Say not with thy self, I am assured the Wrath of God
comes upon the Children of Disobedience, and I must embrace Hell, or forsake
taking of the Name of God in vain; the Offense is great, which I commit in
Swearing, and I could heartily wish I could omit it: but instead of this, argue
thus with thy self, I am solemnly resolved, by the Blessing of the Almighty, to
forsake all Sin, especially what I am most guilty of; for God will not be
mocked, neither must I give a faint denial to Sin.

IV. WHATEVER thy Resolutions are, put them presently in practice, and drive
them not off to futurity. Art thou addicted to Drinking? Do not resolve and
say, This Sin I intend to forsake, but for the present I am engaged to meet
Company where I must appear sociable; but that being finished, I design to
prosecute my Resolution. This is one of Satan's Devices, and is cast in thy way
as a Stumbling Block, which, if not removed, will prove pernicious.

V. NEXT, Let not thy Resolutions be only against Sin, but against the
Temptations and Allurements to it. Solomon does not say to the Adulterer, Thou
may discourse a Harlot; but, Be not enticed by her words to uncleanness: He
will not permit thee to go into her House, or by her Door; Prove. 5. 8. And when
he disswadeth the Drunkard from that Vice, he advises him not to look upon the
Wine; for as the Beauty of a prostitute Harlot, so the Color of Wine will
inflame our Desires after it, Prove. 23. 31. After this method Job resolved, I
have made a covenant with mine eyes, why then should I look upon a maid? Job.
31. 1.

VI. NEXT, You must observe this Caution: If you find your Heart never so much
resolving against, and detesting of any Sin, yet be very circumspect, that you
confide not upon the strength of Resolution, but earnestly deprecate the
Almighty, that he would enable you by his Divine Power; and that as he has
given you the Will, so he would give you his Grace to perform it.

SECT. IX. Of Vows.
AS your Resolutios are, so let your Vows be; rather against the Occasions of
Sin, than against Sin it self. In things Indifferent beware of making any
Perpetual Vow, but rather let it be Conditional. As, First, That you will
abstain from such a thing, or perform what you designed, unless you shall be
otherwise advised by some discreet, sober Person. Secondly, Add this Caution,
if thou art guilty of Drinking, viz. If I think of it, I will not drink Wine
this Month. Now, if a Breach of this Vow be made, though you did not think of
it, you sin if your Vow be absolute.

II. THE next Caution concerning Things Indifferent, is this; Add a Penalty
upon the Breach o^ your Vow; which may be to this purpose: I resolve to set
apart one Hour in the Day, in Prayer for the Church, to the End of this Month;
or else give Alms to the Poor. In such a case, if we perform either, we sin
not: And the reason of our Penalty, is, because some Inconveniences may arise
which may prove very prejudicial to us; and then we have liberty to take the
other part of our Vow, viz. To give so much to the Poor.

III. NOW, this Penalty we inflict upon our selves, must not be too light and
trivial, but of such consequence as may be obligatory; yet not of that
ponderosity to be prejudicial. For a rich Man to vow he will bestow a small
Matter on the Poor, is inconsiderable; yet, perhaps, by a poor Man, the same
Value may be of too large an extent: But let your Penalty be according to the
Rules of Scripture and Reason, and opposite to those Sins which are most
prevalent in thee. For Example, If Covetousness reigns in thee, exercise thy
Penalty in Alms* If Voluptuousness, Prayer and Fasting, or abstaining wholly,
for a time, from thy greatest Delight and Recreation.

IV. LASTLY, Let your Vows be rather against the External than the Internal
Acts of Sin; rather against Speaking angrily, than being Angry: For though
External Acts of Sin are worse, yet we have not so much dominion over them. If
your Vows extend to the Performance of Holy Duties, let it be as to the Time,
not the Quantity. For Example: Should thou bind thy self to read such a
number of Chapters, perhaps thou art tempted to read them too hastily over;
whereas if thou do allot thy self so much Time, thou art not so liable to
this Temptation.

SECT. X. How to Conclude your Meditations.
FIRST, Thou must earnestly beseech the Almighty to give thee Strength to
perform whatever thou have resolved to act in his Service. This must be
performed fervently, though briefly and humbly, from an earnest Desire to act
what thou have promised and resolved, and also from an humble sense of thine
Inability in the Performance. Next, express thy Thankfulness; and when thou
find any Alteration wrought in thy Hearr to detest Sin, give God the Glory,
and rejoice not in thy self, except it be with trembling at thy own Pride and
Arrogance.

II. NEXT, We are to remember what Parts of our Medtation did most affect us,
and lay them up so in our Thoughts, that frequently we may ponder on 'em.
Lastly, When thy Meditations are ended, depart not hastily to thy Temporal
Employments: Go not from the Presence of the Almighty, as a Bird out of the
Snare of the Fowler, with alacrity and speed, but go vigilantly and warily from
Holy Duties.

The Collects to be said Before or After Meditation.
O LORD, from whom all good Things do come, grant to me thy humble Servant,
that by thy holy Inspiration, I may Think those things that be good, and by thy
merciful guiding may Perform the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

GRANT to me, Lord, I beseech thee, the Spirit to Think and Do always such
things as be rightful; that I who cannot do any thing that is good without
thee, may by thee be enabled to live according to thy Will, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

I BESEECH Thee, Almighty God, look upon the hearty Desires of me the humblest
of thy Servants, and send forth the Right Hand of thy Majesty to be my Defense
against all my Enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

MED. I. Confession of Sin.
1 John i. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
OMNIPOTENT God, my Sins ever appear in my sight, and are a Torment unto my
Mind; every Day I think of thy Judgment, because Death threatens me every Hour.
And when I remember, I must appear before the Iudgment-seat of Christ, 2 Cor.
5. 10. then I exaamine my whole Life, and find it is altogether Vanity; my
Actions are vain, my Words profane, and my Thoughts unprofitable. If the shadow
of some Virtue appears, it is imperfect; because Original Sin, and my vitiated
Nature has polluted it.

II. IF all our righteousness are as filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. what can we
expect our Unrighteousness should be? Our Savior tells us, When ye shall have
done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable
servants, Luke 17. 10. And if we are so unprofitable in our Acts of Obedience,
certainly we are abominable in our Transgressions. St. Gregory, in his Morals,
tells us, A diminutive Light may shine in Obscurity; but being set in the Sun,
is darkened. Wood not measured, may appear strait; but applied to the Rule, is
found oblique. The Impress of a Seal may appear perfect in the Eyes of the
Spectators, and yet be very imperfect in the Eye of the Artificer. So that
which glitters in the Estimation of the Performer, is oftentimes sordid in the
Discretion of the Judger. For, the Thoughts of God are different from the
Thoughts of Men, Isa. 55. 8.

III. THE Memory of many Sins affrights me; and yet there are diverse I am
ignorant of. Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my
secret faults! Psalm. 19. 12. I dare not look up to Heaven, because I have
offended him which inhabits there. In Earth I enjoy no Refuge, expecting
nothing from the Creatures, because I have offended the Lord of the Universe.
My Adversary the Devil accuses me to the Almighty, and desires him the most
Just Judge to condemn me to Chains of Darkness, for my Sin, that would not lay
hold on the Means of Grace.

IV. NEXT, The Four Elements, in their order, accuse me: And, First, The
Heavens acquaint me, they have supplied me with Light, to my Joy and Comfort.
The Air whispers me, I have given thee all manner of Fowl my Region affords, to
be at thy Command. The Water violently speaks, I have given thee all manner of
Fish to eat. And the Earth opens her Mouth, saying, I have given thee Corn,
Wine and Oil to nourish thee; but how have thou abused these Mercies, to the
Contempt and Dishonor of our Creation? Therefore let our Benefits redound to
thy Punishment; let the Fire consume thee, the Water overwhelm thee, the Air
fann and winnow thee, the Earth swallow thee up, and Hell devour thee.

V. THE Holy Angels which were appointed by the Almighty to minister unto me in
this Life, and to be my Comforts in the Life to come, they accuse me: for by my
Sins I have deprived my self of their Ministry in this Life, and Hope of their
Fellowship in the World to come; the Voice of God's Divine Law accuses me;
either I must fulfill it, or perish; to perform the one, is impossible; and to
undergo the other, is intolerable.

VI. GOD, the most severe Judge, and potentest Executer of his Eternal Law,
accuses me: Him I cannot deceive, who is Wisdom it self; from him I cannot fly,
who is Power it self, and reigns every where. Whither then shall I fly? Psalm.
139. 7. Even to thee, O Blessed Jesu, my alone Redeemer and Savior. I hear a
Voice which bids me hide my self in the clifts of the rock, Cant. 2. 14. Thou
art that Rock, and thy Wounds are the Clefts; in them will I hide my self
against the Accusations of all the Creatures.

VII. My Sins cry aloud, even unto Heaven; but thy blood which was poured forth
for my sins, cries louder, Heb. 12. 2^. My Sins are potent to Accuse me, but
thy Passion is effectual to Defend me; the Unrighteousness of my Life is
powerful to Condemn me, but thy most perfect Righteousness is powerfuller to
Save me. I appeal therefore from the Throne of thy Justice, to thy Mercy-Seat;
but I dare not appear before thy great Tribunal, unless thy holy Merits
interpose betwixt me and thy Judgment.

MED. II. That the Cross of the Holy Jesus should excite us to Repentance.
Romans v. 8. While we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
BEHOLD, my Soul, thy Savior's Sufferings; the Wounds of him that was
crucified, and the Torments of him that expired on the Cross: That sacred Head
at which Angels tremble, is platted with a Crown of Thorns: That Face which in
Beauty exceeded all Mankind's, is spit upon by the Ungodly: Those Eyes,
brighter than the Sun in his Meridian, are obscured in Death: Those Ears which
were accustomed to hear Angelical Anthems, are infested now with arrogant
Speeches, and scornful Reproaches: That Mouth from whence proceeded Divine
Oracles, and dictated to Angels their Celestial Lessons, receives nothing but
Gaul and Vinegar: Those Feet which the devout Magdalen kissed, and wiped with
the Hairs of her Head, are fastened with Nails: Those Hands which stretched out
the Heavens like a Curtain, are now extended on the Tree of Shame.

II. THAT Body, the Deity's Temple, is scourged and wounded with a Spear:
Nothing escaped the malicious Jews but his Tongue, and that was meekly
exercised in Praying for his Persecutors. And he who now Reigns in the highest
Heavens, underwent all this for lost Mankind: He felt the Pains of Hell, and
cried out, My God! My God! Why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27. 46. So great was
his Agony and Anguish, that he* which comfort Angels, stood now in need of
one to comfort him.

III. IF this happens to the Just, what shall become of wretched Sinners? What
measure shall the Almighty take with us for our Offenses, who is so wrathfully
displeased with his well-beloved Son for the Sins of the whole World? O God of
infinite Mercy, take from us these stony Hearts of ours, and give us Hearts of
Flesh, that we may tremble at thy Word, and melt at thy Judgments. Lord, let us
not forget thy Acclamations and Tears: Thou cryedst from the Cross, Behold, O
ye Sons and Daughters of Men, what I suffer for you! Was ever Grief so great?
or any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow? But O Thou whose Property it is to have
Mercy, convert our stubborn Hearts unto Thee.

MED. III. Of the Fruits of Repentance.
Mat. iii. 8. Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance.
THE Foundation of a Holy Life, is True Repentance; and where that is acquired,
Remission of Sins, and Eternal Life succeeds. Why then do we deferr our
Repentance, and procrastinate it from day to day? To Morrow is not in our
possession; and to Repent sincerely, is not in our power; but when the
Judgment-Day is approached, we must render an Account not only for one Day, but
for our whole Lives.

II. ACKNOWLEDGE and bewail thy Sins, so shall thou find God in Christ appeased
toward thee. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions, says the
Lord, Isa. 43. 25. inferring our Sins are enrolled in the Court of Heaven. Turn
away thy face from my sins, begs the Royal Prophet, Psalm. 51. 9. Demonstating
that our Iniquities are in God's sight. Be converted unto us, O God, prays
Moses: therefore our sins do separate us from God, Isa. 59. 2. Our sins have
answered us, complains Isaiah, ver. 12. and do accuse us before God's
Tribunal. Cleanse me from my sins, is the Psalmist's Petition, Psalm. 51. 2.
Concluding, our Sins, in appearance, are sordid in the Eye of the Almighty.

III. SIN is the Distemper of the Soul: which moved David to cry out, Heal my
soul, for I have sinned against thee, Psalm. 41. 4. It is for Sin, that we are
blotted out of the Book of Life. So said the Eternal, Whosoever shall sin
against me, I will blot him out of my book, Exodus 32. 32. We are cast off by
the Almighty for our Sins: which made David deprecate, Cast me not away from
thy presence, Psalm. 51. 11. Sin torments the Mind, and dries up the Moisture,
as the Psalmist experienced, Restore me to the joy of thy salvation, Psalm. 47.
12.

IV. Sin is infectious, says the ProPrphet, Isa. 24. 5. The earth is defiled by
the inhabitants thereof, which have transgressed the law. Our Sins press us
down to Hell, else the Psalmist had not broke out, saying, Out of the deep have
I cried to thee, O Lord; Lord, hear my voice. 130. 1. Sin is the spiritual
Death of the Soul. So says the Apostle, We were sometimes dead in our sins,
Ephesians. 2. 1. By mortal Sin, Man loses his Creator, who is the infinite and
Incomprehensible Good: therefore, to be deprived of him, is an infinite and
incomprehensible Evil. And as the Almighty is the chiefest Good, so Sin is the
chiefest Evil.

V. CALAMITIES and Punishments are not absolutely Evil; for many times from
them Good is extracted: Nay, they may properly be called Good; because they are
God's Messengers, and proceed from him who is the Fountain of all Goodness.
Moreover, they lead us unto the chiefest Good, even Life Everlasting. Christ,
by his Passion, entered into his Glory, Luke 24. 26. And Christians, by
Tribulations, enter into Life Eternal, Act. 14. 22. And consequently, Sin is
the chiefest Evil, because it draws us from the chiefest Good.

VI. THE Sinner is accused by his Conscience, which he has defiled; by his
Creator, whom he has offended; by the Sins he has committed; by the Creatures
he has abused; and by the Devil, who has seduced him. How saving then is
Repentance, which frees us from such Accusations! Let us haste then with speed
to such a sovereign Catholicon. If thou deferr thy Repentance till Death, thou
do not forsake thy Sins, but they forsake thee; and it is very difficult to
trace out an Example of sincere Repentance at the Hour of Death, except that of
the Thief upon the Cross.

VII. FOVRTEEN years have I served thee, (said Jacob to Laban,) it is time now
that I should provide for my own house, Genesis 31. 41. And if thou have pursued
the World, and chased after the Vanities of it so many Years, it is now high
time to provide for thy Soul. Every Day, nay, every Hour and Minute, we
accumulate Sin; Oh, let the Spirit, every Moment, wash it away with Tears of
Repentance. The Almighty infuses not the Oil of Mercy, but into the Vessel of a
contrite Heart: He first mortifies us by Contrition, and then quickens us by
his Spirit of Consolation: He leads us into a deep abyss of Grief, and brings
us back by his Restraining Grace.

VIII. Elias first heard a vehement Wind, overturning Mountains, and cleaving
Rocks; and after the Wind, an Earthquake; and after the Earthquake, Fire, 1
King. 19. 11. At length there followed a still, small Voice, ver. 12. From
whence we may infer, That Terror is the precursor of the Love of Omnipotency,
and Sorrow precedes Comfort. God binds not up any Wounds that are laid open by
Confession: He Pardons and Justifies none, except they Acknowledge and Condemn
themselves: He Comforts not, unless they first Despond. And this is the sincere
Repentance which God, by his Holy Spirit, operates in us.

MED. IV. Of Man's Salvation.
Tit. ii. 11. For the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared unto
all men.
WHY art thou perplexed, O my Soul? and why art thou dubious of the Mercy of
God? Remember thy Creator, who created thee without thy Assistance; who formed
thee in secret, in the lower parts of the earth, Psalm. 139. 15. He who took
care of thee before thou were born: Will his Providence neglect thee, now thou
art fashioned after his own Image? To Thee, the Great Creator, does thy
unworthy Creature address himself: Though my Nature is infected by Satan, and
wounded by Thieves, which are my sinful Corruptions; yet my Creator lives.

II. HE which made me, can renew me: He that created me without any Evil, can
chase all Evil from me; whatsoever has gained admittance by the Devil's
Suggestions, Adam's Prevarication, or my own Actions; yea, though it has
overspread my whole Substance. The Almighty never hated his own Workmanship:
We are before him, like Clay in the Hands of the Potter. Had he hated me,
certainly he would never have created me when I was nothing: He is the Savior
of all men, but especially of them that believe, 1 Timothy 3. 10. He created me
wonderfully, and redeemed me miraculously; but his Love was never so highly
expressed, than in his Wounds and Passion.

III. SURELY we were indulgently beloved, for whose sakes the only begotten Son
of God is sent from the Bosom of his Father. Dear was the Price of our
Redemption, and great was the Mercy of our Redeemer: To make us Rich, he
embraced Poverty; for he had not where to lay his head, Mat. 8. 20. To make us
the Sons of the Most High, he condescends to become Man; and does not, after he
had accomplished our Redemption, neglect us, but still intercedeth for us, Romans
8. 34.

IV. LET my Sins, Satan, and all the Powers of Darkness accuse me, in Jesus my
Mediator will I trust, who is Greater than my Accusers. Let my Weakness
affright me, yet in his Strength will I glory. For the Sufficiency of my Merit
I am familiarly acquainted, my Merits is not sufficient; it suffices me, that
he is propitious against whom I have sinned; and whatsoever he has decreed not
to impute, will be performed; and all Guilt, with the Price of his most
precious Blood, shall be done away.

V. LET it not then perplex me, that my Sins, though many, and of such a
magnitud^ discomfort me: For were I not oppressed, and heavy laden with Sins,
what need I earnestly request Christ's Righteousness? Had I no Distemper, I had
no necessity to implore the Physician's Help: but I am spiritually sick; and He
who is the Lord our Righteousness, is both our Savior and Physician. Lord, I
am Sick, a Sinner, and Condemned; and upon the Grand Inquest of my Conscience,
pronounce my self Guilty: but have Mercy on me, O my Physician, my Savior, and
my Righteousness!

MED. V. The Youth's Memento.
Eccles. xii. 6. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.
IT was both seasonable and profitable Advice, and one of the elegantest and
choicest Expressions in the Royal Preacher's Sermon. For, who is he which is
now Young and Vigorous, that is certain he shall live to be Old? And yet that
potent Voice which loudly proclaims to all the World, and whose Sound will
remain till Death shall be expired, is scarce aucible in the Ears of thousands.

II. IT IS one of this divine Chanters harmonious Lessons; and yet the World
thinks it too harsh a Note, and is very much displeased with the Tune. It Is
strange, and an amazing Wonder, That the Sweetest and Wisest of Preachers
should have so slender a Train of Followers, being his Oratory is so Rhetorical
and Divine: And yet it is so weighty a Text, which though they shun to hear,
understand, or read, they cannot evade the seeing; for the whole Universe is
but a Comment on it; every Creature we behold, preaches this useful Doctrine,
which we so supinely sleep out with our Eyes open.

III. NATURE her self carries this Memento in her Forehead; and the very Bruit
Beasts, in this Philosophy, can reason with us: And it is strange madness, that
Man should forget his Maker, did he but remember himself. But alas, blooming
Youth affects not to be put in mind of Heaven, which he is not acquainted with;
'twould impair his Memory, and make him think of his Prayers too often: Piety
will but chill his Blood; Religion makes him look withered; the Thoughts of
Heaven, and a Future-State, will make him sager than his years requires: his
Blood informs him, he is not yet qualified to turn Divine; he may serve his
Creator time enough, when he is more at leisure.

IV. THUS these Temporal Objects of Vanity and Pleasure chase away our Thoughts
from Heaven, and its Celestial Raptures: We can spend the Flower and Beauty of
our Years in Vice, and think the Almighty will be well enough pleased with the
Deformity of decrepit Age: We can sport and revel our Piety and Time in vain
and frivolous Delights, and conclude our selves potent enough to compel Heaven,
and become Religious, when we are bowed down with Infirmities, and have nothing
left us but Repentance and a Tomb.

V. WE are so highly pleased with the Sweetness of Sense, that we are negligent
of any greater Felicity; and so extraordinary much delighted with the Happiness
of Sinning freely, that we could willingly embrace that Religion which
tolerates Vice most: We place all our Devotion, with the luxurious Epicure, in
the Riots of Nature: Jolly Meetings are our best Religious Exercises; a Sermon
is as troublesome and melancholy to us, as a Funeral; and to hear of our
Latter-end in the midst of our Pleasures, sounds like a Lecture of Death, the
unwelcome and faint Echo of the Grave.

VI. LET the Preacher instruct us never so earnestly to remember our Creator,
we rather choose to follow Satan's Doctrine, to enjoy this World as long as we
can, and entertain Thoughts of Heaven at our leisure. And shall the Lusts of
this vain World, O Lord, be greater in my Soul than the Love of Thee? Shall the
temporary Allurements of Sin eclipse the Memory of thy Glory? My Life, I know,
is but a Span; and yet, I beseech thee, abreviate that, rather than it shoud be
spent in a neglect of Thee: better this Earthly Tabernacle of my Body be
dissolved, than become a Theater for Sin to revel in.

VII. LET me pay unto Nature the due Debt I owe her, sooner than perhaps she
would summons it, rather than run deeper in score with thy Justice. It Is far
better I should die, and be lost in the memory of the World, than to forget
thee: Thou broughtest me, at first, from nothing, not to sin, but to serve and
fear Thee; and has impressed in me a Ray of thy blessed Self, that I might not
seek my own perverse Will, nor pursue this vain World, but heavenly Mansions:
inure me therefore to Thee, that I may behold those solid and ravishing Joys
and Consolations that is in serving of Thee; what Tranquillity accompanies thy
Grace; that so I may no longer follow my own depraved Sense, but my Savior.

VIII. IT is none of the least Sins of our Youth, that we are negligent and
forgetful of Thee our Creator. And no wonder we are ignorant and insensible of
the Joys to come, that live in such a constant and continued neglect of Heaven.
Make me therefore, O my God, seriously to consider, that had I the perfect
Fruition of all I could wish or long for here, I should not only be
unsatisfied, but, in the end, find how miserable he is that fixes his Heart on
any thing but Thy Self. Teach me therefore so to enjoy the World, that I lose
not Thee, nor the Memory of that Blessed and Eternal Reward Thou have promised
to them that Honor and Fear Thee.

MED. VI. General Rules for a Godly Life.
Ephesians. xv. 16. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise;
redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
EVERY Day Death approaches thee, and then follows Judgment and Eternity.
Therefore, think often how thou may be able to Answer, in that most strict
and severe Judgment: Look circumspectly unto thy Thoughts, Words, and Actions;
for at that great Tribunal thou must render up an exact Account, Eccles. 12.
14. Every Evening and Morning entertain thy Thoughts of the pale Messenger, and
deferr not thy Repentance till the next Day; for the Morrow is uncertain; but
Death is certain, and waits no Person's leisure.

II. NOTHING is more opposite to Piety than Procrastination. If thou contemnest
the inward Voice of the Holy Spirit, thou will never attain to a sincere
Repentance. Make it thy business and study to walk in the Law of the Lord. In
thy Conversation be Affable and Courteous to all, Perplexing to none, and
Familiar with few: To God live Piously, to thy self Continently, and to thy
Neighbor Justly: Show Favor to thy Friend, Patience to thy Enemy, thy
Good Will toward all, and thy Bounty to whom thou art able. Always call to
mind Three things past, the Evil committed, the Good omitted, and the Time
pretermitted: And ever bear in mind Three things present, the Brevity of this
present Life, the Difficulty of being saved, and the Paucity of them that shall
be saved.

III. LET thy Evening Prayers ascend, and humbly confess the Sins of the Day
past, and think how many are in danger of Hellfire. Let the last Day of the
Seven correct and amend what Enormities thou have committed the whole Week:
Show Obedience to thy Superiors, give Counsel and Aid to thy Equals, and
Defend and Instruct thy Inferiors: Subdue thy Body to thy Mind, and thy Mind
to the Will of God: Heartily bewail thy past Evils, and set not thy Affections
on Temporal Enjoyments, but fix them on that which is Eternal: Mourn for Sins,
upon remembrance of them; and often remember Death, that thou may cease from
Sin: Let the Justice of the Almighty keep thee in Fear, and his Mercy preserve
thee from Despair.

IV. WITHDRAW thy self, as much as thou can, from the World, and addict thy
self wholly to God's Service: In Pleasures and Delights, be vigilant of thy
Chastity; in Riches, exercise thy Humility; and in worldly Affairs, neglect not
Piety: Be studious in pleasing none but thy Savior, neither fear to displease
any but Him: Deprecate Him always, that his Will may be done on Earth, as it is
in Heaven; and beseech Him to forgive thee what is past, and to guide and
govern what he has wrought in thee, for the future.

V. ABANDON all Hypocrisy; for God judges not according to external
appearance, but according to the Heart. In thy Words, take heed of vain
repetitions, Mat. 6. 7. because for every idle word thou must give an account
in the day of judgment, Mat. 12. 36. Let thy Words, Works, and Actions, be good
or evil, they pass not away, but remain as Seeds of Eternity. And the Apostle
assures us, If thou sowest to thy flesh, of the flesh thou shall reap
corruption; but if thou sowest to the spirit, of the spirit thou shall reap
life everlasting, Gal. 6. 8. Neither Honors, Riches, Pleasures, or Vanities of
this Life, can attend thee, after thy Glass is run out. Set a low value upon
what thou possesses, but esteem highly what thou want.

VI. LET Holy Meditation produce in thee Knowledge; and Knowledge, Compunction;
and Compunction, sincere Devotion. The Silence of the Mouth creates Peace in
the Heart; and, and the more thou separates thy self from the World, the more
acceptable thou art to the Almighty. Whatsoever thou requestest, ask it of God;
and whatsoever thou enjoyest, resign up freely unto him: for he that is
unthankful for what he has received, is unworthy of receiving more; and the
Gifts of Heaven cease to descend, when the Incense of our Thanks leave off
ascending.

VII. WHATEVER happens to thee, convert it to a good use; as in Prosperity,
bless and praise God, and exercise Charity according to thy Ability. So in
Adversity, exercise thy Repentance for what Enormities thou have committed,
which thou can not but imagine to be the Efficient Cause of what thou
suffer. Let Humility keep thy Heart in Subjection, that Arrogance may get no
possession of thee. Judge God to be a Father, for his Clemency, Power, and
Gentleness; a Lord, for his Discipline, Severity, and Justice. Love him
piously, as a Father, for his Mercy; and fear him, and trust in him, who abhors
Sin in the least degree. Ever humbly acknowledge thy own Misery, but loudly
proclaim his Mercy.

MED. VII. The Whole Duty of Man.
Eccles. xii. 13. Fear God, and keep his commandments, for this is the Whole
duty of man.
FEW there are which perform this Lesson; which yet should not so much appear
our Duty, as it ought to be our Delectation. He that has but once acquired the
habit of adoring his Maker, will assideouslsly confess Religion the highest of
Pleasures; and that Legislative Power which seems so formidable and disgustful
to the World, will prove but recreative to his Immortal Soul. But alas, how
little is there of the Royal Prophet's Piety now among us, when instead of
delighting in God's Law, we obliterate it more; and are so far distant from
meditating in it either Day or Night, that we never in the least think or
consider of it at all.

II. IT IS become a Custom, now, to Sin with Audacity; and a Syllogism of much
Valor, to exile this timorous Religion, or fearing either the Almighty, or his
Law, which he has given us. The Royal Preachers edifying Doctrine is as
obsolete, and worser than a Paradox; a mere Apocrypha, and a Heresy to revive
it. To instruct us in our Duty, is to scurrilize the Times, whilst we
officiously unhinge Religion; and it is no amazing wonder there are such swarms
of Atheists: but indeed, there never was such a time to generate them, as now;
trace Antiquity to its primitive Rise, and this Age cannot be paralleled.

III. THE World never increased so much in Sin: abominable Sects, and
disaffected Parties, like Colonies, new cultivate the Earth; Profaneness is
grown Hereditary, and sprouts out by Propagation; so that in process of time,
Posterity may perhaps become Ethnicks. Were the Divine Wisdom and his Promise
mutable, a Deluge would prove but a slender Penalty. We not only sin, but exult
in it more; whilst some, not satisfied to be occult and silent Atheists,
proclaim it aloud, and are fierce of acquiring the Reputation; as if we could
not render our Ingenuity enough, without Denying our Maker.

IV. NO marvel Religion is out of Tune, when a Harmony in Ecclesiastics is
wanting; or that Christianity bears so faint a Sound, when common Morality is
not heard. And yet it is a Lesson which we cannot learn too well, a Tribute we
cannot pay too often. We owe our Breath to the Bounty of his Hand; what Homage
then can we better pay than that, which by magnifying of him, we purchase an
Immortal Crown for our selves? Tell me, ye stupid Chasers of the World, what ye
aim at in all your Pretenses? Ye that scoff at Heaven, and make Divinity a
Garment for Unrighteousness? That with the Pharisee, embrace Formality for your
Religion, and make an external Piety your Duty?

V. ALAS, Heaven is not gained by pious Fraudulency, gilded Crimes, or
fortunate Transgressions; nor the Eye of the Almigty to be deluded with a gaudy
Zeal. It Is not a pretended Sanctity, that can invest us with Immortality; nor a
modish Devotion only, that will conduct us to Heaven. How miserable is he who
idolizes the World, and embraces that Religion, to neglect his Creator!
Therefore let us make that inquest of the Voice within us, and then invoke the
Almghty in these or the like Expressions.

VI. O GREAT Jehovah, what did thou bestow our Reason on us, but to
diligently listen unto the Voice of thy Law, that the Celestial Rhetoric of
thy Word, might at least attract from us an ignorant Profaneness? Shall
Ethnicks, that had no other Scope, no other Recompense for their Sanctity, than
some vain Applause, or the internal Triumphs of their Spirits, for their good
Performances, outvie us in the Splendours of a Moral Life; and we that have
sublimer and purer Hopes, be scarce Obedient for Thy sake? Shall they that are
ignorant of Thee, be more passionately Just, than we that have traced out
Heaven, and expect Eternity to succeed?

VII. THOUGH it was not in Man's Power to find Thee, till Thou did reveal
Thy Self in a Crucified Jesus; yet now having so richly, and in that Plenitude
expressed to us the Treasures of Thy Love, shall we not be excited to perform
something for Thy Glory? Incite us, we beseech Thee, to consider well the
Advantages that are in Thy Service, the Felicity that accompanies Obedience,
and thae Crown which is the Recompense of Faith; that so our Affections being
mortified unto these fading Objects here Below, they may be enlivened only with
Desires after those Eternal Excellencies that are in Thee, in Thy Heavenly
Kingdom.

MED. VIII. The Vanity of the World.
1 John ii. 15. Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world.
SET not thy Affections upon the World; for it shall pass away; and all the
things that are therein, shall be consumed with fire? 1 Cor. 7. 31. 2 Pet. 3.
10. Love that Felicity which is Eternal, that so thou may enjoy it, and live
for ever. Every Creature is subject to Vanity: whosoever therefore idolizes the
World, shall also become vain himself. Embrace that Good which is true and
stable, that thy Heart may be quiet and fixed. Why does mundane, ambitious
Honor delight thee? He that seeks Applause of Men, cannot be Honored by the
Almighty, Ioh. 5. 44. For he that chaseth after this World's Vanity, must be
conformable to it: And the Apostle tells ye, He that pleases men, cannot
please God, Gal. 1. 10.

II. HE that is Extolled yesterday, perhaps, to a high degree, by the Applauses
of Men, may be levelled to morrow by Dis^race. What is mortal Man the better,
for gaining a Reputation of a greater value than others, if he is disesteem'd
in the sight of God? Our blessed Savior being sought for to receive a Kingdom,
fled from it; but to be ignominiously Crucified, surrendered himself. He that
despises not the World, to follow Christ, how will he be qualified to lay down
his Life for him? Therefore there is no passage to true Happiness, but by
contemning the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked and fading World.

III. CHRIST, that blessed Pattern, taught us how we should value the World:
For, if He who is Glory it self, rejected Temporal Glory, why should we, to our
prejudice, embrace it? What avails the Praises of Men, if the Voice within
accuses us? Or, what signifies a Bed of Gold, to one in a burning Fever,
unless the State or Pomp could abate the Torment? It is only the Testimony of a
good Conscience, that admits of any Duration. But why do thou chase so much
after Riches? He is too covetous, unto whom the Almighty is not sufficient.
This Life is the Path to our Eternal Country. What does transitory things
profit us: They do but rather overload the Traveller, as too much Burden does
a Ship.

IV. THE Majesty of Heaven is the Riches of his Servants; then why should
thou not seek after that which will complete thy Happiness? Temporal Riches
produce Labor and Toil in the getting, Fear in the possessing, and Grief in
the losing: and, which is most deplorable, the Labor of the Covetous not only
perishes, but it brings them also to the same Destiny. Lot's Wife, which was
turned into a Pillar of Salt, yet preaches unto us this Doctrine, Not to look
back on the Splendor of the World, but with speed to hasten to our heavenly
Country. And why do thou so eagerly pursue after Pleasures? They are but
Vanity, and in the end, Vexation of Spirit.

V. O THEN, let the remembrance of a Crucified Savior, banish from thee all
Pleasures; and let the remembrance of a Fire Unquenchable, extinguish all
inordinate Concupiscence. Compare but the short Moments of Pleasure with
Eternal Punishments, and thou will relinquish one to evade the other. Worldly
Pleasures, if really considered, are brutish; and they that are involved in
those Allurements, assume the shape of wild Salvages. The Sweetness of Heavens
Kingdom pleases not that Appetite which daily feeds upon Husk with Swine. Let
us then prepare, with the Patriarch Abraham, and offer up to the Almighty, as
an Oblation, this our beloved Son, even our darling Sins which have so long
invaded us.

VI. LET us consider, the Way to Eternal Mansions, is not strewed with fragrant
Roses, but with Thorns and Thistles. The External Man, indeed, is surrounded
with Pleasures; but the Internal must press through many Tribulations. Let the
Fear of Omnipotency then, macerate thy Flesh, that the Affections thereof may
not delude thee. Retain always in mind the approach of the great Audit, that
the perverse Judgment of thy sensual Appetite may no way enslave thee. Be not
allured by the flattering Face of the Serpent, but remember the Sting he
craftily conceals. Always invoke the Almighty to strengthen thee with his
Grace, that at the last thou may receive a Crown of Glory.

MED. IX. Jacob's Ladder.
Genesis xxviii. 12. And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set upon the earth, and
the top of it reached unto heaven; and behold, the Angels of God ascending and
descending on it.
THE Patriarch Jacob had no sooner fixed upon a Stone for his Pillow, but a
splendid Vision accosts his sight: That filial Obedience which attended him
from his Father, on a Journey to Syria, became a nobler Conduct, and directed
him the Way to Heaven: Those Angelical Travelers ascending and descending
before him: Happy Solitariness, and glorious Entertainment with such Celestial
Company! The Uneasiness of his Lodging was highly recompensed by this
Beatifical. Prospect; when the God of Heaven, the Lord and Governor of the
World, appeared unto him, refreshing him with the graciousness of his Promises
and Providence.

II. WHEN I view the Figure of this humble Sleeper, I cannot forbear wondering
at the folly of those, that expect Visions from Above upon their soft Beds, and
seek for Revelation in the plenitude of their Pleasures: Their wanton Spirits
would wax sick, and be out of humor with Piety, should it molest or oppose
their Quiet: How apt would their Devotion be to contract an Ague, should they,
with the Psalmist, rise up at Midnight to invoke the Almighty? God distills not
his Miracles into the Lap of the Wanton; nor communicats the Excellency of his
Glory, but to those who resign themselves to Him.

III. St. JOHN must be exiled to Patmos, before he can be admitted a Divine;
and have converse with none but Angels, if he would be a fit Penman for Heaven.
Those devout Men, who were retired from all Company, but Solitude, and their
Devotions, could not have merchandized so unspotted with Heaven, had they not
renounced all Correspondence with the World; and unvesting themselves of all
Temporal Felicities, obtained an higher degree of Grace, and became living
Monuments of Celestial Grandeur.

IV. OUR devout Patriarch enjoyed here no-Canopy but the serene Air; no other
Tapers to illuminate his Apartment, but the Lamps celestial; and the vigilant
Angels move to and fro, as it were, to guard and preserve him. Oh, how securely
does he rest, that lays down his Head in the Bosom of Providence, and makes
that his Soul's Receptacle! Repose thus Beatifical, denotes a Sanctuary: Nor
need he fear any Disturbance in his Rest, that has the Almighty for his Keeper;
or that his pious nocturnal Thoughts shall be molested with frightful Dreams.

V. JACOB had no sooner prepared to sleep, but those holy Messengers unlock the
Heavens, and invite him to ascend. But it is by a Ladder. Heaven is not to be
clim'd up to in a moment: The Path to Happiness is trod by degrees; and, as our
Savior informs us, it is very narrow. Every Virtue is a step to Eternity; and
he is so much onward of his Journey, that daily tramples upon his Vices. We
cannot prove too good Proficients in a Life of Sanctity, or imagine that in the
least Acts of Piety we have enough to conduct us to Happiness. It Is not a few
Paces, but a constant Progress, that conveys us thither. Oh, how bad then is
he, that thinks himself too good to be made better!

VI. O LORD, the Promises of Thy Glory are immensible; and yet how negligently
do we embrace'em! Thou have directed us the Way unto Thy Self, and yet we are
not only reluctant, but even weary of walking to Thee! Alas, Is the
Magnificence of Thy Kingdom not worth approaching to? Can we propose to ascend
Thy Throne by a feeble and dronish Devotion? How actively do we run after the
Vanities of the World, but in Thy Service pretend faintness? We can chase after
the fading Pleasures of this Temporal Life, but neglect our progress in the Way
Thou prescribest us to walk in.

VII. QUICKEN us, O Lord, we beseech Thee, and make us more ardous and zealous
in Thy Service; and as Thou have sent Thy dearly beloved Son, and our Redeemer,
to summon us to Thy Self, so do Thou likewise send Thy Holy Spirit to sanctify
us for Thy Self, that we may, by Thy heavenly Grace, become a peculiar People,
zealous of Good Works: And we, who of our selves are unworthy to approach Thy
Altar, will, by Thy Divine Assistance, run the ways of Thy Commandments; so
that at last we may attain our End, even the Saivation of our own Souls, and
appear with Joy and Gladness in the Day of the Lord Jesus.

MED. X. Of a Good Conscience.
Act. xxiv. 16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience
void of offense toward Ged, and toward men.
WHATEVER thou undertakest, consult thy Conscience; and if Satan excites thee
to any Evil, stand in awe of the Checks within thee: for the Internal Testimony
is of more Efficacy than the External. Thy Conscience, that Angel-Guardian,
which Divine Omnipotence has fixed within thee, shall be registered in those
Books which will be opened at the Great Day, as is testified by St. John, Rev.
20. 22.

II. THE First is, the Book of God's Omniscience; wherein thy Thoughts, Words,
and Actions, shall be demonstrated. The Second is, the Book of Life, Rev. 13.
8. wherein those that are found written by Verity and Faith, shall be safely
conducted by the Angels into Heaven's Imperial Court. The Third is, the Book of
Holy Writ; according to which Golden Rule, our Faith and Good Works shall be
measured. The Fourth, contains the Testimony of the Indigent, whom we have
defrauded or relieved. The Last Book contains the Internal Testimony of the
Voice of Conscience; wherein all Offenses are noted: and indeed, the Volume
must be large, and exactly written by the Finger of Truth.

III. SINNERS, in that Day, will be fully convinced by the Terror within 'em;
and they can no ways shun so just an Accusation. A Mind undefiled, is the
Crystal-Glass of the Soul; and is so transparent, that she evidently, by the
Optics of Faith, beholds the Idea of the Almighty: for a sordid Eye cannot
view the Splendour of a true Luminary. As a well Complexion'd, and good Featured
Countenance, is esteemed in the Eye of the World; so an unspotted Conscience is
acceptable in the sight of the Almighty. But that Conscience which abounds with
Putrefaction, generates that Worm which continually, Vulture like, corrodes,
but never dies.

IV. O THEN let us, while it is Day, with a true Remorse, have a sense and
feeling of this never-dying Worm, and diligently labor to use all Arts to
destroy it; and let us not indulge it by any means, lest it abide with us to
all Eternity. What can it advantage thee, if thou were a Proficient in all
the Arts and Sciences in this Microcosm; nay, though thy Skill did extend so
far, as to number the Stars, and to trace out the ways of the Planets, and
did enjoy no Peace within to comfort thee. Let it be thy care to square the
Actions of thy Life according to that Rule prescribed by the Holy Jesus. Let
Purity reign in the Center of thy Heart, Verity possess thy Tongue, and embrace
Justice, that it may attend thee in all thy Proceedings. All which will
evidently demonstrate whether thy Life be Good or Evil.

V. ALL the Applause and Breath of the World is insignificant, if thy Bosom
Friend, thy Conscience, accuse thee? And what can all their Detraction
prejudice thee, if she defend thee? This potent judge thou carriest about thee,
is sufficient to Accuse, Testify, and to Condemn thee: This Justice holds the
Balance even, and will not be bribed with unjust Rewards; never will she be
mollified with fruitless Prayers, but she indefatigably follows thee
whithersoever thou go, and will attend thee wherever thou art, carrying
about her that Charge which thou have committed to her custody, whether it be
good, or whether it be evil.

VI. AND as the Testimony of thy Conscience evidences against thee, such
Judgment must thou expect from the Judge of all Men. Sinners themselves, at
last, shall become their own Accusers, though no other Testimony appeared
against them. For Instance, The Drunkard, when he is overwhelmed with Wine, or
Strong-drink, has no sense of the Prejudice he has received by his
Intemperance; but having slept away his Drunkenness, the charm of sensuality is
fractur'd, and he feels the smart of his own Imbecility.

VII. So Sin, that Diabolical Treasure, whilst it is agitating, darkens the
Mind, and, like a condense Cloud, obscures the Luster of perspicuous Judgment;
but at length the Voice within is rouzed up like a Lion, and rendeth more
vehemently than any other Accuser. Oh, let us all, betimes, mortify this Worm,
by the fervor of our Devotion, that it may not gnaw upon us, to our
Destruction, and lead us to Eternal Horror. Extinguish this internal Fire by
thy Prayers and Tears, that so thou may enjoy Heaven in the Cool of the Day.
Which God of his infinite Goodness grant that we may attain, by fighting a
good fight, finishing our course, and keeping the faith, 2 Timothy 47.

MED. XI. Of a Wounded Spirit.
Prove. xviii. 14. But a wounded spirit who can bear?
NONE, on this side Eternity! not the vastest Heap, the Universe it self, that
Theater of Humane Frailty, cannot; for it groans and travels in Pains it self,
to be delivered. Celestial Mansions was no longer a Residence for those
ambitious, rebellious Spirits, who forfeited their Glory for those infernal
Flames: which Torment is not equivolent to that infinite Despair which for ever
secludes and interdicts them from it. It is no surprising wonder, that many
imagine there is no Infernal Place like this; for its Torments are not to be
paralleled.

II. FIERY Furnaces, Stakes, Gridirons, or Phalarus's Bull, are but Trifles, to
this greedy Vulture. Tortures of the modernest Invention, are delightful
Penalties, compared to this Crulty: Those inhumane dying Miseries, do but
inrage and stupifie Sense; whilst this vital Death, this destroying Life,
exercises its Malice on a more Celestial Object; and contending to demolish and
ruin an Immortal Part, makes Death it self a Principal, and gentle Murderer
to it.

III. CROAKS of Ravens, Shrieks of Owls, and Houls of Wolfs, that adds
Obscurity to the dismal Night; Groans of departing Souls that invade the Ear,
and fill the Apartment with trembling Epitaphs, transcribed in Characters
mournful as the Grave and Silence; are well-tuned Harmonies, to the dying
Elegiacks of a wounded Spirit, that vents nothing but bloody Satyrs against it
self. Behold how, with the disconsolate Psalmist, it goes mourning all the Day
and Night, environed with Sorrows, and surrounded with dismal and fatal Idea's,
and inverts his Bed into a Bath, which those weeping Fountains of Tears, his
Eyes, have distilled! and instead of splendid and gentle Airs, evaporates
nothing but dark and trembling Accents! which busy Satan labors to retort in
doleful and despairing Eccho's.

IV. HOW contritely does it expostulate with Heaven; My dearest Redeemer, is
that amiable Attribute of thy Mercy lost? Is the Fountain of it dried up from a
poor and wretched Sinner? And will thou be a Jesus of Mercy to the whole
Universe, and become none to me? Oh, let me descend from the loftiest
Precipice, and for ever dwell in noisome Dungeons, inhabited by none but
loathsome Toads, Snakes and Serpents, beyond the reach and sight of all the
World, so I may but enjoy the Light of thy Countenance! Let me live more poor
and despicable than patient Job upon his Dunghill, perplexed with Boils, and
and in a naked and dejected Deformity, so I may but conceal my Leopard's Spots,
and place a Beauty in my Soul, which may invite that Allseeing Eye, whose
radient Beams can comfort all Mankind!

V. TAKE heed, thou Sensualist, that now revellest and riottest in the World's
Theater, and counter-charms Damnation: Were thou but sensible of the terrible
Agonies of Guilt, the Horrors of a murdering Sin, and the cursed Stings thy
Pleasures leave behind them, how speedily would thou list thy self in nobler
Services, and employ thy Time in better Thoughts? Were thou now to expire thy
Breath, how would the Guilt of an evil Life appale thee, when every Sin would
represent it self a Messenger of Horror, and the deluding World prove but an
infernal Comforter.

VI. SHOW me in a Glass that Champion Conscience, that will not undertake, at
length, to conquer that frozen Soul, whose Flashes will not liquefie and blast
again, that Atlas-Sinner, whom gentle Burdens will not, at last, numerously
depress. The World is unquainted with a Misery equivolent; the Terrors of the
unwelcom Grave are inconsiderate to it: which, could it but relieve the guilty
Soul, and its tenebrous and silent Regions promise an Immunity from future
Miseries, how readily would it purchase its Peace with Death, and implore its
keenest Dart for a swifter Passage? Loss of Friends, Fortune, or Reputation,
nay, Crosses which penetrate the Bone, are but slight Scratches, to these
gaping VVounds. Procure me a Schedule of the deepest Afflictions; and there is
none, I imagine, except this, which is not tolerable to be dispensed with: But
a wounded Spirit, who can bear?

VII. O LORD, how Ponderous is the Load of a VVounded Spirit! How Formidable
are the Stings of a Guilty Conscience! and the Apprehensions of Thy Fiery
Wrath! And how Deplorable is he that involves himself in Sin, and becomes
insensible of his Guilt, till the Memento of his heinous Crimes display it: And
when Mortality remembers him of a Future-State, nothing is his Concomitant but
his erroneous Life. Oh, Omnipotency! Thou have fixed an impartial Register in
our Breasts which no fawning Practice can bribe, nor Fountain of vulgar Tears
silence from recollecting us of Thy Justice; and yet what numbers are there
whose Consciences, like the great Leviathan, snap in sunder the Silver Cords of
thy Divine Law, like Threads of Flax? and are so backward from Confessing their
Crimes, that they are become obdurate in their Impenitence? But, Lord, do Thou
teach me, as I commit Sin, so inspire me with Thy Grace daily, that whenever I
shall approach Thy Presence, I may have no other Sins to testify against me,
than those which I possess; which if not thoroughly crucified, yet, at least,
sincerely repented of with hearty Contrition.

MED. XII. Of Humility.
1 Pet. v. 5. Be ye clothed with humility; for God resists the proud, and
gives grace to the humble.
IF thou do but seriously consider the miserable State of Mankind, thou will
easily shun the Temptations of an arrogant Spirit. Man, the Lord of all Below,
though he assumes to himself that Pride of Heart, yet he is Vile in his
Ingress, Miserable in his Progress, and Lamentable in his Egress: He is often
assaulted, and provoked by Satan's Temptations: He is allured by Delights and
Pleasures, cast down by Tribulations, entangl'd by Accusations, disrobed of
Virtues, and ensnared into evil Habits and Customs. Why then art thou proud, O
Earth and Ashes? Eccles. 10. 9. What wast thou in thy Conception, but sinful
Corruption? What in thy Life, but a Lump of Flesh? And what after Death, but
Food for Worms? If there be any spark of Goodness in thee, it is not thy own,
but the Almighty's, who is the only Donor of it.

II. THOU can claim nothing peculiar to thy self, but Sin which accompanied
thee into the World; and therefore* if Divine Omnipotence has inspired into
thee any measure of His heavenly Grace, give Him the Glory to whom it is most
due. If thou will be Christ's Disciple, observe His Doctrine: Learn of me, for
I am meek and lowly of heart, Mat. 11. 29. And he that observes this Lesson,
will at length attain to be a Proficient in the School of Humility. Our
Savior, the Pattern of Humility, styles Himself, the Lilly of the Valleys,
Cant. 2. 1. Inferring, That He is the most imbellish'd of all Flowers; and
springs forth, not in the mountainous and lofty proud Hearts, but in the low
Valleys of the contrite and humble Spirits.

III. AND the Royal Psalmist tells ye, God dwells on high, and yet he
beholds the things that are humble, both in heaven and earth, Psalm. 113. 5.
If we contemplate with our selves, we may soon come to this result, That we
cannot approach unto that Great Being, unless we tread in the Paths of
Humility; for he that appears vile in his own Eyes, is valuable in the Eyes of
the Almighty. Weakness and Frailty is entailed upon Humanity, and none can
pretend to boast of such an Imbecility. The twenty four Elders, (Rev. 4. 4.)
cast down their Crowns before the Throne, (ver. 10.) and render unto God all
praise and glory. And the Seraphims cover their faces, before the face of the
most Highest, Isa. 6. 2. What then should Man do, who is the vilest of all
Creatures, the worst of Sinners, and so unthankful to his Creator.

IV. CHRIST, the Everlasting Son of God the Father, wonderfully descended from
Heaven in great Humility, and miraculously condescended to take our frail
Nature upon Him, and stooped so low as to be crucified for us: And what should
poor Mortality answer for so high an Indulgence, who is gone so far astray from
his Maker? Behold, thou aspiring Soul, with what wonderful Humility thy Savior
has allayed thy Pride! And do thou still swell with Ambition? By the Path
of Humility, and his bitter Death and Passion, Christ entered into his Glory,
Luke 24. 26. And do thou imagine ever to reach Heaven-Gates, by wallowing in
the haughty way of Pride: Lucifer, for his Ambition, was expelled Heaven; and
our First Parents, for Diabolical Pride, was cast out of Paradise: And do
thou think to arrive at Eternal Happiness through a Sea of Pride?

V. OH, let us rather demean our selves, with an humble jesus, to wash the Feet
of others, than to seek ambitiously, with Satan, for the highest Place. Let us
humble our selves under the Mighty Hand of God, in this Life present, that we
may be exalted, in due time, in the Life to come. Fix not thy Heart upon what
thou have, but consider seriously what thou want. Mourn for those Graces
that are absent, rather than extol those Virtues thou have acquired. Conceal,
with all humility, what good Qualifications thou do enjoy; but confess those
Sins thou daily committest.

VI. AS Fire is preserved by covering with Ashes, so Charity is secured under
the Guard of Humility. Pride is the Seminary, Parent and Nurse to all Sins:
Exercise therefore thy Vigilance and Care against any Elevation, lest by the
precipice of thy Folly thou be cast headlong into the deep abyss of Sin and
Misery. And now having considered the Detestableness of this Sin of Pride, and
the Amiableness of this Virtue of Humility, let us earnestly endeavor to
abandon the one, and embrace the other; and with all Sanctity, invoke the God
of all Spirits to infuse into us his heavenly Grace, that this Tumor of Pride
may be asswag'd in us; that his Meekness and Humility may be our perfect
Pattern to guide us in this Life, and conduct us to the Life to come.

MED. XIII. The Proud Pharisee.
Luke xviii. 11. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank
thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even
as this publican.
SEE how Ingratitude is radicated in this proud Pharisee, that he so
imperiously thanks Heaven! How prodigiously has Pride metamorphos'd him! He
that accustomed himself to prolix Prayers, intends now to use brevity: His
devoutest Posture is, Standing; and he comes not to Pray, but to Boast; not to
Worship his Creator, but to Extol himself: He is not qualified to be highly
Pious, being so opinionated and transported with his own Virtues, that he is
destitute of either Time or Patience to remember the sole Author, whose
Benignity he would pretendedly seem to acknowledge, but it is so luke-warmly,
'twere better he were ungrateful still.

II. TRUTH had a lucky chance, to proceed from such graceless Lips. He did,
indeed, far excel others, even to the Superlative degree of Audaciousness: But
had he been acquainted with himself better, he would have proved more Grateful,
and not so Arrogant. How amply does he disturb the Ear of Heaven with these
Ostentations of his singular Value; but for his Pride and Arrogance, makes not
the least Apology. Indeed, he Thanks the Almighty; but it is after a modish
Carelessness, and rather an airy Complement, than a solid Prayer.

III. HE may plead Ignorance; but be found guilty of the breach of the Second
Commandment, in the First Table. For he knows he is forbid to Worship Idols, or
Images; yet thinks it no Sin to Idolize himself: and therefore dares presume to
offer to the Almighty a Schedule of his own Merits. How many apt Scholars is
there in the World, that has perfectly learned this Lesson, and imprinted it
in their Memory? See how the Roman Pharisees charm and puff up themselves with
Pride, by their sanctimonious Acts of Supererogation, and think to scale Heaven
by a Ladder of their own forming; magnifying a superabundant Piety, and
triumphing in a meritotious superfluity of performing more than their appointed
Task.

IV. WITH how much Agility do our trembling Enthusiasts follow their Generals
Path, in a sanctimonious Pride, by a supercillious Purity of Intention;
presuming it their Prerogative to reform the Universe, and create it again
anew? That Canonize themselves according to their mode; and with the proud
Pharisee, not only thank the Almighty, but tell him positively they far excel
other Men; That outragiously and loudly proclaim themselves the great Luminary
of the World, and in a devout lunacy, would crowd in new Notions, extravagantly
decrying all Religions but their own? These malecontented Pretenders immure
themselves apart from others; and by a morose Piety, are become so
prodigiously Divine, that they have always extinguished their Humanity.

V. NOW, if the Pharisee were not as other Men, yet these resemble him, having
been such exact Proficients in his Nature and Religion. So apt and prone, O
Lord, are we to be seduced, even in our best Performances, and (whilst we
vainly imagine our selves not only to excel others, but so meritorious in Thy
sight) as to be elevated into Presumption. It Is Humility must Crown all our
Graces, and put a Luster on our Requests, whilst the presuming Assurance of
our own Merits does not only deface, but seclude us from Thee.

VI. TEACH us therefore, O Lord, with such Expressions of Gratitude, to use Thy
Gifts, that we may not be stupefied, so as to be forgetful of our selves or
Thee* Whilst others arrogantly boast themselves in meritorious Acts of
Supererogation, let us earnestly endeavor humbly to acknowledge, confess and
bewail our many Imperfections. Let not a sanctimonious Pride seize upon our
Immortal Souls, that may any ways hinder us from being innocent from the great
Offense.

MED. XIV. The Soul's Delight.
Psalm. xciv. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts
delight my soul.
GOD, the bountiful Provider of all the World, has prepared a great Feast,
Mat. 22. 4. And those which hunger and thirst after Righteousness, are freely
invited. He that tastes not, is not sensible of the Sweetness of this Divine
Banquet; and he that has lost his Appetite, is not expected a Guest at this
Table. If thou believe on the Lord Jesus, obey the first Summons, and
approach with cheerfulness to this Royal Repast. None can acquire a Credulity,
unless with Contrition he confess his Sins, and repent of the same in Dust and
Ashes. And as Contrition is the spiritual Hunger of a Soul surrounded with Sin,
so Faith is the spiritual Food that revives and nourishes it to Everlasting
Life.

II. GOD gave the Israelites in the Wilderness, Manna, the Food of Angels,
Exodus 16. 15. And in this Entertainment of the New Testament, the Almighty
exhibits to us the Celestial Manna; yea, he is there present himself, who is
that spiritual bread which came down from heaven to give life unto the world,
Joh. 6. 51. He which had a desire to see his Field, refused to come, Luke 14.
18. From whence we may infer, That they which set their Affections on the
Pleasures of this Life, cannot approach to this Holy Table. When the rich
Gallant, in the Gospel, heard that he must forsake all his Goods of Fortune,
for Eternal Life, he went away sorrowful, Mat. 19. 22.

III. CHRIST, the Celestial Elisha, infuses not the Oil of his Loving Kindness
but into Vessels which are empty, 2 King. 4. 4. And his Divine Love never
inspires any Soul, except the Love of the World be extracted from it, whereby
it may become a fit Receptacle for so Divine a Guest: For, where our treasure
is, there will our heart be also, Mat. 6. 21. Temporal Enjoyments has its
attrrctive Allurements; but Divine Love has that Energy to unite us to the
Deity. Terrestrial Treasures consists in the Goods of Fortune; but in these the
Soul can acquire no Satisfaction, for it is beyond what this World can afford,
and therefore seeks for far greater Excellencies than transitory things.

IV. DID we but seriously consider the Duration of all Temporalities, we would
not fix our Hearts so fervently upon them: For upon our Bed of Mortality no
Relief can be expected from 'em; and what an absurdity is it for us to place
our Affections on those things which are so frail and inconstant! Our First
Parents, when they rebelled against the Most High, would have attempted the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; but before they could accomplish their
Designs, were driven out of Paradise, Genesis 3. 6. So may we expect, it that
Immortal Part, our Souls, should forsake him who has so dearly purchased 'em,
and cleave unto the World; but that we must undergo the same, if not a worse
Punishment.

V. THEY which neglect our Savior's candid Invitation of, Come unto me, all ye
that labor and are heavy laden, shall not avoid hearing of him pronounce that
Sentence of, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25. 41. The Sodomites
were consumed with fire, Genesis 19. 24. for refusing to hear Lot's Doctrine. and
without a speedy Repentance, the Fire of God's Anger will consume them which
have despised his Gospel, and rejected all Reproof. The five Foolish Virgins
who neglected trimming their Lamps, were excluded the Bridegrooms Presence; so
those whose Hearts are not inspired with Celestial Oil, must expect to be
debarred the Participation of Eternal Joy and Comfort.

VI. CHRIST internally calls to us, by his Holy Spirit, and secretly affords us
Motives to holy Desires, devout Affections, and pious Cogitations; and happy is
he whose Soul is invested with these Ornaments. When thou perceivest the least
spark of the Divine Goodness in thee, which does excite thee to the performance
of any good Duty, then labor to cherish it, that it may break out into a
flame; and take heed that thou quench not the Spirit, and by that means
extinguish the Operation: And the Apostle affirms, If any man defile the Temple
of God, him shall God destroy, 1 Cor. 3. 17.

VII. THE Heart of a Man, is the living Temple of the Lord; and he is guilty of
the Destruction of it, who refuses to give place to his Holy Spirit. The
Prophets, in the Old Testament, diligently hearkened unto the Word of the Lord;
and were prophetically inspired, as a Reward for their-Obedience. And in the
New Testament, the Disciples and Apostles were punctual in preaching the
Gospel, and they were inspired by the Holy Ghost; and were at last Crowned by
the Merits of Christ, as a Recompense for their Labors; and to those which
shall imitate such good Examples, blessed are they which shall hear and
persevere in such good Performances.

MED. XV. True Contentment.
Phil. iv. 12. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every
where, and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry;
both to abound, and to suffer need.
NONE but this happy Apostle, such a divine Saint as St. Paul was, could become
a Proficient in this Lesson. How few is there, that have desired to learn it?
It Is a Lecture the World has long ago been weary of: not so much, because it is
so hard a Task, but because it is so unpleasant a Theme. Were the Way to
Everlasting Happiness strewed with Roses of Pleasure, for our sensual Appetites
to range and revel in, 'twould quickly become a frequented and an easy Walk.
Were there no Difficulties, no skilful Trials to be past through, who, of a
Mortal, would not become a Saint? The Crown of Eternal Glory would be as common
as a Garland of Flowers, did not that of Thorns carry the precedence.

II. THE World values not a Religion which disanuls all Splendor, whose strict
Discipline abrogates all Pomp and Pleasure; and instead of all Temporal
Delights, which affects the Senses, preaches Temperance, Patience, and the
Judgment to come. This Doctrine possesses us with an aguish Fit, and then we,
like Felix, fall a trembling, and desire to be excused from so piercing a Duty.
He that invites us to see Heaven first, informs us, That to desire Temporal
Enjoyments, is the Wish of an Ethnic: For after all these things do the
Gentiles seek, Mat. 6. 32. And shall Christians follow the Examples of
Heathens? and aim not at sublimer Things than what this sublunary World can
afford? Shall they who can, by the Eye of Faith, take a prospect of Eternity,
look down upon this Lower World with Affectation?

III. AND was that the Occasion of this Invitation we gave the Most Highest?
Did He which made the Heavens bow them, come down, and unthrone himself to
convey us thither, and do we lie wallowing in our Sins for ever? How Vile,
Base, Vain, and Senseless a Creature is that Person, that winds up his Felicity
in the fruitless Enjoyments of this Life, and eagerly resigns himself to sordid
Sense! But tell me, O Thou that reignest in Plenty, and obscurest Heaven in
Oblivion, should the two bright Luminaries be invested in their Purple Robes,
and transforming their Lustres, like bleeding Meteors, change their Rays into
Crimson Streams; were the Air now crowded with Sounds of the last Trumpets,
ecchoing audibly in our Ears an approaching Judgment; How prodigious would that
Mutation appear! What vast and horrid Consternations would the remembrance of
thy Profane and Atheistical Plenitude then strike and amaze thee with!

IV. INDEED, these Mundane Enjoyments are so trivially poor and empty, that he
which fixes his Hopes in their Fruition, will speedily find himself but an
eternal Mendicant, a wretched, miserable, and deplorable Dives. And yet such is
the apparent Sanctity of the whole Universe, to scoff at Religious Poverty, and
deride the Exigencies of a Devout Life, as an Adversary to Nature: He is
ignorant of the Joys of a Future State, and of an Expected Eternity, that
thinks there is no Felicity beyond this Hands Breadth, no Happiness beyond this
slender Span.

V. WERE we but sensible of the glorious Reward which shall Crown the World,
for that which she terms Misery, that Felicity that attends on the most
suffering and dejected Devotion, we should glory in our Wants, be affected with
Hardship, and inure our selves to Poverty with Delight; we should be willing,
not only to depart, but to live Martyrs; rejoice even in the lowest State, to
purchase Heaven; and cheerfully learn that Art, with the holy Apostle, to
suffer Want here, and to labor how to abound in that Plenitude which is
infinite.

VI. AND yet how hard a Task is it for us to endure even the pettiest
Affliction, for Thy sake, O Lord? So senseless are we of Thine abundant
Goodness, so wilfully forgetful of Thy Omnipotency, that we not only, in our
greatest Necessities, arraign and condemn thy vigilant Providence, but are
ready even to turn Pagans in our unhappy Misfortunes. Open Thou our Eyes, O
Lord, that we may behold the Vanity of this transitory World, and the
Deceitfulness of our own Hearts; that the alluring Pleasures of it may neither
swallow us up, nor the Losses of it overthrow our Hope, or discourage our
Obedience. Let that illuminated Glory which Thou have freely promised to those
that vanquish the World for Thy sake, be ever in our sight; that in whatsoever
State we are in, we may still be found triumphing in Faith, and at last
receive, as a Recompense of Reward, a Crown of Righteousness.

MED. XVI. Of Divine Faith.
Heb. xi. i. Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things not seen.
LET us now consider the Efficacy of Faith, and offer up an Oblation of Praise
and Thanksgiving unto him who is the only Giver of it. It is that alone which
ingrafts us into the Body of Christ; and as Branches extract their Sap from the
Vine, so from him proceeds Life, Righteousness, and Salvation. Adam, in his
pristine State, fell, and lost his Divine Image, by his Incredulity; but we are
restored again by Grace; and the Image of the Almighty, by Faith, is renewed in
us. By this Faith, Christ dwells in our Hearts; and where He inhabits, there
His Grace resides, and an Assurance of an Inheritance of Eternal Life.

II. AND as the Effects of Faith are Wonderful in their Operation, so they are
Exemplary in their Demonstrations: For, By Faith, Abel offered unto God a
greater sacrifice than Cain, Heb. 11. 4. So, by Faith, we are enabled to offer
Omnipotency spiritual Sacrifices; that is, the Fruit of our Lips, Heb. 13. 15.
And, by Faith, Enoch was translated, Heb. 11. 5. So that Virtue withdraws us
from the Society of the World, and invites us to place our Conversation in
Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. By Faith, Noah prepared an Ark, Heb. 11. 7. So we, by that
Theological Virtue, are received into that Church wherein our Souls are
preserved, amidst all the Storms and Tempests which happen in the World.

III. BY Faith, Abraham left an idolatrous Land, and went into a strange
Country, in Expectation of the Promised Land, Heb. 11. 8, 9. So by the Energy
of that Virtue, we depart this World, forsaking all that is near and dear to
us, expecting to arrive at that Celestial Jerusalem which God has prepared in
the Heavens, Rev. 21. 2. We are Strangers and Pilgrims on this side Heaven, and
travel, by Faith, unto a heavenly Country. By Faith, Moses chose rather to
suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin
for a season, Heb. 11. 25. So Faith animates us to contemn the World, and to
despise the Glory, Honor, Riches and Pleasures of it; and excites our Minds to
Eternal Felicities.

VI. BY Faith, Israel kept the Passover, Heb. 11. 28. So we, by the Eye of
Faith, celebrate the Lord's Supper; where Christ is the Paschal Lamb, whose
Flesh is meat indeed, and whose Blood is drink indeed, Joh. 6. 55. By Faith,
Rahab was saved, Heb. 11. 31. So, in the universal Conflagration of this World,
we shall be saved from Destruction. By Faith, the Fathers overcame Kingdoms,
stopped the Mouths of Lions, and quenched the force of fire, Heb. 11. 33. So we,
by Faith, destroy the Kingdom of the Prince of Darkness, escape the Treacheries
and Rage of the infernal Lion, and are delivered from Hell's implacable Malice,
and everlasting Burnings.

V. NOW, Faith is not a naked Opinion, and slender Profession; but a true and
lively Apprehension of Christ propounded to us in the Gospel, a full Assurance
of his Grace residing in us, the Tranquillity of our Souls, which relies only
upon Christ's Merits. This Faith is fructified of the Seed of the Sacred Word,
whereby the Holy Spirit and this Virtue is united. Now, Faith resembles a
spiritual Illumination; for our Hearts are illustrated by its Splendour, and the
Rays of a Life of Sanctity shines forth: Evil Actions are the Works of
Darkness; and, What communion (says the Apostle) is there between light and
darkness? 2 Cor. 6. 14. Deeds of Darkness are the Seeds of Satan, but a lively
Faith proceeds from Christ; and, What communion is there between Christ and
Satan? 2 Cor. 6. 5.

VI. LASTLY, By Faith, our Hearts are purified; but no Internal Purity can
center where the Words and External Actions are defiled. St. John tells ye,
That Faith is the victory which overcomes the world, 1 John 5. 4. Now, there
cannot be a true Faith fixed, where the Flesh vanquisheth the Spirit, and
leads it away Captive into the Law of Sin. No impenitent Sinner, that
persevereth in his Sins, can be Partaker of Life Eternal; neither can he,
without true Repentance, claim any Privilege or Share in the Merits of Christ
Jesus. Kindle in us, O God, the Light of True Faith, that by the Virtue of it,
and Thy alone Merits, we may obtain Eternal Salvation, and reign with Thee for
evermore, in Thy Kingdom of Glory, World without end, Amen.

MED. XVII. The Canaanitish Woman's Faith.
Mat. xV. 28. And Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy
faith: be it unto thee even as thou will.
BEHOLD this Canaanitish Woman, how fortunate and happy she was, to be found
worthy of so great an Expression! Her Female Weapon compensated for the Guilt
of its past Follies; having now, by its seasonable Answers, merited so Divine
an Eulogy. Poor Female! how enriched was she, in whose Bosom was concealed a
Treasure, which Emperors, Kings and Princes, compared to her, are Indigent: All
the Holy Land, with its precious Balm, and odoriferous Spices, could not
furnish her with a sufficient Antidote to revive her Darling, and charm away
the Infernal Spirit from tormenting her. Behold these Miracles of Faith, that
at once could save two Souls, the Mother's, and her Daughter's!

II. SO miraculous and potent is solid Faith, that even the least grain of it
can remove lofty Mountains, level steep Hills, and smooth the most aspert and
ambitious Soul, into a meek and fructifying Valley. 'Twas this that calmed the
Surface of the foaming Ocean, that made the boisterous Waves an easy Path, and
turned their furious Rage into a pleasant Walk for St. Peter's Feet. 'Twas the
Centurion's Faith, that gave his Servant a Respite from the Hands of Death,
which all his Guards could never have prevented: 'Twas by Faith, that the Blind
Man was restored to his Sight; which was beyond the Skill of Art and Nature to
perform.

III. ALL the Admirations of the Gospel were always concluded with, Thy Faith
has saved thee: And yet that Faith which then operated so many Miracles, is
now grown the greatest Miracle it self. Whilst some take the Symbol for the
Thing, they fix the Magnitude of their Faith on the Greatness of their Works;
and have so candid an Opinion of themselves, that they imagine it Faith enough,
only to do well: Others expect to be Canonized for their Doctrines, though not
for their irregular Lives, they scoff at all Religious Duties, and imagine to
tread the Path to Heaven only by their Faith.

IV. OBEDIENCE, hearty Contrition for Sin, that amiable Robe of a perplexed
Soul, and the Royal Ornaments of our Spiritual Warfare, are but vacant
Ceremonies, and both these Parties Belief are of their own forming. But Heaven
is not purchased only by Speculation: He that fixes his Faith in his empty
Skull, and imagines Religion has not its Attendant, may, like Moses, view and
discourse of the Promised Land at a distance, but never approach to it. Our
Obedience must cry out louder than our Pretensions. It Is not our Noise and
Nonsense, that will create us Saints; it is not our external Show of Profession
only, but our daily Practices too, that must proclaim us Heralds of this Faith.

V. ALTHOUGH our Merits can never reach Heaven, yet our pious Endeavors may,
if they are sincere; because there is a Mercy hangs over our Heads, that will
pardon our Deficiency. All the Blossoms and Buds of our Piety spring forth from
this Stem; and he that either believes or loves his Savior that died for him,
cannot imagine he is too much industrious to live well. This was the Female
Sex's Faith here; and she had scarce effus'd it out with floods of Tears, when
the Infernal Fiend, in a Consternation, forsakes his hold, unable to endure the
Echo of that Sound which was repeated by the diviner Accent of our Redeemer's
Lips; and this Faith must be a Preservative against Sin; and by its diviner
Charms, chase Satan to his Chains of Darkness. It Is this, that prepares Heaven
for us; that makes us survive our Monuments, become Immortal in our Graves, and
promises Eternity to our Dust and Ashes: It Is this that consummates our
Happiness, and will safely arrive us, where the Blessed Jesus shall receive us
into His Glory.

VI. O MOST Divine Omnipotence, Thou sentest Thy Son Christ Jesus to die for
us, that by Believing in Him, we might attain to Everlasting Life. He, under
whom Thou have put all things in Subjection, was pleased to condescend to level
Himself with them; and dethroned Himself, to undergo a Crucifixion for our
Souls, that we might receive the Benefits of His Death and Passion, and be
Partakers of His Glory. Oh, let not those Miseries of our depraved Nature,
which petitioned Thy Mercy and Compassion, make us incapable of it: Let not
those that plead Ignorance of Thee, but by Thy Miracles, be more ardous in
acknowledging Thine abundant Goodness, than we who by the Manifestation of Thy
Love claim an Interest in Thy precious Blood.

VII. BUT grant, O Lord, that we may live in a perpetual Thanksgiving to Thy
Merits, who came down from the Bosom of Thy Father, to purchase and save our
Immortal Souls: To this end; do Thou inspire into us that Faith, without which
it is impossible we should please Thee, and with which Thou annexes all other
Graces. Teach us so to rely on Thy Mercies, that we may not neglect the Means,
or imagine that a dead Faith will conduct us to that Life which Thou have
promised to none but them as work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

MED. XVII. Of Love and Charity.
2 Pet. i. 7. And to brotherly-kindness, charity.
TRUE and Sincere Love is an inseparable Property of a Pious Person. No
Christian can subsist without Faith; and where that Virtue is, Charity is not
wanting. Where the Luster of Charity is extinguished, the Heat of Faith must
consequently be quenched. Thou may as well rob the bright Luminary, the Sun,
of his Light, as deprive Faith of the Gift of Charity. Charity is the External
Act of the Internal Life of a Christian. The Body is dead without the Spirit,
and Faith is dead without Charity, Jam. 2. 26. He is not a Member of Christ,
that is not inspired with his Spirit; and he is not endued with his Holy
Spirit, that is destitute of the Gift of Charity.

II. THIS Theological Virtue, is the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. And by
the Goodness of the Fruit, the Tree is demonstrated. Charity is the bond of
Christian perfection, (says the Apostle, Col. 3. 14.) As the Bodily Members
are united together by the Spirit, so the true Members of the Mystical Body are
united by the Holy Spirit in the Bond of Charity. Solomon's Temple was all
covered with Gold, within and without, 1 King. 6. 21. So our Bodies and Souls,
which are the Almighty's Spiritual Temples, ought in like manner, both within
and without, to be beautified with Love and Charity. Let this regent Virtue
exercise its Efficacy in moving thy Heart to Compassion, and thy Hand to
Contribution: For one, without the other, is not effectual.

III. FAITH receives all from God* the Fountain of all Goodness; and from that
Stream, Charity, as a Channel, conveys it to her Neighbors. By Faith, we are
made Partakers of the Divine Nature, who is Love, 1 John 4. 8. Therefore, where
Charity manifests not Externally, Faith Internally does not inhabit. No Man
believes in the Lord Jesus, which does not express Affections of Love to Him;
and none can fulfill that New Commandment, except he loves his Neighbor. None
can really apprehend the Benefits of Christ, with a Heart unfeigned, which has
not Bowels of Compassion to the distressed.

IV. CHARITY is the Seminary of all Virtues; and nothing can be of good growth,
which proceeds not from that Root. And this Virtue truly delineated, is the
Soul's Spiritual Relish; for unto it alone are all things dulcified, all
Adversity, Pain, Anguish, Trouble, nay, even Death it self: And And the Wise
Man confirms this, That Love is as strong as Death, Cant. 8. 6. And indeed, I
think I may invert the Wise Man's Text, and with Assurance proclaim, That Love
is stronger than Death: For Love brought down a Savior to die for us Sinners,
that the Sting of Death might be removed from us: He, when he had overcome the
sharpness of death, did open the kingdom of heaven to all believers. Oh, let us
then embrace this Love, and die unto Sin daily, that we may live unto
Righteousness.

V. ALL the Works of the Most High proceeds from this lovely Attribute, even
Punishments, Denunciations, and Judgments: The Two great Luminaries, and the
Constellations of Heaven, illuminate not themselves, but us wretched Creatures.
Fire, Air, Earth, and Water, were created for our Necessity: The Beasts, Herbs,
Plants, Trees, Birds, Fish, and Fowls, were all for our Use. And as God has
been so gracious to give thee Plenty of these Blessings, so do thou distribute
to thy Neighbors according to their Necessities. And this must be done freely,
with true Amity, Affection and Compassion, else all our Charity is nothing
worth, but will prove like sounding Brass, or a tinkling Symbal.

VI. CHARITY is patient, 1 Cor. 13. 4. For no Man is easily enraged with those
whom he truly affects. Charity likewise is bountiful: And he who has been so
liberal, as to resign his Heart to his Friend, will, without all question, not
withold from him any temporal Enjoyments for the Relief of his Necessity.
Charity envieth not; it thinks no Evil, is not puffed up, and behaveth not it
self undecently: Next, she seeks not those things which are her own, neither
is she provoked to Anger; she imagines no Mischief, nor rejoices not in
iniquity; but she bears all things, believes, hops, and endures all
things: she refuses not to do unto others, as she desires them to perform unto
her. Tongues and Prophecies shall cease, and Arts and Sciences be destroyed,
but Charity shall never be extinguished.

VII. LET us then study this Lesson of Love and Charity; and howsoever thy
Friend or Neighbor be qualified toward thee, yet remember Christ vouchsafed
to lay down his Life for him: Therefore, refuse not to relieve that Soul whom
Christ has so dearly purchased. Let us not, while upon Earth, live in Discord;
but observe the Psalmist's extolling of Tranquillity, Behold how good and how
pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity, Psalm. 133. 1.
We are all the Servants of One Lord, all Members of One Body: we have all One
Father that Created us, One Savior that Redeemed us, and One Holy Ghost that
Inspires us. Should thy Neighbor prove thine Enemy, yet love him; for in so
doing, thou obeyest the Will and Pleasure of the Almighty.

VIII. TAKE no cognizance of what Trespasses Man commits agrinst thee, but
consider what thou stand guilty of against Omnipotency: Observe not what
Injuries are offered to thee, by thy Enemies; but remember the Benefits
conferred on thee, by thy Redeemer, who commanded thee to love thine Enemies.
We are Neighbors, by the State of our Earthly Nativity; and Brothers, by the
Hope of our Celestial Inheritance. Let us therefore fervently love one another:
And do Thou inflame in us, O God, the Fire of Love and Charity, by the
Inspiration of Thy Blessed Spirit.

MED. XIX. An Act of Divine Lov.
Luke ix. 57. Lord, I will follow thee whither soever thou go.
HE was not ignorant, but knew it was the happiest Resolve he ever entertained:
Nor can any check him for his Confidence, when it was his Glory to have been so
presumptuous: he might have traveled longer, and far remoter, and not have
happened with such Celestial Company. Now the Query is, Whether his Boldness,
or his Love to Christ, prompted him to this Heroic Action? Behold, with how
devout an Importunity he salutes Him whom perhaps he had never known, seen, or
heard of before, except by his Miracles only! And that Purity of Life which so
amazed the Eyes of the Universe, could not but attract his Eyes, and inure his
Heart too: And therefore thinking it no great Presumption to use all Arts of
improving himself, nor willing to let slip so fair an Opportunity of being
Happy; ambitious of an Admission into his Service, he breaks out into Raptures,
without any other Oratory than a^ humble Earnestness, resolutely gives Him this
Salutation, Lord, I will follow thee whither soever thou go.

II. NOR could our Savior's Indigency, obstruct or deliberate his Resolution,
or dishearten his Purpose; being not only satisfied, but ambitious to partake
of the Afflictions of so good a Master, in whose very Necessities he should
find a Felicity beyond all Temporal Enjoyments. And is not this Person a fit
Example for the whole World to imitate? He that will not run after Jesus
affectionately, yet let him not be so scandalous, as to permit a Jew or
Publican to circumvent him in the Journey. Are the Felicities of Eternal Bliss
of so small a Value, that they are not worth approaching too? Or shall we
imagine every step too tiresom, that conveys us to Everlasting Glory?

III. Were the Path to the New Jerusalem but spread with fragrant Roses, or
millions of odoriferous Scents and Pleasures to prevent Carnality, the brutish
Sensualist would divert himself constantly, and strive to be a Precursor in
those Walks. The Miser cannot follow a Crucified Savior, for his extortionated
Lumber; and rather than relinquish it, will make no Essay toward it. The
riotous Epicure will not embrace that Religion that exhorts him to Temperance;
for although, perhaps, sometimes, Prayer may be agreeable to him, in case of
Necessity, yet Fasting is a Stranger to his Constitution.

IV. THE Celestial Way is too straight for proud Ambition, whose lofty Edifice
affects not to be squeezed in its full carreer, but must post it away swiftly
in a Road of as vast an extant as the Universe, or the Infernal Pit can provide
him, wherein his Troops of sinful Splendours may, as his Concomitants, attend
him in a rank. So difficult a Task it is to abandon the World, even for
Celestial Mansions; and contend against the Adulation of Sense, for an
Inestimable Bliss; as if all our Hopes, all our Felicity, were wound and wrapped
up in Transactions of this Life only, and no future Expectation for us besides
the Delectablenes on this side Mortality.

V. AND yet how numerous are they that imposterously pretend to follow Christ!
but must plead Ignorance to his Divine Steps, that pursue Causeys not of his
proposing, but of their own shallow seeking: that beaten Path which so many
Persons of Sanctity have walked before us, is too Vulgar, too Atheistical for
them to trample in; they have, by their indefatigable and diabolical Industry,
found out a nearer Way of their own; and imagine they shall arrive at the
Celestial Country sooner, by shunning of that Way they think so difficult: So
inauspicious is that eclipsed Zeal which hotly pursues an Ignis Fatuus which
misguides 'em; and scorns the legal steps to the Sacred Temple, but shrinks it
self in the obtuse and obscure Labyrinths of Enthusiasm.

VI. THE Way to the Heavenly Canaan is not thorough dark Corners; and how
straight soever it is, its Passage to all Believers is kept open: It Is a serene
Path, from whence may be viewed a Prospect of Eternal Happiness; nor need he be
timorous of losing his Way, that does not absurdly forsake it. The poor sinful
Mortal here mentioned, in an Ecstasie hastes to Jesus; and joining Humility to
Resolution, will admit of no Denial; but in a Mendicant Petionary style, and
fortified with Confidence, thus proclaims his Mind, Lord, I will follow thee
whither soever thou go.

VII. AND now, who would not run with Alacrity, through Adversity, wild Woods,
Deserts, and Wildernesses? nay, even wade thorough Seas of Blood, to arrive
safe at the Port of the Heavenly Cannaan? He that strives to follow after
Jesus, shall never repent his undertaking so happy a Journey: He shall acquire
such infinite Treasures in religious Poverty, such multiplicities of Celestial
Joys and Satisfaction in the apparent Miseries of a Life of Sanctity, that he
will not require any great Persuasions to excite him to this Resolution,
cheerfully to forsake all, and follow Jesus whither soever he goes.

VIII. BUT it is Thou alone, O Lord, that can raise our Souls from the World,
and make them ambitious in searching after Thee and those Things which are
Above. Thou art ascended to Thy Throne of Majesty, in glorious Splendor;
attract our Souls after Thee in Divine Raptures of Amity, and Spiritual
Exaltation, that we may effectually make the Virtues and Perfections of Thy
Life, the Golden Rule of ours: And grant that we may not be so allured with
transitory things, as to be void of Affection for Thy Glory; but enable us to
walk with Alacrity in that Path which Thou have trod, and fixed before us; that
as we continally live by Thy Goodness, we may live to Thy Glory; and as we move
in Thee, we may indefatigably be ever moving toward Thee, till we shall enjoy
the Happiness of an Eternal Rest in Thy Heavenly Kingdom, Amen.

MED. XX. Of Chastity.
Romans xii. 1. I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
your reasonable service.
HE that would be entertained a Disciple of Christ, must wear his Livery of
Sanctity and Chastity: For, God is a Spirit of that infinite Purity and
Chastity, that no unclean thing must presume to approach his Presence. It was
the Opinion and Saying of a wise Person, That the Chastity of the Body, and the
Sanctity of the Soul, are the two Keys of Religion and Felicity, Now, if the
Body be not preserved pure and immaculare from all Sordidness, the Soul cannot
be ardent in Supplication: Our Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
6. 19. And therefore we must be very vigilant and sollicitous, that we defile
not this Body, which is the Habitacle of so great a Comforter.

II. OUR Members are the Members of Christ: Let us not then make 'em the
Members of an Harlot; but let us cleave unto the Lord with Fidelity and
Continency, that we may be one Spirit with him, and be pure as he even is pure.
The swinish Sodomites were smitten with Spiritual and Corporal Blindness, and
their burning Lust was punished with an Element proper to their crying Sins;
and the Almighty will inflict the same Punishment on all obscene and
incontinent Persons, with a Fire not to be extinguished: For the smoke of the
torments ascends up for ever, Rev. 14. 11. Nature has taught us, not to be
guilty in the Eye of the World; and shall not the Checks of our own Consciences
impede us from committing Enormities iu the Eye of Heaven.

III. DENS, Caves, nor Corners, can exclude ns from the Divine Omnipotence: All
Hearts are open to his Omnisciency, all Desires are known, and from him no
Secrets can be concealed: His Omnipresence is of that potency, that the Voice
within us, upon the Grand Inquest, will bear Testimony against us; and our own
Enormities being empannell'd, will condemn us upon the Verity of the Verdict.
And who would not relinquish this momentary sensual Pleasure, to evade
everlasting Burnings? If the Smoke of that concupiscible Fire ascends up to the
Nostrils of the Almighty, nothing can purge the Odiousness of it, but infernal
Flames.

IV. OH, let then the Remembrance of a Crucified Savior. crucify in thee all
inordinate Affections; and the Thoughts of a tormenting Hell, quench in thee
all the fiery Darts of the Wicked: Let Fountains of Tears, spring from a
sincere Repentance, extinguish in thee this conflagrating Carnality; and let
the fear and dread of the Almighty mortify that concupiscible Enemy, that the
Allurements of it may not delude thee. Consider with thy self the ill
Consequents which are its Concomitants; it is full of Anxiety and Folly,
Abomination and Ignominy; and without Repentance, must partake of everlasting
Punishment.

V. LOOK not on the fawning outside of this Temptation; but fly from it, as
you would from a Serpent. Check the first Motions of it; for if you once fall
to reason and article with it, it will prove like the Element of Fire, if not
quenched in due time, grow too great to be conquered. Next, fly Idleness,
which is the native Soil for these abominable Weeds to grow in; and be always
employed in whatsoever lawful Vocation or Business God has been pleased to
allot thee; that when the Tempter comes, he may find thee fortified against
Temptations. 'Twas Idleness allured David to Adultery: Had he been busied as
Joseph was, he had withstood the Temptation.

VI. THINK often of Death's Summons, and that his cold Hand will one day chill
that Blood which was so apt to be inflamed; and then tell me, whether
Mortification is not more suitable to Deathbed Thoughts, than Sordidness and
Obscenity. Be frequent in Prayer, and bring the Unclean Spirit to Christ, that
he may cast him out. And to your Prayer, add Fasting; for this Kind goes not
forth, but by Prayer and Fasting. And indeed, Temperance is a great Antidote
against this Sin of Sodom; for many times our Tables become a Snare to us: for
in pleasing our luxurious Palate, we make Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill
the Lusts thereof. And by Epicuring of it so here, what can we expect when we
depart hence, but the rich Glutton's Fate, even to want a drop of Water to cool
our Tongues.

VII. REMEMBER, thou must give an account for every idle and unprofitable word,
Mat. 12. 36. And how much more then will thy Account extend to obscene
Speeches, and sordid Actions? Of what Continuance thy Life has been, while
brought to a Period, and what multiplicity of Sins soever thou have committed,
thy Accusers and Accusations will be equivalent: Then those secret Thoughts
which thou never resented'st, will apparently prove thee obnoxious before the
great Tribunal: From thence thou can not fly, nor deceive the Omnipotence
with vain Excuses; neither can thou appeal from that Sentence which will be
pronounced against thee; for there will be Verity in the Inquisition, and
Severity in the Execution.

VIII. THEREFORE, whilst thou art on this side the Grave, endeavor to adorn
thy Immortal Part with the fragrant Rose of Charity, the dulcified Violet of
Humility, and the innocent Lilly of Chastity. When thou enter'st the List to
conquer this formidable lustful Enemy, if the Fight seem difficult, animate thy
self with this Assurance, That the Conquest will be Glorious: Thou must
vanquish it as thou would a sturdy Beggar, give it a positive Answer, and it
is vanished: but show it Encouragement, and it will prove like the Snake in the
Fable, when warm by the Fire, to fall a hissing. If thou would not have this
Enemy to rule over thee, entertain it not in the least corner of thy Heart, but
earnestly beseech God to keep thee in Sanctity of Life, and Chastity of Body.

MED. XXI. Of Purity of Heart.
Mat. v. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
IF Innocence be the Robe of Heaven, who then would not diligently strive to be
adorned with Purity? It is no wonder the Kingly Prophet was so importunate for
a clean Heart, and a right Spirit. If this be the Recompense of true Sanctity,
who would neglect Religious Duties? Beatifical Spirits! What Felicity and
Purity do ye enjoy, that behold the glorious Face of your Heavenly Creator! Who
would not indefatigably be industrious to imitate your Seraphick Example here,
that he might resemble you in your happy Station, and possess Eternal Joys,
such as the Heart, in all his Divine Raptures, never knew? Shall the
imposterous and perfidious Vanities of this Transitory World allure our Hearts,
and divest us of the Hopes of this Celestial Glory, the Fruition of this
splendid Vision?

II. A Magnified Vision! in Comparison whereof, the Regalities of this Lower
Orb, the Trophies and dazzling Splendors of the Optic Nerves, and the Luster of
the whole Universe, is not worth the gazing at! A Vision, which no mortal Eye
ever was Spectator of; but shall not be excluded, if it don't obscurely lose it
self on Inferior Objects here Below. No Ear did ever audibly hear its true
Description; but may be admitted to the divine Harmony, and heavenly
Halleluja's of it, if it incline not to the Syrenical Charms of Sin, and the
bewitching Music of sordid Carnality.

III. It Is a Vision, whose bright Idea cannot be delineated by the most
elevating and contemplative Speculations of any Metaphysical Brain, though
never so Angelical: It Is not a sublime Fancy, but true Sanctity, that can reach
it. The Divine Apostolical Geographer, St. Paul, though lately there, could not
exactly give us a Description of it; and Sacred Scripture divinly characters it
out, but in Parables and Simitudes, to demonstrate how infinitely transcendent
is that Glory which is so unexpressible, and beyond all comprehension. Were all
the Pearls, Rubies, Saphires and Diamonds the Earth produces, mustered to a
Splendor, they would not equallize the diminitivest Glance of the radient
Beams of Sol's bright Eye; and yet that magnificent Luminary, surrounded with
so many attending Constellations that derive their Luster from him, is but a
Spark to his shining Countenance.

VI. WHO then would offer up that Part an Oblation to the World, which might be
rendered the Instrument of so much Felicity? and suffer the Profuseness of his
wanton Blood to revel there, where sublimer Passions and Flames should triumph?
He that would be an Inhabitant among the Spirits of the Just, must discipline
his own to the same Uniformity, and convert his Body to a Temple, where his
Heart must be both Altar and Sacrifice; or rather, an Emblem of the Sanctum
Sanctorum, for those excellent Graces of the Spirit to inhabit in.

V. THE stately Mansion House of Life must be converted into a Mansion of
Divine Love; and the magnificent Palace of Heroic Spirits, into a Royal Court
of peculiar Graces; and then that Part which (as Natural Philosophors observe)
which lives first, and dies last, shall become purely Vital, and not be liable
to Mortality. Nothing but a thrice Glorious Trinity can satiate this Triangle,
which must be shaped to the purest Figure, and taught in all its Pulses to
palpitate nothing but Heaven and Eternity.

VI. OUR Bosoms must be converted to Closets of Devotion; and our Hearts to
Cabinets of immaculate Innocence, and fervent Prayer; embellished with that
sparkling Diamond, a lively Faith, the Lamp at which all our minor Graces, as
Tapers, light themselves, and like Stars, borrow their Luster from this
Luminary. It Is not a Heart that can chime to the airy Sound of any tinkling
Religion, and pretends a Sanctity fixed in its Countenance, that makes
Affectation his Conscience; and Moroseness of Humor, Tenderness of Spirit.

VII. NO, it is a Heart adorned with the White Robe of Humility, crowned with
the Diadem of Love, fumigated by Prayers, the odoriferous Scent of Chastity,
and the Fragrancies of a Life of Sanctity, that couches it self within the
embracing Arms of our Savior's Spouse, and styles himself a Mourner in her
Persecutions; that looks upon the World as the Enemy of its Glory, and had
rather embrace Mortality, than prove a Rebel against Heaven. It Is such a
Celestial Heart that must be a Preparative for this transcendant Vision, and
happy is he that arrives to that Purity.

VIII. Fortify us therefore, O Lord, against the Pomps and Vanities of this
wicked World, and elevate our Thoughts to the sublime Contemplations of Thy
Glory. Level in us every arrogant Thought that dares exalt it self against the
Potency and Purity of Thy Law; and sanctify us for Thy Self and Service, that
the Practick Part of a Life of Sanctity may be our chiefest Employment; that
when we are summoned to depart hence, we may be accepted of Thee; and being
fled from the Eye of this Lower Orb, we may take a Prospect of Thy Heavenly
Palace, of what neither Eye has seen, Ear heard, nor Heart can conceive, the
Glory Thou will impart in the Fruition of Thy Self.

MED. XXII. Against Covetousness.
Heb. xiii. 7. Let your conversation be be without covetousness.
COVETOUSNESS is the Root of all Malignity; and he that is a Slave to Riches,
his Mind is always indigent; he is tugging continually at the Oar, and
accumulates worldly Dross; but (as the Psalmist says) he knows not who shall
gather it, Psalm. 39. 6. And as he is impoverished in his Mind, so he is
miserable in his Station; for Bounty and Goodness are Strangers to himself and
others; and Charity with him is so frozen, that the Poor, instead of
recompenceing him with their Prayers, are more ready to attend him with their
Imprecations. Fix not thy Trust in uncertain Riches, but place thy Mind on what
is certain. It Is certain, the Hour of Death will come, and then what will all
thy Wealth avail thee? They cannot assist thee in a true Repentance, nor plead
thy Cause in the Court of Heaven: They cannot procure thee an easy Passage
hence, nor give thee Assurance of Eternal Happiness.

II. THEREFORE, lay aside this bitter Root, and graft new Plants of Liberality
and Charity. Make haste, with speed, and undertake this Task, lest thou offend
the Almighty, and endanger thy own Soul. The covetous Person must needs allow
this Maxim, That he lives without God in the World. And our Savior informs us,
we cannot serve God and Mammon, Luke 16. 13. For he that wholly sets his Heart
upon transitory Treasure, must of necessity unfix it from God, and Eternal
Glory; and is incapable of performing that Duty which is required by the
Almighty.

III. SEE with what eagerness the Covetous pursues Riches; and is greedy as a
Lion after his Prey. All Opportunities of Gain are readily embraced: Prayer,
and all Religious Duties, are laid aside, to accomplish and attend it. So prone
is frail Mortality to this Sin, that he leaves nothing unattempted to answer
his sordid Avarice: nay, it is often apparent, that Unlawfulness and
Fraudulency is used by the Covetous to that degree, that many Families have
suffered Destruction, though it were to the utter Ruin of the Souls and Bodies
of the Misers themselves. And now, what can these Men expect for the Cruelties
they transact, but to be excluded from Happiness, and to receive that Reward,
of not inheriting the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 10.

IV. THEY which hoard up Terrestrial Treasures, resemble those that place their
Fruits in low and moist places, not considering they are incident to
Putrefaction. Oh, how infatuated are they then, which indulge themselves to
that which is liable to Corruption? For, how can that which is Temporal,
satisfy the Soul which is Eternal? The Animate Part comprehends all Corporal
Things, by virtue of its Spiritual Nature, that it cannot be distended and
filled by any Quantity. All things, the higher they soar toward Heaven, the
less they cark and care to hoard up: This may be attested by the Fowls of the
Air, which neither sow nor reap, Mat. 6. 26. So it is with that Immortal Part,
the Soul, the more it is elevated to its Creator, the more it withdrawn from
Temporal Riches.

V. LET Contentment be the Avaritious Man's Catholicon to purge out
Covetousness. This will make him a Proficient in the Almighty's Court, and
wholly to depend upon His Providence. Then he may contemplate, That God
cloatheth the lillies of the field: And if so, much more will He cloth them
which depend upon Him. Think on the Providence of thy Creator; and if thou
reliest upon Him, thou may assure thy self, that none ever trusted in him,
and was confounded. He is too guilty of Avarice, that charge the Almighty
with not granting him his Heart's Desire; and he is too ungrateful, that
expresses not his Thankfulness for those Mercies he daily, nay, hourly receives
from him.

VI. CONSIDER this, now ye that take too much Pains for Riches, what an
imprudent Choice ye use to apply your Diligence: Ye that add House to House,
and Field to Field, a lesser Compass at last must entomb ye; why then do you
perplex your selves so much, and appear such busy Graspers of the World; early
you rise to gripe the World, and late go to rest, but can find no ease; your
Mind is so fixed on uncertain Riches, that you are perpetually loaded with Care
and Sorrow. And why all this, poor Covetous Wretches! but to undo others, and
lose your Souls? Did you but wisely love your selves, you would pursue alone
your own true Happiness: you would not become such wilful Fools; and prefer a
short vexatious Vanity bfore an Eternal Joy and Felicity.

MED. XXIII. A Bad Exchange.
Mat. xvi. 26. For what is a man profited, if he gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
THIS Text works no Effects upon the Covetous; for they had rather lose their
Souls, than forsake their Riches. He, for whom the whole Creation was made,
makes himself wretched and miserable, in chasing after Vanity: disrobing
Himself of all his Glory; and by exceeding a brutish Transformation, inhumes
the Divinity of his Immortal Part in the Bowels of the Earth. Hearken unto
this, all you that inhabit in this Lower Region, ye that are Votaries to
Sensualities, and ascend no higher than the Elements for Celestial Glory! that
can mortgage your Souls for a momentary Pleasure; and entertain a delectable
Misery, for Evelasting Happinss!

II. GIVE Ear, thou aspiring Meteor, whose haughty Ambition, with Icarus, soars
to that height, that thou consumes the Wings of thy immoderate Desires! Thou
that wilt with eagerness adore Satan, for a Kingdom; and greedily render him
your Fidelity, for a Crown, and offer him a Revenue worth Ten thousand Worlds,
the immortal Tribute of your precious Soul; till thy flourishing Hopes, and
Trophies, be turned to endless Torments; thy Masquerading Revellings of
elvevated Honor, into Repentant Regrets of direful Horror; and thy Imperial
Chair of State, into a Bed of Infernal Flames!

III. BE attentive, O thou indefatigable Wanton, whose Soul is as unsatiable as
brutish Animals; that palpitates after Pleasure, beyond the Camelion's
breathing after Air! Thou that swimmest in iniquity, and plungest Morality in
Seas of Vice; bathing thy self in those amorous Streams that drown thee in
wanton Delights! that imaginest True Religion but a ridiculous Fable; the Lives
of Apostles, Saints and Martyrs, but a Tragy-Comical Play, or a melancholy
Romance! and scoffest at Heaven, and its Creator, as if Infinite Eternity were
but an imaginary Fancy!

IV. STOP not thy Ears, O thou wretched Miser, whom the deluding Rhetoric of
Bags crammed with Silver Coin can invite to Hell! and art ardeously allured to
throw thy self into the Arms of Satan, at the Music of tempting Gold! That
can assist thy weak Eyes with Spectacles; and gaze thy self almost blind, at
the Splendour and Curiosity of a rich Gemm; and imprecateth Geography, for
defining Riches beyond thy Sphere; earnestly wishing thy self an Indian, that
thou might lead the remnant of thy Life among the choicest Treasures; and
converse with the richest Mines, till the Hair on thy Head were all Silver;
till thou thy self were all transmuted to Ore, and every Bone turned into a
Wedge of the purest Gold.

V. LISTEN, ye tender Gallants, that are so attracted with the Mode of this
World, that ye have have lost all Conceptions of a better! Ye that dwell upon
Earth, only to delight your sensitive Appetites; and supply your Luxury with
the exquisite martyrdom of thousands of Creatures! As ye are well-complexion'd
Dust, and possess purer Veins; so entertain purer Passions too, and acquire
generous and nobler Inclinations for Eternal Glory! The sumptuousness of your
Attire will not invest you with Immortality. Should you expose your Estates to
sale, and receive for it a great Value, '^would not purchase one Inch in
Paradise. It was the elegantest Speech the ancient Orator ever delivered, when
he uttered, He would not buy Repentance so dear. 'Twas but an Extemporay
Oration; and yet all Silver-tongu'd Rhetoric could never parallel it: That one
Note exceeded all his Eloquence, and will survive the Dexterity of his Pen.

VI. COULD we outlive the Lives of Patriarchs, even beyond the Age of old
Methusalah, or of Time it self; and with the Pleasures of the greatest
Epicures: Could we, like Cleopatra the Egyptian Queen, dissolve a Pearl into a
Golden Cup, and drink the Riches and Pleasure of a Kingdom at a Draught; or
Command all the Creatures of the Universe, as positively as ever the Centurion
did his Servants: Had we all the delectable Enjoyments we can either wish,
fancy, or chase after, and whatever can satisfy the Ambition of the most
profuse and carnal Appetite: Were the whole Universe turned into a Garden of
Eden, or a perpetual Spring adorn the Surface of our Mother Earth:

VII. COULD we, like the Eagle, renew our Age, and not grow Old, but still
continue in our pristine Health; or if in Years, be insensible of the Miseries
that attend the Aged: Could we unravel, untwist, or unwind Time again; reverse
and retrograde its Wheels again; stop the swift Celestial Mercuries, the nimble
Posts of Heaven, in their full career; and set the great Clock of the World
backward to a Minute: Nay, were our Bodies of that durability as our Souls,
that we could survive Time it self, and be a Spectator when the World receives
its Period: Yet what shall we extract, if after all our vain and imaginary
Felicities, and flippery Contentments, we become an Oblation for Hell, enrolled
in the execrable Catalogue of the Infernal Crew, a Victim for sulphurous
Eternal Flames, banished to Perpetuity from God and Heaven: Then inform me,
whoever thou art, and ask Dives himself that necessary Question, What is? etc.

VIII. O Lord, what is there in this World, that should attract our Hearts, to
tire our selves in fruitless Desires, and indulge our selves to the Pleasures
of this Life, as our chiefest Felicity? How difficult is it for him that is
unacquainted with thy Law, to perceive the Evacuity of those Enjoyments he has
so long rouled himself in, to resist the enticing Advantages of Sin; and
disesteem the glittering Flashes of this Life, for that Luster of Glory Thou will impart. My God, instruct me so to use the World, that I forget not Thee.
Let the Blessings Thou showerest down, quicken and increase, not stupifie my
Devotion. Elevate my Obedience, not overwhelm my Thankfulness; that so the
Follies of the World may become my Derision; and the Glories of Heaven, my only
Ambition; that I may never, for a fading Fruition in this World, hazard both my
Soul, and thy Saving-Grace together.

MED. XXIV. In time of Sickness.
Mat. viii. 2. Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.
THIS Prayer was effectual; and all Petitions are answered by the Almighty, if
delivered with a sincere Faith, and a good Assurance. Let us now be upon the
Grand Inquest; Is not Sin a Leprosy? Then every Sinner ought to make the same
Deprecation. He that had been a Spectator of the Leper's Body, would not have
been amazed at his Prayer: and yet, could he but have inspected his Soul,
might, perhaps, have beheld Objects more prodigious and horrible; the
Corruption of his Blood, which had lost its Vigor, and proved but an useless
help to Nature, every part without Vitality, by so nauseating a Nutrition,
instructed his Tongue this necessary, though doleful kind of Confident Prayer;
Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.

II. CHRIST, whose Bounty and Compassion never fails to demonstrate that the
Fountain of his Love was as large as his Power was potent, would not reject
such a Suit wherein his tender Mercy was so much concerned: and those Members
which might have been sooner immersed, than bathed into a Cure, reassume new
Vitality and Complexion, by the liberal Bounty of a Touch. Thus the Leper
receives a new Body; but we read no Lecture of any Operation upon his Immortal
Part, which, perhaps, effectually required it: But his Successor, who was
Bedridden, was in a far greater state of Happiness; for his Sin and Disease were
both healed together.

III. HOW many be found, that, like the Leper, view no higher than their
Corporeal Substance, whole Exterior Part is all their Principles of Religion;
whilst the Immortal Part, that Spring of Life, lies all neglected under
Epidemical Infection: Our Blood shall enjoy all the Delights that Art can
reach, or the most Chemical Luxury can extract, to supply its Flames; whilst
our splendid Part, the Divine and Celestial Fire which inspires us, lies all
extinguished, and bereft of his Immortal Aliment, and can reserve nothing but a
dull and hectic Luster to its Maker.

IV. THE Anguish of a Limb, can attract us to more Devotion in one Hour, than
all the Concernments of our Souls can produce in a Year: and the deformity of
the meanest Part, will appear an Object of more Disgrace and Dolor to us, than
those pallid and infernal Forms that attend Sin, and disfigure Heaven in us. Of
all Pestilences, this is the grandest, and yet least regarded: as if Hell were
but a Trifle; Everlasting Damnation, a Pleasure; and the Eternal Misery of our
Souls, a Diversion. Show me that exquisite Beauty that is not Leprous; that
Innocence, which is so perspicuous, that it is Immaculate; that Pattern of
Sanctity, which may become a Saint; that Infant, Man or Woman, which is a
Stranger unto Sin; and then I shall be hold an Amazing Wonder.

V. DID our curious Veins excel the fragrant Violet, whose Odor perfumes the
Chemistry of the Air, the Dew of the blushing Morn: Were our Ancestor, Adam's
Sin, an Alien to our crimson Blood; and the Day of our Nativity, as
perspicuuous as the splendidst Morn, immaculate as the new-blown Rose: yet the
Pollution of our irregular Lives would soon discipline us in this Prayer; and
the blackness of our occultest Thoughts would silently proclaim our own
Deformity; and be ready to join with the Leper in this Petition, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.

VI. AND yet, was there not to be found, in those Days, a Generation of Vipers,
that were righteous and clean in their own Eyes, that justified themselves in
their own Impurity, and reckoned all the World but Lepers to them? Was not the
lofty Pharisee a greater Leper than the poor Publicane, though so ambitiously
he displayed his proud Plumes? His soaring Pride carrry'd more contagious
Infection along with it, than the other Persons Sins could ever pretend too. He
that trusts to the Merit of his own Illustration, may infallibly lose Heaven,
and those Eternal Joys which an humble Assurance does procure.

VII. O LORD, though I am not so vile as some; yet I am so vile in my own Eyes,
that the Leper here is a Pattern of Perfection, to my imperfect Soul; Lazarus's
Corpse a Perfume, to my ulcerated Heart: yet were I far more impotent and
fractured than the poor Cripple of Bethesda; more spotted with Leprosy than
the Nine Unthankful Lepers which were cleansed, whose Ingratitude was more
odious than their Disease; were those Legions of Infernal Spirits, ejected by
Thy Sacred Word, infused in me; and were I as execrable as Satan could wish to
make me; yet I know Thy Paternal Goodness, and I do not despond of Thy Almighty
Power: for, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.

MED. XXV. Upon Death.
Romans vi. 21. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? for the end of those things is death.
SINCE Sin must be destroyed, who then would make choice of that for his
Felicity, which shall perish with himself; whose End is not only Death, but
Hell; and will be his Destruction, not only now, but hereafter? Indeed, were
there no hopes that our Relics should resuscitate again, or the Ruins of our
Frame resurrect to a politer Shape, we might well plunge our selves in
Enjoyments here, and fix our Felicity in delectable Pleasures: Every Person
might then be tolerated, without Sin, to become an Epicure; and he that could
project new Modes of Luxry, would not only pass for being Ingenious, but be
esteemed Fortunate.

II. GOOD Morality would appear all Vice; and yet Vice it self would be held no
more a Crime, but our Happiness: not to be Lavish, then, were a Sin against
Nature; and he that excelled in Brutality, would be rendered most Rational:
Legal Proceedings would then be a grand Enemy to Humanity; there could be no
Sociableness, but in Confusion: and were there no Heaven, nor Hell, we should
pleasantly mingle to a Chaos, and obey no other discipline but Riot: every
Person might then be Atheistical, without Scandal: To be without the Almighty,
and his Grace in the World, would be rendered no Misfortune; for then every Man
might depend upon his own Merits, without Blasphemy.

III. Could they which inhabit the Earth, die like Bruits and Animals, and
revive no more; the Hopes of not being Damned, would be a greater Comfort than
the Delights of Sin. But alas, he that enters the Grave now, must live* again,
that his Life may be remembered. Nor yet is it so much the Terror of Death, as
the Horrors of a Guilty Conscience* the formidable Prognostics of a Future
Etetnity, that affrights the departing Soul: The Pangs and Anguish of expiring
Nature are insignificant to those Stings that attend the Memory of our Crimes:
The deep Sorrows of the Grave, and our being Extinct here for ever, are Joys,
to the Miseries which remain behind, but will certainly come.

IV. INFORM me now, thou that art so indulgent to the World, and hunts for
Paradise in a Park of Sins; thou that make Terrestrial things thy Treasure,
and foldest up the Riches of thy Hopes in the Bosom of Old Time, or the Compass
of a Span; when those lucid and swift Guides of Life, thine Eyes, shall wax dim
with Age, or tired with Pain; when every Member shall become Sorrow's Object,
and those Parts which were so employed in the Operation of Sin, shall become
Instruments of Despair; when that delectable Frame, that magnificent Darling
Edifice, thy Body, shall, by its shivering Qualms, and trembling Convulsions,
consternate its disconsolate Owner; how will the Fulgurations of a Future
Justice, and the Terrors of thy Ultimate End, confound thee!

V. CAN those transitory Enjoyments that allured away thy Immortal Part,
restore it in convenient time? Can those Pleasures which bereft thee of Heaven,
recover it again before Death puts a period to thy Life? Can thy Pomps and
Vanities assuage or allay thy deep Sorrows? or the Memento of thy Sins, the
Destruction of thy End? Where Is that soft Music, whose select Airs, like
David's Harp, might charm the Cries of a Guilty Conscience; and by its skilful
Strains, drop a pleasant Harmony that might pacify the Trouble of thy
anguish'd Soul?

IV. WHERE are those expanded Trophies of empty Glories, thy Ambition has
purchased at the easy Rate of only sinning for greedy Honor, for which thou
have traffiqu'd and sold Heaven? That Sovereignty for which thou enslavest thy
self, and lost the perfect Freedom of thy Immortal Soul? Cannot all thy
Grandeur excite thee up a little; and by a fumy Power, once so formidable and
applauded, reprieve thee from the unsatisfied Grave, or a more Eternal Prison.

VII. Where are those Goods of Fortune thou have forfeited thine Inheritance
for, whose transporting Luster deprived thee of thy Eyesight, and rendered
thee dimmer than themselves? Can they, by their utmost Skill, neither bribe nor
purchase thy Pardon? Or will the silent Grave require no other Fee than so rich
a Miser? Where are all those fine Diversions that divested thee of thy Piety,
and the Thoughts of thy Creator? those pleasing deluding Vanities that swept
away all sense of Heaven, and foresight of thy Future State? Are all shrunk
into a Tomb, and an unwelcom Period? Are all thy Jocularities terminated in the
Confines of a Sepulchral-Urn; and no other Objects left for thy Concomitants,
but thy Crimes, and those Terrors thy Guilt presents?

VIII. BEHOLD now, and stand amazed, ye Adorers of the World more than of the
Almighty! and view the Portraiture of your End, those Ruins you have so
smoothly built on! Try if your imaginary Felicities are Proof against this
Arrow; or can protect you from this Invader, the only Conqueror of the World,
whose general Prison is but a Reserve for a worse, and its Execution here, but
a Reprieve for a more durable and yet vital Mortality. He that reigned in
Pleasures, must expire in Flames; and having long revelled it in Sin, must
expect to riot it in Torments; and the misery is, that wishing not to live, he
can never die.

IX. AND yet, how foolish and vain are our Desires still after the World? How
easy and alluringly, O Lord, are we led by the counterfeit and transitory
Pleasures of this Life, from Thee? We cannot plead Ignorance, but fully attest,
That the Wages of Sin is Death; and yet how absurdly do we prefer its Service
before Thine, whose Recompense of Reward is Life and Immortality? But The
Period of Profaneness is Eternal Destruction, and the Delights of Impiety end
in Confusion; and yet we eagerly embrace the fawning Proffers of Sin, before
the never-failing Promises of Everlasting Glory.

X. Have Pity, O Holy Jesu, upon the weak Frailties of our Humane and Corrupt
Natures: And we humbly implore Thee to pardon and forgive the profuse
Irregularities of our whole Lives. Grant unto us, O Lord, a perpetual Supply of
noble and ardent Defires to run after Thee, that the Pomps, Vanities, and
Tinselware of the World, may become Objects of our Scorn and Derision; and that
the bright Splendor of Thy Eternal Glory, may create our Ambition to serve
Thee all the Days we remain here; that we may not, for a present temporal
Enjoyment in this transitory Life, lose the blessed Hopes, and future
Inheritance of the Saints in Light, but at last, having finished our Course
here, we may arrive with Joy and Gladness at Thy Heavenly Kingdom.

MED. XXVI. Upon Judgment.
2 Cor. v. 10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad.
IT is an Axiom, confirmed by woeful Experience, That the generality of them
which bear the Name of Christians, and pretend to fight under Christ's Banner
against the Enemies of the Apostolic Faith, are, by their profligate
Impieties, the greatest Scandal to that glorious Profession: They live in such
a Universe of Wickedness, as if the Redeemer of the World descended from Glory,
not to subvert, but to establish the Empire of Sin; as if the main Design of
their State, in this World, were only to fulfill that voluptuous Maxim of the
Licentious Epicure, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we mst die.

II. BUT if these Proficients in Atheism had a serious Memento, That there is a
Deity enthroned in Heaven, who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity; and so
jealous of his Honor, that he will not remit the least Guilt with Impunity:
could they be persuaded to devote a few Minutes of the Time which they consume
away to finish their Debaucheries, to a solemn Reflection upon that inevitable
Account which will be exacted from them at the General Resuscitation; when not
only their Words and Actions, but the most occultest of their Cogitations shall
be brought to Judgment; it were impossible for them, unless given over to a
reprobate Sense, to perpetuate under the Dominion of their Carnal Appetites and
Infections.

III. THE very Apprehension of the Vengeance to come, would fright 'em into an
immediate Repentance; and produce such an admirable Reformation, that living
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, they might be found
Unblameable in the Great Day of the Lord Jesus. And what a Day will that be! at
whose Appearance the Sun shall be turned into Darkness, and the Moon into
Blood, Act. 2. 20. When the Heavens shall be rolled together as a Scroll, Isa.
34. 4. the Elements melt with fervent heart, 2 Pet. 3. 10. and this magnificent
imbellish'd Structure of the Material Creation must perish in a Conflagration.

IV. When the ecchoing Sound of the Last Trumpet will be loud enough to
astonish drowsy Mankind out of the sleep of Mortality; and all those
innumerable Bodies, which for so many past Ages have inhabited the vast
Re-Regions of Forgetfulness, shall arise from their Beds of Dust, and appear
before the Aweful Tribunal of the Great and Impartial Judge! The Books will
then be opened, the Indictments read, and every Man's Works shall be produced
at the Bar, and Evidence given, either for or against him. No Title of Honor,
or Dignity of Place; no Pre-eminence of Nativity, or Excellency of Natural or
Acquired Endowments, will, in this Court of Equity, be admitted, as a
sufficient Demurr, to an immediate and impartial Trial: but the High and the
Low, the Rich and the Poor, the Noble and the Mean, the Learned and the
Ignorant; he that sits on the Throne, and he that stands behind the Mill; even
from the Swayer of the Scepter, to the Drawer of Water, must be equally
impleaded; and without respect of Persons, receive a Compensation
proportionable to their Merits.

V. IN this Great Day, the Lord of the Harvest will gather his Wheat into
Heaven's Granary, bat the Chaff shall be thrown into Fire Unquencheable; He
shall separate his Fine Gold from the Dross, and distinguish Right Jewels from
False and Counterfeit Sparkles: The Sheep will then be separated from the
Goats, and True Believers manifestly known from Formal Hypocrites. But what
Tongue! not that of Angels, can express the Joy of those vigilant Servants,
whom their Lord, at that time, will find diligently employed in the Performance
of their Duties! All that formidable Pomp, and dreadful Solemnity, which shall
precede and attend the Advent of the Judge, will but contribute to their
Comfort, and enhance their Consolation: For they shall know, that He, who
appears with such ineffable Majesty, to keep his General Sessions of
Righteousness, is the same Jesus which was crucified for their Redemption.

VI. THEN that Exalted Savior will accost his Followers in the Regeneration,
Mat. 19. 28. with these or the like transporting Expressions: you my beloved
Disciples, who renounced all that the World called Grandeur and Generosity, for
the sake of your Crucified Lord and Master, and despised the present Enjoyments
of Flesh and Blood, in Expectation of a Future and Invisible State of Felicity.
You, who who retained your Obedience, in the midst of a Rebellious Generation;
and embraced Virtue, in an Age of Impiety and Profaneness. You, who subdued
your sensual Appetites by the Austerities of Self-denial, and conformed them to
the sublimer Dictates of Reason and Religion. And You, who rejoiced in the Day
of Tribulation, and adorned the Doctrine of the Gospel by an exemplary Patience
in the Day of Adversity: This is the Day wherein you shall receive a Recompense
for all your Sufferings; a Recompense so incomparably Glorious, and of such
Sublimity, that it will at once create and accomplish your Beatitude.

VII. Your Troubles were Finite, and expired in a Moment; but the Duration of
your Bliss will be Infinite and Eternal: You shall now enter into that Heavenly
Kingdom, where all your Tears shall be wiped from your Eyes; and those Crystal
Drops which you plentiful shed in the Prosecution of your Salvation, shall be
congealed into Pearls, to enrich your Diadems, and imbellish your Robes of
Immortality: There no Deluge of Sorrow shall disturb the Serenity of your
Felicity; no Anxiety or Perplexity, no Discontent or Vexation shall intrude
within the Limits of your Happiness; but you shall securely bathe in Oceans of
unmixed Pleasures, and feast upon Delights which know no period.

VIII. BUT, while these Fluctuations of the Divine Mercy will consummate a
Beatifick Calm in the Breasts of the Righteous, what irresistible Tempests of
Consternation shall excruciate those impenitent Wretches, who chose their
Portion on this side Heaven; and preferred the Dung and Miseries of a
transitory World, before the Real Joys of a Solid Eternity? Now, they shall in
vain invoke the Mountains to bury them beneath their perpetual Ruins; that by
a more tolerable Destruction, they might evade the Fury of that Almighty
Indignation ready to overwhelm them. But what will attribute them, in these
inextricable Exigencies, that they possessed the Quintessence of the Earth;
that they were splendid in Wealth and Honor; that they inhabited Palaces of
Cedar, and took their Repose under Canopies embroidered with Gold; that they
were homag'd by Crowds of Parasites, and grew Famous in Popular Applause; that
they were the Favorites of Crowned Heads, and the Darling of the Multitude;
that all things past currrant according to their Desires, and were not molested
by the Misfortunes of other Men: when those illustrated Accommodations did
contribute but to render 'em the more magnificently Miserable; when they
vanished like a visionary Dream of the Night; but the Memento and Guilt of
their Absurdity, will, like venomous Snakes and Serpents, cling to their
Consciences, and become their remorseless Executioners for infinite Ages.

IX. THEN the Eyes of their Understanding will be opened, which the
Fascinations of Sin had kept long closed; and they shall perceive the Folly and
Frailty of those impertinent Trifles which they courted with so much Passion
and Eagerness; and for whose unsatiable Fruition they neglected their Immortal
Souls, forfeited their Title to a blissful Immortality, and subjugated
themselves to those tremendous Extremities which are the inseparable
Concomitants of an inevitable Damnation. What heaps of Treasure then would they
give, to reenjoy one Minute of that inestimable Time which they profusely
expended in the unprofitable Works of Darkness, that for so inconsiderable a
space, they might be but within a Possibility of Salvation? What Presidents of
Mortification! What Miracles of Piety? What inimitable Examples of Virtue and
Goodness would they appear to Mankind, were they to renovate the Lease of their
Lives! How would they disesteem all those magnificent Shadows, and glittering
Annihilations, which the idolizing Worldling so preposterously admires; and
esteem the unmatchable Treasure of a Pacifick Conscience, unspeakably beyond
the most transcendent Terrestrial Enjoyments!

X. BUT alas! 'twill be then too late for Repentance; and they who, in the Day
of their Visitation, contemned the repeated Proposals of a Redeemers
Reconciliation, shall, at this Juncture, with Tears of Blood, supplicate for
Mercy, and be refused it: and the Lord Jesus, who would have been their
Savior, and so frequently extended his compassionate Arms to receive them into
Favor, if they would but Believe and Repent, will, as their inexorable Judge,
utter this direful Sentence against them, Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

XI. O IRREVERSIBLE Decree! from whence there can be no Appeal! and which no
sooner pronoun'd, but those Condemned Wretches must be for ever exiled from the
Ecstatical Presence of the Almighty; and by Legions of apostate Spirits, haled
away to the dismal Place of Horror and Confusion, where they shall languish
under the pressure of intolerable Punishments; and, by Wonder of Omnipotency,
shall in Torrents of Fire, endure Extremity of Frigidity; and in Rivers of Ice,
be tormented with perpetual Burnings: There they shall feed the Worm that never
dies, and transude in those Flames which cannot be extinguished. And the
Consideration of the Perpetuity of those Supernal Felicities which they
rejected for Vanities, and of the infinite Continuation of their infernal
Tortures, will shipwreck all their Hopes in the formidable Gulf of Desperation,
and plunge them into the bottomless Abysses of the lowest Hell.

The Prayer.
O BLESSED Father! since Thou art Formidabe in Thy Judgments, and Thy Anger is
a Consuming Fire; since those incorrigible Sinners who despise the Offers of
Thy Mercy, shall become the Victims of Thy implacable Vengeance, and glorify
Thee in unimaginable Pains; since Thou have appointed a Season, when an
Eternity of Felicity, or Misery, shall be the Reward of our Actions; and we
must either stand or fall, according to our handy Operations: Vouchsafe, that
the Contemplation of these weighty Verities may be such a prevalent Inducement
to the Amendment of our Lives, that we may work out our salvation with fear and
trembling. Let not the pernicious Allurements of this fraudulent World make us
negligent of the Wrath to come; but let us walk with that aweful Care, and
vigilant Circumspection, that we may appear with Joy, in that dreadful Day
wherein the greater part of mis-call'd Christians shall be consigned to an
Immortal Ruin and Destruction.

MED. XXVII. Upon Hell.
Isa. xxxiii. 14. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among
us shall dwell with everlasting burning?
ETERNAL Death is the dreadful State of the Damned; by which they are not only
deprived of the Presence of the Almighty, but are also tormented with perpetual
Suffering both in Soul and Body. Oh, how horrid is it then, to incurr the
Displeasure of the Divine Omnipotence! How strangely infatuated are ye, O
senseless Sinners! to run on so swiftly in the Ways of Sin! Tell me, Can you
freely receive your Wages, which is Death; and take up your Habitation in
Everlasting Burnings, there perpetually to abide for ever.

II. COULD we but obtain, by Divine Permission, a Visionary Prospect of that
incorrigible Miscreant and Traitor, Judas; what a Scene of Horror would that
be, to behold him, violently dragged by Infernal Spirits, and loaded with
Chains of Fire; his Diabolical Countenance, pale and Wan; the Voice within him,
his Conscience, Worm-eaten; his Pestilential Skin, covered with Leprosy, from
whence issues out Stinks not to be endured; his Limbs and Body, wounded and
tormented; and his Tongue filled with bitter Lamentations and Execrations; What
a dreadful Apprehension will the Vision of so deplorable a Spectacle create in
thee!

III. SHOULD thou, in Contemplation, fix that dire Object before thine Eyes;
and upon a strict Disquisition, examine him, saying, Tell me, O thou perfidious
Judas! what Griefs, what Pains and Torments are these thou undergoest? What
number of Years has thou reigned in sulphurous Fire? And how many Centuries of
Ages must thou yet remain buried in Flames, and roaring among the Infernal
Crew? His guilty and amazing Conscience would soon reply, The Pains which which
I endure are intolerable; no intermission for Relief is here to be found, but
the Torments thus ininflicted are perpetual: The least of our Miseries far
exceed all Punishments, which either the Justice of God, or the Cruelties of
Men upon Earth, did ever execute: Despair is our continual Associate, and there
is no vacant Place for Hopes of ever to be freed for these unexpressible
Torments: You upon Earth, take your Ease, you Eat and drink in full Bowls;
whilst we want Water to cool our Tongues, which are tormented in these Flames.

IV. Let the Thoughts of Hell's Terrors ever put me in a Method to escape their
Fury. Consider the Damned in their fatal Circumstances; their Life is, to die
without expiring; and their Death is, to live in perpetual Punishment: There
the Tormentor is never wearied, the Fire never consumes, and the Torments never
decrease. And this Decree is according as the irrevocable Sentence requires;
the fulfilling of the Justice of the Almighty, and the Reward due to wilful
Impenitents, and obdurate Offenders; that they should never want a sufficient
measure of Punishment, who were continually glutted, and never ceased from Sin.

V. There, the least Sin has its peculiar Punishment, wonderfully extracted out
of its own Sordidness: The Salacious shall inhabit in unextinguishable
sulphurous Fire, continually flaming from their own inordinate Affections: The
Epicure and Ebrious shall sigh in vain for a little Water to cool their
Tongues: The Outrageous and Passionate shall snarl like mad Dogs; and the
Malicious and Uncharitable shall corrode their own Entrails: The Wealth of the
Misers shall be as Goads in their Sides; and the Arrogant and Ambitious shall
be hurried down from the Precipice of Scorn, to the Bottomless-Pit of Contempt:
The Infatuated shall miserably deplore their misspent Time; and pine away with
Grief, for their not being diligent.

VI. BUT, O what strange Convulsions shall fasten on their Spirits, and
vulnerate and search the utmost of their Souls! When they shall with Amazement
behold themselves eternally bereft of the illuminating Vision of the Most
Highest! When they shall behold themselves eternally exiled from the joyful and
amiable Presence of Jesus; that Omnipotence who created 'em to inherit His
Kingdom; that Savior who purchased 'em to reign with Him in Glory: then shall
they execrate the Hour of their Nativity, and those sordid Associates that
enticed them to Ruin! They shall exclaim against the Folly of the fraudulent
Universe; and belch out, with a raving Distraction, Are these the Products of
those infatuated Desires, whose empty Enjoyments we esteemed our Happiness!
Alas! what will our loose Liberties, and those fond Delights we so eagerly
chased after, now yield us? What Happiness receive we from those fleeting
Honors, and transitory Treasures we so highly valued? They are all fled away
as a Vapor, and past away as a Morning-Cloud.

VII. BUT the Sting and Torment perpetually endures, and plagues our Vitals
with Everlasting Anguish. Thus shall they roar out; but all is deaf to their
Complaint: Thus shall they lament; but no Compassion shall relieve them. O
dismal Spectacle of a wicked Life! O terrible Sequel of a destructive Death!
perpetually to wish for what they never can obtain! perpetually to undergo that
which is inevitable! O magnified be Thy Divine Omnipotence, that with such an
indulgent Affection gives us timely Notice of our Ruin! Save us, O blessed
Lord! from all Impieties: Oh, save us, for Thy Own dear sake! Quicken our Minds
against the Effects of Sin! and with Thy Fatherly Corrections chastise us
often, that at last the Terrors of Hell may force us into Thy Heavenly Kingdom!

MED. XXVIII. Upon Heaven.
Psalm. lxxxvii. 2 Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God.
BUT all the most exalted Encomiums are infinitely below thy deserved Lauds and
Praises: For, What Humane Understanding, What created Tongue, can be able to
comprehend or express thy ineffable Excellencies? If this Inferior Orb, the
Place of our Exilement, and a Theater of inevitable Miseries, be so wonderfully
delightful, that our Eyes are entranced with the Variety of its Objects, and
can never sufficiently admire the Marvels they behold; if the Firmament, which
is but a Foot-cloth for the Saints to tread on, be enameled with so many
Starry Jewels, and imbellish'd with such radient Planets, and glittering
Constellations: How transcendent! how superlatively Magnificent are the Inner
Appartments and Chambers of that Emperial Palace where the Adorable Deity does
vouchsafe to communicate his Essential and Ecstatick Glories?

II. O DESIRABLE Mansion! One Minute's Residence in thy Celestial Courts, will
make us more than Recompense for all the Afflictions we can possibly suffer in
this Valley of Tears: And And how conceivably will our Reward be, when, by a
Miracle of Divine Mercy, we shall be admitted to an Everlasting Participation
of thy Immense and Inexpressible Felicities! It was the certain Hope of thy
Enjoyment, which animated the Primitive Martyrs to sustain the most fiercest
Tortures with an undaunted Constancy, and to triumph in the midst of their
Conflagration.

III. THE comfortable Expectation of thy Fruition, was the Grand Motive which
induced the Magnanimous Ignatius, when threatened by his Persecutors with
Extremity of Torments, to make this Heroic Replication; Fire, Gallows, Beasts,
Breaking of my Bones, Quartering of my Members, Crushing of my Body, all the
Torments of the Devil together; let them come upon me, so I may enjoy my Lord
Jesus Christ.

IV. IT is an undeniable Axiom, That all Secular Felicitities are built upon
brittle Foundations. The most sublime Terrestrial Pleasures, even in their
greatest Complacencies, are but transcient Vanities, and conclude in Vexation;
but the Objects of the Celestial Habitations are refined to such an
extraordinary degree of Perfection, that they will be able to satiate the most
extended Desires of our capacious Souls: There we shall possess, in lieu of a
living Mortality, which moves us toward the Grave, a Vitality glorious beyond
Imagination, durable as the Ages of Eternity, and whose Enjoyment will entitle
us to excessive and inexplicable Satisfactions.

V. IF we admire Beauty: Our ravished Eyes, in lieu of Corporeal Objects, shall
behold those Immaterial Glories which flow from the Fountain of Uncreated
Light, and shall be permitted to contemplate that wonderful Clearness which
proceeds from the Beatifical Visage of the Supreme Creator. If Riches be the
Center of our Affections: Gold, Pearls, Diamonds, Rubies, Jewels, and whatever
we account most precious and estimable in the Universe, are but faint Metaphors
to describe the Inestimable Treasures of the Supernal World.

VI. IF Honor be the Subject of our Ambition: What are Scepters and Crowns,
but Illustrious Miseries? What are the Grandeurs upon Earth, but gaudy Shadows,
in comparison of those Incorruptible Diadems, those permanent and Substantial
Dignities which flourish Above. If we delight in Music: There we shall hear
the Panegyrical Anthems of the Seraphick Choir; and shall bear a part in the
solemn Celebration of that Almighty Being, whose only Presence will be
sufficient to replenish us with immeasurable Felicity.

VII. TO Conclude: Nothing can be ded to that Immensity of Beatitude which we
shall there enjoy; but we shall be as perfectly Happy, as the immediate Vision
of the Incomprehensibly Glorious Trinity, the Society of Angels, the
Conversation of Triumphant Spirits, and the inexpressible Accommodations of a
blissful Heaven can possibly make us.: And to consummate our Felicity, all our
Enjoyments shall be invested with Eternal Glory.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I. What Meditation is Page 1 SECT. II. That it is a Duty Page 5 SECT.
III. Rules and Directions for Meditation Page 10 SECT. IV. Of the Subject and
Method of Meditation Page 14 SECT. V. Of being Affected with the Divine
Presence Page 17 SECT. VI. Of Preparatory Prayer Before Meditation Page 21
SECT. VII. Of Consideration Page 25 SECT. VIII. Affections and Resolutions Page
29 SECT. IX. Of Vows Page 33 SECT. X. How to Conclude your Meditations Page 35
Collects to be said Before and After Meditations Page 36
Meditations on Several Occasions.
MED. I. COnfession of Sins Page 38 MED. II. That the Cross of the Holy Jesus
should excite us to Repentance Page 42 MED. III. Of the Fruits of Repentance
Page 45 MED. IV. Of Man's Salvation Page 50 MED. V. The Youth's Memento Page 53
MED. VI. General Rules of a Godly Life Page 58 MED. VII. The Whole Duty of Man
Page 63 MED. VIII. The Vanity of the World Page 67 MED. IX. Jacob' s Ladder.
Page 72 MED. X. Of a Good Conscience. Page 76 MED. XI. Of a Wounded Spirit.
Page 81 MED. XII. Of Humility Page 86 MED. XIII. The Proud Pharisee Page 91
MED. XIV. The Soul's Delight Page 95 MED. XV. True Contentment Page 10^ MED.
XVI. Of Divine Faith Page 105 MED. XVII. The Canaanitish Woman's Faith Page 109
MED. XVIII. Of Love and Charity Page 114 MED. XIX. An Act of Divine Love Page
120 MED. XX. Of Chastity Page 126 MED. XXI. Purity of Heart Page 133 MED. XXII.
Against Covetousness Page 137 MED. XXIII. A Bad Exchange Page 142 MED. XXIV. In
Time of Sickness Page 148 MED. XXV. Upon Death Page 153 MED. XXVI. Upon
Judgment Page 160 MED. XXVII. Upon Hell Page 171 MED. XXVIII. Upon Heaven. Page
177
FINIS.

