Imprimatur.

JO. NICHOLAS. Vice Cancel. Oxon. Junii 10. 1678.

THE Lively Oracles given to us OR The Christians Birthright and Duty, in the
custody and use of the HOLY SCRIPTURE. By the Author of the WHOLE DUTY OF MAN,
etc.

Search the Scriptures, Jo. 5. 39.

At the THEATER in OXFORD, 1678.

The lively Oracles given to us or The Christians birthright and duty in the
custody and use of the holy Scripture.


THE PREFACE.
IN the Treatise of the Government of the Tongue published by me heretofore, I
had occasion to take notice among the exorbitances of that unruly part, which
sets on fire the whole course of nature, and its self is set on fire from hell,
Jam. 3. 6. of the impious vanity prevailing in this Age, whereby men play with
sacred things, and exercise their wit upon those Scriptures by which they shall
be judged at the last day, Joh. 12. 48.

But that holy Book not only suffering by the petulancy of the Tongue, but the
malice of the heart, out of the abundance whereof the mouth speaks, Mat. 12.
34. and also from that irreligion, prepossession, and supiness, which the
pursuit of sensual plesures certainly produces; the mischief is too much
diffused, and deeply rooted, to be controlled by a few casual reflections. I
have therefore thought it necessary, both in regard of the dignity and
importance of the subject, as also the prevalence of the opposition, to attemt
a professed and particular vindication of the holy Scriptures, by displaying
their native excellence and beauty; and enforcing the veneration and obedience
that is to be paid unto them.

This I designed to do in my usual method, by an address to the affections of
the Reader; soliciting the several passions of love, hope, fear, shame and
sorrow, which either the majesty of God in his sublime being, his goodness
derived to us, or our ingratitude returned to him, could actuate in persons not
utterly obdurate.

But where as men, when they have learnt to do amiss, quickly dispute and
dictate; I found my self concerned to pass sometimes within the verge of
controversy, and to discourse upon the principles of reason, and deductions
from Testimony, which in the most important transactions of human life are
justly taken for evidence. In which whole performance I have studied to avoid
the entanglements of Sophistry, and the ambition of unintelligible quotations;
and kept my self within the reach of te unlearned Christian Reader; to whose
uses, my labors have bin ever dedicated.

All that I require, is that men would bring as much readiness to entertain the
holy Scriptures, as they do to the reading profane Authors; I am ashamed to
say, as they do to the incentives of vice and folly, nay, to the libels and
invectives that are levelled against the Scriptures.

If I obtain this, I will make no doubt that I shall gain a farther point; that
from the perusal of my imperfect conceptions, the Reader will proceed to the
study of the Scriptures themselves: there taste and see how gracious the Lord
is, Ps. 34. 8. and as the Angel commanded Saint John, Rev. 10. 9. eat the Book;
where he will experimentally find the words of David verified, Ps. 19. 7. The
Law of the Lord is an undefiled Law, converting the soul: the testimony of the
Lord is sure, and gives wisdom to the simple. The Statutes of the Lord are
right, and rejoice the heart; the commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives
light to the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean and endures for ever, the
judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether. More to be desired are
they then gold, yea, then much fine gold; sweeter also then honey and the
honeycomb. Moreover by them is thy servant taught, and in keeping of them there
is great reward.

It is said of Moses, Ex. 34. 29. that having received the Law from God, and
converst with him in Mount Sina forty days together, his face shone, and had a
brightness fixed upon it that dazzled the beholders; a pledge and short essay not
only of the appearance at Mount Tabor, Mat. 17. 1. where at the Transfiguration
he again was seen in glory: but of that greater, and yet future change when he
shall see indeed his God face to face, and share his glory unto all eternity.
The same divine Goodness gives still his Law to every one of us. Let us receive
it with due regard and veneration; converse with him therein, instead of forty
days, during our whole lives; and so anticipate and certainly assure our
interest in that great Transfiguration, when all the faithful shall put of
their mortal flesh, be translated from glory to glory, eternally behold their
God, see him as he is, and so enjoy him.

Conversation has every where an assimilating power, we are generally such as
are the men and Books, and business that we deal with: but surely no
familiarity has so great an influence on Life and Manners, as when men hear God
speaking to them in his Word. That Word which the Apostle, Heb. 4. 12. declares
to be quick and powerful, sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to
the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

The time will come when all our Books however recommended, for subtilty of
discourse, exactness of method, variety of matter, or eloquence of Language;
when all our curious Acts, like those mentioned Act. 19. 19. shall be brought
forth, and burnt before all men: When the great Book of nature, and heaven it
self shall depart as a scroul rolled together, Rev. 6. 14. At which important
season 'twill be more to purpose, to have studied well, that is, transcribed in
practice this one Book, then to have run through all besides, for then the dead
small and great shall stand before God, and the Books shall be opened, and
another Book shall be opened which is the Book of Life, and the dead shall be
judged out of those things which were written in the Books, according to their
works, Rev. 20. 12.

In vain shall men allege the want of due conviction, that they did not know
how penal it would be, to disregard the Sanctions of Gods Law, which they would
have had enforced by immediate miracle; the apparition of one sent from the
other world, who might testify of the place of torment. This expectation the
Scripture charges every where with the guilt of temting God, and indeed it
really involves this insolent proposal, that the Almighty should be obliged to
break his own Laws, that men might be prevailed with to keep his. But should he
think fit to comply herein, the condescension would be as successless in the
event, as it is unreasonable in the offer. Our Savior assures, that they who
hear not Moses and the Prophets, the instructions and commands laid down in
holy Scripture, would not be wrought upon by any other method, would not be
persuaded, by that which they allow for irresistible conviction, tho one rose
again from the dead, Luke 16. 31.

THE LIVELY ORACLES GIVEN TO US, Or the Christians Birthright and Duty in the
custody and use of the HOLY SCRIPTURE.
SECT. I. The several Methods of Gods communicating the knowledge of himself.
GOD, as he is invisible to human eyes, so is he unfathomable by human
understandings; the perfection of his nature, and the impotency of ours,
setting us at too great a distance to have any clear perception of him. Nay, so
far are we from a full comprehension, that we can discern nothing at all of
him, but by his own light; those discoveries he has bin pleased to make of
himself.

2. THOSE have bin of several sorts; The first was by infusion in man's
creation, when God interwove into man's very constitution and being the notions
and apprehensions of a Deity: and at the same instant when he breathed into him
a living soul, impressed on it that native religion, which taught him to know and
reverence his Creator, which we may call the instinct of humanity. Nor were
those principles dark and confused, but clear and evident, proportionable to
the ends they were designed to, which were not only to contemplate the nature,
but to do the will of God; practice being even in the state of innocence
preferrable before an unactive speculation.

3. BUT this Light being soon eclipsed by Adams disobedience, there remained to
his benighted posterity, only some faint glimmerings, which were utterly
insufficient to guide them tho their end, without fresh aids, and renewed
manifestations of God to them. It pleased God therefore to repair this ruin,
and by frequent revelations to communicate himself to the Patriarchs in the
first Ages of the World; afterward to Prophets, and other holy men; till at
last he reveled himself yet more illustriously in the face of Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 4. 6.

4. THIS is the one great comprehensive Revelation wherein all the former were
involved, and to which they pointed; the whole mystery of Godliness being
comprised in this of Gods being manifested in the flesh, and the consequents
thereof. 1 Timothy 3. 16. whereby our Savior as he effected our reconciliation
with God by the sacrifice of his death; so he declared both that, and all
things else that it concerned man to know in order to bliss, in his doctrine and
holy life. And this Teacher being not only sent from God, Jo. 3. but being
himself God blessed for ever; it cannot be that his instructions can want any
supplement. Yet that they might not want attestation neither to the incredulous
world; he confirmed them by the repeted miracles of his life, and by the
testimony of those who saw the more irrefragable conviction of his Resurrection
and Ascension. And that they also might not want credit and enforcement, the
holy Spirit set to his seal, and by his miraculous descent upon the Apostles,
both asserted their commission, and enabled them for the discharge of it, by
all gifts necessary for the propagating the Faith of Christ over the whole
World.

5. THESE were the ways by which God was pleased to revele himself to to the
Forefathers of our Faith, and that not only for their sakes, but ours also, to
whom they were to derive those divine dictats they had received. Saint Stephen
tells us, those under the Law received the lively Oracles to deliver down to
their posterity, Act. 7. 38. And those under the Gospel, who received yet more
lively Oracles, from him who was both the Word and the Life, did it for the
like purpose; to transmit it to us upon whom the ends of the world are come. By
this all need of repeted Revelations is superseded, the faithful deriving of
the former, being sufficient to us for all things that pertain to life and
godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 3.

6. AND for this, God (whose care is equal for all successions of men) has
graciously provided, by causing Holy Scriptures to be writ; by which he has
derived on every succeeding Age the illuminations of the former. And for that
purpose endowed the Writers not only with that moral fidelity requisite to the
truth of History, but with a divine Spirit, proportionable to the great design
of fixing an immutable rule for Faith and Manners. And to give us the fuller
security herein, he has chosen no other penmen of the New Testament, then those
who were the first oral Promulgers of our Christian Religion; so that they have
left to us the very same doctrine they taught the Primitive Christians; and he
that acknowledges them divinely inspired in what they preached, cannot doubt
them to be so in what they writ. So that we all may enjoy virtually and
effectively that wish of the devout Father, who desired to be Saint Paul's
Auditor: for he that hears any of his Epistles read, is as really spoke to by
Saint Paul, as those who were within the sound of his voice. Thus God who in
times past spoke at sundry times, and in diverse manners to our Fathers by the
Prophets, and in the later days by his son, Heb. 1. 1, 2. continues still to
speak to us by these inspired Writers; and what Christ once said to his
Disciples in relation to their preaching, is no less true of their writings: He
that despises you, despises me, Luke 10. 16. All the contemt that is at any
time flung on these sacred Writings, rebounds higher, and finally devolves on
the first Author of those doctrins, whereof these are the Registres and
Transcripts.

7. BUT this is a guilt which one would think peculiar to Infidels and Pagans,
and not incident to any who had in their Baptism listed themselves under
Christ's banner: yet I fear I may say, of the two parties, the Scripture has met
with the worst treatment from the later. For if we mesure by the frequency and
variety of injuries. I fear Christians will appear to have out-vied Heathens:
These bluntly disbelieve them, neglect, nay perhaps scornfully deride them.
Alas, Christians do this and more; they not only put contemts, but tricks upon
the Scripture, wrest and distort it to justify all their wild phancies, or
secular designs; and suborn its Patronage to those things it forbids, and tells
us that God abhors.

8. INDEED so many are the abuses we offer it, that he that considers them
would scarce think we owned it for the words of a sensible man, much less of
the great omniscient God. And I believe 'twere hard to assign any one so
comprehensive and efficacious cause of the universal depravation of manners, as
the disvaluing of this divine Book, which was designed to regulate them. It
were therefore a work worthy another inspired writing, to attemt the rescue of
this, and recover it to its just estimate. Yet alas, could we hope for that, we
have scoffers who would as well despise the New as the Old; and like the
Husbandmen in the Gospel, Mat. 21. 36. would answer such a succession of
messages by repeting the same injuries.

9. To such as these it is I confess vain for man to address; nay 'twere
insolence to expect that human Oratory should succeed where the divine fails;
yet the spreading infection of these renders it necessary to administer
antidotes to others. And besides, tho (God be blessed) all are not of this form,
yet there are many who, tho not arrived to this contempt, yet want some degrees
of that just reverence they owe the sacred Scriptures, who give a confused
general assent to them as the word of God, but afford them not a consideration
and respect answerable to such an acknowledgment. To such as these, I shall
hope it may not be utterly vain to attemt the exciting of those drowsy notions
that lie unactive in them, by presenting to them some considerations concerning
the excellence and use of the Scripture: which being all but necessary
consequences of that principle they are supposed to own, viz. that they are
Gods word, I cannot much question their assent to the speculative part: I wish
I could as probably assure my self of the practic.

10. INDEED were there nothing else to be said in behalf of holy Writ, but that
it is Gods word, that were enough to command the most awful regard to it. And
therefore it is but just we make that the first and principal consideration in
our present discourse. But then it is impossible that that can want others to
attend it; since whatsoever God says, is in all respects completely good. I
shall therefore to that of its divine original add secondly the consideration
of its subject Matter; thirdly, of its excellent and no less diffusive end and
design; and fourthly, of its exact propriety and fitness to that design, which
are all such qualifications, that where they concur, nothing more can be
required to commend a writing to the esteem of rational men. And upon all these
tests, notwithstanding the cavil of the Romanists and others, whose force we
shall examine with the unhappy issue of contrary counsels, this law of God will
be found to answer the Psalmists character of it, Ps. 19. 7. The Law of God is
perfect: and 'twill appear that the custody and use thereof, is the Birthright
and Duty of every Christian. All which severals being faithfully deduced; it
will only remain that I add such cautions as will be necessary to the due
performance of the aforesaid duty; and our being in some degree rendered
perfect, as this Law of God, and the Author thereof himself is perfect, Mat. 5.
48.

SECT. II. The divine Original, Endearments, and Authority of the Holy
Scripture.
MEN'S judgments are so apt to be biast by their affection, that we often find
them readier to consider who speaks, then what is spoken: a temper very unsafe,
and the principle of great injustice in our inferior transactions with men; yet
here there are very few of us that can wholly divest our selves of it, whereas,
when we deal with God (in whom alone an implicit faith may securely be reposed)
we are nice and wary, bring our scales and mesures, will take nothing upon his
word which holds not weight in our own balance. It Is true, he needs not our
partiality to be justified in his sayings, Psalm. 51. 4. His words are pure,
even as the silver tried seven times in the fire, Psalm. 12. 6. able to pass the
strictest test that right reason (truly so called) can put them to. Yet it
shows a great perverseness in our nature, that we who so easily resign our
understandings to fallible men, stand thus upon our guard against God; make him
dispute for every inch he gains on us; nor will afford him what we daily grant
to any credible man, to receive an affirmation upon trust of his veracity.

2. I am far from contradicting our Saviors Precept, of Search the Scriptures,
Jo. 7. or Saint Paul's, of proving all things, 1 These. 5. 21. we cannot be too
industrious in our inquest after truth, provided we still reserve to God the
decisive vote, and humbly acquiesce in his sense, how distant soever from our
own; so that when we consult Scripture (I may add reason either) it is not to
resolve us whether God be to be believed or no in what he has said, but whether
he has said such and such things: for if we are convinced he have; reason as
well as Religion commands our assert.

3. WHATEVER therefore God has said, we are to pay it a reverence merely upon
the account of its Author; over and above what the excellence of the matter
exacts: and to this we have all inducements as well as obligation: there being
no motives to render the words of men estimable to us, which are not eminently
and transcendently appliable to those of God.

4. THOSE motives we may reduce to four: first, the Authority of the Speaker;
secondly, his Kindness; thirdly, his Wisdom; and fourthly, his Truth. First,
for that of Authority; that may be either native, or acquired; the native is
that of a parent, which is such a charm of observance, that we see Sa^omon,
when he would impress his counsels, assumes the person of a Father; Hear O my
children the instructions of a Father, Prove. 4. 1. And generally through that
whole Book he uses the compellation of my Son, as the greatest endearment to
engage attention and reverence. Nay so indispensible was the obligation of
children in this respect, that we see the contumacious child that would not
hearken to the advice of his Parents, was by God himself adjudged to death,
Deuteronomy. 21. 20.

5. NOR have only Gods, but men's Laws exacted that filial reverence to the
dictats of Parents. But certainly no Parent can pretend such a title to it as
God, who is not only the immediate Father of our persons, but the original
Father of our very nature; not only of our flesh, but of our spirits also, Heb.
12. 9. So that the Apostles Antithesis in that place is as properly applied to
counsels as corrections, and we may as rightly infer, that if we give reverence
to the advices of our earthly Parents, much more ought we subject our selves to
this Father of our spirits. And we have the very same reason wherewith to
enforce it: for the Fathers of our flesh do as often dictate, as correct
according to their own plesures, prescribe to their children not according to
the exact mesures of right and wrong, but after that humor which most
predominates in themselves. But God always directs his admonitions to our
profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 11. So that we are
as unkind to our selves, as irreverent toward him, whenever we let any of his
words fall to the ground; whose claim to this part of our reverence is much
more irrefragable then that of our natural Parents.

6. BUT besides this native Authority there is also an acquired; and that we may
distinguish into two sorts; the one of dominion, the other of reputation. To
the first kind belongs that of Princes, Magistrates, Masters, or any that have
coercive power over us. And our own interest teaches us not to slight the words
of any of these, who can so much to our cost second them with deeds. Now God
has all these titles of jurisdiction; He is the great King, Ps. 48. 2. Nor was
it only a complement of the Psalmists; for himself owns the style, I am a great
King, Mal. 1. He is the Judge of all the World; Genesis 18. yea, that Ancient of
days, before whom the Books were opened, Dan. 7. 10. He is our Lord and Master
by right, both of Creation and Redemtion; and this Christ owns even in his
state of inanition; yea, when he was about the most servile imploiment; the
washing his Disciples feet; when he was most literally in the form of a
servant; yet he scruples not to assert his right to that opposite title; You
call me Master, and Lord; and ye say well, for so I am; Jo. 13. Nor are these
emty names, but effectively attended with all the power they denote. Yet so
stupid are we, that whilst we awfully receive the dictates of our earthly
Superiors, we slight and neglect the Oracles of that God who is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords. When a Prince speaks, we are apt to cry out with Herod's
Flatterers, the voice of a God, and not of a man, Act. 12. Yet when it is
indeed the voice of God, we choose tot listen to any thing else rather then it.
But let us sadly remember, that notwithstanding our contemts, this word shall
(as our Savior tells us) judge us at the last day, Jo. 12. 38.

7. A second sort of acquired Authority is that of reputation. When a man is
famed for some extraordinary excellencies, whether moral or intellectual, men
come with appetite to his discourses, greedily suck them in, nor need such a
one bespeak attention; his very name has don it for him, and prepossest him of
his Auditors regard. Thus the Rabbis among the Jews, the Philosophers among
the Greeks, were listened to as Oracles, and to cite them was (by their
admiring Disciples) thought a concluding Argument. Nay, under Christianity,
this admiration of men's persons has bin so inordinate, that it has crumbled
Religion away in little insignificant parties; whilst not only Paul, Apollo, or
Cephas, but names infinitely inferior, have become the distinctive characters of
Sects and separate Communions. So easily alas are we charmed by our
prepossessions, and with itching ears run in quest of those doctrins which the
fame of their Authors, rather then the evidence of truth, commend to us.

8. AND has God don nothing to get him a repute among us? has he no
excellencies to deserve our esteem? is he not worthy to prescribe to his own
creatures? If we think yes, why is he the only person to be disregarded? or why
do we so unseasonably depart from our own humor, as not to give his Word a
reverence proportionable to that we pretend for him; nay, which we actually pay
to men of like passions with our selves? A contemt so absurd as well as
impious, that we have not the example of any the most barbarous people to
countenance us. For tho some of them have made very wild mistakes in the choice
of their Deities, yet they have all agreed in this common principle, that
whatever those Deities said, was to be received with all possible veneration;
yea, such a deference gave they to all significations of the divine will, that
as they would undertake no great enterprise without consulting their Auguries;
so upon any inauspicious signs they relinquisht their attemts. And certainly if
we had the same reverence for the true God which they had for the false, we
should as frequently consult him. We may do it with much more ease and
certainty: we need not trust to the entrails of Beasts, or motion of Birds; we
need not go to Delphos, or the Lybian Hammon for the resolving our doubts; but
what Moses said to Israel is very applicable to us, the Word is nigh thee,
Deuteronomy. 30. 14. That Word which David made his Counselor* Psalm. 119. 24. his
Comforter, ver. 50. his Tresure, ver. 72. his Study ver. 99. And had we those
awful apprehensions of God which he had, we should pay the like reverence to
his Word. Did we well ponder how many titles of Authority he has over us, we
should surely be ashamed to deny that respect to him in whom they all conspire;
which we dare not deny to them separately in human Superiors.

9. A second motive to esteem men's words, is the kindness of the speaker. This
has such a fascinating power, as nothing but extreme ill nature can resist.
When a man is assured of the kindness of him that speaks, whatever is spoken is
taken in good part. This is it that distinguishes the admonitions of a friend
from the reproaches of an enemy; and we daily in common conversation receive
those things with contentment and applause from an intimate and familiar, which
if spoken by a stranger or enemy would be despised or stomach'd. So insinuating
a thing is kindness, that where it has once got it self believed, nothing it
says after is disputed; it supples the mind, and makes it ductile and pliant
to any impressions.

10. BUT what human kindness is there that can come in any competition with the
Divine? it surpasses that of the nearest and dearest relations; Mothers may
forget, yet will I not forget thee, Isa. 49. 15. And the Psalmist found it
experimentally true, When my Father and my Mother forsake me, the Lord takes
me up, Ps. 27. 10. The tenderest bowels compared to his, are adamant and flint:
so that it is a most proper epithet the Wise man gives him; O Lord thou lover of
souls, Wis. 11. 26. Nor is this affection merely mental, but it attests it self
by innumerable effects. The effects of love are all reducible to two heads,
doing and suffering; and by both these God has most eminently attested his love
to us.

11. FOR the first, we cannot look either on our bodies or our souls, on the
whole Universe about us, or that better World above us; but we shall in each
see the Lord has don great things for us, Psalm. 114. Nay, not only our
enjoiments, but even the capacity to enjoy, is his bounty. Had not he drawn
mankind out of his original clay, what had we bin concerned in all the other
works of his Creation? So that if we put any value either upon what we have or
what we are, we cannot but account our selves so much indebted to this his
active love. And tho the passive was not practicable by the divine Nature
simply and apart, yet that we might not want all imaginable evidences of his
love, he who was God blessed for ever, linkt his impassible to ^ur passible
nature; assumed our humanity, that he might espouse our sorrows, and was ^orn
on purpose that he might die for us. So that sure we may say in his own words,
greater love then this has no man, Jo. 15, 13.

12. AND now it is very hard, if such an unparalled love in God, may not as
much affect us as the slight benefactions of every ordinary friend; if it
cannot so much recommend him to our regard, as to rescue his word from contemt,
and dispose us to receive impressions from it; especially when his very
speaking is a new act of his kindness, and designed to our greatest advantage.

13. BUT if all he has don and suffered for us cannot obtain him so much from
us, we must surely confess, our disingenuity is as superlative as his love. For
in this instance we have ^o plea for our selves. The discourses of men, ^tis
true, may sometime be so weak and irrational, that tho kindness may suggest
pity, it cannot reverence: But this can never happen in God, whose wisdom is as
infinite as his love. He talks not at our vain rate who often talk only for
talkings sake; but his words are directed to the most important ends, and
addressed in such a manner as befits him in whom are all the tresures of wisdom
and knowledge, Col. 2. And this is our third consideration, the wisdom of the
Speaker.

14. How attractive a thing Wisdom is, we may observe in the instance of the
Queen of Sheba, who came from the utmost parts of the earth, as Christ says,
Mat. 12. 42. to hear the Wisdom of Solomon. And the like is noted of the Greek
Sages, that they were addressed to from all parts, by persons of all ranks and
qualities, to hear their Lectures. And indeed the rational nature of man does
by a kind of sympathetic motion close with whatever has the stamp of reason
upon it. But alas what is the profoundest wisdom of men compared with that of
God? He is the essential reason; and all that man can pretend to, is but an
emanation from him; a ray of his Sun, a drop of his Ocean: which as he gives,
so he can also take away. He can infatuate the most subtle designers; And (as
he says of him self) makes the diviners mad turns the wise men back, and makes
their wisdom foolishness, Esaias 44. 25.

15. How impious a folly is it then in us, to Idolize human Wisdom with all its
imperfections, and despise the divine? yet this every man is guilty of, who is
not attracted to the study of sacred Writ by the supereminent wisdom of its
Author. For such men must either affirm that God has not such a super^minency;
or that, tho he have in himself, he ^ath noth exerted it in this writing: The
former is downright blasphemy; and truly the ^^ter is the same, a little
varied. For that any thing but what is exactly wise, can proceed ^^om infinite
wisdom, is too absurd for any ^an to imagine. And therefore he that ^harges Gods
Word with defect of wisdom, ^ust interpretatively charge God so too. For ^^o
it is true, a wise man may sometimes speak ^olishly; yet that happens through that
mixture of ignorance or passion, which is in the most knowing of mortals: but
in God, who is a pure Act, and essential Wisdom, that is an impossible
supposition.

16. NAY, indeed it were to tax him of folly beyond what is incident to any
sensible man, who will still proportion his instruments to the work he designs.
Should we not conclude him mad, that should attemt to fell a mighty Oak with a
Penknife, or stop a Torrent with a wisp of Straw? And sure their conceptions
are not much more reverend of God, who can suppose that a writing designed by
him for such important ends, as the making men wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.
15. the casting down all that exalts it self against the obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10. 5. should it self be foolish and weak: or that he should give it those
great Attributes of being sharper then a two edged sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, of the joints and marrow Heb. 4. 14. if
its discourses were so flat and insipid, as some in this profane Age would
represent them.

17. IT IS true indeed, it is not as the Apostle speaks, the wisdom of this
world, 1 Cor. 2. 6. The Scripture teaches us not the arts of undermining
Governments, defrauding and circumventing our brethren; but it teaches us that
which would tend much more even to our temporal felicity; and as reason promts
us to aspire to happiness, so it must acknowledge, that is the highest wisdom
which teaches us to attain it.

18. AND as the Holy Scripture is thus recommended to us by the wisdom of its
Author; so in the last place is it by his truth, without which the other might
rather raise our jealousy then our reverence. For wisdom without sincerity
degenerates into serpentine guile; and we rather fear to be ensnared then hope
to be advantaged by it. The most subtle addresses, and most cogent arguments
prevail not upon us, where we suspect some insidious design. But where wisdom
and fidelity meet in the same person, we do not only attend, but confide in his
counsels, And this qualification is most eminently in God. The children of men
are deceitful upon the weights. Psalm. 62. 9. Much guile often lurks
indiscernibly under the fairest appearances: but Gods veracity is as
essentially himself, as his wisdom, and he can no more deceive us, then he can
be deceived himself. He is not man that he should die, Number. 23. 19. He designs
not (as men often do) to sport himself with our credulity; and raise hopes
which he never means to satisfy: he says not to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me
in vain, Ex. 45. 19. but all his promises are yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. He is
perfectly sincere in all the proposals he makes in his Word: which is a most
rational motive for us to advert to it, not only with reverence but love.

19. AND now when all these motives are thus combined; the authority, the
kindness, the wisdom, the veracity of the speaker, what can be required more to
render his words of weight with us? If this fourfold cord will not draw us, we
have sure the strength, not of men, but of that Legion we read of in the
Gospel, Mar. 5. 9. For these are so much the cords of a man, so adapted to our
natures, nay to our constant usage in other things, that we must put off much
of our humanity, disclaim the common mesures of mankind, if we be not attracted
by them. For I dare appeal to the breast of any sober, industrious man, whether
in case a person, who he were sure had all the forementioned qualifications,
should recommend to him some rules as infallible for the certain doubling, or
trebling his estate, he would not think them worth the pursuing; nay, whether
he would not plot and study on them, till he comprehended the whole Art. And
shall we then when God in whom all those qualifications are united, and that in
their utmost transcendencies, shall we, I say, think him below our regard, when
he proposes the improving our interests, not by the scanty proportions of two
or three; but in such as he intimated to Abraham, when he showed him the Stars,
as the representative of his numerous offspring, Genesis 15. 5. when he teaches
us that highest, and yet most certain Alchimy, of refining and multiplying our
enjoiments, and then perpetuating them?

20. ALL this God does in Scripture; and we must be stupidly improvident, if we
will take no advantage by it. It was once the complaint of Christ to the Jews,
I am come in my Fathers name and ye receive me not, if another shall come in
his own name, him ye will receive, Jo. 5. 43. And what was said by him the
eternal essential Word, is no less applicable to the written; which coming in
the name, and upon the message of God, is despised and slighted, and every the
lightest composure of men preferred before it. As if that signature of Divinity
it carries, served rather as a Brand to stigmatize and defame, then adorn and
recommend it. A contemt which strikes immediately at God himself, whose
resentments of it, tho for the present suppressed by his long-suffering, will at
last break out upon all who persevere so to affront him, in a judgment worthy
of God, Wis. 12. 26.

21. BUT after all that has bin said, I foresee some may say, that I have all
this while but beaten the air, have built upon a principle which some flatly
deny, others doubt of, and have run away with a supposition that the Bible is
of divine Original, without any attemt of proof. To such as these I might
justly enough object the extreme hard mesure they offer to Divinity above all
other Sciences. For in those, they still allow some fundamental maxims, which
are presupposed without proof; but in this they admit of no Postulata, no
granted principle on which to superstruct. If the same rigor should be extended
to secular cases, what a damp would it strike upon commerce? For example, a man
expects fair dealing from his neighbor, upon the strength of those common
notions of Justice he presumes writ in all men's hearts: but according to this
mesure, he must first prove to every man he deals with, that such notions there
are, and that they are obligatory: that the wares exposed to sale are his own;
that dominion is not founded in grace, or that he is in that state, and so has
a property to confer upon another; that the person dealt with, paies a just
price; does it in good money; and that it is his own; or that he is in the state
of grace; or needs not be so, to justify his purchase: and at this rate the
Market will be as full of nice questions as the Schools. But because complaints
and retortions are the common refuge of causes that want better Arguments, I
shall not insist here; but to proceed to a defense of the questioned Assertion,
that the Bible is the Word of God.

22. IN which I shall proceed by these degrees. First, I shall lay down the
plain grounds upon which Christians believe it. Secondly, I shall compare those
with those of less credibility which have generally satisfied mankind in other
things of the like nature. And thirdly, I shall consider whether those who are
dissatisfied with those grounds, would not be equally so with any other way of
attestation.

23. BEFORE I enter upon the first of these, I desire it may be considered,
that matters of fact are not capable of such rigorous demonstrative evidences,
as mathematical propositions are. To render a thing fit for rational belief,
there is no more required but that the motives for it do over-poise those
against it, and in that degree they do so, so is the belief stronger or weaker.

24. Now the motives of our belief in the present case, are such as are
extrinsic, or ^ntrinsic to the Scriptures; of which the extrinsic are first,
and preparative to the other; and indeed all that can reasonably be insisted on
to a gain-saier, who must be supposed no competent judge of the later. But as to
the former, I shall adventure to say, that the di^ine Original of the Scripture
has as great grounds of credibility as can be expected in any thing of this
kind. For whether God ^nspir'd the Penmen of Holy Writ, is matter of fact, and
being so, is capable of no other external evidence but that of testimony: and
that matter of fact being also in point of time so remote from us, can be
judged of only by a series of Testimonies derived from that Age wherein the
Scriptures were written, to this: and the more credible the testifiers, and the
more universal the Testimony; so much the more convincing are they to all
considering men.

25. AND this attestation the Scripture has in the highest circumstances, it
having bin witnessed to in all Ages, and in those Ages by all persons that
could be presumed to know any thing of it. Thus the Old Testament was owned by
the whole Nation of the Jews, as the writings of men inspired by God; and that
with such evidence of their mission, as abundantly satisfied those of that Age,
of their being so inspired; and they derived those Writings with that
attestation to their posterity. Now that those of the first Ages were not
deceived, is as morally certain as any thing can be supposed. For in the first
part of the Bible is contained the history of those miracles wherewith God
rescued that people out of Egypt, and instated them in Canaan. Now if they who
lived at that time knew that such miracles were never don, it is impossible they
could receive an evident Fable as an inspired truth. No single person, much
less a whole Nation can be supposed so stupid. But if indeed they were
eie-witnesses of those miracles, they might with very good reason conclude,
that the same Moses who was by God empowered to work them, was so also for the
relating them; as also all those precedent events from the Creation down to
that time, which are recorded by him.

26. So also for the preceptive parts of those Books, those that saw those
formidable solemnities, with which they were first published, had sure little
temtation to doubt that they were the dictats of God, when written. Now if they
could not be deceived themselves, it is yet less imaginable that they should
conspire to impose a cheat upon their posterities; nor indeed were the Jews of
so easy a credulity, that it is at all probable the succeeding Generations would
have bin so imposed on: their humor was stubborn enough, and the precepts of
their Law severe and burdensome enough to have temted them to have cast off the
yoke, had it not bin bound upon them by irresistible convictions of its coming
from God. But besides this Tradition of their Elders, they had the advantage of
living under a Theocracy, the immediate guidance of God; Prophets daily raised
up among them, to foretell events, to admonish them of their duty, and reprove
their backslidings: yet even these gave the deference to the written Word,
nay, made it the test by which to try true inspirations from false: To the Law
and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to it, there is no light in
them, Esaias 8. 20. So that the veneration which they had before acquired, was
still anew excited by fresh inspirations, which both attested the old, and
became new parts of their Canon.

27. NOR could it be esteemed a small confirmation to the Scriptures, to find
in succeeding Ages the signal accomplishments of those prophecies which were
long before registered in those Books; for nothing less then divine Power and
Wisdom could foretell, and also verify them. Upon these grounds the Jews
universally through all successions received the Books of the Old Testament as
divine Oracles, and looked upon them as the greatest trust that could be
committed to them: and accordingly were so scrupulously vigilant in conserving
them, that their Masorits numbered not only the sections, but the very words,
nay letters, that no fraud or inadvertency might corrupt or defalk the least
iota of what they esteemed so sacred. A farther testimony and sepiment to
which, were the Samaritan, Chaldee, and Greek versions: which being made use of
in the Synagogs o^ Jews, in their dispersions, and the Samaritan^ at Sichem,
could not at those distances receive a uniform alteration, and any other would
be of no effect. Add to this, that the Original exemplar of the Law, was laid
up in the Sanctuary, that the Prince was to have a Copy of it always by him,
and transcribe it with his own hand; that every Jew was to make it his constant
discourse and meditation teach it his children, and wear part of it upon his
hands and forehead. And now sure it is impossible to imagine any matter of fact
to be more carefully deduced, or irrefragably testified, nor any thing believed
upon stronger evidence.

28. THAT all this is true in reference to the Jews, that they did thus own
these Writings as divine, appears not only by the Records of past Ages, but by
the Jews of the present, who still own them, and cannot be suspected of
combination with the Christians. And if these were reasonable grounds of
conviction to the Jews, (as he must be most ab^urdly skeptical that shall deny)
they must be so to Christians also; who derive them ^^om them: and that with
this farther ad^antage to our Faith, that we see the clear ^ompletion of those
Evangelical prophecies which remained dark to them, and conse^uently have a
farther Argument to confirm ^s, that the Scriptures of the Old Testament ^re
certainly divine.

29. THE New has also the like means of ^robation: which as it is a collection
of the ^octrin taught by Christ and his Apostles, must if truly related be
acknowledged no less divine then what they orally delivered. So that they who
doubt its being divine, must either deny what Christ and his Apostles preached
to be so; or else distrust the fidelity of the relation: The former strikes at
the whole Christian Faith; which if only of men, must not only be fallible, but
is actually a deceit, whilst it pretends to be of God, and is not. To such
Objectors we have to oppose those stupendous miracles with which the Gospel
was attested; such as demonstrated a more then human efficacy. And that God
should lend his omnipotence to abet the false pretensions of men, is a conceit
too unworthy even for the worst of men to entertain.

30. IT IS true, there have bin by God permitted lying miracles; as well as true
ones have bin don by him; Such as were those of the Magicians in Egypt, in
opposition to the other of Moses; but then the difference between both was so
conspicuous, that he must be more partial and disingenuous, then even those
Magicians were, who would not acknowledge the disparity, and confess in those
which were truly supernatural, the finger of God, Exodus 8. 19. Therefore both
in the Old and New Testament it is predicted, that false Prophets should arise,
and do signs and wonders, Deuteronomy. 13. 1. Mat. 24. 11. 24. as a trial of their
fidelity who made profession of Religion; whether they would prefer the few and
trivial sleights which recommended a deceiver, before those great and
numberless miracles which attested the sacred Oracles delivered to the sons of
men by the God of truth. Whether the trick of a Barchochebas, to hold fire in
his mouth; that of Marcus the heretic, to make the Wine of the Holy Sacrament
appear blood; or that of Mahomet, to bring a Pidgeon to his ear, ought to be
put in balance against all the miracles wrought by Moses, our Savior, or his
Apostles. And in a word, whether the silly stories which Iamblichus solemnly
relates of Pythagoras, or those Philostratus tells of Apollonius Tyaneus,
deserve to rival those of the Evangelists. It is a most just judgment, and
accordingly threatened by Almighty God, that they who would not obey the truth
should believe a lie, 2 These. 2. 11. But still the Almighty, where any man or
devil does proudly, is evidently above him, Exodus 18. 11. will be justified in
his sayings, and be clear when he is judged, Romans 3. 4.

31. BUT if men will be Skeptics, and doubt every thing, they are to know that
the matter called into question, is of a nature that admits but two ways of
solution; probability, and testimony. First for probability, let it be
considered who were the first promulgers of Christ's miracles. In his life time
they were either the patients on whom his miracles were wrought, or the common
people, that were spectators: the former, as they could not be deceived
themselves, but must needs know whether they were cured or no; so what
imaginable design could they have to deceive others? Many indeed have pretended
impotency as a motive of compassion; but what could they gain by owning a cure
they had not? As for the Spectators, as their multitude adds to their
credibility; (it being morally impossible that so many should at once be
deluded in a matter so obvious to their senses) so does it also acquit them
from fraud and combination. Cheats and forgeries are always hatched in the
dark, in close Cabals, and private Juncto's. That five thousand men at one time,
and four thousand at another, should conspire to say, that they were
miraculously fed, when they were not; and all prove true to the fiction, and
not betray it: is a thing as irrational to be supposed, as impossible to be
paralleled.

32. BESIDES, admit it possible that so many could have joined in the deceit,
yet what imaginable end could they have in it? Had their lie bin subservient to
the designs of some potent Prince that might have rewarded it, there had bin some
temtation: but what could they expect from the reputed son of a Carpenter, who
had not himself where to lay his head? Nay, who disclaimed all secular power;
convei'd himself away from their importunities; when they would have forced him
to be a King: And consequently, could not be looked on as one that would head a
Sedition, or attemt to raise himself to a capacity of rewarding his Abettors.
Upon all these considerations, there appears not the least shadow of
probability; that either those particular persons who published the cures they
had received, or those multitudes who were witnesses and divulgers of those, or
his other miracles; could do it upon any sinister design, or indeed upon any
other motive but gratitude and admiration.

33. IN the next place, if we come to those miracles which succeeded Christ's
death, those most important, and convincing, of his Resurrection and Ascension,
and observe who were the divulgers of those, we shall find them very unlikely
to be men of design; a set of illiterate men, taken from the Fisher-boats, and
other mean occupation: and such as needed a miracle as great as any of those
they were to assert (the descent of the Holy Ghost) to fit them for their
office. What alas could they drive at, or how could they hope that their
testimony could be received, so much against the humor and interest of the
present rulers; unless they were assured not only of the truth of the things,
but also of some supernatural aids to back and fortify them? Accordingly we
find, that till they had received those; till by the descent of the holy Ghost
they were endued with power from on high, Luke 24. 49. they never attemted the
discovery of what they had seen: but rather hid them selves, kept all their
assemblies in privacy and concealment for the fear of the Jews, Jo. 20. 19. and
so were far enough from projecting any thing beside their own safety.
Afterward, when they began to preach, they had early essays, what their
secular advantages would be by it; threatenings and revilings, scourgings and
imprisonments, Act. 4. 20. 5. 18. 40. And can it be imagined, that men who a
little before had showed themselves so little in love with suffering, that none
of them durst stick to their Master at his apprehension, but one forswore, and
all forfook him; can it, I say, be imagined that these men should be so much in
love with their own Fable, as to venture all sorts of persecution for the
propagating it? Or if they could, let us in the next place consider what
probability there could be of success.

34. THEIR preaching amounted to no less then the Deifying of one, whom both
their Roman and Jewish Rulers, nay, the generality of the people had executed
as a malefactor: so that they were all engaged, in defense of their own Act, to
sift their testimony with all the rigor that conscious jealousy could suggest.
And where were so many concerned inquisitors, there was very little hope for a
forgery to pass. Besides the avowed displesure of their Governors made it a
hazardous thing to own a belief of what they asserted. Those that adhered to
them could not but know, that at the same time they must espouse their dangers
and sufferings. And men use not to incur certain mischiefs, upon doubtful and
suspicious grounds.

35 YET farther, their doctrine was designed to an end to which their Auditors
could not but have the greatest reluctance: they were to struggle with that
rooted prepossession which the Jews had for the Mosaical Law, which their
Gospel out-dated; and the Gentiles for the Rites and Religion of their
Ancestors; and, which was harder then either, with the corruptions and vices of
both: to plant humility and internal sanctity, so contrary to that ceremonial
holiness, upon which the Jews so valued themselves, and despised others: and
Temperance, Justice, and Purity, so contrary to the practice, nay, even the
religion of the Heathen: and to attemt all this with no other allurement, no
other promise of recompense but what they must attend in another world, and
pass too through reproaches and afflictions, torments and death. These were all
such invincible prejudices, as they could never hope to break through with a lie,
nay, which they could not have encountered even with every common truth, but
only with that, which being divine, brought its aids with it; without which
'twas utterly impossible for all the skill or oratory of men to overcome such
disadvantages.

36. AND yet with all these did these rude inartificial men contest, and that
with signal success: no less then three thousand Proselytes made by Saint
Peter's first Sermon; and that in Jerusalem, the Scene where all was acted, and
consequently where 'twas the most impossible to impose a forgery. And at the
like miraculous rate they went on, till as the Pharisees themselves complain,
they had filled Jerusalem with their doctrine. Acts 5. 28. nor did Judea set
bounds to them; their sound went out into all nations, Romans 10. 18. and their
doctrine spread it self through all the Gentile world.

37. AND sure so wonderful an event, so contrary to all human mesures, does
sufficiently evince there was more then man in it. Nothing but the same
creative Power that produced light out of darkness, could bring forth effects
so much above the proportion of the cause. Had these weak instruments acted
only by their natural powers, nothing of this had bin achieved. Alas, could
these poor rude men learn all Languages within the space of fifty days, which
would take up almost as many years of the most industrious Student? And yet had
they not bin able to speak them, they could never have divulged the Gospel to
the several Nations, nor so effectually have convinced the bystanders, Act. 2.
that they acted by a higher impulse. Yet to convince the world they did so,
they repeted their Masters miracles as well as his doctrine; healed the sick,
cast out devils, raised the dead; And where God communicated so much of his
power, we may reasonably conclude he did it to promote his own work, not the
work of the Devil, as it must have bin if this whole Scene were a lie.

38. WHEN all this is weighed, I presume there will remain little ground to
suspect, that the first planters of Christian Faith had any other design then
what they avowed, viz. the bringing men to holiness here, and salvation
hereafter. The suspicion therefore, if any, must rest upon later times; and
accordingly some are willing to persuade themselves and others that the whole
Scheme of our Religion, is but a lately devised Fable to keep the world in awe;
whereof Princes have made some use, but Clergymen more; and that Christ and his
Apostles are only actors whom themselves have conjured up upon the stage to
pursue their plot.

39. IN answer to this bold, this blasphemous suggestion, I should first desire
these surmisers to point out the time when, and the persons who began this
design; to tell us exactly whence they date this politic Religion, as they are
pleased to suppose it. If they cannot, they are manifestly unjust to reject our
account of it when they can give none themselves; and fail very much of that
rigid demonstration they require from others. That there is such a profession
as Christianity in the world, is yet (God be blessed) undeniable; (tho at the
rate it has of late declined, God knows how long it will be so:) we say it came
by Christ and his Apostles, and that it is attested by an uninterrupted
testimony of all the intervening Ages, the suffrage of all Christian Churches
from that day to this. And sure they who embraced the doctrine, are the most
competent witnesses from whence they received it.

40. YET lest they should be all thought parties to the design, and their
witness excepted against, it has pleased God to give us collateral assurances,
and made both Jewish and Gentile Writers give testimony to the Antiquity of
Christianity. Josephus does this, lib. 20. chap. 8. and lib. 18. chap. 4.
where, after he has given an account of the crucifixion of Christ exactly
agreeing with the Evangelists; he concludes, And to this day the Christian
people, who of him borrow their name, cease not to increase. I add not the
personal elogium which he gives of our Savior; because some are so hardy to
control it: also I pass what Philo mentions of the religious in Egypt, because
several Learned men refer it to the Essens, a Sect among the Jews, or some
other. There is no doubt of what Tacitus and other Roman Historians speak of
Christ as the Author of the Christian doctrine; which it had bin impossible for
him to have don; if there had then bin no such doctrine, or if Christ had not
bin known as the Founder of it. So afterward Pliny gives the Emperor Trajan an
account both of the manners, and multitude of the Christians; and makes the
innocence of the one, and the greatness of the other, an Argument to slacken
the persecution against them. Nay, the very bloody Edicts of the persecuting
Emperors, and the scoffs and reproaches of Celsus, Porphyrie, Lucian, and other
profane opposers of this Doctrine, do undeniably assert its being. By all which
it appears, that Christianity had in those Ages not only a being, but had also
obtained mightily in the world, and drawn in vast numbers to its profession;
and vast indeed they must needs be, to furnish out that whole Army of Martyrs,
of which profane, as well as Ecclesiastic writers speak. And if all this be not
sufficient to evince that Christianity stole not clancu^arly into the world,
but took its rise from those times and persons it pretends, we must ^enounce
all faith of testimony, and not believe an inch farther then we see.

41. I suppose I need say no more to show that the Gospel, and all those
portentous miracles which attested it, were no forgeries, or stratagems of men.
I come now to that doubt which more immediately concerns the Holy Scripture,
viz. whether all these transactions be so faithfully related there, that we may
believe them to have bin dictated by the spirit of God. Now for this, the
process need be ^ut short, if we consider who were the pen^en of the New
Testament; even for the most part the Apostles themselves: Matthew, and John
who wrote two of the Gospels, were certainly so: and Mark, as all the Ancients
aver, was but the Amanuensis to Saint Peter, who dictated that Gospel. Saint
Luke indeed comes not under this first rank of Apostles; yet is by some affirmed
to be one of the seventy Disciples: however an Apostolical person it is certain
he was, and it was no wonder for such to be inspired. For in those first Ages
of the Church men acted more by immediate inflation of the Spirit then since.
And accordingly we find Stephen, tho but a Deacon, had the power of miracles;
and preached as divinely as the prime Apostles, Act. 7. And the gift of the Holy
Ghost was then a usual concomitant of conversion, as appears in the Story of
Cornelius, Acts 10. 45, 46. Besides, Saint Luke was a constant attendant on
Saint Paul (who derived the Faith not from man, but by the immediate revelation
of Jesus Christ, as himself professes, Gal. 1. 12.) and is by some said to have
wrote by dictat from him, as Mark did from Saint Peter. Then as to the Epistles
they all bear the names of Apostles, except that to the Hebrews, which yet is
upon very good grounds presumed to be Saint Paul's. Now these were the persons
commissionated by Christ to preach the Christian doctrine, and were signally
assisted in the discharge of that office; so that as he tells them, it was not
they who spoke, but the spirit of the Father that spoke in them, Mat. 13. 11.
And if they spoke by divine inspiration, there can be no question that they
wrote so also. Nay, indeed of the two, it seems more necessary they should do
the later. For had they erred in any thing they orally delivered, they might
have retracted and cured the mischief: but these Books being designed as a
standing immutable rule of Faith and Manners to all successions, any error in
them would have bin irreparable, and have entailed it self upon posterity:
which agreed neither with the truth, nor goodness of God to permit.

42. Now that these Books were indeed writ by them whose names they bear, we
have as much assurance as it is possible to have of any thing of that nature,
and that distance of time from us. For however some of them may have bin
controverted; yet the greatest part have admitted no dispute, whose doctrins
agreeing exactly with the others, give testimony to them. And to the bulk of
those writings, it is notorious that the first Christians received them from
the Apostles, and so transmitted them to the ensuing Ages, which received them
with the like esteem and veneration. They cannot be corrupted, says Saint
Austin in the thirty second Book against Faustus the Manich. c. 16. because
they are and have bin in the hands of all Christians. And whosoever should
first attemt an alteration, he would be confuted by the inspection of other
ancienter Copies. Besides, the Scriptures are not in some one Language, but
translated into many: so that the faults of one Book would be corrected by
others more ancient, or in a different Tongue.

43. AND how much the body of Christians were in earnest concerned to take care
in this matter, appears by very costly evidences; multitudes of them choosing
rather to part with their lives then their Bibles. And indeed it is a sufficient
proof, that their reverence of that Book was very avowed and manifest; when
their heathen Persecuters made that one part of their persecution. So that as
wherever the Christian Faith was received, this Book was also, under the notion
we now plead for, viz. as the writings of men inspired by God: so it was also
contended for even unto death; and to part with the Bible was to renounce the
Faith. And now, after such a cloud of testimonies, we may sure take up that
(ill-applied) saying of the high Priest, Mat. 26. 65. what farther need have we
of witnesses.

44. YET besides these, another sort of witnesses there are, I mean those
intrinsic evidences which arise out of the Scripture it self; but of these I
think not proper here to insist, partly because the subject will be in a great
degree coincident with that of the second general consideration; and partly
because these can be argumentative to none who are not qualified to discern
them. Let those who doubt the divine Original of Scripture, well digest the
former grounds which are within the verge of reason; and when by those they are
brought to read it with due reverence, they will not want Arguments from the
Scripture it self to confirm their veneration of it.

45. IN the mean time, to evince how proper the former discourse is to found a
rational belief that the Scripture is the word of God; I shall compare it with
those mesures of credibility upon which all human transactions move, and upon
which men trust their greatest concerns without diffidence or dispute.

46. THAT we must in many things trust the report of others, is so necessary,
that without it human society cannot subsist. What a multitude of subjects are
there in the world, who never saw their Prince, nor were at the making of any
Law? if all these should deny their obedience, because they have it only by
hearsay, there is such a man, and such Laws, what would become of government?
So also for property, if nothing of testimony may be admitted, how shall any
man prove his right to any thing? All pleas must be decided by the sword, and
we shall fall into that state (which some have phancied the primitive) of
universal hostility. In like manner for traffic and commerce; how should any
Merchant first attemt a trade to any foreign part of the world, if he did not
believe that such a place there was? and how could he believe that, but upon
the credit of those who have bin there? Nay indeed how could any man first
attemt to go but to the next Market Town, if he did not from the report of
others, conclude that such a one there was, so that if this universal
diffidence should prevail, every man should be a kind of Plantagnus, fixed to
the soil he first sprung up in. The absurdities are indeed so infinite, and so
obvious, that I need not dilate upon them.

47. BuT it will perhaps be said, that in things that are told us by our
contemporaries, and that relate to our own time, men will be less apt to
deceive us, because they know it is in our power to examine and discover the
truth. To this I might say, that in many instances it would scarce quit cost to
do so; and the inconveniences of trial would exceed those of belief. But I
shall willingly admit this probable Argument, and only desire it may be applied
to our main question, by considering whether the primitive Christians who
received the Scripture as divine, had not the same security of not being
deceived, who had as great opportunities of examining, and the greatest concern
of doing it throly, since they were to engage not only their future hopes in
another world, but (that which to nature is much more sensible) all their
present enjoiments, and even life it self upon the truth of it.

48. BuT because it must be confessed that we who are so many Ages removed from
them, have not their means of assurance, let us in the next place consider,
whether an assent to those testimonies they have left behind them, be not
warranted by the common practice of mankind in other cases. Who is there that
questions there was such a man as William the Conqueror in this Island? or, to
lay the Scene farther, who doubts there was an Alexander, a Julius Caesar, an
Augustus? Now what have we to found this confidence on besides the faith of
History? And I presume even those who exact the severest demonstrations for
Ecclesiastic Story, would think him a very impertinent Skeptic that should do
the like in these. So also, as to the Authors of Books; who disputes whether
Homer writ the Iliads, or Virgil the Aeneids, or Caesar the Commentaries, that
pass under their names? yet none of these have bin attested in any degree like
the Scripture. It Is said indeed, that Caesar ventured his own life to save his
Commentaries, employing one hand to hold that above the water, when it should
have assisted him in swimming. But who ever laid down their lives in
attestation of that, or any human composure, as multitudes of men have don for
the Bible?

49. BUT perhaps 'twill be said, that the small concern men have, who wrote
these, or other the like Books, inclines them to acquiesce in the common
opinion. To this I must say, that many things inconsiderable to mankind have
often bin very laboriously discust, as appears by many unedifying Volumes, both
of Philosophers and Schole-men. But whatever may be said in this instance, it is
manifest there are others, wherein men's real and greatest interests are
entrusted to the testimonies of former Ages. For example, a man possesses an
estate which was bought by his great Grandfather, or perhaps elder Progenitor:
he charily preserves that deed of purchase, and never looks for farther
security of his title: yet alas, at the rate that men object against the Bible,
what numberless Cavils might be raised against such a deed? How shall it be
known that there was such a man as either Seller or Purchaser? if by the
witnesses, they are as liable to doubt as the other; it being as easy to forge
the Attestation as the main writing: and yet notwithstanding all these possible
deceits, nothing but a positive proof of forgery can invalidate this deed. Let
but the Scripture have the same mesure, be allowed to stand in force, to be
what it pretends to be, till the contrary be (not by surmises and possible
conjectures) but by evident proof evinced; and its greatest Advocats will ask
no more.

50. A like instance may be given in public concerns: the immunities and rights
of any Nation, particularly here, of our Magna Charta, granted many Ages since,
and deposited among the public Records: to make this signify any thing, it must
be taken for granted, that this was without falsification preserved to our
times; yet how easy were it to suggest that in so long a succession of its
keepers, some may have bin prevailed on by the influence of Princes to abridg
and curtail its concessions; others by a prevailing faction of the people to
amplify and extend it? Nay, if men were as great Skeptics in Law, as they are
in Divinity, they might exact demonstrations that the whole thing were not a
forgery. Yet, for all these possible surmises, we still build upon it, and
should think he argued very fallaciously, that should go to evacuate it, upon
the force of such remote suppositions.

51. Now I desire it may be considered whether our security concerning the holy
Scripture be not as great, nay, greater then it can be of this. For first, this
is a concern only of a particular Nation, and so can expect no foreign
attestation; and secondly, it has all along rested on the fidelity of its
keepers; which has bin either a single person, or at best some small number at a
time; whereas the Scriptures have bin witnessed to by persons of all Nations,
and those not single, but collective Bodies and Societies, even as many as
there have bin Christian Churches through out the world. And the same that are its
Attestors have bin its Guardians also, and by their multitudes made it a very
difficult, if not an impossible thing to falsify it in any considerable degree;
it being not imaginable, as ^ showed before from St. Austin, all Churches shall
combine to do it: and if they did not* the fraud could not pass undetected: and
i^ no eminent change could happen, much less could any new, any counterfeit
Gospel be obtruded, after innumerable Copies of the first had bin translated
into almost all Languages, and dispersed throout the world.

52. THE Imperial Law compiled by Justinian, was soon after his death, by
reason of the inroads of the Goths, and other barbarous Nations, utterly lost
in the Western world and scarce once heard of for the space of five hundred
years, and then came casually to be retriv'd upon the taking of Amalfis by the
Pisans, one single Copy being found there a^ the plundering of the City. And
the whole credit of those Pandects, which have ever since governed the Western
world, depends in a manner on that single Book, formerly called the Pisan; and
now, after that Pisa was taken by the Florentines, the Florentine Copy. But
notwithstanding this; the body of the Civil Law obtains; and no man thinks it
reasonable to question its being really what it pretends to be, notwithstanding
its single, and so long interrupted derivation. I might draw this parallel through
many other instances, but these may suffice to show, that if the Scripture
might find but so much equity, as to be tried by the common mesures of other
things, it would very well pass the test.

53. BUT men seem in this case (like our ^ate Legislators) to set up new
extraregular Courts of Justice, to try those whom no ordinary rules will cast,
yet their designs require should be condemned: And we may conclude, it is not
the force of reason, but of prejudice, that makes them so unequal to themselves
as to reject the Scripture, when they receive every thing else upon far weaker
grounds. The bottom of it is, they are resolved not to obey its Precepts; and
therefore think it the shortest cut to disavow its authority: for should they
once own that, they would find themselves entangled in the most ^nextricable
dilemma; that of the Pharisees about John Baptist: If we say from heaven, he
will say, why then did you not believe him? Mat. 21. 25. If they confess the
Scriptures divine, they must be self-condemned in not obeying them. And truly
men that have such preingagements to their lust, that they must admit nothing
that will disturb them; do but prevaricate when they call for greater evidences
and demonstrations: for those bosom Sophisters will elude the most manifest
convictions and like Juglers, make men disbelieve even their own senses. So
that any other ways o^ evidence will be as disputable with them, as those
already offered: which is the thir^ thing I proposed to consider.

54. IT has bin sometimes seen in popular mutinies, that when blanks have bin
se^ them, they could not agree what to ask: and were it imaginable that God
should so far court the infidelity of men, as to allow them to make their own
demands, to set down what ways of proof would persuade them I doubt not there
are many have obstinac^ enough, to defeat their own methods, as we^ as they now
do Gods. It Is sure there is (...) ordinary way of conviction left for them t^
ask, God having already (as has also b^ showed) afforded that. They must
therefore resort to immediate revelation, expect in stant assurances from
heaven, that this Boo^ we call the Bible is the word of God.

55. MY first question then is, in wha^ manner this revelation must be made to
appear credible to them. The best account w^ have of the several ways of
revelation (...) from the Jews, to whom God was pleas^ upon new emergencies
signally to revel himself. These were first dreams; secondly visions; by both
which the Prophets received their inspiration. Thirdly, Vrim and ^hummim.
Fourthly, the Bath-col (as they ^erm it) Thunder and voice from Heaven. Let us
consider them distinctly, and see whether our Skeptical men may not probably
find ^omwhat to dispute in every one of these. And first for dreams; it is
among us so hard to distinguish between those that arise from constitution,
prepossession of fancy, diabolical, or divine infusion, that those that have
the most critically considered them, do rather difference them by their matter,
then any certain discriminating circumstances: and unless we had some infallible
way of discerning, ^ur dependence on them, may more probably ^etray then direct
us. It Is unquestionable that usually fancy has the greatest stroke in them.
And if he that should commit himself ^o the guidance of his waking fancy, is
not like to be over-wisely governed, what can we expect from his sleeping? All
this and more may doubtless be soberly enough objected against the validity of
our common dreams.

56. BUT admit there were now such divine dreams as brought their evidence
along with them; yet sure it is possible for prejudiced men, to resist even the
clearest convictions. For do we not see some that have made a shift ^o
extinguish that natural light, those notions which are interwoven into the very
frame and constitution of their minds, that so they may sin more at ease, and
without reluctance? and sure it is as possible for them to close their eyes
against all rays from without too, to resist revelation as well as instinct;
and more likely, by how much a transient cause is naturally less operative then
a permanent. An instance of this we have in Balaam, who being in these nightly
visitations prohibited by God to go to Balack; and tho^ he knew then, what he
afterward says, Number 23. 19. that God was not a man that he should lie, nor
the son of man that he should repent; ye^ he would not take God at his first
word, but upon a fresh bait to his covetousness, tries again for an answer more
indulgent to his interest. Besides, if God should thus revele himself to some
particular persons, yet it is beyond all president or imagination, that he
should do it to every man; and then how shall those who have these dreams, be
able to convince others that they are divine?

57. IT IS easy to guess what reception ^ man that produces no other authority,
would have in this ludicrous Age: he would certainly be thought rather to want
sleep, then to have had revelations in it. And if Jacob and the Patriarchs, who
were themselves acquainted with divine dreams, yet did not believe Joseph's; any
man that should now pretend i^ that kind, would be sure to fall under the same
irony that he did, to be entertained with a behold this dreamer comes, Genes.
37. 19.

58. THE second way of revelation by vision was, where the man was wrapped into
an ecstasy, his spirit for a while suspended from all sensible communication
with the body, and entertained with supernatural light. In these the Prophets
saw emblematical representation of future events, received knowledge of divine
Mysteries, and commission and ability to discharge the whole prophetic office.
Now suppose God should now raise us Prophets, and inspire them after this
manner; what would the merry men of this time say to it? Can we think that they
who rally upon all that the former Prophets have writ, would look with much
reverence on what the new ones should say? Some perhaps would construe their
raptures to be but like Mahomets Epilepsy; others a fit of frenzy, others
perhaps a being drunk with new wine, Act. 2. 13. but those that did the most
soberly consider it, would still need a new revelation to attest the truth of
this: there being far more convincing arguments to prove the Scriptures divine,
then any man can allege to prove his inspiration to be so. And it is sure a very
irrational method, to attemt the clearing of a doubt, by somewhat which is it
self more doubtful.

59. A third way, was by Vrim and Thummim, which Writers tell us was an Oracle
resulting from the Letters which were graven in the High Priests Pectoral, to
which in all important doubts the Jews of those Ages resorted, and received
responses; but whether it were by the sudden prominency, or resplendency of
the letters, or by any other way, is not material in this place to enquire: one
thing is certain, that the Ephod, and consequently the Pectoral was in the
Priests custody, and that he had the administration of the whole affair. Now I
refer it to consideration, whether this one circumstance would not (to those
prejudiced men I speak of) utterly evacuate the credit of the Oracle. They have
taught themselves to look on Priesthood, whether Legal or Evangelical, only as
a better name for imposture and cosenage: and they that can accuse the Priests
for having kept up a cheat for so many Ages, must needs think them such
omnipotent Juglers, that nothing can be fence against their Legerdemain: and by
consequence, this way of revelation would rather foment their displesure at the
Ecclesiastics, then satisfy their doubts of the Scripture.

69. LASTLY, for the fourth way, that of thunder and voice from Heaven, tho
that would be a signal way of conviction to unprejudiced men, yet it would
probably have as little effect as the rest upon the others: men that pretend to
such deep reasoning, would think it childish to be frighted out of their
opinion by a clap of Thunder; some philosophical reason shall be found out, to
satisfy them that it is the effect only of some natural cause, and any the most
improbable shall serve turn to supplant the fear of its being a divine
testimony to that which they are so unwilling should be true. As for the voice
from Heaven, it must either be heard by others, and related to them; or else
immediately by themselves: if the former, 'twill lie under the same prejudice
which the Bible already does: that they have it but by hearsay, and reporters
would fall under the reproach either of design or frenzy; that they meant to
deceive, or were themselves deceived by their own distempered fancy. But if
themselves should be Auditors of it; it is odds but their bottomless jealousies
in divine Matters would suggest a possibility of fraud, tho they knew not how
to trace it: nay it is more then possible that they will rather disbelieve their
own senses, then in this instance take their testimony with all its
consequences.

61. NOR is this a wild supposition: for we see it possible not only for single
men, but multitudes to disbelieve their senses, through an excess of credulity;
witness the doctrine of Transubstantiation. Why may it not then be as possible
for others to do the like through a greater excess of incredulity? Besides, men's
prepossessions and affections have a strange influence on their Faith: men many
times will not suffer themselves to believe the most credible things, if they
cross their inclination. How often do we see irregular patients that will not
believe any thing that their appetite craves, will do them hurt, tho their
Physicians, nay, their own even sensitive experience attest it to them? And can
we think that a diseased mind, gasping with an Hydropic thirst after the
plesures of sin, will ever assent to those premises, whose conclusion will
engage to the renouncing them? Will not a luxurious voluptuous person be
willing rather to give his cars the lie, to disbelieve what he hears, then
permit them more deeply to disoblige his other senses, by bringing in those
restraints and mortifications which the Scripture would impose upon them?

62. THUS we see how little probability there is, that any of these ways of
revelation would convince these incredulous men. And indeed, those that will
not believe upon such inducements as may satisfy men of sober reason, will
hardly submit to any other method according to that Assertion of Father
Abraham; If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded, tho one rose from the dead, Luke 16. 31. Now at this rate of
infidelity, what way will they leave God to manifest any thing convincingly to
the world? which is to put him under an impotency greater then adheres to
humanity: for we men have power to communicate our minds to others, tell
whether to we own such or such a thing, to which we are entitled; and we can
satisfy our Auditors that it is indeed we that speak to them: but if every
method God uses, does rather increase then satisfy men's doubts, all intercourse
between God and man is intercepted; and he must do that of necessity, which
Epicurus phancied he did of choice; viz. keep himself unconcerned in the
affairs of mortals, as having no way of communicating with them. Nay what is
yet, if possible, more absurd) he must be supposed to have put the works of his
Creation out of his own reach, to have given men discoursive faculties, and
left himself no way of address to them.

63. THESE inferences how horridly soever they sound, yet I see not how they
can be disclaimed by those, who are unsatisfied with all those ways by which
God has hitherto revel'd himself to the world. For can it be imagined, that
God who created man a reasonable creature, that himself might be glorified in
his free and rational obedience; (when all other creatures obey upon impulse
and instinct) can it, I say, be imagined, that he should so remisly pursue his
own design, as to let so many Ages pass since the Creation, and never to
acquaint manking with the particulars wherein that obedience was to be
exercised. This sure were so disagreeable to his wisdom and goodness, that it
cannot be charged upon his will: and consequently they who own not that he has
made any such revelation, must tacitly tax him of impotence, that he could not
do it. But if any man will say he has, and yet reject all this which both Jews
and Christians receive as such, let him produce his testimonies for the others,
or rather (to retort his own mesure) his demonstrations. And then let it appear
whether his Scheme of doctrine, or ours, will need the greater aid of that easy
credulity he reproaches us with.

64. I have now gone through the method I proposed for evincing the Divine Original
of the Scriptures, and shall not descend to examine those more minute and
particular Cavils which profane men make against them; the proof of this,
virtually superseding all those. For if it be reasonable to believe it the Word
of God, it must be reasonable also to believe it of perfection proportionable
to the Author, and then certainly it must be advanced beyond all our
objections. For to those who except to the style, the incoherence. the
contradictions or whatever else in Scripture; I shall only ask this one
question, whether it be not much more possible that they (who can pretend to be
nothing above fallible men) may misjudg, then that the infallible God should
dictate any thing justly liable to those charges: I am sure they must depart as
much from Reason as Religion, to affirm the contrary. But alas, instead of this
implicit submission to Gods Word, men take up explicit prejudices against it;
condemn it without ever examining the truth of the Allegation. It Is certain,
that in a writing of such Antiquity, whose original Language has Idioms and
Phrases so peculiar, whose Country had customs so differing from the rest of
the world; it is impossible to judge of it without reference to all those
circumstances. Add to this, that the Hebrew has bin a dead Language for well
nigh two thousand years, nowhere in common use: nor is there any other ancient
Book now extant in it, besides those; yet not all neither, of the Old Testament.

65. Now of those many who defame Holy Writ, how few are there that have the
industry to inquire into those particulars? And when for want of knowledge, some
passages seem improper, or perhaps contradictory; the Scripture must bear the
blame of their ignorance, and be accused as absurd and unintelligible, because
themselves are stupid and negligent. It were therefore methinks but a
reasonable proposal, that no man should arraign it, till they have used all
honest diligence, taken in all probable helps for the understanding it: and if
this might be obtained. I believe most of its Accusers would like those of the
woman in the Gospel, Jo. 8. 9. drop away, as conscious of their own
incompetency: the loudest outcries that are made against it, being commonly of
those who fall upon it only as a fashionable theme of discourse, and hope to
acquire themselves the reputation of wits by thus charging God foolishly. But
he that would heartily and uprightly endeavor to comprehend before he judges,
and to that end industriously use those means which the providence of God by
the labors of pious men has afforded him, will certainly find cause to acquit
the Scripture of those imputations which our bold Critics have cast upon it. I
do not say that he shall have all the obscurities of it perfectly clear (...)
to him; but he shall have so many of them as is for his real advantage, and
shall discern such reasons why the rest remain unfathomable, as may make him
not only justify, but celebrate the wisdom of the Author.

66. YET this is to be expected only upon the forementioned condition, viz.
that he come with sincere and honest intentions; for as for him that comes to
the Scripture with design, and wishes to find matter of cavil and accusations;
there is little doubt but tha^ spirit of impiety and profaness which sen^ him
thither, will meet him there as a spirit of delusion and occecation. That
Prince of the Air will cast such mists, raise such black vapors; that as the
Apostle speaks, the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ shall not shine unto
him, 2 Cor. 4. 5. Indeed were such a man left only to the natural efficacy of
prejudice, that is of it self so blinding, so infatuating a thing, as commonly
fortifies against all conviction. We see it in all the common instances of
life; men's very senses are often enslaved by it: the prepossession of a strong
fancy will make the objects of sight or hearing appear quite different from
what they are. But in the present case, when this shall be added to Satanical
illusions, and both left to their operations by Gods withdrawing his
illuminating grace, the case of such a man answers that description of the
Scripture: They have eyes and see not, ears have they and hear not, Romans 11. 8.
And that God will so withdraw his grace, we have all reason to believe; he
having promised it only to the meek; to those who come with malleable ductile
spirits; to learn, not to deride or cavil. Saint Peter tells us, that the
unlearned and unstable wrest the Scripture to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.
15. And if God permit such to do so, much more will he the proud malicious.

67. I say not this, to deter any from the study of Holy Scripture, but only to
caution them to bring a due preparation of mind along with them; Gods Word
being like a generous sovereign medicament; which if simply and regularly
taken, is of the greatest benefit; but if mixed with poison, serves only to make
that more fatally operative. To conclude, he that would have his doubts solved
concerning Scripture, let him follow the method our blessed Lord has described:
Let him do the will of God, and then he shall know of the doctrine, whether it
be of God, Jo. 7. 17. Let him bring with him a probity of mind, a willingness
to assent to all convictions he shall there meet with: and then he will find
grounds sufficient to assure him that it is Gods Word and consequently to be
received with all the submission and reverence, that its being so exacts.

SECT. III. The subject matter treated of in the Holy Scripture is excellent,
as is also its end and design.
WE have hitherto considered the holy Scripture only under one notion, as it is
the Word of God; we come now to view it in the subject matter of it: the
several parts whereof it consists; which are so various and comprehensive, as
shows the whole is derived from him who is all in all, 1 Cor. 19, 28. But that
we may not speak only loosely, and at ^overs, we will take this excellent frame
in pieces, and consider its most eminent parts distinctly. Now the parts of
Holy Writ seem to branch themselves into these severals. First, the Historical;
secondly, the Prophetic; thirdly, the Doctrinal; fourthly, the Preceptive;
fifthly, the Minatory; sixthly, the Promissory. These are the several veins in
this ^ich Mine, in which he who industriously labors, will find the Psalmist
was not out in his estimate, when he pronounces them more to be desired then
gold, yea, then much fine gold, Psalm. 19. 10.

2. To speak first of the Historical part; the things which chiefly recommend a
History are the dignity of the subject, the truth of the relation, and those
pleasant or profitable observations which are interwoven with it. And first, for
the dignity of the subject the History of the Bible must be acknowledged to
excel all others: those show the rise and progress of some one people or Empire
this shows us the original of the whole Universe; and particularly of man, for
whose use and benefit the whole Creation was designed By this mankind is
brought into acquaintance with it self; made to know the elements of its
constitution, and taught to pu^ a differing value upon that Spirit which was
breathed into it by God, Genesis 2. 7. and the fle^^ whose foundation is in the
dust, Job 4. 19. And when this Historical part of Scripture contracts and draws
into a narrow channel, when it records the concerns but of one Nation yet it
was that which God had dignified above all the rest of the world, marked it out
for his own peculiar; made it the repository of his truth, and the visible
stock from whence the Messiah should come, in whom all the Nations of the earth
were to be blessed, Genesis 18. 18. so that in this one people of the Jews, was
virtually infolded the highest and most important interests of the whole world;
and it must be acknowled'gd, no Story could have a nobler subject to treat of.

3. SECONDLY, as to the truth of the relation, tho to those who own it Gods
Word there needs no other proof; yet it wants not human Arguments to confirm
it. The most undoubted symptom of sincerity in an Historian is impartiality.
Now this is very ^minent in Scripture writers: they do not record others
faults, and baulk their own; but indifferently accuse themselves as well as
others. Moses mentions his own diffidence and unwillingness to go on Gods
message, Ex. 4. 13. his provocation of God at the wa^ers of Meribah, Number. 20.
Jonah records his own sullen behavior toward God, with as great aggravations
as any of his enemies ^ould have don. Peter in his dictating Saint Marks
Gospel, neither omits nor extenuates his sin; all he seems to speak short in,
is his ^epentance. Saint Paul registers himself as the greatest of sinners.

4. AND as they were not indulgent to their own personal faults, so neither did
any ^earness of relation, any respect of quality ^ribe them to a concelement:
Moses relates the ossence of his sister Miriam in muti^ing. Number. 12. 1. of his
brother Aaron in the matter of the Calf, Ex. 32. 4. with as little disguise as
that of Korah and his company. David, tho a King, has his adultery and murder
displaied in the blackest characters: and King Hezekiahs little vanity of
showing his tresures, does not escape a remark. Nay, even the reputation of
their Nation could not biass the sacred Writers; but they freely tax their
crimes: the Israclites murmurings in the wilderness, their Idolatries in
Canaan, are set down without any palliation or excuse. And they are as
frequently branded for their stubborness and ingratitude, as the Canaanites are
for their abominations. So that certainly no History in the world does better
attest its truth by this evidence of impartiality.

5. IN the last place it commends it sell both by the pleasure and profit it
yields. The rarity of those events it records, surprises the mind with a
delightful admiration; and that mixture of sage discourses, and wellcoucht
Parables wherewith it abounds, does at once please and instruct. How
ingenuously apt was Nathans Apologue to David, whereby with holy artifice he
ensnared him into repentance? And it remains still matter of instruction to us,
to show us with what unequal scales we are apt to weigh the same crime in
others and our selves. So also that long train of smart calamities which
succeeded his sin, is set out with such particularity, that it seems to be
exactly the crime reverst. His own lust with Bathsheba, was answered with
Amnons toward Thamar; his murder of Vriah with that of Amnon; his treacherous
contrivance of that murder, with Absoloms traitorous conspiracy against him. So
that every circumstance of his punishment, was the very echo and reverberation
of his guilt. A multitude of the like instances might be produced out of holy
Writ; all concurring to admonish us, that God exactly marks, and will repay our
crimes; and that commonly with such propriety, that we need no other clue to
guide us to the cause of our sufferings, then the very sufferings themselves.
Indeed innumerable are the profitable observations arising from the historical
part of Scripture, that flow so easily and unconstrained, that nothing but a
stupid inadvertence in the reader can make him baulk them: therefore 'twould be
impertinent here to multiply instances.

6. LET us next consider the prophetic part of Scripture, and we shall find it
no less excellent in its kind. The prophetic Books are for the most part made
up (as the prophetic Office was) of two parts; prediction and instruction. When
God raised up Prophets, 'twas not only to acquaint men with future events, but
to reform their present manners: and therefore as they are called Seers in one
respect, so they are Watchmen and Shepherds in another. Nay, indeed the former
was often subservient to the other as to the nobler end; their gift of
foretelling was to gain them authority, to be as it were the seal of their
commission; to convince men that they were sent from God: and so to render them
the more pliant to their reproofs and admonitions. And the very matter of their
prophecies was usually adapted to this end: the denouncing of judgments being
the most frequent theme, and that designed to bring men to repentance; as
appears experimentally in the case of Nineveh. And in this latter part of their
office, the Prophets acted with the greatest incitation and vehemence.

7. WITH what liberty and zeal does Elijah arraign Ahab of Naboths murder, and
foretell the fatal event of it, without any fear of his power, or reverence of
his greatness? And Samuel, when he delivers Saul the fatal message of his
rejection, does passionately and convincingly expostulate with him concerning
his sin, 1 Samuel 15. 17. Now the very same Spirit still breaths in all the
propheties Writings: the same truth of prediction, and the same zeal against
vice.

8. FIRST for the predictions, what signal completions do we find? How exactly
are all the denunciations of judgments fulfilled, where repentance has not
intervened? He that reads the 28. chap. of Deuteronomy. and compares it with the Jews
calamities, both under the Assyrians and Babylonians, and especially under the
Romans, would think their opressors had consulted it, and transcribed heir
severities thence. And even these Nations, who were the instruments of
accomplishing those dismal presages, had their own ^uins foretold, and as
punctually executed. And as in Kingdoms and Nations, so to private persons none
of the prophetic threatings ever returned emty. The sentence pronounced against
Ahab, Jezebel, and their ^osterity, was fulfilled even to the most minute
circumstances of place and manner; as is evident by comparing the denunciation
of ^lijah, 1 Kings 21. 19. 23. with their tragical ands recorded in the
following chapters. And as for Jehu, whose service God was pleased ^ use in
that execution, tho he rewarded it with entailing the crown of Israel on him or
four descents; yet he foretold those should be the limits, and accordingly we
find ^achariah, the fourth descendent of his line, was the last of it that sat
on that throne, Kings 15. 10. So also the destruction of ^chitophel and Judas,
the one immediate, he other many hundred years remote, are pre-told by David,
Psalm. 109. and we find exactly answered in the event.

9. NOR was this exactness confined only to the severe predictions, but as
eminent in the more gracious. All the blessings which God by himself, or the
Ministry of his Prophets promised, were still infallibly made good. At the time
of life God returned and visited Sarah with conception, notwithstanding those
natural improbabilities which made her not only distrust, but even deride and
laugh at the promise, Genesis 18. The posterity of that Son of Promise, the whole
race of Abraham was delivered from the Egyptian bondage, and possessed of Canaan,
at the precise time which God had long before signified to Abraham, Genesis 15. So
likewise the return of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity, was foretold
many years before their deportation, and Cyrus named for their restorer before
he had either name or being save only in Gods prescience, If. 44. 28. But I
need not multiply instances of national or personal promises. The earliest, and
most comprehensive promise of all was that of the Messiah, in whom all persons
and Nations of the world were to be blessed, Genesis 22. 11. that see^ of the woman
that should bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3. 15. To him give all the Prophets
witness, as Saint Peter observes, Acts 10. And he who was the subject, made
himself also the expounder of those prophecies in his walk to Emmaus with the
two Disciples, Lu. 24. 1^ beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he
expounded to them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself.

10. THIS as it was infinitely the greatest blessing afforded mankind, so was it
the most frequently and eminently predicted; and that with the most exact
particularity as to all the circumstances. His immaculate conception, the union
of his two natures implied in his name Immanuel; Behold a virgin shall conceive
and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel; is most plainly foretold by
Is. chap. 7. 14. Nay, the very place of his birth so punctually foretold, that
the Priests and Scribes could ^eadily resolve Herod's question upon the strength
of the Prophecy, and assure him Christ must be born in Bethlehem, Mat. 2. 5. As
for the whole business and design of his life, we find it so described by
Isaiah, chap. 61. as Christ himself owns it, Luke 4. 18. The spirit of the Lord
is upon me, because he has appointed me to preach good tidings to the meek; he
has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the
captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord.

11. IF we look farther to his death, the greatest part of the Old Testament
has a direct aspect on it. All the Levitical economy of Sacrifices and
Ablutions were but prophetic Rites, and ocular Predictions of that one
expiatory Oblation. Nay, most of Gods providential dispensations to the Jews,
carried in them types and prefigurations of this. Their rescue from Egypt, the
sprinkling of blood to secure them from the destroying Angel; the Manna with
which they were fed, the Rock which supplied them water: these and many more
referred to Christ, as their final and highest signification.

12. BUT besides these darker adumbration, we have (as the Apostle speaks) a
more sure word of prophecy. Saint Peter in his calculation begins with Moses,
takes Samuel, and the whole succession of Prophets after him, as bearing
witness to this great event of Christ's passion, Acts 4. 22. 24. And indeed he
that reads the Prophets consideringly, shall find it so punctually described,
that the Evangelists do not much more fully instruct him in the circumstances
of it. Daniel tells us his death, as to the kind of it, was to be violent: The
Messiah shall be cut off; and as to the design of it, 'twas not for himself,
Dan. 9. 26. But the Prophet Isaiah gives us more then a bare negative account
of it; and expressly says he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised
for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was on him, and by his
stripes we were healed, chap. 53. 5. And again, ver. 10. Thou shall make his
soul an offering for sin; and ver 11. my righteous Servant shall justify many,
for he shall bear their iniquities. Nor is, Job an Idumean, much short of even
this Evangelical Prophet, in that short Creed of his, wherein he owns him as
his Redeemer, I know that my Redeemer lives, etc. Job. 19. 25,

13. AND as the end, so the circumstances of his sufferings are most of them
under prediction: His extension upon the Cross is mentioned by the Psalmist:
They pierced my hands, and my feet; I may tell all my bones, Psalm. 22. 16. 17.
As for his inward dolors, they are in that Psalm so pathetically described,
that Christ chose that very form to breath them out in: My God, my God, why
have thou for saken one? ver. 1. So his revilers did also transcribe part of
their reproaches form ver. 8. He trusted in God; let him deliver him now if he
will have him, Mat. 27. 43. That vinegar which was offered him on the Cross,
was a completion of a prophecy; In my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink, Ps.
69. 21. the piercing of his side was expressly foretold by Zachary; they shall
look on him whom they have pierced, Zach. 10. 12. The company in which he
suffered and the interment he had, are also intimated by Isaiah: he made his
grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, Isai. 53. 9. Nay, even
the disposal of his garments was not without a prophecy: they parted my
garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots, Ps. 22. 18. Here
are a cloud of witnesses, which as they serve eminently to attest the truth of
Christian Religion; so do they to evince the excellency of sacred Scripture, as
to the verity of the prophetic part.

14. As to the admonitory part of the prophetic Writings, they are in their
kind no way inferior to the other. The reproofs are autoritative and
convincing. What piercing exprobrations do we find of Isreal's ingratitude? How
often are they upbraided with the better examples of the brute creatures? with
the Ox and the Ass by Isaiah, chap. 1. 3. with the Stork and the Crane, and the
Swallow, by Jeremiah, chap. 8. 7. Nay, the constancy of the Heathen to their
false gods is instanced to reproach their revol^ from the true. Has a Nation
changed their gods which yet are no gods! but my people have changed their
glory for that which does not profit. Jer. 2. 11. What awful, what majestic
representations do we find of Gods power, to awake their dread! Fear ye not me
says the Lord? will ye not tremble at my presence; who have placed the sand
for the bounds of the sea by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass over and
tho the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; tho they roar,
yet can they not pass over it? Jer. 22. And again, Thus says the high and
lofty one that inhabiteth eternity whose name is holy: I dwell in the high and
holy place, If. 57. 15. So we find him described as a God glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, doing wonders, Ex. 15. 11. These and many other the like
heights of divine eloquence we meet with in the prophetic Writings: which
cannot but strike us with an awful reverence of the divine Power.

15. NOR are they less pathetic in the gentler strains. What instance is there
of the greatest tenderness and love, which God has not adopted to express his
by? He personates all the nearest and most endearing relations: that of a
Husband; I will marry thee to my self, Hos. 2. 19. of a Father; I am a Father
to Israel, and Ephraim is my first born: nay, he ^ies bowels with the tender
sex, and makes it more possible for a mother to renounce her ^ompassions
toward the son of her womb, then for him to withdraw his, Isa. 49. 15. By all
these endearments, these cords of a man, these bands of love, as himself styles
them, Hos. 11. 4. endeavoring to draw his people to their duty, and their
happiness. And when their per^erseness frustrates all this his holy Artifice;
how passionately does he expostulate with them? how solemnly protest his
aversness to their ruin? Why will ye die O house of Israel? for I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32.
with what regrets and relentings does he think of abandoning them? How shall I
give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make thee as
Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within me, my
repentings are kindled together; Hos. 11. 8. In short, 'twere endless to cite
the places in these prophetic Books, wherein God does thus condescend to
solicit even the sensitive part of man; and that with such moving Rhetoric,
that I cannot but wonder at the exception some of our late Critics make against
the Bible, for its defect in that particular: for Oratory is nothing but a
dextrous application to the assections and passions of men. And certainly we
find not that don with greater advantage any where then in sacred Writ.

16. YET it was not the design of the Prophets (no more then of the Apostle) to
take men with guile, 2 Cor. 12. 16. to inveigle their affections unawares to
their understandings; but they address as well to their reasons, make solemn
appeals to their judicative faculties. And now judge I pray between me and my
vineyard, saics Isa. 5. 3. Nay, God by the Prophet Ezekiel solemnly pleads his
own cause before them* vindicates the equity of his proceedings from the
aspersions they had cast on them; and by most irrefragable Arguments refutes
that injurious proverb which went current among them; and in the close appeals
to themselves, O house of Israel are not my ways equal, are not your ways
unequals Ezekiel. 18. the evidences were so clear that he remits the matter to
their own determination. And generally we shall find that among all the Topics
of disswasion from sin, there is none more closely pressed, then that of the
folly of it. Idolatry was a sin to which Israel had a great propension, and
against which most of the Prophets admonitions were directed. And certainly it
can never be more exposed and the sottish unreasonableness of it better
displaied, then we find it in the 44. chap. of Isaiah. In like manner we may
read the Prophet Jeremy dissuading from the same sin by Arguments of the most
irrefragable conviction, Jer. 10.

17. AND as the Prophets omitted nothing as to the manner of their address, to
render their exhortations effectual, the matter of them was likewise so
considerable as to command attention; It was commonly either the recalling them
from their revolts and Apostacies from God by Idolatry, or else to convince
them of the insignificancy of all those legal ceremonial performances they so
much confided in, when taken up as a supersedeas to moral duties. Upon this
account it is, that they often depreciate, and in a manner prohibit the
solemnest of their worships. To what purpose are the multitude of your
sacrifices unto me? bring no more vain oblations: incense is an abomination to
me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies I cannot away with:
it is iniquity even your solemn meetings, etc. Is. 1. 11. 13. Not that these
things were in themselves reprovable; for they were all commanded by God; but
because the Jews depended so much on these external observances, that they
thought by them to commute for the weightier matters of the Law (as our Savior
after styles them) Judgment, Mercy and Faith, Mat. 23. 23. looked on these Rites
which discriminated them from other Nations, as dispensations from the
universal obligations of nature and common justice.

18. THIS deceit of theirs is sharply upbraided to them by the Prophet Jeremy;
where he calls their boasts of the temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord,
lying words: and on the contrary, lays the whole stress of their obedience,
and expectation of their happiness on the justice and innocence of their
conversation, chapter 7. 4. And after does smartly reproach their insolence in
boldly resorting to the house, which by bringing their sins along with them,
they made but an Asylum, and Sanctuary for those crimes. Will ye steal, murder
and commit adultery, and swear falsely and burn incense to Baal, and walk after
other gods whomye know not, and come and stand before me in this house? Is this
house which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? chap.
7. 9, 10, 11. Indeed all the Prophets seem to conspire in this one design, of
making them look through shadows and ceremonies, to that inward purity, Justice
and Honesty, which they were designed to inculcate, not to supplant. And this
design as it is in it self most excellent, most worthy the command of God, and
the nature of man; so we have seen that it has bin pursued by all the most apt,
and most powerful mediums, that the thing or persons addressed to were capable
of; and so that the Prophets are no less eminent for the discharge of this
exhortatory part of their office, then they were in the former, of the
predicting.

19. THE next part of Scripture we are to consider, is the Doctrinal; by which
I shall not in this place understand the whole complex of Faith and Manners
together; but restrain it only to those Revelations which are the object of our
Belief: and these are so sublime, as shows flesh and blood never revel'd them.
Those great mysteries of our Faith, the Trinity, the Incarnation, the
Hypostatical union, the Redemtion of the world by making the offended party the
sacrifice for the offense, are things of so high and abstruse speculation, as
no finite understanding can fully fathom. I know their being so, is by some made
an Argument for disbelief; but doubtless, very unjustly: for (not to insist
upon the different natures of Faith and Science, by which that becomes a proper
object of the one which is not of the other) our non-comprehension is rather an
indication that they have a higher rise; and renders it infinitely improbable
that they could spring from man's invention. For 'twere to suppose too great a
disproportion between human faculties, to think men could invent what
themselves could not understand. Indeed these things lie so much out of the
road of human imagination, that I dare appeal to the breasts of the most
perverse gain-saiers, whether ever they could have fallen into their thoughts
without suggestion from without. And therefore it is a malicious contradiction
to reject these truths because of their dissonancy from human reason, and yet
at the same time to ascribe their original to man. But certainly there can be
nothing more inconsistent with mere natural reason, then to think God can be or
do no more then man can comprehend. Never any Nation or person that owned a
Deity, did ever attemt so to circumscribe him: and it is proportionable only to
the licentious profaness of these later days, thus to mesure immensity and
omnipotence by our narrow scantling.

20. THE more genuine and proper effect of these supernatural truths, is, to
raise our admiration of that divine Wisdom, whose waier are so past finding
out; and to give us a just sense of that infinite distance which is between it,
and the highest of that reason wherein we so pride our selves. And the great
propriety these doctrins have to that end, may well be ^eckon'd as one part of
their excellency.

21. INDEED there is no part of our holy Faith, but is naturally productive of
some peculiar virtue; as the whole Scheme together engages us to be universally
holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 15. And it is the supereminent
advantage true Religion has over all false ones, that it tends to so laudable
an end.

22. THE Theology of the Heathens was ^n many instances an extract and
quintessence of vice. Their most solemn Rites, and sacredest Mysteries were of
such a nature, that instead of refining and elevating, they corrupted and
debased their Votaries; immerst them in all those abominable pollutions which
sober nature abhorred. Whereas the principles of our Faith serve to
spiritualize and rectify us, to raise us as much above mere manhood as theirs
cast them below it.

23. AND as they are of this vast advantage ^o us, so also are they just to
God, in giving us ^ight notions of him. What vile unworthy ^pprehensions had
the Heathen of their Dei^ies; intitling them not only to the passions but even
to the crimes of men: making Jupiter an adulterer, Mercury a thief, Bacchus a
^runkard, etc. proportionably of the rest? Whereas our God is represented to us
as an essence, so spiritual, and incorporeal, that we must be unbodied our
selves before we can perfectly conceive what he is: so far from the impotent
affections and inclinations of men that he has neither parts, nor passions; and
is fain to veil himself under that disguise, to speak sometimes as if he had,
merely in condescension to our grosser faculties. And again, so far from being
an example, a patron of vice, this his eyes are too pure to behold iniquity,
Hab. 1. 13. Holiness is an essential part of his nature, and he must deny
himself to put it off.

24. THE greatest descent that ever he made to humanity, was in the incarnation
of the second person: yet even in that, tho he was linked with a sinful nature,
yet he preserved the person immaculate; and while he had all the sins of the
world upon him by imputation, suffered not any one to be inherent in him.

25. To conclude, the Scripture describes our God to us by all those glorious
Attributes of infinity, Power and Justice, which may render him the proper
object of our Adorations and Reverence: and it describes him also in those
gentler Attributes of Goodness, Mercy and Truth, which may excite our love of
and dependence on him. These are representations something worthy of God, and
such as impress upon our mind great thoughts of him.

26. BUT never did the divine Attributes so concur to exert themselves, as in
the mystery of our Redemtion: where his Justice was satisfied without
diminution to his Mercy; and his Mercy without entrenching on his Justice: his
Holiness most eminent in his indignation against sin, and yet his Love no less
so in sparing sinners: these contradictions being reconciled, this discord
composed into harmony by his infinite Wisdom. This is that stupendous Mystery
into which the Angels desired to look, 1 Pet 1. 12. And this is it which by the
Gospel is preached unto us; as it follows, ver. 25.

27. AND as the Scripture gives us this knowledge of God, so it does also of our
selves; in which two, all profitable knowledge is comprised. It teaches us how
vile we were in our original dust; and how much viler yet in our fall, which
would have sunk us below our first principles, sent us not only to earth, but
hell. It shows the impotence of our lapsed estate: that we are not able of our
selves so much as to think a good thought: and it shows us also the dignity of
our renovated estate, that we are heirs of God, and fellow-heirs with Christ,
To. 8. 17. yet lest this might puff us up with mistaken hopes; it plainly
acquaints us with the condition on which this depends; that it must be our
obedience both active and passive, which is to entitle us to it: that we must
be faithful to death, if we mean to inherit a crown of life, Rev. 2. 10. and
that we must suffer with Christ, if we will be glorified with him. To. 8. 17.
And upon supposition that we perform our parts of the condition, it gives us
the most certain assurance, engages Gods veracity that he will not fail on his.
By this it gives us support against all the adversities of life; assuring us
the sufferings of it are not worthy to be compared with the glory we expect.
Romans 8. 18. yea, and against the terrors of death too; by assuring us that what
we look on as a dissolution, is but a temporary parting; and we only put off
our bodies, that they may put of corruption, and be clothed with immortality.

28. THESE and the like are the doctrins the holy Scripture offers to us: and
we may certainly say, they are faithful sayings, and worthy of all acceptance,
1 Timothy 4. 15. The notions it gives us of God are so sublime and great, that
they cannot but affect us with reverence, and admiration: and yet withal, so
amiable and endearing that they cannot but raise love and gratitude, affiance
and delight.

29. AND, which is yet more, these milder Attributes are apt to inspirit us
with a generous ambition of assimilation; excite us to transcribe all his
imitable excellencies: in which the very Heathens could discern consisted the
accomplishment of human felicity.

30. AND then the knowledge it gives us of our selves, does us the kindest
office imaginable: keeps us from those swelling thoughts we are too apt to
entertain, and shows us the necessity of bottoming our hopes upon a firmer
foundation: and then again keeps us from being lazy or secure, by showing us
the necessity of our own endevors. In a word, it teaches us to be humble and
industrious, and whoever is so ballasted can hardly be shipwrackt.

31. THESE are the excellencies of the doctrinal part of Scripture, which also
renders them most aptly preparative for the preceptive. And indeed, so they
were designed: the Credenda and the Agenda being such inseparable relations,
that whoever parts them, forfeits the advantage of both. The most solemn
profession of Christ, the most importunate invocations, Lord, Lord, will
signify nothing to them which do not the things which he says, Mat. 7. And how
excellent, how rational those precepts are which the Scripture proposes to us
from him, is our next point of consideration.

32. THE first Law which God gave to mankind was that of nature. And tho the
impressions of it upon the mind be by Adams fall exceedingly dimmed and
defaced; yet that derogates nothing from the dignity and worth of that Law,
which God has bin so far from cancelling, that he seems to have made it the
rule and square of his subsequent Laws: so that nothing is enjoined in those,
but what is consonant and agreeable to that. The Moral Law given in the
Decalogue to the Jews, the Evangelical Law given in the Gospel tho Christians,
have this natural Law for their basis and foundation. They license nothing
which that prohibits, and very rarely prohibit any thing which it licenses.

33. IT IS true, Christ in his Sermon on the Mount, raises Christians to a
greater strictness then the Jews thought themselves obliged to; but that was
not by contradicting either the natural, or moral Law, but by rescuing the
later from those corruptions which the false glosses of the Scribes and
Pharisees had mixed with it; and reducing it to its primitive integrity, and
extent. In a word, as the Decalogue was given to repair the defacings, and
renew the impressions of the natural Law; so the precepts of the Gospel were
designed to revive and illustrate both. And accordingly we find Christ, in the
matter of divorce, calls them back to this natural Law; In the beginning it was
not so, Mat. 19. 8. I say not but that even these natural notions are in some
instances refined and elevated by Christ; the second Adam being to repair the
fall of the first with advantage: but yet he still builds upon that
groundwork, introduces nothing that is inconsistent with it.

34. AND this accordance between these several Laws is a circumstance that
highly recommends Scripture precepts to us. We cannot imagine but that God who
made man for no other end but to be an instrument of his glory, and a recipient
of all communicable parts of his happiness, would assign him such rules and
mesures as were most conducive to those ends. And therefore since the Scripture
injunctions are of the same mould, we must conclude them to be such as tend to
the perfection of our being; the making us what God originally intend us; and
he that would not be that, will certainly choose much worse for himself.

35. I know there have bin prejudices taken up against the precepts of Christ,
as if they imposed unreasonable, unsupportable strictnesses upon men: and some
have assumed liberty to argue mutinously against them; nay, against God too for
putting such natural appetites into men, and then forbidding them to satisfy
them.

36. BUT the ground of this cavil is the not rightly distinguishing of natural
appetites, which are to be differenced according to the two states of rectitude
and depravation: those of the first rank are the appetites God put into man;
and those were all regular and innocent, such as tended to the preservation of
his being: nature in its first integrity mesuring its desires by its needs. Now
Christ's prohibitions are not directed against these, he forbids no one kind of
these desires. And tho the precept of self-denial may sometimes restrain us in
some particular acts; yet that is but proportionable to that restraint Adam was
under in relation to the forbidden tree, a particular instance of his
obedience, and fence of his safety. So that if men would consider nature under
this its first and best notion, they cannot accuse Christ of being severe to it.

37. BUT it is manifest they take it in another acception, and mean that
corruption of nature which inordinatly inclines to sensitive things; and on
this account they call their riots, their luxuries, appetites put into them by
God: whereas it is manifest this was superinduced from another coast: The wise
man gives us its true pedigree in what he says of death, which is its
twin-sister: By the envy of the devil came death into the world, Wis. 2. 24.
And can they expect that Christ who came to destroy the works of the devil, 1 John 3. 8. should frame Laws in their favor, make Acts of toleration and
indulgence for them? This were to annul the whole design of his coming into the
world* which was to restore us from our lapst estate, and elevate us to those
higher degrees of purity which he came not only to ^rescribe, but to exemplify
to us.

38. BUT in this affair men often take nature ^n a yet wider and worse notion;
and under natural desires comprehend whatever upon any sort of motive they have
a mind to do. The awe of a superior, the importunity of a companion, custom,
and example, make men do many ill things, to which their nature would never
promt them; nay, many times such as their nature relucts to, and abhors, ^is
certainly thus in all debauchery and excess. It Is evident, it gratifies no man's
nature to be drunk, or to lie under undigested loads of meats: these are
outrages and violences upon nature, take it only in the most sensi^ive notion,
such as the struggles to avert: and yet men make her bear, not only the
oppression, but the blame too.

39. BUT besides it is to be considered, that the nature of a man includes
reason as well as sense, and to this all sorts of luxury are yet more
repugnant, as that which clouds the mind, and degrades the man (who in his
constitution is a rational being) and sets him ^n the rank of mere animals: and
certainly these can be no appetites of nature, which thus subvert it.

40. THE like may be said concerning revenge, particularly that absurdest sort
of it, duels; which certainly are as great contradictions to nature as can be
imagined, the unravelling and cancelling its very first principle of
self-preservation, (which in other instances men bring in bar against duty.)
And yet men will say the generosity of their natures compels them to it; so
making their natures a kind of felo de se to prompt the destroying it self:
when alas it is only the false notion they have got of honor that so engages
them. And if men would but soberly consider, they must be convinced that there
is nothing more agreeable to reason then that precept of Christ of not
retaliating injuries; which is in effect but to bid us to choose a single
inconvenience before a long train of mischiefs. And certainly if nature even in
its depraved estate were left to determine, it would resolve it a better
bargain to go off with a reprochful word, then to lose a limb, perhaps a life
in the revenge of it. There being no maxim more indisputable, then that of
evils the least is to be chosen. And the innate principle of self-love does
more strongly biass nature to preserve it self, then any external thing can to
destroy ir.

41. know 'twill be said to this, that revenge is a natural appetite: but I say
still, selfpreservation is more so; and would prevail against as much of
revenge as is natural, were it not heightened and fortified by fancy, and that
Chimera of point of honor, which, as it is now stated, is certainly one of the
most emty nothings that ever was brought in balance with solid interests. And
indeed it is to belie nature, and suppose it to have forfeited all degrees of
reason, as well as virtue, to fasten ^o absurd a choice upon her. But admit
re^enge to be never so much the dictate of corrupt nature; it is certain it is
not of primitive regular nature. Revenge is but a relative to ^njury: and he
that will say God put the ap^etite of revenge into man, must say he put the
appetite of injury into him also: which ^s such an account of the sixth days
creation, ^s is hardly consistent with Gods own testimony of its being very
good, Genesis 1.

42. BESIDES, it is certain all the desires God infused into human nature, were
such as ^ended to its preservation; but this of revenge, is of all other the
most destructive, as ^s too sadly attested by the daily tragical effects of it.
In short, the wise man gives a good summary of the whole matter: God made man
^pright, but he sought out many inventions, Eccl. 7. 29.

43. NOW if man have by his own voluntary act depraved himself, it would be
neither just nor kind in God to warp his Laws to man's now distorted frame; but
it is both, to keep up the perfect rectitude of those, and call upon man to
reduce himself to a conformity with them: and when to this is added such a
supply of grace as may silence the plea of disability, there can nothing be
imagined more worthy of God, or more indulgent to man.

44. AND all this Christ does in the Gospel in those precepts which the blind
world makes the subject of their cavil or scorn. It were an easy task to evince
this in every particular precept of the Gospel; but I shall content my self
with the instances already given, and not swell this Tract by insisting upon
what has already bin the subject of so many pious and excellent discourses, as
must already have convinced all but the obstinate.

45. WE proceed therefore to a view of the promissory parts of Scripture; in
which we are first in general to observe the great goodness of God, in making
any promises at all to us; and next to examine of what nature and excellence
these promises are. And first if we consider how many titles God has to our
obedience, we must acknowledge he may challenge it as his undoubted right: We
are the work of his hands; and if the Potter have power over the clay (the
materials whereof are not of his making) much more has God over his creatures,
whose matter as well as form is wholly owing to him. We are the price of his
blood. And if men account purchase an indefeisible title, God must have
absolute dominion over what he has bought, and at so dear a price too as his
own blood. Lastly we depend upon him for the support of that being he has given
us: we live merely upon his bounty, spend upon his stock. And what Patron will
not expect observance from one who thus subsists by him?

46. YET as if God had none of these claims, these preingagements upon us, he
descends to treat with us as freemen, by way of Article and compact; buies his
own of us, and engages to reward that obedience, which he might upon the utmost
penalties exact: which is such an astonishing indulgence as our highest
gratitude cannot reach: and of this the sacred Scriptures are the evidences and
records; and therefore upon that account deserve at once our reverence, and our
joy.

47. BUT this will yet farther appear, if we look in the second place into the
promises themselves; which are so extensive as to take in both our present and
future state: according to that of the Apostle; Godliness has the promise of
this life, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. For the present, they are
proportioned to the several parts of our composition; the body, and the mind,
the outward and the inward man; so stretching themselves to all we can really
be concerned for in this world.

48. AND first for the body, the Old Testament abounds in promises of this
sort. The first part of the 28. of Deuteronomy. contains a full catalogue of all
temporal blessings; and those irreversibly entailed upon the Israelites
obedience, ver. 1. The Psalmist tells us, they that fear the Lord shall lack
nothing, Ps. 34. 9. that they shall not be confounded in the perilous time,
and in the days of dearth they shall have enough, Ps. 37. 19. And Solomon,
that the Lord will not suffer the righteous to famish, Pro. 10. 3. And tho
under the Gospel, the promises of temporal affluence seem not so large; (its
design being to spiritualize us, and raise our minds to higher injoiments;) yet
it gives us ample security of so much as is really good for us. It supersedes
our care for our selves by assuring us all these things shall be added to us,
Mat. 6. 33. that is, all those things which our heavenly Father knows we have
need of, ver. 32. which is all the limitations the context gives. And certainly
we have little temtation to fear want, who have him for our provider; whose are
all the beasts of the Forest, and the cattle upon a thousand hills, Ps. 50. 10.

49. AND when we are thus secured of all things necessary, it may perhaps be an
equal mercy to secure us from great abundance; which at the best, is but a
lading ones self with thick clay, in the Prophets phrase, Hab. 2. 6. but is
often a snare as well as a burden.

50 BESIDES, the Gospel by its precepts of temperance and self-denial, does so
contract our appetites, that a competence is a more adequate promise to them,
then that of superfluity would have bin: and it is also the mesure wherein all
the true satisfaction of the senses consist; which are gratified with moderate
plesures, but suffocated and overwhelmed with excessive. The temperat man tastes
and relishes his portion, whilst the voluptuous may rather be said to wallow in
his plenty then enjoy it.

51. AND as the necessaries of life, so life it self, and the continuance of
that, is a Scripture promise. The fifth Commandment affixes it to one
particular duty: but it is in a multitude of places in the Old Testament
annexed to general obedience. Thus it is, Deuteronomy. 11. 9. and again, ver. 21. And
Solomon proposes this practical wisdom as the multiplier of days: By me they
days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be increased, Pro.
9. 11. and chap. 3. Length of days is in her right hand, ver. 16. And tho we
find not this promise repeted in the New Testament, yet neither is it
retracted: it is true, the Gospel bids us be ready to lay down our lives for
Christ's sake, but it tells us withal, that he that will lose his life, shall
save it: which tho it be universally true only in the spiritual sense, yet it
often proves so in a literal. It did so eminently in the destruction of
Jerusalem, where the most resolute Christians escaped, while the base compliers
perished together with those they sought to endear. This is certain, that if
the New Testament do not expressly promise long life, yet it does by its rules
of temperance and sobriety, contentedness and cheerfulness, very much promote
it: and so does virtually and efficaciously ratify those the Old Testament made.

52. THE next outward blessing is reputation: and this also is a Scripture
promise. The wise shall inherit glory, Prove. 3. 38. And the virtuous woman
Solomon describes, is not only blessed by her children and husband, but she is
praised in the gate, Pro. 31. ult. Nay, this blessing is extended even beyond
life. The memory of the just shall be blessed, Pro. 10. 7. Nor does the Gospel
evacuate this promise; but rather promts us to the ways of having it made good
to us, by advising us to abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 These. 5. 22. to
provide for honest things, not only in the sight of God, but also in the sight
of men, 2 Cor. 8. 21.

53. IT IS true indeed, Christ fore-warns his Disciples that they shall be
reviled, and have all manner of evil spoken against them falsely, for his names
sake: but then the cause transformed the sufferings, and made it so honorable,
that they were to count it matter of oy, Mat. 5. 11, 12. Neither was this any
paradox even in relation to their reputation; which tho sullied by a few ill
men of that age, yet has bin most illustrious among all Ages since. Their
sufferings and indignities gave them a new title of honor, and added the Martyr
to the Apostle. And the event has bin proportionable in all successions since:
Those holy men that filled up the Pagan prisons, filled up the Churches Diptycs
also, and have bin had as the Psalmist speaks, in everlasting remembrance, Ps.
112. 6.

54. AND as Scripture-promises thus take in all the concerns of the outward
man, so do they also of the inward. The fundamental promise of this kind, is
that of sending Christ into the world, and in him establishing the ^ew
Covenant, which we find, Jer. 31. 31. and is referred to by the Author to the
Hebrews, I will put my Laws in their hearts, and write them in their minds; and
their sins and ^niquities will I remember no more, Heb. 10. 16.

55. AND this is so comprehensive a promise as includes all the concerns of the
inward man. The evils incident to the mind of man may be reduced to two;
impurity, and inquietude: and here is a cure to both. The divine Law written in
the heart, drives hence all those swarms of noysom lust, which ^^ke the
Egyptian Frogs overrun and putrify ^he soul. Where that is seated and
enshrined, those can no more stand before it, the Dagon before the Ark. This
repairs the divine Image in us (in which consists the perfection of our nature)
renews us in the spirits of our minds, Ephesians. 4. 22. and purges our consciences
from dead works, Heb. 6. 4. which all the Cathartics and Lustrations among the
Heathen, all the sacrifices and ceremonies of the Law were not able to do.

56. SECONDLY, this promise secures the mind from that restlesness and
unquietness, which attends both the dominion and guilt of sin. To be subject to
a man's lusts and corrupt appetites is of all others the vilest vassallage: they
are the cruellest taskmasters, and allow their slaves no rest, no intermission
of their drudgery, And then again, the guilt that tortures and racks the mind
with dreadful expectations, keeps it in perpetual agitation and tumult; which
is excellently described by the Prophet Isaiah, The wicked is like the troubled
sea, when it cannot rest; whose waters cast out mire and dirt: there is no
peace says my God to the wicked, Is. 48. 22. How prosperous soever vice may
seem to be in the world, yet there are such secret pangs and horrors that dog
it, that as Solomon says, eve^ in laughter the heart is sorrowful, Prove. 14.
13.

57. BUT this Evangelical promise of being merciful to our iniquities, and
remembering our sins no more, calms this tempest, introduces peace and serenity
into the mind, and reconciles us at once to God and our selves. And sure we may
well say with the Apostle, these are great and precious promises, ^. Pet. 1. 4.

58. THERE are besides many other which spring from these principal, as suckers
from the root: such are the promises of fresh supplies of grace upon a good
imploiment of the former. To him that has shall be given, Mat. 25. 29. Nay,
even of the source and fountain of all grace. He shall give the holy spirit to
them that ask him, Mat. 7. 11. Such is that of supporting us in all
difficulties and as^aults: the not suffering us to be temted above that we are
able, 1 Cor. 10. 13. which like Gods bow set in the clouds, Genesis 9. is our
security, that we shall not be overwhelmed by any ^eluge of temtation: and (to
instance no more) such is that comprehensive promise of hearing our prayers,
Ask and it shall be given you, Mat. 7. 7. This puts all good things within our
reach, gives us the key of Gods Storehouse, from whence we may furnish our
selves with all that is really good for ^s. And if a few full Barns could temt
the ^ich man in the Gospel, to pronounce a Re^uiem to his soul; what notes of
acquiescence may they sing, who have the command of an ^^exhaustible store;
that are supplied by him whose is the earth, and the fullness thereof?

59. AND certainly, all these promises together must be (to use the Apostles
phrase) strong consolation; such as may quiet and calm all the fears and
griefs, all the tumults and perturbations of the mind, in relation to its
present state. But then there are others relating to the future of a much
higher elevation: those glories and felicities of another world, which are so
far beyond our narrow conception, that the comprehension and injoiment must
begin together. The Scripture shadows it out to us by all the notions we have
of happiness: by glory, Romans 8. 18. by a kingdom, Mat. 25. 14. by joy, Mat. 25.
21. and which comprehends all, by being with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17. seeing
him face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. being like to him, 1 Jo. 3. 2. In a word it is
bliss in the utmost extent: immense for quantity, and eternal for duration.

60. AND surely this promise is so excellent for kind, so liberal in its
degree, so transcendently great in all respects, that did it stand single,
stripped of all those that relate to this life, it alone would justify the name
of Gospel, and be the best tidings that ever came to mankind. For alas, if we
compare the hopes that other Religions propose to their Votaries with these,
how base, how ignoble are they! The Heathens Elysium, the Mahumetan Paradise,
were but higher gratifications of the sensual part, and consequently were
depressions and debasements of the rational. So that in effect they provided a
heaven for the beast, and a hell for the man. We may therefore confidently
resume our conclusion, and pronounce the Scripture promises to be so divine and
excellent, that they could as little have bin made, as they can be performed by
any but an holy and almighty Author.

61. NOR is their being conditional any impeachment to their worth, but an
enhansement. Should God have made them (as some fancy he has his decrees)
absolute and irrespective; he had set his promises at war with his precepts,
and these should have superseded what those injoin. We are all very niggardly
toward God, and should have bin apt to have asked Judas's question; to what
purpose is this wast? Mat. 26. 8. What needs the labor of the course if the
prize be certain? And it must have bin infinitely below the wisdom and majesty
of the supreme Legislator, to make Laws, and then evacuate them by dispencing
rewards without any aspect on their observance. It Is the Sanction which
inspirits the Law, without which the divine, as well as the human, would to
most men be a dead letter.

62. BUT against this God has abuntdantly provided, not only by the
conditionality of the promises, but the terror of his threats too; which is the
last part of Scripture which falls under consideration. And these are of the
most direful kinds; and cannot better be illustrated then by the opposition
they stand in to the promises: for as those included all things that might make
men happy either as to this life or the next; so these do all that may make
them miserable. If we make our reflection on all the particulars of the
promises, we shall find the threats answering them as their reverse or dark
shadow.

63. AND first as concerning the outward state, if we look but into the 28 of
Deuteronomy. we shall find, that after all the gracious promises which begun the
chapter, it finally ends in thunder, in the most dreadful denunciations
imaginable, and those adapted by a most peculiar opposition to the former
promises: as the Reader may see at large in that Chapter. And the whole tenor
of the Scripture go's in the like style. Thus, Psalm. 140. 11. A wicked person
shall not prosper in the earth, evil shall hunt the wicked man to overthrow
him. The Lord will not suffer the righteous to famish, but he casts out the
substance of the wicked; Pro. 10. 3. And again, the righteous eats to the
satisfying of his soul, but the belly of the wicked shall want, Pro. 13. 25.
Multitudes of like general threatenings of temporal improsperity there are every
where scattered through out the Scripture; and many more applied to particular
vices, as sloth, unmercifulness, luxury, and the like; which would be here too
long to enumerate.

64. AND although these threatenings may seem sometimes to be literally confuted by
the wealth and opulency of wicked men, yet they never miss of being really and
vertually verified. For either their prosperities are very short, and only
preparative to a more eminent ruin, which was the Psalmists resolution of this
doubt, Psalm. 72. or else if God leave them the matter of temporal happiness,
yet he substracts the virtue and spirit of them, renders them emty and
unsatisfying. This is well expressed by the Psalmist in the case of the
Israelites: He gave them their desire, and sent leaness withal into their
soul, Psa. 106. 15. and by Zophar, Job. 20. 22. where speaking of the wicked,
he says; In the fullness of his sufficiency shall he be in straits. And to this
Solomon seems to refer, when he says, the blessing of the Lord makes rich,
and he adds no sorrow with it, Pro. 10. 22.

65. NEITHER is it only the comforts of life, but life it self that is
threatened to be taken from wicked men: untimely death is throout the Old
Testament frequently mentioned as the guerdon of impiety: it is often assigned
judicially in particular cases: He shall be cut off from his people, being the
usual sentence upon most offenders under the Levitical Law. But it is also
menaced more generally as an immediate judgment from God: The blood-thirsty and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days, Psalm, 55. 23. Farther yet,
their names shall putrify as soon as their Carcasses: the name of the wicked
shall rot; Pro. 10. 7. Nay both their infamy and their ruin are entailed upon
their posterity. The seed of evil doers shall never be renowned. Prepare
slaughter for his children, for the iniquity of their fathers; Isa. 14. 20. 21.

66. IF now we look on Scripture threatenings in relation to the mind of man, we
shall find them yet more severe: wilful impenitent sinners being cut off from
the benefits of the new covenant, nor barely so, but looked upon as despisers
of it, and that blood of Christ in which it was sealed; Heb. 10. 29. nay as
those murtherous Wretches that shed it: They crucify to themselves the Son of
God afresh; Heb. 6. 6. And this is the fataliest sentence that can fall on any
man in this life; to be thus disfranchised of all the privileges of the Gospel,
and ranckt as well in punishment as guilt, with the most criminous of mankind.

67. FROM hence it is consequent, that the mind remains not only in its native
impurity, but in a greater and more incurable one; whilst that blood which
alone could cleanse it, serves but to embrue and pollute it; and as it were
flush, and excite it to all immanities and vilenesses: and he that is thus
filthy, it is the doom pronounced against him, that he shall be filthy still,
Rev. 22. 11.

68. AND then in the second place, what calm can there be to such a mind? what
remains to such a person, but that fearful expectation of wrath and fiery
indignation, which the Apostle mentions, Heb. 10. 27. Indeed, were there none
but temporal mischiefs to fear, yet it were very unplesant to think ones self,
like Cain, out-lawed from the presence and protection of God; to be afraid that
every man that meets us should slay us, Genesis 4. 14. Nay, those confused
indistinct fears of indefinite evils which attend guilt, are very unquiet
uneasy inmates in the mind. This is excellently described by Moses; The Lord
shall give thee a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind, and
thy life, shall ^ang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day and night;
in the morning thou shall say, would God it were evening, and in the evening,
would God it were morning, Deuteronomy, 28. 65, 66, 67.

69. AND what can be more wretched then to have a mind thus agitated and tossed,
rackt and tortured; especially when through all these clouds it sees a glimpse of
the eternal To^het; and knows, that from the billows of this uneasy state, it
must be tossed into that Lake of fire. And this is indeed the dregs of the cup of
Gods wrath, the dreadfullest and most astonishing of all Scripture
denunciations. This comprehends all that the nature of man is capable of
suffering. Divines distinguish it into the pain of sense, and of loss: that of
sense is represented to us in Scripture by fire; and that accended, and
rendered noisome as well as painful by brimstone, that afflicts the smell as
well as the touch: sometimes by outer darkness, wailing and gnashing of teeth,
to grate the ears, and consume the eyes; by intolerable thirst, to torment the
palate. Not that we are to think the sensitive pains of Hell do not infinitely
exceed all these; but because these are the highest mesures our present
capacities can make, and are adequate to those senses for whose carnal
satisfactions we incur them.

70. THE pain of loss is yet more dismal; as being seated in the soul, whose
spiritual nature will then serve it only to render its torments more refined,
and acute. With what anguish will it then see it self banished from the
presence of God, and consequently from all that may give satisfaction and bliss
to the creature? But yet with how much deeper anguish will it reflect on it
self as the Author of that deprivation? How will it recollect the many despised
tenders of grace, the easy terms on which salvation might have bin had? And how
sadly will conscience then revenge all its stifled admonitions by an
unsilenceable clamor, that worm which never dies, Mar. 9. 48. How wounding will
it then be to see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the Saints in the kingdom
of God, Luke 13. 28. (nay, that poor Lazarus, whom here men turned over to the
charity of their dogs) and it self in the company of the devil and his angels,
who will then upbraid what they once enticed to?

71. NATURE abhors nothing more then to have our misery insulted over by those
who drew us into it: yet that no circumstance may be lacking to their torment,
this must be the perpetual entertainment of damned souls. And to all this
Eternity is the dismal adjunct; which is of all other circumstances the most
disconsolate, as leaving not so much as a glimpse of hopes; which here uses
still to be the reserve, and last resort of the miserable.

72. THIS Eternity is that which gives an edg, infuses a new acrimony into the
torments: and is the highest strain, the vertical point of misery. These are
those terrors of the Lord, with which the Scripture acquaints us: and sure we
cannot say that these are flat contemtible menaces; but such as suit the
dreadful Majesty of that God who is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. So that
these are as aptly accommodated for the exciting our dread, as the promises
were of our love: both jointly concur to awake our industry.

73. FOR God has bin so good to mankind, as to make the threats conditional as
well as the promises: so that we as well know the way to avoid the one, as we
do to attain the other. Nor has he any other intendment or end in proposing
them, but that we may do so. See to this purpose, with what solemnity he
protests it by Moses; I call heaven and earth to record against you this day
that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live, Deuteronomy. 30. 19.

74. I have now run through the several parts of Scripture I proposed to speak of.
And tho I have in each given rather short instances and essaies then an exact
description, yet even in these contracted lineaments the exquisit proportions
may be discerned. And if the Reader shall hence be encouraged to extend his
contemplations, and as he reads holy Scripture, observe it in all its graces,
and full dimensions; I doubt not he will pronounce from his experience, that
the matter of the divine Book is very correspondent to the Author: which is the
highest Eulogy imaginable.

75. IN the next place we are to consider the holy Scripture in relation to its
end and design; in proportion to which every thing is more or less valuable.
The most exquisit frame, and curious contrivance, that has no determinat end or
use, is but a piece of industrious folly, a Spiders web, as the Prophet speaks,
Isa. 59. 5. Now those designs have always been esteemed the most excellent
that have had te most worthy subjects, and bin of the greatest extent.
Accordingly, those who have projected the obliging and benefiting of other men
(tho but within a private Sphere) have always bin looked on as men of generous
and noble designs. Those who have taken their level higher, and directed their
aim to a more public good, tho but of a City or Nation, have proportionably
acquired a greater esteem. But those who have aspired to be universal
benefactors, to do something for the common benefit of the world, their fame has
commonly teach'd as far as their influence; men have reverenced, nay sometimes
(according to the common excesses of man's nature) adored them. Many of the
heathen deities (especially their demigods) having bin only those persons, who
by introducing some useful Art, or other part of knowledge, had obliged mankind.
So we see what a natural gratitude men are apt to pay to worthy and generous
designs. And if we will be content but to stand to this common award of our
nature, the Scripture will have the fairest claim imaginable to our reverence
and thankfulness, upon this very account of the excellency of its designs.

76. NOR need we borrow the balance of the Sanctuary to weigh them in; we may
do it in our own scales; for they exactly answer the two properties above
mentioned, of profit and diffusiveness which in secular concerns are the
standard rules of good designs. For first, it is the sole scope and aim of
Scripture, the very end for which 'twas writ, to benefit and advantage men; and
that secondly, not only some small select number, some little angle or corner of
the world, but the whole race of mankind, the entire Universe; and he that can
imagine a more diffusive design, must imagine more worlds also.

77. NOW for the first of these, that it is the design of the Scripture to
benefit men, we need appeal but to Scripture it self; which surely can give the
best account to what ends it is directed; and that tells us, it is to make us
wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. In which is comprehended the greatest
benefit that man's nature is capable of: the making us wise while we live here,
and the saving us eternally. And this sure is the most generous, the most
obliging design, that it is possible even for the Creator to have upon the
creature: and this is it which the holy Scripture negotiates with us.

78. AND first, the making us wise, is so inviting a proposal to humanity, that
we see when that was much wiser then now it is, it caught at a fallacious
tender of it; the very sound of it, tho out of the devils mouth, fascinated our
first Parents, and hurried them to the highest disobedience, and certainest
ruin. And therefore now God by the holy Scriptures makes us an offer as much
more safe, as it is more sincere; when he sends his Word thus to be a lamp to
our feet, and a light to our paths, Ps. 119. 105. to teach us all that is good
for us to know, our affectation of ignorance will be more culpable then theirs
of knowledge, if we do not admire the kindness, and embrace the bounty of such a
tender.

79. NOW the making us wise must be understood according to the Scripture
notion of wisdom, which is not the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of
this world, which come to ^ought, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 2. 5. but that
wisdom which descends from above, Ja. 3. 17. which he there describes to be
first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy. Indeed the Scripture
usually comprehends these and all other graces under Wisdom; for it makes it
synonymous to that which includes them all, viz. the fear of the Lord. Thus we
find throout the whole Book of Proverbs these used as terms convertible. In
short, Wisdom is that practical knowledge of God and our selves which engages us
to obedience and duty; and this is agreeable to that definition the Wise man
gives of it; The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way, Pro. 14. 8.
Without this, all the most refined and aerial speculations, are but like
Thales's star-gazing; which secured him not from falling in the water; nay,
betrayed him to it. In this is all solid wisdom comprised.

80. THE utmost all the wise men in the world have pretended to, is but to know
what true happiness is, and what is the means of attaining it; and what they
sought with so much study, and so little success, the Scripture presents us
with in the greatest certainty, and plainest characters, such as he that runs
may read, Hab. 2. 2. It acquaints us with that supreme felicity, that chief
good whereof Philosophy could only give us a name; and it shows us the means,
marks us out a path which will infallibly lead us to it. Accordingly we find
that Solomon after all the accurate search he had made to find what was that
good for the sons of men; he shuts up his inquest in this plain conclusion:
Fear God and keep his commandments; for God shall bring every work unto
judgment, Eccles. 12. 13, 14 The regulating our lives so by the rules of Piety,
as may acquit us at our final account, is the most eligible thing that falls
within human cognizance; and that not only in relation to the superlative
happiness of the next world, but even to the quiet and tranquillity of this.
For alas, we are impotent giddy crea^ures, swai'd sometimes by one passion,
som^imes by another; nay often the interfearing of our appetites makes us
irresolute which we are to gratify, whilst in the interim their ^trugling
agitates and turmoils the mind. And what can be more desirable in such a ^ase,
then to put our selves under a wiser conduct then our own; and as oppressed
States ^se to defeat all lesser pretenders by becoming homagers to some more
potent: so for us to deliver our selves from the tyranny of our ^usts, by
giving up our obedience to him whose service is perfect freedom.

81. WERE there no other advantage of the exchange, but the bringing us under
fixed and determinat Laws, 'twere very consideraable. Every man would gladly
know the terms of his subjection, and have some standing ^ule to guide himself
by; and Gods Laws are ^o; we may certainly know what he requires of us: but the
mandats of our passions are ^rbitrary and extemporary: what pleases them to day
disgusts them to morrow; and we must always be in readiness to do we know not
what, and of all the Arbitrary governments that men either feel or fear, ^his
is doubtless the most miserable. I wish our apprehensions of it were but as
sensible: and then we should think the holy Scripture did us the office of a
Patriot, in offering us a rescue from so vile a slavery.

82. AND that it does make us this offer, is manifest by the whole tenor of the
Bible. For first it rowzes and awakes us to a sense of our condition, shows us
that what we call liberty, is indeed the saddest servitude; that he that
commits sin is the servant of sin, Jo. 8. 34. that those vices which pretend
to serve and gratify us, do really subdue and enslave us, and fetter when they
seem to embrace: and whereas the will in all other oppressions retains its
liberty, this tyranny brings that also into vassallage: renders our spirits so
mean and servile, that we choose bondage; are apt to say with the Israelites,
Let us alone that we may serve the Egyptians, Ex. 14. 12.

83. AND what greater kindness can be don for people in this forlorn abject
condition, then to animate them to cast off this yoke, and recover their
freedom. And to this are most of the Scripture exhortations addressed; as may be
seen in a multitude of places, particularly in the sixth chapter to the Romans,
the whole scope whereof is directly to this purpose.

84. NOR does it only sound the alarm, put us upon the contest with our
enemies, but it assists us in it, furnishes us with that whole armor of God
which we find described, Ephesians. 6. 13. Nay further it excites our courage, by
assuring us that if we will not basely surrender our selves, we can never be
overpowered if we do but stand our ground; resist our enemy, he will fly from
us; Ja. 4. 7. And to that purpose it directs us under what banner we are to
list our selves; even his who has spoiled principalities and powers, Col. 2.
15. to whose conduct and discipline if we constantly adhere, we cannot miss of
victory.

85. AND then lastly it sets before us the prize of this conquest; that we
shall not only recover our liberty, manumit our selves from the vilest bondage
to the vilest and cruellest oppressors; but we shall be crowned for it too, be
rewarded for being kind to our selves, and be made happy eternally hereafter
for being willing to be happy here.

89. AND sure these are terms so apparently advantageous, that he must be
infinitely stupid (foolish to destruction) that will not be thus made wise unto
salvation, that despifes or cavils at this divine Book, which means him so much
good, which designs to make him live here generously and according to the
dignity of his nature, and in the next world to have that nature sublimated,
and exalted, made more capacious of those refined and immense felicities, which
there await all who will qualify themselves for them; who (as the Apostle
speaks) by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality, eternal life, Romans 2. 7.

87. BUT besides the greatest and principal advantages which concern our
spiritual interest, it takes in also the care of our secular, directs us to
such a managery of our selves, as is naturally apt to promote a quiet and happy
life. Its injunction to live peaceable with all men, keeps us out of the way of
many misadventures, which turbulent unruly spirits meet with, and so secures
our peace. So also as to wealth, it puts us into the fairest road to riches by
prescribing diligence in our callings: what is thus got being like sound flesh,
which will stick by us; whereas the hasty growth of ill-gotten wealth is but a
tumor and impostume, which the bigger it swells, the sooner it bursts and
leaves us lanker then before. In like manner it shows us also how to guard our
reputation, by providing honest things not only in the sight of God, but also
in the sight of men, Cor. 8. 28. by abstaining even from all appearance of
evil, 1 These. 5. 22. and making our light shine before men, Mat. 5. 16. It
provides too for our ease and tranquillity, supersedes our anxious cares and
sollicitud's, by directing us to cast our burden upon the Lord, Psalm. 55. 22.
and by a reliance on his providence how to secure to our selves all we really
want. Finally it fixes us in all the changes, supports us under all the
pressures, comforts us amidst all the calamities of this life, by assuring us
they shall all work together for good to those that love God; To. 8. 28.

88. NOR does the Scripture design to promote our interests considered only
singly and personally, but also in relation to Societies and Communities; it
gives us the best rules of distributive and commutative Justice; teaches us to
render to all their dues, To. 13. 7. to keep our words, to observe inviolably
all our pacts and contracts; nay tho they prove to our damage. Psa. 15. 4. and
to preserve exact fidelity and truth; which are the sinews of human commerce.
It infuses into us noble and generous principles, to prefer a common good
before our private: and that highest flight of Ethnic virtue, that of dying for
ones Country, is no more then the Scripture prescribes even for our common
brethren, 1 To. 3. 16.

89. BUT besides these generals, it descends to more minute directions
accommodated to our several circumstances; it gives us appropriate rules in
reference to our distinct relations, whether natural, civil, ecclesiastical, or
oeconomical. And if men would but universally conform to them, to what a
blessed harmony would it tune the world? what order and peace would it
introduce? There would then be no oppressive Governors, nor mutinous Subjects;
no unnatural Parents, nor contumacious Children: no idle Shepherds, or straying
Flocks: none of those domestic jars which often disquiet, and sometimes subvert
families: all would be calm and serene; and give us in reality that golden Age,
whereof the Poets did but dream.

90. THIS tendency of the Scripture is remarkably acknowledged in all our
public Judicatories, where before any testimony is admitted, we cause the
person that is to give his testimony, first to lay hold of with his hands, then
with his mouth to kiss the holy Scriptures: as if it were impossible for those
hands, which held the mysteries of Truth, to be immediately emploi'd in working
falsehood; or that those lips which had adored those holy Oracles, should be
polluted with perjuries and lies. And I fear, the civil Government is
exceedingly shaken at this day in its firmest foundation, by the little regard
is generally had of the holy Scriptures, and what is consequent thereto, the
oaths that are taken upon them.

91. IT IS true, we are far removed from that state which Esaiah prophesied of
under the Gospel, tho we have the Bible among us; that when the Law should go
forth of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, they should heat their
swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks, Es. 2. 4. but
that is not from any defect in it, but from our own perverseness: we have it,
but (as the Apostle speaks in another sense) as if we had it not, 1 Cor. 7. 29.
We have it (that is, use it) to purposes widely different from what it means.
Some have it as a Supersedeas to all the duty it injoins; and so they can but
cap texts, talk glibly of Scripture, are not at all concerned to practice it:
some have it as their Arsenal, to furnish them with weapons, not against their
spiritual enemies, but their secular: applying all the damnatory sentences they
there find, to all those to whose persons or opinions they have prejudice. And
some have it as a Scene of their mirth, a topic of raillery, dress their profane
and scurrilous jests in its language; and study it for no other end but to
abuse it. And whilst we treat it at this vile rate, no wonder we are never the
better for it. For alas, what will it avail us to have the most sovereign
Balsom in our possession, if instead of applying it to our wounds, we trample
it under our feet?

92 BUT tho we may frustrate the use, we cannot alter the nature of things.
Gods design in giving us the Scripture was to make us as happy as our nature is
capable of being; and the Scripture is excellently adapted to this end: for as
to our eternal felicity, all that believe there is any such state, must
acknowledge the Scripture chalks us out the ready way to it: not only because
it is dictated by God who infallibly knows it, but also by its prescribing those
things which are in themselves best; and which a sober Heathen would adjudg
fittest to be rewarded. And as to our temporal happiness, I dare appeal to any
unprejudiced man, whether any thing can contribute more to the peace and real
happiness of mankind, then the universal practice of the Scripture rules would
do. Would God we would all conspire to make the experiment; and then doubtless,
not only our reason, but our sense too would be convinced of it.

93. AND as the design is thus beneficial, so in the second place is it as
extensive also. Time was when the Jews had the enclosure of divine Revelation;
when the Oracles of God were their peculiar depositum, and the Heathen had not
the knowledge of his Laws, Ps. 147. ult. but since that by the goodness of God
the Gentiles are become fellow-heirs, Ephesians. 3. 6. he has also delivered into
their hands the deeds and evidences of their future state, given them the holy
Scriptures as the exact and authentic registres of the covenant between God and
man, and these not to be like the heathen Oracles appropriated to some one or
two particular places, so that they cannot be consulted but at the expense of a
pilgrimage; but laid open to the view of all that will believe themselves
concerned.

94. IT was a large commission our Savior gave his Disciples; go preach the
Gospel to every creature, Mar. 16. 15. (which in the narrowest acception must
be the Gentile world) and yet their oral Gospel did not reach farther then the
written: for wherever the Christian Faith was planted, the holy Scriptures were
left as the records of it; nay, as the conservers of it too; the standing rule
by which all corruptions were to be detected. It Is true, the entire Canon of
the New Testament, as we now have it, was not all at once delivered to the
Church; the Gospels and Epistles being successively writ, as the needs of
Christians, and the encroachments of Heretics gave occasion: but at last they
became all together the common magazine of the Church, to furnish arms both
defensive and offensive. For as the Gospel puts in our hands the shield of
Faith, so the Epistles help us to hold it, that it may not be wrested out of
our hands again, either by the force of persecution, or the sly insinuations of
vice or heresy.

95. THUS the Apostles like prudent leaders, have beat up the Ambushes,
discovered the snares that were laid for us; and by discomfiting Satan's forlorn
hope, that earliest Set of false teachers and corrupt practices which then
invaded the Church, have laid a foundation of victory to the succeeding Ages,
if they will but keep close to their conduct, adhere to those sacred Writings
they have left behind them in every Church for that purpose.

96. Now what was there deposited, was designed for the benefit of every
particular member of that Church. The Bible was not committed (like the
Regalia, or rarities of a Nation) to be kept under lock and key (and
consequently to constitute a profitable office for the keepers) but exposed
like the Brazen Serpent for universal view and benefit: that sacred Book (like
the common air) being every man's propriety, yet no man's enclosure: yet there
are a generation of men whose eyes have bin evil, because Gods have bin good:
who have sealed up this spring, monopoliz'd the word of Life, and will allow
none to partake of it but such persons, and in such proportions as they please
to retail it: an attemt very insolent in respect of God, whose purpose they
contradict; and very injurious in respect of man, whose advantage they
obstruct. The iniquity of it will be very apparent, if we consider what is
offered in the following Section.

SECT. IV. The Custody of the holy Scripture is a privilege and right of the
Christian Church, and every member of it; which cannot without impiety to God,
and injustice unto it and them, be taken away or empeacht.
BESIDES the keeping of the divine Law, which is obsequious, and imports a due
regard to all its Precepts, commonly expressed in Scripture by keeping the
commandments, harkening to, and obeying the voice of the Lord, walking in his
ways, and observing and doing his statutes and his judgments: there is a
possessory keeping it, in reference to our selves and others; in respect
whereof, Almighty God, Deuteronomy. 6. and elsewhere frequently, having enjoined the
people of Israel, to love the Lord their God with all their heart, and with all
their soul, and with all their might, and that the words which he commanded
them should be in their heart, he adds, that they shall teach them diligently
to their children, and shall talk of them when they sit down in their houses,
and when they walk by the way, and when they lie down, and when they rise up:
and that they bind them for a sign upon their hand, and that they shall be as
froutlets between their eyes, and that they shall write them upon the posts of
their house, and on their gates. So justly was the Law called the Scripture,
being written by them, and worn upon the several parts of the body, inscribed
upon the walls of their houses, the entrance of their doors and gates of their
Cities; and in a word, placed before their eyes wherever they conversed.

2. AND this was granted to the Jews, as matter of privilege and favor. To
them, says Saint Paul, Romans 9. 4. pertains the adoption, and the glory, and
the covenants, and the giving of the Law. And the same Saint Paul, at the 3.
chap. 2. v. of that Epistle, unto the question, what advantage has the Jew, or
what prosit is there of circumcision, answers, that it is much every way,
chiefly because unto them were committed the Oracles of God. This depositum or
trust was granted to the Fathers, that it should be continued down unto their
children. He made a covenant, says David, Ps. 78. v. 5. with Jacob, and gave
Israel a Law, which he commanded our Forefathers to teach their children, that
their posterity might know it, and the children which were yet unborn: to the
intent that when they came up, they might show their children the same. Which
Scripture by a perpetual succession was to be handed down unto the Christian
Church, the Apostles on all occasions appealing unto them, as being read in the
Synagogues every Sabbath day, Act. 13. 27. and also privately, in their hands;
so that they might at pleasure search into them, Jo. 5. 39. Act. 17. 11.
Hereupon the Jews are by Saint Austin called the Capsarii, or servants that
carried the Christians Books. And Athanasius in this Tract of the Incarnation,
says, The Law was not for the Jews only, nor were the Prophets sent for them
alone; but that Nation was the Divinity-Schole of the whole world; from whence
they were to fetch the knowledge of God, and the way of spiritual living: which
amounts to what the Apostle says, Galat. 3. 24. That the Law was a
Schole-master to bring us unto Christ.

3. AND it is observable that the very same word, Romans 3. 2. in the Text even
now recited, which expresses the committing of the Oracles of God to the Jews,
is made use of constantly by Saint Paul, when he declares the trust and duty
incumbent on him in the preaching of the Gospel: of which, see 1 Cor. 9. 17.
Gal. 2. 7. 1 These. 2. 4. 1 Timothy 1. 11. Tit. 1. 3. And therefore, as he says, 1
Cor. 9. Tho I preach the Gospel I have nothing to glory of; for necessity is
laid upon me, yea, woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel, for if I do this
thing willingly, I have a reward; but if against my will, a dispensation of the
Gospel is committed unto me: So may all Christians say; if we our selves keep
and transmit to our posterities the holy Scriptures, we have nothing to glory
of, for a necessity is laid upon us, and woe be unto us if we do not our selves
keep, and transmit to our posterity the holy Scriptures. If we do this thing
willingly, we have a reward, but if against our will, the custody of the
Gospel, and at least that dispensation of it, is committed to us. But if we are
Traditors, and give up our Bibles, or take them away from others; let us
consider how black an apostasy and sacrilege we shall incur.

4. THE Mosaic Law was a temporary constitution, and only a shadow of good
things to come, Heb. 10. 1. but the Gospel being in its duration as well as its
intendment, everlasting, Rev. 14. 6. and to remain when time shall be no more,
Rev. 10. 6. it is an infinitely more precious depositum, and so with greater
care and solemner attestation to be preserved. Not only the Clergy, or the
people of one particular Church, nor the Clergy of the universal are entrusted
with this care; but it is the charge, the privilege and duty of every Christian
man, that either is, or was, or shall be in the world; even that collective
Church which above all competition, is the pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy
3. 15. against which the assaults of men and devils, and even the gates of hell
shall not prevail, Mat. 16. 18.

5. THE Gospels were not written by their holy Penmen to instruct the
Apostles, but to the Christian Church, that they might believe Jesus was the
Christ, the son of God, and that believing they might have life through his name,
Jo. 20. 31. The Epistles were not addressed peculiarly to the Bishops and
Deacons, but all the holy brethren, to the Churches of God that are sanctified
in Jesus Christ, and to all those that call upon the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, Romans 1, 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 1. Galat. 1. 2. Ephesians. 1. 1. Col. 4.
16. 1 These. 5. 27. Phil. 1. 1. Jam. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 1. Revel. 1.
4. Or if by chance some one or two of the Epistles were addressed to an
Ecclesiastic person, as those to Timothy and Titus, their purport plainly
refers to the community of Christians, and the depositum committed to their
trust; Tim. 6. 20. And Saint John on the other side directs his Epistles to
those who were plainly secular; to fathers, young men and little children; and
a Lady and her children, Epist. 1. chap. 2. 12. 13, 14. and Epist. 2. 1. 1.

6. BUT besides the interest which every Christian has in the custody of the
Scripture upon the account of its being a depositum entrusted to him, he has
also another no less forcible; that it is the Testament of his Savior, by which
he becomes a Son of God, no more a Servant but a Son; and if he be a Son, it is
the Apostles inference, that he is then an heir, an heir of God through Christ,
Gal. 4. 7. Now as he who is heir to an estate, is also to the deeds and
conveiances thereof; which without injury cannot be detained, or if they be,
there is a remedy at Law for the recovery of them: So it fares in our Christian
inheritance; every believer by the privilege of faith, is made a son of
Abraham, and an heir of the promises made unto the fathers, whereby he has an
hereditary interest in the Old Testament; and also by the privilege of the same
Faith he has a firm right to the purchased possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. and the
charter thereof, the New. Therefore the detention of the Scriptures, which are
made up of these two parts, is a manifest injustice, and sacrilegious invasion
of right, which the person wronged is empowered, nay, is strictly obliged by
all lawful means to vindicate.

7. WHICH invasion of right, will appear more flagrant when the nature and
importance of it is considered; which relating to men's spiritual interest,
renders the violation infinitely more injurious then it could be in any secular.
I might mention several detriments consequent to this detention of Scripture,
even as many as there are benefits appendant to the free use of it; but there
is one of so fundamental and comprehensive a nature, that I need name no more;
and that is, that it delivers men up to any delusion their teachers shall
impose upon them, by depriving them of means of detecting them. Where there is
no standard or mesures, it is easy for men to falsify both; and no less easy is
it to adulterate doctrins, where no recourse can be had to the primary rule.
Now that there is a possibility that false teachers may arise, we have all
assurance; nay we have the word of Christ, and his Apostles that it should be
so: and all Ecclesiastic Story to attest it has bin so. And if in the first and
purest times (those Ages of more immediate illumination) the God of this world
found instruments whereby to blind men's minds, 2 Cor. 4. 4. it cannot be
supposed impossible or improbable he should do so now.

8. BUT to leave generals, and to speak to the case of that Church which
magisterially prohibits Scripture to the vulgar: she manifestly stands liable
to that charge of our Savior, Luke 11. 52. Ye have taken away the key of
knowledge: and by allowing the common people no more Scripture then what she
affords them in their Sermons and private Manuals, keeps it in her power to
impose on them what she pleases. For it is sure those portions she selects for
them, shall be none of those which clash with the doctrins she recommends: and
when ever she will use this power to the corrupting their faith, or worship
(yea, or their manners either) they must brutishly submit to it, because they
cannot bring her dictats to the test.

9. BUT 'twill be said, this danger she wards by her doctrine of infallibility:
that is, she enervates a probable supposition attested by event, by an
impossible one confuted by event. For it is certain, that all particular
Churches may err; and tho the consciousness of that, forces the Roman Church
upon the absurd pretense of universality, to assert her infallibility; yet
alas, Tyber may as well call it self the Ocean, or Italy the world, as the
Roman Church may name it self the universal; whilst it is so apparent that far
the less part of Christians are under her communion. And if she be but a
particular Church, she has no immunity from errors, nor those under her from
having those errors (how pernicious soever) imposed upon them. As to her having
actually erred, and in diverse particulars, the proof of that has bin the work
of so many Volumes, that 'twould be impertinent here to undertake it: I shall
only instance in that of Image Worship; a practice perfectly irreconcilable
with the second Commandment; and doubtless, clearly discerned by her to be so:
upon which account it is, that tho by Translations and Paraphrases she wrests
and moulds other Texts to comply with her doctrins, yet she dares not trust to
those arts for this: but takes a more compendious course, and expunges the
Commandment; as is evident in her Catechisms and other Manuals. Now a Church
that can thus sacrilegiously purloin one Commandment (and such a one as God has
owned himself the most jealously concerned in) and to delude her children split
another to make up the number, may as her needs require, substract and divide
what others she please: and then whilst all resort to Scripture is obstructed;
how fatal a hazard must those poor souls run, who are obliged to follow these
blind, or rather these winking guides into the ditch?

10. BUT all these criminations she retorts by objecting the dangers of
allowing the Scriptures to the vulgar, which she accuses as the spring of all
Sects, Schisms, and Heresies. To which I answer first, that supposing this were
true, 'twas certainly foreseen by God, who notwithstanding laid no restraint;
probably as foreseeing, that the dangers of implicit faith (to which such a
restraint must subject men) would be far greater: and if God saw fit to indulge
the liberty, those that shall oppose it, must certainly think they do not only
partake, but have transplanted infallibility from God to themselves.

11. BUT secondly, it is not generally true, that Sects, Schisms, and Heresies
are owing to this liberty; All Ecclesiastical Story shows us that they were not
the illiterat Laymen, but the learned Clarks who were usually the broachers of
Heresies. And indeed many of them were so subtle and aerial, as could never
have bin forged in grosser brains; but were founded not on Scripture merely
mistaken. but rackt and distorted with nice criticisms, and quirks of Logic, as
several of the Ancients complain: some again sprang from that ambition of
attaining, or impatience of missing Ecclesiastical dignities: which
appropriates them to the Clergy. So that if the abuse infer a forfeiture of the
use, the Learned have of all others the least title to the Scriptures; and
perhaps those who now ingross them, the least title of all the Learned.

12. ON the other side, Church-story indeed mentions some lay-propugners of
Heresies; but those for the most part were either so gross and bestial; as
disparaged and confuted themselves and Authors, and rose rather from the
brutish inclination of the men, then from their mistakes of Scripture: or else
they were by the immediate infusion of the devil, who backed his heretical
suggestions with sorceries and lying wonders, as in Simon Magus, Menander, etc.
And for later times, tho sometimes there happens among the vulgar a few
pragmatic spirits, that love to tamper with the obscurest Texts, and will
undertake to expound before they understand; yet that is not their common
temper: the generality are rather in the other extreme, stupid and unobservant
even of the plainest doctrins. And if to this be objected the multitude of
Quakers and Fanatics, who generally are of the ignorant sort; I answer, that
it is manifest the first propugners of those tenets in Germany were not seduced
into them by mistakes of Scripture, but industriously formed them, at once to
disguise and promote their villainous designs of sedition and rapine: and as
for those amongst us, it is not at all certain that their first errrors were
their own productions: there are vehement presumtions that the seeds were sown
by greater Artificers; whose first business was to unhinge them from the
Church, and then to fill their heads with strange Chimera's of their privileges
and perfections; and by that intoxication of spiritual pride, dispose them for
all delusions: and thereby render them, like Samsons Foxes, fit instruments to
set all in combustion.

13. BUT admit this were but a conjecture, and that they were the sole Authors
of their own frenzy; how appears it that the liberty of reading the Scripture
was the cause of it? Had these men bin of the Romish communion, and so bin
interdicted private reading, yet some broken parts of Scripture would have bin in
Sermons and Books of devotion communicated to them; had it not bin as possible
for them to have wrested what they heard as what they read? In one respect it
seems rather more likely: for in those loose and incidental quotations the
connection is sometimes not so discernable: and many Texts there are whose sense
is so interwoven with the context, that without consulting that, there may be
very pernicious mistakes: on which account it is probably more safe that the
Auditor should have Bibles to consult. So that this restraint of Scripture is a
very fallible expedient of the infallible Church. And indeed themselves have in
event found it so: for if it were so sovereign a prophylactic against error,
how comes it to pass that so many of their members who were under that
discipline have revolted from them into that which they call heresy? If they
say, the defection was made by some of the Learned to whom the Scripture was
allowed, why do they not (according to their way of arguing) take it from them
also upon that experiment of its mischief, and confine it only to the
infallible chair? but if they own them to have bin unlearned (as probably the
Albigenses and Waldenses, etc. were) they may see how insignificant a guard
this restraint is against error: and learn how little is got by that policy
which controles the divine Wisdom.

14 NOR can they take shelter in the example of the primitive Christians: for
they in the constant use of the holy Scriptures yielded not unto the Jews.
Whereas the Jews had the Scriptures read publicly to them every Sabbath day;
which Josephus against Appion thus expresses: Moses propounded to the Jews the
most excellent and necessary learning of the Law; not by hearing it once or
twice, but every seventh day laying aside their works, he commanded them to
assemble for the hearing of the Law, and thoroughly and exactly to learn it.
Parallel to this was the practice of the primitive Church, performed by the
Lector, or Reader, of which Justin Martyr in his 2. Apol. gives this account.
On the day called Sunday, all that abide in towns or the countries about, meet
in one place, and the writings of the Apostles and Prophets are read, so far as
there is place. So Tertullian in his Apol. describing the offices in the public
Assemblies: We feed our faith with the sacred Words, we raise our hopes, and
establish our reliance.

15. AND as the Jews thought it indecent for persons professing piety, to let
three days pass without the offices thereof in the congregation; and therefore
met in their Synagogues upon every Tuesday and Thursday in the week, and there
performed the duties of fasting, prayer, and hearing the holy Scriptures;
concerning which is the boast of the Pharisee, Luke 18. 12. in conformity
hereto the Christians also, their Sabbath being brought forward from the
Saturday to the day following; that the like number of days might not pass
them without performing the aforesaid duties in the congregation; met together
on the Wednesdaies and Fridaies, which were the days of Station, so frequently
mentioned in Tertullian, and others, the first writers of the Church.
Tertullian expressly says* that the Christians dedicated to the offices of
Piety, the fourth and sixth day of the week: and Clemens Alex. says of the
Christians, that they understood the secret reasons of their weekly fasts, to
wit, those of the fourth day of the week and that of preparation before the
Sabbath; commonly called Wednesday and Friday. Where, by the way, we may take
notice what ground there is for the observation of the Wednesday and Friday in
our Church, and the Litanies then appointed, so much neglected in this
profligate Age.

16. BUT secondly, as the Jews were diligent in the private reading of the
Scripture; being taught it from their infancy which custom Saint Paul refers to
1 Timothy 3. 15. whereof Josephus against Appion says, That if a man ask any Jew
concerning the Laws, he will tell every thing readier then his name: for
learning them from the first time they have sense of any thing, they retain
them imprinted in their minds. So were the first Christians equally industrious
in improving their knowledge of divine Truth. The whole life of a Christian,
says Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7. is a holy solemnity, there his sacrifices are
prayers and praises, before every meal he has the readings of the holy
Scriptures; and Psalms, and Hymns at the time of his meals. Which Tertullian
also describes in his Apol. and Saint Cyprian in the end of the Epist. to
Donatus.

17. AND this is farther evidenced by the early and numerous versions of the
Scriptures into all vulgar Languages; concerning which Theodoret speaks in his
Book of the Cure of the Affections of the Greeks, Sermon. 5. We Christians (sais
he) are enabled to show the power of Apostolic and prophetic doctrins, which
h^ve filled all Countries under Heaven. For that which was formerly uttered in
Hebrew, is not only translated into the Language of the Grecians, but also the
Romans, Egyptians, Persians, Indians, Armenians, Scythians, Samaritans; and in
a word to all the Languages that are used by any Nation. The same is said by
Saint Chrysostom in his first Homily upon Saint John.

18. NOR was this don by the blind zeal of inconsiderable men, but the most
eminent Doctors of the Church were concerned herein: such as Origin, who with
infinite labor contrived the Hexapla. Saint Chrysostom, who translated the New
Testament, Psalms, and some part of the Old Testament into the Armenian Tongue
as witnesses Geor. Alex. in the life of Chrysostom. So Vlphilas the first Bishop
of the Goths translated the holy Scripture into the Gothic; as Socrat. Eccl.
Hist l. 4. cap. 33. and others testify. Saint Jerome, who translated them not
only into Latin from the Hebrew, the Old Italic version having bin from the
Greek; but also into his native vulgar Dalmatic: which he says himself in his
Epistle to Sophronius.

19. BUT the peoples having them for their private and constant use, appears
farther by the Heathens making the extorting of them a part of their
persecution: and when diverse did faint in that trial, and basely surrendered
them, we find the Church levelled her severity only against the offending
persons, did not (according to the Romish equity) punish the innocent, by
depriving them of that sacred Book, because the others had so unworthily
prostituted it (tho the prevention of such a profanation for the future had bin
as fair a plea for it as the Romanists do now make:) but on the contrary the
primitive Fathers are frequent, nay indeed importunat in their exhortations to
the private study of holy Scripture, which they recommend to Christians of all
Ranks, Ages, and Sexes.

20. AS an instance hereof let us hear Clemens of Alex. in his Exhort. The
Word, says he, is not hid from any, it is a common light that shines to all
men; there is no obscurity in it; hear it you that be far off, and hear it you
that are nigh.

21. To this purpose St. Jerome speaks in his Epistle to Leta, whom he directs
in the education of her young daughter, and advises, that instead of gems and
silk, she be enamored with the holy Scripture; wherein not gold, or skins, or
Babylonian embroideries, but a correct and beautiful variety producing faith,
will recommend its self. Let her first learn the Psalter, and be entertained
with those songs; then be instructed unto life by the Proverbs of Solomon: let
her learn from Ecclesiastes to despise worldly things; transcribe from Job the
practice of patience and virtue: let her pass then to the Gospels, and never
let them be out of her bands: and then imbibe with all the faculties of the
mind, the Acts of the Apostles, and Epistles. When she has enriched the
storehouse of her breast with these tresures, let her learn the Prophets, the
Heptateuch, or books of Moses, Joshua and Judges, the books of Kings and
Chronicles, the volumes of Ezra and Esther, and lastly the Canticles. And
indeed, this Father is so concerned to have the unlettered semale sex skilful
in the Scriptures, that tho he sharply rebukes their pride and over-wening; he
not only frequently resolves their doubts concerning difficult places in the
said Scriptures, but dedicates several of his Commentaries to them.

22. THE same is to be said of Saint Austin, who in his Epistles to unlettered
Laics, encourages their enquiries concerning the Scripture, assuring Volusianus
Ep. 3. that it speaks those things that are plain to the heart of the learned
and unlearned, as a familiar friend; in the mysterious, mounts not up into high
phrases which might deter a slow and unlearned mind, (as the poor are in their
addresses to the rich;) but invites all with lowly speech, feeding with
manifest truth, and exercising with secret. And Ep. 1. 21. tells the devout
Proba, that in this world, where we are absent from the Lord, and walk by faith
and not by sight, the soul is to think it self desolate, and never cease from
prayer, and the words of divine and holy Scripture, etc.

23. SAINT Chrysostom in his third Homily of Lazarus thus addresses himself to
married persons, house-holders, and people enga'd in trades and secular
professions; telling them, that the reading of the Scripture is a great
defensative against siu; and on the other side, the ignorance thereof is a deep
and headlong precipice; that not to know the Law of God, is the utter loss of
salvation; that this has caused heresies, and corruption of life, and has
confounded the order of things: for it cannot be by any means, that his labor
should be fruitless, who emploies himself in a daily and attentive reading of
the Scripture.

24. I am not, says the same St. Chry. Hom. 9. on Colos. 3. a Monk, I have
wise and children, and the cares of a family. But it is a destructive opinion,
that the reading of the Scripture pertains only to those who have addicted
themselves to a monastic life; when the reading of Scripture is much more
necessary for secular persons; for they who converse abroad, and receive
frequent wounds, are in greatest need of remedies and preservatives. So Hom. 2.
on Mat. Hearken all you that are secular, how you ought to order your wives and
children; and how you are particularly enjoined to read the Scriptures, and
that not perfunctorily, or by chance, but very diligently.

25. LIKEWISE Hom. 3. on Laz. What say thou, O man? it is not thy business
to turn over the Scripture, being distracted by innumerable cares; no, thou
have therefore the greater obligation: others do not so much stand in need of
the aids of the Scripture, as they who are conversant in much business.
Farther, Hom. 8. on Heb. 5. I beseech you neglect not the reading of the
Scriptures; but whether we comprehend the meaning of what is spoken or not, let
us always be conversant in them: for daily meditation strengtheus the memory;
and it frequently happens, that what you now cannot find out, if you attemt it
again* you will the next day discover: for God of his goodness will enlighten
the mind. It were endless to transcribe all the Exhortations of the ancient
Doctors and Fathers of the Church; they not only permitted, but earnestly pressed
upon all Christians, whatever their estate or condition were, the constant
reading of the holy Scripture. Nor indeed was their restraint ever heard of
till the Church of Rome had espoused such doctrins as would not bear the test
of Scripture; and then as those who deal in false wares are used to do, they
found it necessary to proportion their lights accordingly.

26. THIS Peter Suitor in his second Book cap. 22. of the Translation of the
Scripture honestly confesses, saying, that whereas many things are enjoined
which are not expressly in Scripture, the unlearned observing this, will be apt
to murmur and complain that so heavy burdens are laid upon them, and their
Christian liberty infringed. They will easily be withdrawn from observing the
Constitutions of the Church, when they find that they are not contained in the
Law of Christ. And that this was not a frivolous suggestion, the desperate
attemt of the Romanists above mentioned, in leaving out the second Commandment
in their Primers and Catechisms which they communicate to the people, may pass
for an irrefragable evidence; For what Layman would not be shockt, to find
Almighty God command, not to make any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth; that no one should bow down to them, nor worship them: when he sees
the contrary is practiced and commanded by the Church.

27. BUT would God none but the Romanist were impeachable of this detention of
Scripture: there are too many among us that are thus false and envious to
themselves: and what the former do upon policy and pretense of reverence, those
do upon mere oscitancy and avowed profaness; which are much worse inducements.
And for such as these to declaim against detention of the Scripture, is like
the Lawsuits of those who contend only about such little punctilio's as
themselves design no advantage from, but only the worsting their adversaries:
and it would be much safer for them to lie under the interdict of others, then
thus to restrain themselves: even as much as the errors of obedience are more
excusable, then those of contemt and profaness.

28. AND here I would have it seriously considered that the Edict of Diocletian
for the demolishing the Christian Churches, and the burning their Bibles;
became the character and particular aggravation of his most bloody persecution.
Now should Almighty God call us to the like trial, should Antichristian
violence, whether heathen or other, take from us our Churches and our Bibles,
what comfort could we have in that calamity, if our contemt of those blessing
drove them from us; nay, prevented perfecution, and bereft us of them even
whilst we had them in our power? He who neglects to make his constant resort
unto the Church, which by Gods mercy now stands open; or to read diligently the
holy Scriptures, which by the same divine Goodness are free for him to use, in
his own Diocletian; and without the terrors of death, or torments, has
renounced, i^ not the Faith, the great instruments of its conveiance, and pledge
of God Almighties presence among the sons of men.

29. BUT what if men either upon the one motive or the other, will not read;
yet the Scriptures continue still most worthy to be read: they retain still
their propriety for all those excellent ends to which God designed them: and as
the Prophet tells the Jews, Ez. 2. 5. whether they will hear, or whether they
will forbear, they shall know there has bin a Prophet among them; so whether we
will take the benefit or no, we shall one day find that the holy Scriptures
would have made us wise unto salvation. If through our fault alone they fail to do
so, they will one day assume a less grateful office; and from guides and
assistants, become accusers and witnesses against us.

SECT. V. The Scripture has great propriety and fitness toward the attainment
of its excellent end.
WE are now in the next place to consider how exactly the holy Scriptures are
adapted to those great ends to which they are directed: how sufficient they are
for that important negotiation on which they are sent: and that we shall
certainly find them,. if we look on them either intrinsecally, or
circumstantially. For the first of these notions we need only to reflect on the
third Part of this discourse, where the Scripture in respect of the subject
Matter is evinced to be a system of the most excellent Laws, backed with the
most transcendent rewards and punishments; and the certainty of those confirmed
by such pregnant instances of Gods mercies and vengeance in this world, as are
the surest gages and earnests of what we are bid to expect in another.

2 NOW what method imaginable can there be used to rational creatures of more
sorce and energy? Nay it seems to descend even to our passions and accommodates
it self to our several inclinations. And seeing how few Proselytes there are to
bare and naked virtue, and how many to interest and advantage; God closes with
them upon their own terms, and does not so much injoin as buy those little
services he asks from us.

3. BUT because some men's natures are so disingenuous as to hate to be obliged
no less then to be reformed, the Scripture has goads and scourges to drive such
beasts as will not be led; terrors and threatenings, and those of most
formidable sorts, to affright those who will not be allured. Nay lest
incredulous men should question the reality of future rewards or punishments,
the Scripture gives as sensible evidence of them as we are capable of receiving
in this world; by registring such signal protections and judgments proportioned
to virtue and vice, as sufficiently attests the Psalmists Axiom: Doubtless
there is a God that judges the earth, Psalm. 58. 11. and leaves nothing to the
impenitent sinner, but a fearful expectation of that fiery indignation
threatened hereafter; Heb. 10. 27.

4. AND now methinks the Scripture seems to be that net our Savior speaks of,
that caught of every sort, Mat. 13. 47. it is of so vast a compass, that it
must, one would think, fetch in all kind of tempers: and sure had we not mixed
natures with fiends, contracted some of their malice and obstinacy, mere human
pravity could not hold out.

5. AND as the holy Scripture is thus fitly proportioned to its end in respect
of the subject matter, so is it also in reference to its circumstances, which
all conspire to render it, the power of God unto salvation, To. 1. 16. In the
first rank of those we must place its divine original, which stamps it with an
uncontrollable authority; and is an infallible security that the matter of it is
perfectly true: since it proceeds from that essential verity which cannot abuse
us with fraudulent promises or threatenings: and from that infinite power that
cannot be impeded in the execution of what he purposes.

6. YET to render this circumstance efficacious there needs another; to wit,
that its being the word of God be sufficiently testified to us: and we have in
the foregoing discourse evinced it to be so; and that in the utmost degree
that a matter of that kind is capable of, beyond which no sober man will
require evidence in any thing. And certainly these two circumstances thus
united, have a mighty force to impress the dictats of Scripture on us. And we
must rebel against God and our own convictions too, to hold out against it.

7. A third circumstance relates to the frame and composure of this divine
Book, both as to method, and style: concerning which I have already made some
reflections. But now that I may speak more distinctly, I observe it takes its
rise from the first point of time wherein 'twas possible for mankind to be
concerned; and so gradually proceeds to its fall and renovation: shows us first
our need of a Redeemer, and then points us out who it is by types and promises
in the Old Testament, and by way of history and completion in the New. In the
former it acquaints us with that pedagogy of the Law which God designed as our
Schole-master to bring us to Christ, Gal. 3. 25. and in the Gospel shows us yet
a more excellent way; presents us with those more sublime elevated doctrins,
which Christ came down from heaven to revele.

8. As for the style, that is full of grateful variety, sometimes high and
majestic, as becomes that high and holy one that inhabiteth eternity, Esai. 57.
15 and sometimes so humble and after the manner of men, as agrees to the other
part of his Characters* his dwelling is with him that is of an humble spirit*
Esaias 57. 15. I know profane wits are apt to brand this as an unevenness of
style: but they may as well accuse the various notes of Music as destructive to
harmony, or blame an Orator for being able to tune his tongue to the most
different strains.

9. ANOTHER excellency of the style, is its propriety to the several subjects
it treats of. When it speaks of such things as God would not have men pry into,
it wraps them up in clouds and thick darkness; by that means to deter
inquisitive man (as he did at Sinai) from breaking into the mount, Ex. 20. And
that he gives any intimation at all of such, seems designed only to give us a
just estimate how shallow our comprehensions are; and excite us to adore and
admire that Abyss of divine Wisdom which we can never sathom.

10. THINGS of a middle nature, which may be useful to some, but are not
indispensibly necessary to all, the Scripture leaves more accessible; yet not
so obvious as to be within every man's reach: but makes them only the prize of
industry, prayer, and humble endevors. And it is no small benefit, that those
who covet the knowledge of divine Truth, are by it engaged to take these virtues
in the way. Besides there is so much time required to that study, as renders it
inconsistent with those secular businesses wherein the generality of men are
immerst: and consequently it is necessary that those who addict themselves to the
one, have competent vacancy from the other: And in this it has a visible use
by being very contributive to the maintaining that spiritual subordination of
the people to the Pastors; which God has established. Miriam and Corahs
Partisans are a pregnant instance how much the opinion of equal knowledge unfits
for subjection: and we see by sad experience how much the bare pretense of it
has disturbed the Church, and made those turn preachers who never were
understanding hearers.

11. BUT besides these more abstruse, there are easier truths in which every
man is concerned; the explicit knowledge whereof is necessary to all; I mean the
divine Rules for saving Faith and Manners. And in those the Scripture style is
as plain as is possible: condescends to the apprehensions of the rudest
capacities: so that none that can read the Scripture but will there find the
way to bliss evidently chalked out to him. That I may use the words of Saint
Gregory, the Lamb may wade in those waters of life, as well as the Elephant may
swim. The Holy Ghost, as St. Austin tells us, lib. 2. of Christian doctrine,
chap. 6. has made in the plainer places of Scripture magnificent and healthful
provision for our hunger; and in the obscure, against satiety. For there are
scarce any things drawn from obscure places, which in others are not spoken
most plainly And he farther adds, that if any thing happen to be no where
explained, every man may there abound in his sense.

12. So again, in the same Book, cap. 9. he says, that all those things which
concern Faith and Manners, are plainly to be met with in the Scripture: and
Saint Jerome in his Comment on Es. 19. tells us, that it is the custom of the
Scripture to close obscure sayings with those that are easy; and what was first
expressed darkly, to propose in evident words: which very thing is said likewise
by Saint Chrysostom, Hom. 9. 2 Cor. 4. 11. who in his first homily on Saint
Mat. farther declares, that the Scriptures are easy to be understood, and
exposed to vulgar capacities.

13. He says again, Hom. upon Esaias, that the Scriptures are not metals that
require the help of Miners, but afford a tresure easily to be had to them that
seek the riches contained in them. It is enough only to stoop down, and look
upon them, and depart replenished with wealth; it is enough only to open them,
and behold the splendour of those Gems. Again, Hom. 3. on the second Ep. to the
These. 2. All things are evident and strait, which are in the holy Scripture;
whatever is necessary is manifest. So also Hom. 3. on Genesis 14. It cannot be
that he who is studious in the holy Scripture should be rejected: for tho the
instruction of men be wanting, the Lord from above will inlighten our minds,
shine in upon our reason, revele what is secret, and teach what we do not know.
So Hom. 1. on Jo. 11. Almighty God involves his doctrine with no mists, and
darkness, as did the Philosophers: his doctrine is brighter then the Sunbeams,
and more illustrious; and therefore every where diffused: and Hom. 6. on Jo.
11. His doctrine is so facile, that not only the wise, but even women, and
youths must comprehend it. Hom. 13. on Genesis 2. Let us go to the Scripture as
our Mark, which is its own interpreter. And soon after says, that the
Scripture interprets it self, and suffers not its Auditor to err. To the same
purpose says Cyril in his third Book against Julian. In the Scripture nothing
is difficult to them, who are conversant in them as they ought to be.

14. IT is therefore a groundless cavil which men make at the obscurity of the
Scripture; since it is not obscure in those things wherein it is our common
interest it should be plain: which sufficiently justifies its propriety to that
great end of making us wise unto salvation. And for those things which seem
less intelligible to us, many of them become so, not by the innate obscurity of
the Text, but by extrinsic circumstances (of which perhaps the over-busy
tampering of Paraphrasts, pleased with new notions of their own, may be
reckoned for one.) But this subject the Reader may find so well pursued in Mr.
Boyls Tract concerning the style of Scripture, that I shall be kindest both to
him and it to refer him thither; as also for answer to those other querulous
objections which men galled with the sense of the Scripture, have made to its
style.

15. A third circumstance in which the Scripture is fitted to attain its end,
is its being committed to writing, as that is distinguished from oral delivery.
It is most true, the word of God is of equal authority and efficacy which way
soever it be delivered: The Sermons of the Apostles were every jot as divine
and powerful out of their mouths, as they are now in their story. All the
advantage therefore that the written Word can pretend to, is in order to its
perpetuity, as it is a securer way of derivation to posterity, then that of
oral Tradition. To evince that it is so, I shall first weigh the rational
probabilities on either side. Secondly, I shall consider to which God himself
appears in Scripture to give the deference.

16. FOR the first of these, I shall propose this consideration, which I had
occasion to intimate before, that the Bible being writ for the universal use of
the faithful, 'twas as universally dispersed amongst them: The Jews had the Law
not only in their Synagogues, but in their private houses, and as soon as the
Evangelical Books were writ, they were scattered into all places where the
Christian Faith had obtained. Now when there was such a vast multitude of
copies, and those so revered by the possessors, that they thought it the
highest pitch of sacrilege to expose them, it must surely be next to
impossible, entirely to suppress that Book. Besides, it could never be attemted
but by some eminent violence as it was by the heathen Persecutors; which
(according to the common effect of opposition) served to enhance the Christians
value of the Bible; and consequently when the storm was past, to excite their
diligence for recruiting the number. So that, unless in after Ages, all the
Christians in the world should at once make a voluntary defection, and conspire
to eradicate their Religion, the Scripture could not be utterly extinguished.

17. AND that which secures it from total suppression, does in a great degree
do so from corruption and falsification. For whilst so many genuine copies are
extant in all parts of the world, to be appealed to, it would be a very
difficult matter to impose a spurious one; especially if the change were so
material as to awaken men's jealousies. And it must be only in a place and age
of gross ignorance, that any can be daring enough to attemt it. And if it
should happen to succeed in such a particular Church, yet what is that to the
universal? And to think to have the forgery admitted there, is (as a learned
man says) like attemting to poison the sea.

18. ON the other side, oral Tradition seems much more liable to hazards, error
may there insinuate it self much more insensibly. And tho there be no universal
conspiracy to admit it at first; yet like a small eruption of waters, it widens
its own passage, till it cause an inundation. There is no impression so deep,
but time and intervening accidents may wear out of men's minds; especially where
the notions are many and are founded not in nature, but positive institution,
as a great part of Christian Religion is. And when we consider the various
tempers of men, 'twill not be strange that succeeding Ages will not always be
determined by the Traditions of the former. Some are pragmatic, and think
themselves fitter to prescribe to the belief of their posterity, then to follow
that of their Ancestors: some have interest and designs which will be better
served by new Tenets: and some are ignorant and mistaking, and may unawares
corrupt the doctrine they should barely deliver: and of this last sort we may
guess there may be many, since it falls commonly to the mothers lot to imbue
children with the first rudiments.

19. NOW in all these cases how possible is it that primitive Tradition may be
either lost or adulterated? and consequently, and in proportion to that
possibility, our confidence of it must be staggered. I am sure according to the
common estimate in seculars it must be so. For I appeal to any man whether he
be not apter to credit a relation which comes from an eie-witness then at the
third or fourth, much more at the hundredth rebound: (as in this case.) And
daily experience tells us; that a true and probable story by passing through many
hands, often grows to an improbable lie. This man thinks he could add one
becoming circumstance; that man another: and whilst most men take the liberty
to do so, the relation grows as monstrous as such a heap of incoherent phancies
can make it.

20. IF to this it be said that this happens only in trivial secular matters,
but that in the weighty concern of Religion mankind is certainly more serious
and sincere: I answer that it is very improbable that they are; since it is
obvious in the common practice of the world, that the interests of Religion are
postpon'd to every little worldly concern. And therefore when a temporal
advantage requires the bending and warping of Religion, there will never be
wanting some that will attemt it.

21. BESIDES, there is still left in human nature so much of the venom of the
Serpents first temtation, that tho men cannot be as God, yet they love to be
prescribing to him, and to be their own Assessors as to that worship and homage
they are to pay him.

22. BUT above all it is considerable that in this case Satan has a more
peculiar concern, and can serve himself more by a falsification here then in
temporal affairs. For if he can but corrupt Religion, it ceases to be his
enemy, and becomes one of his most useful engines, as sufficiently appeared in
the rites of the heathen worship. We have therefore no cause to think this an
exemt case; but to presume it may be influenced by the same pravity of human
nature, which prevails in others; and consequently are obliged to bless God
that he has not left our spiritual concerns to such hazards, but has lodged
them in a more secure repository, the written Word.

23. BUT I foresee 'twill be objected, that whilst I thus disparage Tradition,
I do vertually invalidate the Scripture it self, which comes to us upon its
credit. To this I answer first that since God has withdrawn immediate
revelation from the world* Tradition is the only means to convey to us the
first notice that this Book is the word of God: and it being the only means he
affords, we have all reason to depend on his goodness, that he will not suffer
that to be evacuated to us: and that how liable soever Tradition may be to err,
yet that it shall not actually err in this particular.

24. BUT in the second place; This Tradition seems not so liable to
falsification as others: It is so very short and simple a proposition; such and
such writings are the word of God, that there is no great room for Sophistry or
mistake to pervert the sense; the only possible deception must be to change the
subject, and obtrude suppositious writings in room of the true, under the title
of the word of God. But this has already appeared to be unpracticable, because
of the multitude of copies which were dispersed in the world; by which such an
attemt would soon have bin detected. There appears therefore more reason as
well as more necessity, to rely upon Tradition in this, then in most other
particulars.

25. NEITHER yet do I so far decry oral Tradition in any, as to conclude it
impossible it should derive any truth to posterity: I only look on it as more
casual; and consequently a less fit conveiance of the most important and
necessary verities then the written Word: In which I conceive my self justified
by the common sense of mankind; who use to commit those things to writing,
which they are most solicitous to derive to posterity. Does any Nation trust
their fundamental Laws only to the memory of the present Age, and take no other
course to transmit them to the future? does any man purchase an estate, and
leave no way for his children to lay claim to it, but the Tradition the present
witnesses shall leave of it? Nay does any considering man ordinarily make any
important pact or bargain (tho without relation to posterity) without putting
the Articles in writing? And whence is all this caution but from a universal
consent that writing is the surest way of transmitting?

26. BUT we have yet a higher appeal in this matter then to the suffrage of
men: God himself seems to have determined it; And what his decision is, it is
our next business to inquire.

27. AND first he has given the most real and comprehensive attestation to this
way of writing, by having himself chose it. For he is too wise to be mistaken
in his estimate of better and worse, and too kind to choose the worst for us:
and yet he has chosen to communicate himself to the latter Ages of the world by
writing; and has summed up all the Eternal concerns of mankind in the sacred
Scriptures, and left those sacred Records by which we are to be both informed
and governed; which if oral Tradition would infallibly have don, had bin
utterly needless: and God sure is not so prodigal of his spirit, as to inspire
the Authors of Scripture to write that, whose use was superseded by a former
more certain expedient.

28. NAY, under the Mosaic economy, when he made use of other ways of
reveling himself, yet to perpetuate the memory even of those Revelations, he
chose to have them written. At the delivery of the Law, God spoke then viva
voce, and with that pomp of dreadful solemnity, as certainly was apt to make
the deepest impressions; yet God foresaw that through every succeeding Age that
stamp would grow more dim, and in a long revolution might at last be extinct.
And therefore how warm soever the Israelites apprehensions then were, he would
not trust to them for the perpetuating his Law, but committed it to writing;
Ex. 13. 18. nay wrote it twice himself.

29. YET farther even the ceremonial Law, tho not intended to be of perpetual
obligation, was not yet referred to the traditionary way, but was wrote by
Moses, and deposited with the Priests, Deuteronomy. 31. 9. And afterevent showed this
was no needless caution. For when under Manasses, Idolatry had prevailed in
Jerusalem, it was not by any dormant Tradition, but by the Book of the Law
found in the Temple, that Josiah was both excited to reform Religion, and
instructed how to do it; 2 Kings 22. 10. And had not that or some other copy bin
produced, they had bin much in the dark as to the particulars of their
reformation; which that they had not bin convei'd by Tradition, appears by the
sudden startling of the King upon the reading of the Law; which could not have
bin. had he bin before possessed with the contents of it. In like manner we find
in Nehemiah, that the observation of the Feast of Tabernacles was recovered by
consulting the Law; the Tradition whereof was wholly worn out; or else it had
sure bin impossible that id could for so long a time have bin intermitted, Neh.
8. 18. And yet men's memories are commonly more retentive of an external visible
rite, then they are of speculative Propositions, or moral Precepts.

30. THESE instances show how fallible an expedient mere oral Tradition is for
transmission to posterity. But admit no such instance could be given, it is
argument enough that God has by his own choice of writing, given the preference
to it. Nor has he barely chosen it, but has made it the standard by which to
mesure all succeeding pretenses. It Is the means he prescribes for
distinguishing divine from diabolical Inspirations: To the Law and to the
Testimony: if they speak not according to this Word, there is no light in them,
Isai. 8. 20. And when the Lawier interrogated our Savior what he should do to
inherit eternal life, he sends him not to ransac Tradition, or the cabalistical
divinity of the Rabbis, but refers him to the Law: What is written in the Law?
how read thou? Luke 10. 26. And indeed, throout the Gospel, we still find
him in his discourse appealing to Scripture, and asserting its authority: as on
the other side inveighing against those Traditions of the Elders which had
evacuated the written Word: Ye make the Word of God of none effect by your
Tradition, Mat. 15. 6. Which as it abundantly shows Christ's adherence to the
written Word, so it is a pregnant instance how possible it is for Tradition to
be corrupted, and made the instrument of imposing men's phancies even in
contradiction to Gods commands.

31. AND since our blessed Lord has made Scripture the test whereby to try
Traditions, we may surely acquiesce in his decision, and either embrace or
reject Traditions, according as they correspond to the supreme rule, the
written Word. It must therefore be a very unwarrantable attemt to set up
Tradition in competition with (much more in contradiction to) that to which
Christ himself has subjected it.

32. Saint Paul reckons it as the principal privilege of the Jewish Church,
that it had the Oracles of God committed to it; i. e. that the holy Scriptures
were deposited, and put in its custody: and in this the Christian Church
succeeds it, and is the guardian and conservator of holy Writ. I ask then, had
the Jewish Church by virtue of its being keeper, a power to supersede any part
of those Oracles entrusted to them? if so, Saint Paul was much out in his
estimate, and ought to have reckoned that as their highest privilege. But
indeed, the very nature of the trust implies the contrary; and besides, it is
evident, that is the very crime Christ charges upon the Jews in the place above
cited. And if the Jewish Church had no such right, upon what account can the
Christian claim any? Has Christ enlarged its Charter? has he left the sacred
Scriptures with her, not to preserve and practice, but to regulate and reform?
to fill up its vacancies, and supply its defects by her own Traditions? if so,
let the commission be produced; but if her office be only that of guardianship
and trust, she must neither substract from, nor by any superadditions of her
own evacuate its meaning and efficacy: and to do so, would be the same guilt
that it would be in a person entrusted with the fundamental Records of a
Nation, to foist in fuch clauses as himself pleases.

33 IN short, God has in the Scriptures laid down exact rules for our belief
and practice, and has entrusted the Church to convey them to us: if she vary,
or any way enervate them, she is false to that trust, but cannot by it oblige
us to recede from that rule she should deliver, to comply with that she
obtrudes upon us. The case may be illustrated by an easy resemblance. Suppose a
King have a foreign principality for which he composes a body of Laws; annexes
to them rewards and penalties, and requires an exact and indispensable
conformity to them. These being put in writing, he sends by a select messenger:
now suppose this messenger deliver them, yet says withal, that himself has
authority from the King to supersede these Laws at his pleasure; so that their
last resort must be to his dictats, yet produces no other testimony but his own
bare affirmation. Is it possible that any men in their wits should be so
stupidly credulous, as to incur the penalty of those Laws upon so improbable an
indemnity? And sure it would be no whit less madness in Christians, to violate
any precept of God, on an ungrounded supposal of the Churches power to dispense
with them.

34. AND if the Church universal have not this power, nor indeed ever claimed
it, it must be a strange insolence for any particular Church to pretend to it,
as the Church of Rome does; as if we should owe to her Tradition all our
Scripture, and all our Faith; insomuch that without the supplies which she
affords from the Oracle of her Chair, our Religion were imperfect, and our
salvation insecure. Upon which wild dictates I shall take liberty in a distinct
Section, farther to animadvert.

SECT. VI. The suffrage of the primitive Christian Church, concerning the
propriety and fitness which the Scripture has toward the attainment of its
excellent end.
AGAINST what has bin hitherto said to the advantage of the holy Scripture,
there opposes it self (as we have already intimated) the authority of the Church
of Rome; which allows it to be only an imperfect rule of Faith, saying in the
fourth Session of the Council of Trent, that Christian faith and discipline,
are contained in the Books written, and unwritten Tradition. And in the fourth
rule of the Index put forth by command of the said Council, the Scripture is
declared to be so far from useful, that its reading is pernicious if permitted
promiscuously in the vulgar Tongue, and therefore to be withheld: insomuch that
the study of the holy Bible is commonly by persons of the Roman Communion,
imputed to Protestants as part of their heresy; they being called by them in
contemt the Evangelical men, and Scripturarians. And the Bible in the vulgar
Tongue of any Nation, is commonly reckoned among prohibited Books, and as such,
publicly burnt when met with by the Inquisitors: and the person who is found
with it, or to read therein, is subjected to severe penalties.

2. FOR the vindication of the truth of God, and to put to shame those unhappy
Innovators, who amidst great pretenses to antiquity, and veneration to the
Scriptures, prevaricat from both: I think it may not be amiss, to show plainly
the mind of the primitive Church herein; and that in as few words as the matter
will admit.

3. FIRST I premise that Ireneus and Tertullian having to do with Heretics, who
boasted themselves to be emendators of the Apostles, and wiser then they;
despising their authority, rejecting several parts of the Scripture, and
obtruding other writings in their steed, have had recourse unto Tradition, with
a seeming preference of it unto Scripture. Their adversaries having no common
principle besides the owning the name of Christians; it was impossible to
convince them, but by a recourse to such a medium which they would allow. But
these Fathers being to set down and establish their Faith, are most express in
resolving it into Scripture: and when they recommend Tradition, ever mean such
as is also Apostolical.

4. IRENEUS in the second Book, 47. c. tells us, that the Scriptures are
perfect, as dictated by the word of God and his spirit. And the same Father
begins his third Book in this manner, The disposition of our salvation is no
otherwise known by us, then by those by whom the Gospel was brought to us;
which indeed they first preached, but afterward delivered it to us in the
Scripture, to be the foundation and pillar of our Faith. Nor may we imagine,
that they began to preach to others, before they themselves had perfect
knowledge, as some are bold to say; boasting themselves to be emendators of the
Apostles. For after our Lords Resurrection, they were endued with the power of
the holy Spirit from on high; and having perfect knowledge, went forth to the
ends of the earth, preaching the glad tidings of salvation, and celestial
praise unto men. Each and all of whom had the Gospel of God. So Saint Matthew
wrote the Gospel to the Hebrews, in their tongue. Saint Peter and Saint Paul
preached at Rome, and there founded a Church: Mark the Disciple and interpreter
of Peter, delivered in writing what he had preached, and Luke the follower of
Paul set down in his Book the Gospel he had delivered. Afterward Saint John at
Ephesus in Asia published his Gospel, etc. In his fourth Book, c. 66. he
directs all the Heretics with whom he deals, to read diligently the Gospel
delivered by the Apostles, and also read diligently the Prophets, assuring they
shall there find every action, every doctrine, and every suffering of our Lord
declared by them.

5. THUS Tertullian in his Book of Prescriptions, c. 6. It is not lawful for us
to introduce any thing of our own will, nor make any choice upon our
arbitrament. We have the Apostles of our Lord for our Authors, who themselves
took up nothing on their own will or choice; but faithfully imparted to the
Nations the discipline which they had received from Christ. So that if an Angel
from heaven should teach another doctrine, he were to be accursed. And. c. 25.
It Is madness, says he of the Heretics, when they confess that the Apostles
were ignorant of nothing, nor taught things different; to think that they did
not revele all things to all: which he enforces in the following chapter. In
his Book against Hermogenes, c. 23. he discourses thus; I adore the plenitude
of the Scripture, which discovers to me the Creator, and what was created. Also
in the Gospel I find the Word was the Arbiter and Agent in the Creation. That
all things were made of preexistent matter I never read. Let Hermogenes, and
his journy-men show that it is written. If it be not written, let him fear the
woe, which belongs to them thad add or detract. And in the 39. chapter of his
Prescript. We feed our faith, raise our hope, and establish our reliance with
the sacred Words.

6. IN like manner Hippolytus in the Homily against Noetus declares, that we
acknowledge only from Scripture that there is one God. And whereas secular
Philosophy is not to be had, but from the reading of the doctrine of the
Philosophers; so whosoever of us will preserve piety toward God, he cannot
otherwise learn it then from the holy Scripture. Accordingly Origin in the
fifth Homily on Leviticus, says, in the Scripture every word appertaining to
God, is to be sought and discust; and the knowledge of all things is to be
received.

7. WHAT Saint Cyprian's opinion was in this point, we learn at large from his
Epistle to Pompey. For when Tradition was objected to him, he answers; Whence
is this Tradition? is it from the authority of our Lord and his Gospel; or comes
it from the commands of the Apostles in their Epistles? Almighty God declares
that what is written should be obei'd and practiced. The Book of the Law, says
he in Joshua, shall not depart from thy mouth, but thou shall meditate in it
day and night, that you may observe and keep all that is written therein. So
our Lord sending his Apostles, commands them to baptize all Nations, and teach
them to observe all things that he had commanded. Again, what obstinacy and
presumtion is it to prefer human Tradition to divine Command: not considering
that Gods wrath is kindled as often as his Precepts are dissolved and neglected
by reason of human Traditions. Thus God warns and speaks by Isaiah: This people
honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me; but in vain do they
worship me, teaching for doctrins the commandments of men. Also the Lord in the
Gospel checks and reproves, saying; you reject the Law of God, that you may
establish your Tradition. Of which Precept the Apostle Saint Paul being
mindful, admonishes and instructs, saying; If any man teaches otherwise, and
hearkens not to sound doctrine, and the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, he is
proud, knowing nothing: From such we must depart. And again he adds, There is a
compendious way for religious and sincere minds, both to deposit their errors,
and find out the truth. For if we return to the source and original of divine
Tradition, human error will cease, and the ground of heavenly Mysteries being
seen, what soever was hid with clouds and darkness, will be manifest by the
light of truth. If a pipe that brought plentiful supplies of water, fail on the
sudden, do not men look to the fountain, and thence learn the cause of the
defect, whether the spring it self be dry; or if running freely, the water is
stopped in its passage; that if by interrupted or broken conveiances, it was
hindered to pass, they being repaired, it may again be brought to the City, with
the same plenty as it flows from the spring? And this Gods Priests ought to do
at this time, obeying the commands of God, that if truth have swerved or failed
in any particular, we go backward to the source of the Evangelical and
Apostolical Tradition, and there found our actings; from whence their order and
origation began.

8. IT is true Bellarmine reproaches this discourse as erroneous; but whatever
it might be in the inference which Saint Cyprian drew from it, in it self it
was not so. For Saint Austin, tho sufficiently engaged against Saint Cyprian's
conclusion, allows the position as most Orthodox; saying, in the fourth Book of
Baptism, c. 35. Whereas he admonishes to go back to the fountain, that is, the
Tradition of the Apostles, and thence bring the stream down to our times; it is
most excellent, and without doubt to be don.

9. THUS Eusebius expresses himself in his second Book against Sabellius. As it
is a point of sloth, not to seek into those things, whereof one may enquire; so
it is insolence to be inquisitive in others. But what are those things which we
ought to enquire into? Even those which are to be found in the Scriptures:
those things which are not there to be found, let us not seek after. For if
they ought to be known, the holy Ghost had not omitted them in the Scripture.

10. ATHANASIUS in his Tract of the Incarnation, says, It is fit for us to
adhere to the word of God, and not relinquish it, thinking by syllogisms to
evade, what is there clearly delivered. Again in his Tract to Serap. of the
holy Ghost; Ask not, says he, concerning the Trinity, but learn only from the
Scriptures. For the instructions which you will find there, are sufficient. And
in his Oration against the Gentiles, declares, That the Scriptures are
sufficient to the manifestation of the truth.

11. AGREEABLE to these is Optatus in his 5. Book against Parmen. who reasons
thus, You say it is lawful to rebaptize, we say it is not lawful: betwixt your
saying and our gainsaying the peoples minds are amused. Let no man believe
either you or us. All men are apt to be contentious. Therefore Judges are to be
called in. Christians they cannot be; for they will be parties; and thereby
partial. Therefore a Judge is to be looked out from abroad. If a Pagan, he knows
not the mysteries of our Religion. If a Jew, he is an enemy to our baptism.
There is therefore no earthly Judge; but one is to be sought from heaven. Yet
there is no need of a resort to heaven, when we have in the Gospel a Testament:
and in this case, celestial things may be compared to earthly. So it is as with
a Father who has many children; while he is present he orders them all, and
there is no need of a written Will: Accordingly Christ when he was present upon
earth, from time to time commanded the Apostles whatsoever was necessary. But
as the earthly father finding himself to be at the point of death, and fearing
that after his departure his children should quarrel among themselves, he calls
witnesses, and puts his mind in writing; and if any difference arise among the
brethren, they go not to their Fathers Sepulcher, but repair to his Will and
Testament; and he who rests in his grave, speaks still in his writing, as if he
were alive. Our Lord who left his Will among us, is now in heaven, therefore
let us seek his commands in the Gospel, as in his Will.

12. THUS Cyril of Ierus. Cat. 4. Nothing, no not the least concernment of the
divine and holy Sacraments of our Faith, is to be delivered without the holy
Scripture: believe not me unless I give you a demonstration of what I say from
the Scripture.

13. SAINT Basil in his Book of the true Faith says, If God be faithful in all
his sayings, his words, and works, they remaining for ever, and being don in
truth and equity; it must be an evident sign of infidelity and pride, if any
one shall reject what is written, and introduce what is not written. In which
Books he generally declares that he will write nothing but what he receives
from the holy Scripture: and that he abhors from taking it elsewhere. In his
29. Homily against the Antitrinit. Believe, says he, those which are written;
seek not those which are not written. And in his Eth. reg. 26. Every word and
action ought to be confirmed by the testimony of the divine^y inspired
Scriptures to the establishment of the Faith of the good, and reproof of the
wicked.

14. SAINT Ambrose in the first Book of his Offic. says: How can we make use
of any thing which is not to be found in Scripture? And in his Instit. of
Virgins. I read he is the first, but read not he is the second; let them who
say he is second, show it from the reading.

15. GREG. Nyssen in his Dial. of the soul and resurrect. says. It Is
undeniable, that truth is there only to be placed, where there is the seal of
Scripture Testimony.

16. SAINT Jerome against Helvidius declares. As we deny not that which is
written, so we refuse those which are not written. And in his Comment on the
98. Ps. Every thing that we assert, we must show from the holy Scripture. The
word of him that speaks has not that authority as Gods precept. And on the 87.
Ps. Whatever is said after the Apostles, let it be cut off, nor have afterward
authority. The one be holy after the Apostles, the one be eloquent; yet has he
not authority.

17. SAINT Austin in his Tract of the unity of the Church, c. 12. acknowledges
that he could not be convinced but by the Scriptures of what he was to believe;
and adds they are read with such manifestation, that he who believes them, must
confess the doctrine to be most true. In the second Book of Christian doctrine,
c. 9. he says, that in the plain places of Scripture are found all those
things that concern Faith and Manners. And in Epist. 42. All things which have
bin exhibited heretofore as don to mankind, and what we now see and deliver to
our posterity, the Scripture has not past them in silence, so far forth as they
concern the search or defense of our Religion. In his ^ract of the good of
Widowhood, he says to ^ulian, the person to whom he addresses: What shall I
teach you more then that we read in the Apostle: for the holy Scripture settlos
the rule of our doctrine; that we think not any thing more then we ought to
think; but to think so^erly, as God has dealt to every man the mesure of Faith.
Therefore my teaching is only to ex^ound the words of this Doctor, Ep. 157.
Where any subject is obscure, and passes our compre^ension, and the Scripture
does not plainly afford its help, there human conjecture is presum^^ous in
defining,

18. THEOPHILUS of Alex. in his second Paschal homily, tells us, that it is the
suggestion of a diabolical spirit to think that any thing besides the Scripture
has divine authority. And in his third he adds, that the Doctors of the Church
having the Testimony of the Scripture, lay firm foundation of their doctrine.

19. CHRYSOSTOM in his third Homily on the first of the Thessal. asserts, that
from the alone reading or hearing of the Scripture one may learn all things
necessary. So Hom. 34. on Act. 15. he declares. A heathen comes and says: I
would willingly be a Christian, but I know not who to join my self to; for
there are many contentions among you, many seditions and tumults; so that I am
in doubt what opinion I should choose. Each man says, what y say is true, and I
know not whom to believe; each pretends to Scripture which I am ignorant of
It Is very well the issue is put here: for if the appeal were to reason, in this
case there would be just occasion of being troubled: but when we appeal to
Scripture, and they are simple and certain, you may easily your self judge. He
that agrees with the Scripture is a Christian, he that resists them, is far out
of the way. And on Ps. 95. If any thing be said without the Scripture, the mind
halts between different opinions; sometimes inclining as to what is probable,
anon rejecting as what is frivolous: but when the testimony of holy Scripture
is produced, the mind both of speaker and hearer is confirmed. And Hom. 4. on
Lazar. Tho one should rise from the dead, or an Angel come down from heaven, we
must believe the Scripture; they being framed by the Lord of Angels, and the
quick and dead. And Hom. 13. 2 Cor. 7. It is not an absurd thing that when we
deal with men about money, we will trust no body, but cast up the sum, and make
use of our counters; but in religious affairs, suffer our selves to be led
aside by other men's opinions, even then when we have by an exact scale and
touchstone, the dictat of the divine Law. Therefore I pray and exhort you, that
giving no heed to what this or that man says, you would consult the holy
Scripture, and thence learn the divine riches, and pursue what you have learnt.
And Hom. 58. on Jo. 10. 1. It Is the mark of a thief that he comes not in by the
door, but another way: now by the door the testimony of the Scripture is
signified. And Hom. on Gal. 1. 8. The Apostle says not, if any man teach a
contrary doctrine let him be accursed, or if he subvert the whole Gospel; but if
he teach any thing beside the Gospel which you have received, or vary any
little thing, let him be accursed.

20. CYRIL of Alex. against Jul. l. 7. says, The holy Scripture is sufficient
to make them who are instructed in it, wise unto salvation, and endued with
most ample knowledge.

21. TH^ODORET Dial. 1. I am persuaded only by the holy Scripture. And Dial. 2.
I am not so bold to affirm any thing, not spoken of in the Scripture. And
again, qu. 45. upon Genes. We ought not to enquire after what is past over in
silence, but acquiesce in what is written.

22. IT were easy to enlarge this discourse into a Volume; but having taken, as
they offered themselves, the suffrages of the writers of the four first
Centuries, I shall not proceed to those that follow. If the holy Scripture were
a perfect rule of Faith and Manners to all Christians heretofore, we may
reasonably assure our selves it is so still; and will now guide us into all
necessary truth, and consequently make us wise unto salvation, without the aid
of oral Tradition, or the new mintage of a living infallible Judge of
controversy. And the impartial Reader will be enabled to judge whether our
appeal to the holy Scripture, in all occasions of controversy, and
recommendation of it to the study of every Christian, be that heresy and
innovation which it is said to be.

23. IT is, we know, severely imputed to the Scribes and Pharisees by our
Savior, that they took from the people the key of knowledge, Luke 11. 52. and
had made the word of God of none effect by their Traditions, Matt. 15. 6. but
they never attemted what has bin since practiced by their Successors in the
Western Church, to take away the Ark of the Testament it self, and cut of not
only the efficacy, but very possession of the word of God by their Traditions.
Surely this had bin exceeding criminal from any hand: but that the Bishops and
Governors of the Church, and the universal and infallible Pastor of it, who
claim the office to interpret the Scriptures, exhort unto, and assist in the
knowledge of them, should be the men who thus rob the people of them; carries
with it the highest aggravations both of cruelty and breach of trust. If any
man shall take away from the words of the Book of this prophecy, says Saint
John, Revel. 22. 19. God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life, and
out of the holy City, and from the things which are written in this Book. What
vengeance therefore awaits those, who have taken away not only from one Book,
but at once the Books themselves, even all the Scriptures, the whole word of
God?

SECT. VII. Historical reflections upon the events which have happened in the
Church since the withdrawing of the holy Scripture.
'TWILL in this place be no useless contemplation to observe, after the
Scriptures had bin ravished from the people in the Church of Rome, what pitiful
pretenders were admitted to succeed. And first because Laymen were presumed to
be illiterate, and easily seducible by those writings which were in themselves
difficult, and would be wrested by the unlearned to their own destruction;
pictures were recommended in their steed, and complemented as the Books of the
Laity, which soon improved into a necessity of their worship, and that gross
superstition which renders Christianity abominated by Turks, and Jews, and
Heathens unto this day.

2. I would not be hasty in charging Idolatry upon the Church of Rome, or all
in her communion; but that their Image Worship is a most fatal snare, in which
vast numbers of unhappy souls are taken, no man can doubt who has with any
regard travailed in Popish Countries. I my self, and thousands of others, whom
the late troubles, or other occasions sent abroad, are and have bin witnesses
thereof. Charity, it is true, believes all things, but it does not oblige men to
disbelieve their eyes. 'Twas the outcry of Micah against the Danites, Jud. 18.
24. ye have taken away my Gods which I have made, and the Priest, and are gone
away, and what have I more? but the Laity of the Roman communion may enlarge
the complaint, and say; you have taken away the oracles of our God, and set up
every where among us graven and molten Images, and Teraphims, and what have we
more? and 'twas lately the loud, and I doubt me is still, the unanswerable
complaint of the poor Americans, that they were denied to worship their Pagod
once in the year, when they who forbad them, worshipped theirs every day.

3. THE Jews before the captivity, notwithstanding the recent memory of the
Miracles in Egypt and the Wilderness, and the first conquest of the Land of
Canaan with those that succeeded under the Judges and kings of Israel and Juda;
as also the express command of God, and the menaces of Prophets, ever and anon
fell to downright Idolatry: but after their return unto this day, have kept
themselves from falling into that sin, tho they had no Prophets to instruct
them, no miracles or government to encourage or constrain them. The reason of
which a very learned man in his discourse of religious Assemblies takes to be,
the reading and teaching of the Law in their Synagogues; which was performed
with great exactness after the return from the captivity, but was not so
performed before. And may we not invert the observation, and impute the
Image Worship now set up in the Christian Church, to the forbidding the reading
of the Scriptures in the Churches, and interdicting the private use, and
institution in them?

4. FOR a farther supplement in place of the Scriptures, whose History was
thought not edifying enough, the Legends of the Saints were introduced; stories
so stupid, that one would imagine them designed as an experiment how far
credulity could be imposed upon; or else framed to a worse intent, that
Christianity by them might be made ridiculous. Yet these are recommended to use
and veneration, while in the mean time the word of God is utterly forbidden,
whereby the parties to this unhappy practice (that I may speak in the words of
the Prophet Jerem. 2. 13.) have committed two evils, they have for saken the
fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns that
can hold no water.

5. FARTHER yet, the same unreasonable tyranny which permitted not the Laity to
understand Almighty God speaking to them in the Scripture; hindered them from
being suffered to understand the Church or themselves speaking to him in their
prayers; whilst the whole Roman office is so disposed, that in defiance of the
Apostles discourse, 1 Cor. 14. he that occupies the room of the unlearned must
say amen, to those prayers and praises which he has no comprehension of: and by
his endless repetitions of Paters, Ave's and Credo's, falls into that battology
reproved by our Savior, Mat. 6. 7. and as 'twas said to the woman of Samaria,
Jo. 4. 22. knows not what he worships. Yet this unaccountable practice is so
much the darling of that Church, that when in France about eighteen years
since, the Roman Missal was translated into the vulgar Tongue, and published by
the direction of several of their Bishops; the Clergy of France rose up in
great fury against the attemt, anathematizing in their circular Epistles, all
that sold, read, or used the said Book: and upon complaint unto Pope Alex. the
7. he resented the matter so deeply, as to issue out his Bull against it in the
following words.

6. WHEREAS sons of perdition, endevoring the destruction of souls, have
translated the Roman Missal into the French Tongue, and so attemted to throw
down and trample upon the majesty of the holy Rites comprehended in Latin
words: As we abominate and detest the novelty, which will deform the beauty of
the Church, and produce disobedience, temerity, boldness, sedition and schism;
so we condemn, reprobate and forbid, the said and all other such Translations,
and interdict the reading, and keeping, to all and singular the faithful, of
whatever sex, degree, order; condition, dignity, honor, or preeminence, etc.
under pain of excommunication. And we command the copies to be immediately
burnt, etc. So mortal a sin it seems 'twas tought for the Laity to understand
the prayers in which they must communicate.

7. NOR is this all; agreeable to the other attemts upon the holy Scripture,
was the bold insolence of making a new authentic Text, in that unknown Tongue
in which the offices of prayer had bin, and were to be kept disguised; which
was don by the decree of the Council of Trent in the fourth Session. But when
the Council had given this Prerogative to the Version which it called vulgar,
the succeeding Popes began to consider what that Version was; and this work
Pius the fourth and fifth set upon, but prevented by death failed to complete
it, so that the honor of the performance fell to Sixtus the fifth, who in the
plenitude of his Apostolic power (the Translation being reformed to his mind)
commanded it to be that genuine ancient Edition, which the Trent Fathers had
before made authentic, and under the pain of excommunication required it to be
so received: which he does in this form. Of our certain knowledge, and the
plenitude of Apostolic power, we order and declare that vulgar Edition which
has hin received for authentic by the Council of Trent, is without doubt or
controversy to be esteemed this very one, which being amended as well as it is
possible, and printed at the Vatican Press, we publish to be read in the whole
Christian Republic, and in all Churches of the Christian world. Decreeing that
it having bin approved by the consent of the holy universal Church, and the
holy Fathers, and then by the Decree of the general Council of Trent, and now
by the Apostolic authority delivered to us by the Lord; is the true,
legitimate, authentic, and undoubted, which is to be received and held in all
public and private Disputations, Lectures, Preachings, and Expositions, etc. But
notwithstanding this certain knowledge, and plenitude of Apostolic power, soon
after came Clement the eighth, and again resumes the work of his Predecessor
Sixtus, discovers great and many errors in it, and puts out one more reformed,
yet confessed by himself to be imperfect; which now stands for the authentic
Text, and carries the title of the Bible put forth by Sixtus, notwithstanding
all its alterations. So well does the Roman Church deserve the honor which she
pretends to, of being the mistress of all Churches; and so infallible is the
holy Chair in its determinations: and lastly, so authentic a Transcript of the
word of God (concerning which it is said, Mat. 5. 18. one jot or one title shall
not fail) is that which she established, and that has received so many, and yet
according to the confession of the infallible Corrector, wants still more
alterations.

8. DEPENDENT upon this, and as great a mischief as any of the former,
consequent to the withdrawing of the Scripture, I take to be the step it made
to the overthrow of the ancient and most useful discipline of the Church in
point of Penance, whose rigors always heretofore preceded the possibility of
having absolution. Now of this we know a solemn part was the state of Audience,
when the lapst person was received after long attendance without doors,
prostrations, and lamentations there, within the entrance of the Church; and
was permitted with the Catechumens or Candidats of Baptism, to hear the
readings of the Scripture, and stay till Prayer began, but then depart. He was
obliged to hear the terrors of the Lord, the threats of the divine Law against
sin and sinners, to stand among the unbaptiz'd and heathen multitude, and learn
again the elements of that holy Faith from which he had prevaricated; and so in
time be rendered capable of the devotions of the faithful, and afterward the
reception of the Eucharist. But when the Scriptures were thought useless or
dangerous to be understood and heard, it was consequent that the state of
Audience should be cut off from Penance, and that the next to it, upon the
self-same principle should be dismissed: and so the long probation formerly
required should be supplanted; and the compendious way of pardoning first, and
repenting afterward, the endless circle of sinning and being absolved, and
then sinning and being absolved again, should prevail upon the Church. Which
still obtains, notwithstanding the complaints, and irrefragable demonstrations
of learned men even of the Romish Communion, who plainly show this now received
method, to be an innovation groundless and unreasonable, and most pernicious in
its consequents.

9. AND, by the way, we may take notice that there cannot be a plainer evidence
of the judgment of the Church, concerning the necessity of the Scriptures being
known, not only by the learned but mean Christian, and the interest they have
therein; then is the ancient course of Penance, established by the practice of
all the first Ages, and almost as many Councils, whether general or local, as
have decreed any thing concerning discipline; with the penitentiary Books and
Canons, which were written for the first eleven hundred years in the whole
Christian world. For if even the unbaptiz'd Catechumen, and the lapst sinner,
notwithstanding their slender knowledge in the mysteries of Faith, or frail
pretense to the privilege thereof: had a right to the state of Audience, and
was obliged to hear the Scripture read; surely the meanest unobnoxious Laic,
was in as advantageous circumstances, and might not only be trusted with the
reading of those sacred Books, but might claim them as his birthright.

10. I may justly, over and above what has bin hitherto alleged, impute to the
Governors of the same Church, and their withholding from the Laity the holy
Scripture; the many dangerous errors, gross ignorances, and scandalous
immoralities which have prevailed among them both. It is no new method of
divine vengeance, that there should be like people, like Priest, Hos. 4. 9. and
that the Idol shepherd who led his flock into the ditch, should fall therein
himself, Mat. 15. 14. And as the Prophet Zachary describes it, c. 11. 17. The
sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean
dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.

11. BUT no consequence can be more obviously deducible from that practice,
then that men should justify the withholding of the Scripture, by lessening
its credit, and depreciating its worth: which has occasioned those reproaches
which by the writers of the Church of Rome, of best note, have bin cast upon
it. As that it was a Nose of wax, a leaden rule, a deaf and useless deputy to
God in the office of a Judge; of less authority then the Roman Church, and of no
more credit then Esops Fables, but for the testimony of the said Church; that
they contain things apt to raise laughter or indignation, that the Latin
Translation in the Complutensian Bible is placed between the Hebrew Text, and
the Septuagint Version, as our Savior was at his Crucifixion between two
thieves; and that the vulgar Edition is of such authority that the Originals
ought to be mended by it, rather then it should be mended from them: which are
the complements of Cardinal Bellarmin, Hosius, Eckius, Perron, Ximenes,
Coqueus, and others of that Communion: words to be answered by a Thunderbolt,
and fitter for the mouth of a Celsus or a Porphyrie, then of the pious sons,
and zealous Champions of the Church of Christ.

12. IT IS to be expected that the Romanists should now wipe their mouths, and
plead not guilty; telling us that they permit the Scripture to the Laity in
their mother Tongue: And to that purpose the Fathers of Rhemes and Doway have
published an English Bible for those of their communion. I shall therefore give
a short and plain account of the whole affair, as really it stands, and then on
Gods name let the Romanist make the best of their Apology.

13. THE fourth rule of the Index of prohibited Books composed upon the command
and auspice of the Council of Trent, and published by the authority of Pius the
fourth, Sixtus the fifth, and Clement the eighth, runs thus; Since it is
manifest by experience, that if the holy Bible be suffered promiscuously in the
vulgar Tongue, such is the temerity of men, that greater detriment then
advantage will thence arise; in this matter let the judgment of the Bishop or
Inquisitor be stood to: that with the advice of the Curat or Confessor, they
may give leave for the reading of the Bible in the vulgar Tongue, translated by
Catholics, to such as they know will not receive damage, but increase of Faith
and Piety thereby. Which faculty they shall have in writing; and whosoever
without such faculty shall presume to have or to read the Bible, he shall not
till he have delivered it up, receive absolution of his sins. Now (to pass over
the iniquity of obliging men to ask leave to do that which God Almighty
commands) when it is considered how few of the Laity can make means to the
Bishop or Inquisitor, or convince them, or the Curat or Confessor, that they
are such who will not receive damage, but increase of Faith and Piety by the
reading of the Scripture; and also have interest to prevail with them for their
favor herein: and after all can and will be at the charge of taking out the
faculty, which is so penally required: it is easy to guess what thin numbers of
the Laity are likely, or indeed capable of reaping benefit by this Indulgence
pretended to be allowed them.

14. BUT, besides all this, what shall we say, if the power it self of giving
Licenses be a mere show, and really signifies just nothing? In the observation
subjoined to this fourth rule it is declared, that the Impression and Edition
thereof gives no new faculty to Bishops, or Inquisitors, or Superiors of
regulars to grant Licenses of buying, reading, or retaining Bibles published in
a vulgar Tongue; since hitherto by the command and practice of the holy Roman
and universal Inquisition, the power of giving such faculties, to read or
retain vulgar Bibles, or any parts of Scripture of the Old or New Testament, in
any vulgar Tongue; or also summaries, or historical compendiums of the said
Bibles or Books of Scripture, in whatsoever Tongue they are written, has bin
taken away. And sure if a Layman cannot read the Bible without a faculty, and
it is not in any ones power to grant it; 'twill evidently follow that he cannot
read it: And so the pretense of giving liberty, owns the shame of openly
refusing it, but has no other effect or consequence. And if any Romanist among
us, or in any other Protestant Country enjoies any liberty herein, it is merely
by connivance, and owed to a fear least the Votary would be lost, and take the
Bible where it was without difficulty to be had, if strictness should be used.
And should Popery, which God forbid, become paramount; the Translations of the
Scripture into our Mother Tongues, would be no more endured here, then they are
in Spain: and they who have formerly bin wary in communicating the Scriptures;
remembering how thereby their errors have bin detected, would upon a revolution
effectually provide for the future, and be sure to keep their people in an
Egyptian darkness, that might it self be felt, but that allowed the notices of
no other object. They would not be content with that composition of the
Ammonite, to thrust out all the right eyes of those that submitted to them, 1 Samuel 11. 2. but would put out both; as the Philistines did to Samson, that they
might make their miserable captives for ever grind in their Mill, Jud. 16. 21.

15. BUT this heaviest of judgments will never fall upon the reformed Churches,
till by their vicious practice and contemt of the divine Law, they have
deserted their profession; and made themselves utterly unworthy of the
blessings they enjoy, and the light of that Gospel which with noonday
brightness has shined among them. Upon which account, I suppose it may not be
impertinent in the next place to subjoin some plain directions, and cautionary
advices, concerning the use of these sacred Books.

SECT. VIII. Necessary cautions to be used in the reading of the holy
Scriptures.
IT is a common observation: that the most generous and sprightly Medicines are
the most unsafe; if not applied with due care and regimen: And the remark holds
as well in spiritual as corporal remedies. The Apostle asserts it upon his own
experience, that the doctrine of the Gospel, which was to some the savor of life
unto life, was to others the savor of death, 2 Cor. 2. 15. And the same effect
that the oral Word had then, the written Word may have now; not that either the
one or the other have any thing in them that is of it self mortiferous, but
becomes so by the ill disposition of the persons who so pervert it. It is
therefore well worth our inquiry, what qualifications on our part are necessary
to make the Word be to us what it is in it self, the power of God unto
salvation, Romans 1. 16. Of these some are previous before our reading, some are
concomitant with it, and some are subsequent and follow after it.

2. OF those that go before, sincerity is a most essential requisite: by
sincerity, I mean an upright intention, by which we direct our reading to that
proper end for which the holy Scriptures were designed; viz. the knowing Gods
will in order to the practicing it. This honest simplicity of heart is that
which Christ represents by the good ground, where alone it was that the seed
could fructify, Mat. 13. 8. And he that brings not this with him, brings only
the shadow of a Disciple. The word of God, is indeed, sharper then a two-edged
sword, Heb. 4. 12. but what impression can a sword make on a body of air; which
still slips from, and eludes its thrusts? And as little can all the practical
discourses of holy Writ make on him, who brings only his speculative faculties
with him, and leaves his will and affections behind him; which are the only
proper subjects for it to work on.

3. To this we may probably impute that strange inefficaciousness we see of the
Word. Alas, men rarely apply it to the right place: our most inveterat diseases
lie in our morals; and we suffer the Medicin to reach no farther then our
intellects. As if he that had an ulcer in his bowels should apply all his
balsoms and sanatives only to his head. It Is true, the holy Scriptures are the
tresuries of divine Wisdom; the Oracles to which we should resort for saving
knowledge: but they are also the rule and guide of holy Life: and he that covets
to know Gods will for any purpose but to practice it, is only studious to
entitle himself to the greater number of stripes, Luke 12. 47.

4. NAY farther, he that affects only the bare knowledge, is often disappointed
even of that. The Scripture, like the Pillar of fire and cloud, enlightens the
Israelites, those who sincerely resign themselves to its guidance; but it
darkens and confounds the Egyptians, Ex. 14. 20. And it is frequently seen, that
those who read only to become knowing, are tolled on by their curiosity into
the more abstruse and mysterious parts of Scripture, where they entangle
themselves in inextricable mazes and confusions; and instead of acquiring a
more superlative knowledge, loose those easy and common notions which lie
obvious to every plain well meaning Reader. I fear this Age affords too many,
and too frequent instances of this; in men who have lost God in the midst of
his Word, and studied Scripture till they have renounced its Author.

5. AND sure this infatuation is very just, and no more then God himself has
warned us of, who takes the wise in their own craftiness, Job. 5. 12. but
appropriates his secrets only to them that fear him, and has promised to teach
the meek his way, Psalm. 25. 9. 14. And this was the method Christ observed in
his preaching; unveiling those truths to his Disciples, which to the Scribes
and Pharisees, his inquisitive, yet refractory hearers, he wrapped up in
parables: not that he disliked their desire of knowledge, but their want of
sincerity: which is so fatal a defect as blasts our pursuits, tho of things in
themselves never so excellent. This we find exemplifi'd in Simon Magus, Acts 8.
who tho he coveted a thing in itself very desirable, the power of conferring
the holy Ghost, yet desiring it not only upon undue conditions, but for
sinister ends, he not only mist of that, but was (after all his convincement by
the Apostles miracles, and the engagement of his Baptism) immerst in the gall
of bitterness; and at last advanced to that height of blasphemy, as to set up
himself for a God; so becoming a lasting memento, how unsafe it is to
prevaricate in holy things.

6. BUT as there is a sincerity of the Will in order to practice, so there is
also a sincerity of the understanding in order to belief; and this is also no
less requisite to the profitable reading of Scripture. I mean by this, that we
come with a preparation of mind, to embrace indifferently, whatever God there
reveles as the object of our Faith: that we bring our own opinions, not as the
clue by which to unfold Scripture, but to be tried and regulated by it. The
want of this has bin of very pernicious consequence in matters both of Faith
and speculation. Men are commonly prepossest strongly with their own notions,
and their errand to Scripture is not to lend them light to judge of them, but
aids to back and defend them.

7. OF this there is no Book of controversy that does not give notorious proof.
The Socinian can easily overlook the beginning of Saint John, that says, The
Word was God, Jo. 1. 1. and all those other places which plainly assert the
Deity of our Savior; if he can but divert to that other more agreeable Text,
that the Father is greater then I. Among the Romanists, Peter's being said to be
first among the Apostles, Mat. 10. 2, and that on that Rock Christ would build
his Church, Mat. 16. 18. carries away all attention from those other places
where Saint Paul says he was not behind the very chiefest of the Apostles, 2
Cor. 11. 5. that upon him lay the care of all the Churches, 2 Cor. 11. 28. and
that the Church was not built upon the foundation of some one, but all the
twelve Apostles, Revel. 21. 14. So it fares in the business of the Eucharist:
This is my body, Mat. 26. 26. carries it away clear for Transubstantiation,
when our Saviors calling that which he drunk the fruit of the vine, Mat. 26.
29. and then Saint Paul's naming the Elements in the Lords Supper several times
over Bread and Wine; The Bread that we break, is it not the Communion of the
Body of Christ: the Cup that we bless, is it not the Communion, and 1 Cor. 10.
16. And again, He that eats this Bread, and drinks this Cup unworthily, etc. 1
Cor. 11. 29. can make no appearance of an Argument.

8. THUS men once engaged ransac for Texts that carry some correspondency to the
opinions they have imbibed; and those how do they rack and scrue to bring to a
perfect conformity; and improve every little probability into a demonstration?
On the other side, the contrary Texts they look on as enemies, and consider
them no farther then to provide fences and guards against them: So they bring
Texts not into the scales to weigh, but into the field to skirmish, as
Partisans and Auxiliaries of such or such opinions.

9. BY this force of prepossession it is, that that sacred Rule, which is the
mesure and standard of all rectitude, is it self bowed and distorted to
countenance and abet the most contrary tenets: and like a variable picture,
represents differing shapes according to the light in which you view it. And
sure we cannot do it a worse office then to represent it thus dissonant to it
self. Yet thus it must still be till men come unbiast to the reading of it. And
certainly there is all the reason in the world they should do so: the ultimate
end of our faith is but the salvation of our souls, 1 Pet. 1. 9. and we may be
sure the Scripture can best direct us what Faith it is which will lead us to
that end.

10. WHY should we not then have the same indifference which a traveller has,
whether his way lie on this hand or that; so as it be the direct road to his
journies end? For although it be infinitely material that I embrace right
principles, yet it is not so that this should be right rather then the other:
and our wishes that it should be so, proceed only from our prepossessions and
fondness of our own conceptions, then which nothing is more apt to intercept
the clear view of truth. It therefore nearly concerns us to deposit them, and
to give up our selves without reserve to the guidance of Gods Word, and give it
equal credit when it thwarts, as when it complies with our own notions.

11. WITHOUT this, tho we may call Scripture the rule of Faith, and judge of
controversies; yet it is manifest we make it not so, but reserve still the last
appeal to our own prejudicat phancies: and then no wonder, tho we fall under
the same occaecation which our Savior upbraids to the Jews, that seeing, we see
not, neither do we understand, Mat. 13. 14. For he that will not be saved Gods
way, will hardly be so by his own. He that resolves not impartially to embrace
all the Scriptures dictats, comes to them as unsincerely, as the remnant of the
Jews did to Jeremiah to inquire of the Lord for them, which he no sooner had
don, but they protest against his message, Jer. 42. 20. and may expect as fatal
an event.

12. BUT there are a set of men who deal yet more insincerely with the Word;
that read it insidiously: on purpose to collect matter of objection and cavil:
that with a malicious diligence compare Texts in hope to find contradictions;
and read attentively, but to no other end then to remark incoherences and
defects in the style: which when they think they have started, they have their
design; and never will use a quarter of the same diligence in considering how
they may be solved, or consulting with those who may assist them in it. For I
think I may appeal to the generality of those who have raised the loudest
clamors against the Scripture, whether they have endeavored to render
themselves competent judges of it by inquiring into the Originals, or informing
themselves of those local Customs, peculiar Idioms, and many other
circumstances, by which obscure Texts are to be cleared. And tho I do not
affirm it necessary to salvation that every man should do this; yet I may
affirm it necessary to him that will pretend to judge of the Bible: and he that
without this condems it, does it as manifest injury, as a Judge that should pass
sentence only upon the Indictment, without hearing the defense.

13. AND certainly there cannot be any thing more unmanly and disingenuous,
then for men to inveigh and condemn before they inquire and examine. Yet this is
the thing upon which so many value themselves, assuming to be men of reason,
for that for which the Scripture pronounces them brute beasts, viz. the
speaking evil of those things they understand not, 2 Pet. 2. 12. Would men use
due diligence, no doubt many of those seeming contradictions would be
reconciled, and the obscurities cleared: and if any should after all remain, he
might find twenty things fitter to charge it on, then want of verity or
discourse in the inspired writers.

14. ALAS what human writing is there of near that Antiquity, wherein there are
not many passages unintelligible? And indeed, unless modern times knew all
those national customs, obsolete Laws, particular Rites and Ceremonies, Phrases
and proverbial Sayings, to which such ancient Books refer, it is impossible but
some passages must remain obscure. Yet in these we ordinarily have so much
candor, as to impute their unintelligibleness to our own ignorance of those
things which should clear them, the improprieties of style, to the variation
that times make in dialects, or to the errors of Scribes, and do not presently
exclame against the Authors as false or impertinent, or discard the whole Book
for some such passages.

15. AND sure what allowances we make to other Books, may with more reason be
made to the Bible; which having bin writ so many Ages since, past through infinite
variety of hands, and (which is above all) having bin the object of the Devils,
and wicked men's malice, lies under greater disadvantages then any human
composure: And doubtless men would be as equitable to that as they are to
others, were it not that they more wish to have that false or irrational then
any other Book. The plain parts of it, the precepts and threatenings speak
clearer then they desire, gall and fret them; and therefore they will revenge
themselves upon the obscurer: and seem angry that there are some things they
understand not, when indeed their real displesure is at those they do.

16. A second qualification preparatory to reading the Scripture is reverence.
When we take the Bible in our hands, we should do it with other sentiments and
apprehensions then when we take a common Book; considering that it is the word
of God, the instrument of our salvation; or upon our abuse of it a promoter of
our ruin.

17. AND sure this if duly apprehended. cannot but strike us with a reverential
awe. make us to say with Jacob, Genesis 28. 17. surely God is in this place;
control all trifling phancies, and make us read, not for custom or
divertisement, but with those solemn and holy intentions which become the
dignity of its Author. Accordingly we find holy men have in all Ages bin
affected with it, and some to the inward reverence of the mind, have joined the
outward of the body also, and never read it but upon their knees: an example
that may both instruct and reproach our profaness; who commonly read by chance,
and at aventure: If a Bible happen in our way, we take it up as we would do a
Romance, or Play-book; only herein we differ, that we dismiss it much sooner,
and retain less of its impressions.

18 IT was a Law of Numa, that no man should meddle with divine things, or
worship the Gods, in passing, or by accident, but make it a set and solemn
business. And every one knows with how great ceremony and solemnity the heathen
Oracles were consulted. How great a shame is it then for Christians to defalk
that reverence from the true God, which heathens allowed their false ones?

19. NOW this proceeds sometimes from the want of that habitual reverence we
should always have to it as Gods word, and sometimes from want of actual
exciting it, when we go to read: for if the habit lie only dormant in us, and
be not awaked by actual consideration, it avails us as little in our reading,
as the habitual strength of a man does toward labor, when he will not exert it
for that end.

20. WE ought therefore, as to make it our deliberat choice to read Gods word;
so when we do it, to stir up our selves to those solemn apprehensions of its
dignity and authority, as may render us malleable, and apt to receive its
impressions: for where there is no reverence, it is not to be expected there
should be any genuine or lasting obedience.

21. SAINT Austin in his Tract to Honoratus, of the advantage of believing,
makes the first requisite to the knowledge of the Scriptures to be the love of
them. Believe me, says he, every thing in the Scripture is sublime and divine,
its truth and doctrine are most accommodate to the refreshment, and building up
of our minds: and in all respects so ordered, that every one may draw thence
what is sufficient for him; provided he approach it with devotion, piety, and
religion. The proof of this may require much reasoning and discourse. But this
I am first to persuade, that you do not hate the Authors, and then that you
love them. Had we an ill opinion of Virgil, nay, if upon the account of the
reputation he has gained with our Predecessors, we did not greatly love, before
we understood him; we should never patiently go through all the difficult
questions Grammarians raise about him. Many employ themselves in commenting
upon him; we esteem him most, whose exposition most commends the Book, and
shows that the Author, not only was free from error, but did excellently well
where he is not understood. And if such an account happen not to be given, we
impute it rather to the Interpreter then the Poet.

22. THUS the good Father; whose words I have transcribed at large, as being
remarkable to the present purpose; he also shows that the mind of no Author is
to be learnt from one averse to his doctrine: as that it is vain to enquire of
Aristotle's Books from one of a different Sect: Or of Archimedes from Epicurus:
the discourse will be as displeasing as the speaker; and that shall be esteemed
absurd, which comes from one that is envied or despised.

23. A third preparative to our reading should be prayer. The Scripture as it
was dictated at first by the holy Spirit, so must still owe its effects and
influence to its cooperation. The things of God, the Apostle tells us, are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. And tho the natural man may well enough
apprehend the letter, and grammatical sense of the Word; yet its power and
energy, that insinuative persuasive force whereby it works on hearts, is
peculiar to the spirit; and therefore without his aids, the Scripture whilst it
lies open before our eyes, may still be as a Book that is sealed, Esai. 29. 11.
be as ineffective as if the characters were illegible.

24. BESIDES our Savior tells us the devil is still busy to steal away the seed
as soon as it is sown, Mat. 13. 17. And unless we have some better guard then
our own vigilance, he is sure enough to prosper in his attemt. Let it therefore
be our care to invoke the divine Aid; and when ever we take the Bible into our
hands, to dart up at least a hearty ejaculation, that we may find its effects
in our hearts. Let us say with holy David, open thou mine eyes O Lord, that I
may see the wondrous things of thy Law. Blessed art thou O Lord, O teach me thy
statutes, Ps. 119. Nay indeed 'twil be fit matter of a daily solemn devotion,
as our Church has made it an annual in the Collect on the second Sunday in
Advent: a prayer so apt and fully expressive of what we should desire in this
particular, that if we transcribe not only the example, but the very words, I
know not how we can form that part of our devotion more advantageously.

25. IN the second place we are to consider what is required of us at the time
of reading the Scripture; which consists principally in two things. The first
of these is attention, which is so indispensably requisite, that without it all
Books are alike, and all equally insignificant: for he that adverts not to the
sense of what he reads, the wisest discourses signify no more to him, then the
most exquisit music does to a man perfectly deaf. The letters and syllables of
the Bible are no more sacred then those of another Book; it is the sense and
meaning only that is divinely inspired: and he that considers only the former,
may as well entertain himself with a spelling-book.

26. WE must therefore keep our minds fixed and attent to what we read: it is a
folly and lightness not to do so in human Authors; but it is a sin and danger
not to do so in this divine Book. We know there can scarce be a greater
instance of contemt and disvalue, then to hear a man speak, and not at all mind
what he says: yet this vilest affront do all those put upon God, who hear or
read his Word, and give it no attention. Yet I fear the practice is not more
impious then it is frequent: for there are many that read the Bible, who if at
the end of each Chapter they should be called to account, I doubt they could
produce very slender collections: and truly it is a sad consideration, that that
sacred Book is read most attentively by those, who read it as some preach the
Gospel, Phil. 1. 15. out of ^^vy and strife. How curiously do men inspect, nay
ransac and embowel a Text to find a pretense for cavil and objection, whilst
men who profess to look there for life and salvation. read with such a
retchless heedlesness, as if it could tell them nothing they were concerned in:
and to such it is no wonder if their reading bring no advantage. God is not in
this sense found of those that seek him not, Esai. 65. 1. it is Satan's part to
serve himself of the bare words and characters of holy Writ, for charms and
amulets: the virtue God has put there consists in the sense and meaning, and
can never be drawn out by drousy inadverting Readers.

27. THIS unattentiveness fore-stalls all possibility of good. How shall that
convince the understanding, or persuade the affections, which does not so much
as enter the imagination. So that in this case the seed seems more cast away
then in any of those instances the parable gives, Mat. 13. In those it still
fell upon the soil, but in this it never reaches that; but is scattered and
dissipated, as with a mighty wind, by those thoughts which have prepossessed
the mind. Let no man therefore take this sacred Book into his hand, till he
have turned out all distracting phancies, and have his faculties free and
vacant for those better objects which will there present themselves. And when
he has so disposed himself for attention, then let him contrive to improve that
attention to the best advantage.

28. To which purpose it may be very conducive to put it into some order and
method. As for instance, when he reads the doctrinal part of Scripture, let him
first and principally advert to those plain Texts which contain the necessary
points of Faith: that he may not owe his Creed only to his education, the
institution of his Parents or Tutors; but may know the true foundation on which
it is bottomed, viz. the word of God, and may thence be able to justify his
Faith: and as Saint Peter exhorts, be ready to give an answer to every man that
asks him a reason of the hope that is in him, 1 Pet. 3. 15. For want of this it
is, that Religion sits so loose upon men, that every wind of doctrine blows them
into distinct and various forms; till at last their Christianity it self vapors
away and disappears.

29. BUT let men be careful thus to secure the foundation, and then 'twill be
commendable in them (who are capable of it) to aspire to higher degrees of
speculation; yet even in these it will be their safest course chiefly to pursue
such as have the most immediate influence on practice, and be more industrious
to make observations of that sort, then curious and critical remarks, or bold
conjectures upon those mysteries on which God has spread a veil.

30. BUT besides a man's own particular collections, it will be prudence in him
to advantage himself of those of others, and to consult the learned and best
expositors; and that not only upon a present emergency, when he is to dispute a
point, (as most do) but in the constant course of this reading, wherein he will
most sedatly, and dispassionatly judge of the notions they offer.

31. AS to the choice of the portions of Scripture to be read in course, tho I
shall not condemn that of reading the whole Bible in order, yet it is apparent
that some parts of it (as that of the Levitical Law) are not so aptly
accommodated to our present state, as others are; and consequently not so
edificatory to us: and therefore I cannot see why any man should oblige himself
to an equal frequency in reading them. And to this our Church seems to give her
suffrage; by excluding such out of her public Lessons. And if we govern our
private reading by her mesures, it will well express our deference to her
judgment; who has selected some parts of Scripture, not that she would keep her
children in ignorance of any, but because they tend most immediately to practice.

32. NEITHER will the daily reading the Scripture in the rubricks order, hinder
any man from acquainting himself with the rest. For he may take in the other
parts as supernumeraries to his constant task, and read them as his leisure and
inclination shall promt. So that all the hurt that can accrue to him by this
method, is the being invited to read sometimes extraordinary proportions.

33. IF it be objected, that to those who daily hear the Church Service, 'twill
be a kind of tautology, first to read those Lessons in private, which soon after
they shall hear read publicly, I answer that whatever men may please to call
it, 'twill really be an advantage: For he that shall read a chapter by himself
with due consideration, and consulting of good Paraphrasts, will have dived so
far into the sense of it, that he will much better comprehend it when he hears
it read: as on the other side, the hearing it read so immediately after will
serve to confirm and rivet the sense in his mind. The one is as the conning,
the other the repeating the Lesson; which every Schole-boy can tell us is best
don at the nearest distance to each other. But I shall not contend for this, or
any particular method; let the Scripture be read in proportion to every man's
leisure and capacity, and read with attention; and we need not be scrupulous
about circumstances, when the main duty is secured.

34. BUT as in the doctrinal, so in the preceptive part, there is a caution to
be used in our attention. For we are to distinguish between those temporary
precepts that were adapted to particular times and occasions, and such as are
of perpetual obligation. He that does not this may bring himself under the
Jewish Law, or believe a necessity of selling all and giving it to the poor
because 'twas Christ's command to the rich man, Mat. 19. or incur other
considerable mischiefs.

35. THUS frequently commands are put in comprehensive indefinite words, but
concern only the Generality to whom the Law is written; and not those who are
entrusted with the vindication of their contemt. Accordingly it is said, thou
shall not kill, Mark. 10. 19. which concerns the private person; but extends
not to the Magistrate in the execution of his office, who is a revenger
appointed by God, and hears not the sword in vain. Romans 13. 4. So the
injunction not to swear at all, Mat. 5. 34 refers to the common transactions of
life; but not those solemn occasions where an oath is to give glory to God, and
is the end of all strife, Heb. 9. 16. Yet these mistakes at this day prevail
with Anabaptists and Quakers, and bottom their denial of the Magistrates power
to protect his Subjects by war; and to determine differences in Peace, by the
oath of witnesses in judicial proceedings.

36. THERE is another distinction we are to attend to; and that is between
absolute and primary commands, and secundary ones: the former we are to set a
special remark upon, as those upon whose observance or violation our eternal
life or death inseparably depends. And therefore our first and most solicitous
care must be concerning them. I mention this, not to divert any from aspiring
to the highest degrees of perfection: but to reprove that preposterous course
many take, who lay the greatest weight upon those things on which God lays the
least; and have more zeal for oblique intimations, then for express downright
commands; nay think by the one to commute for the contemt of the other. For
example, fasting is recommended to us in Scripture, but in a far lower key then
moral duties: rather as an expedient and help to virtue, then as properly a
virtue it self. And yet we may see men scrupulous in that, who startle not at
injustice, and oppression (that clamorous sin that cries to heaven) who pretend
to mortify their appetites by denying it its proper food, or being luxurious in
one sort of it; and yet glut their avarice, eat up the poor, and devour widows
houses, Mat. 23.

37. To such as these 'twould be good advice to fix their attention on the
absolute commands, to study moral honesty, and the essentials of Christianity;
to make a good progress there, and do what God indispensably requires: and then
it may be seasonable to think of voluntary oblations: but till then they are so
far from homage, that they are the most reprochful flattery; an attemt to bribe
God against himself; and a sacrilege, like that of Dionysius; who took away
Apollo's golden robe, and gave him a stuff one.

38. THE second thing requisite in our reading is application: this is the
proper end of our attention: and without this we may be very busy to very
little purpose. The most laborious attention without it, puts us but in the
condition of those poor slaves that labor in the mines: who with infinite toil
dig that ore of which they shall never partake. If therefore we will
appropriate that rich tresure, we must apply, and so make it our own.

39. LET us then at every period of holy Writ, reflect and look on our selves
as the persons spoke to. When we find Philip giving baptism to the Eunuch upon
this condition that he believe with all his heart, Act. 8. let us consider that
unless we do so; our baptism (like a thing surreptitiously obtained) conveis no
title to us; will avail us nothing.

40. WHEN we read our Saviors denunciation to the Jews, except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish; Lu. 13. 5. we are to look on it as if addressed
immediately to our selves; and conclude as great a necessity of our repentance.
In those black catalogues of crimes which the Apostle mentions, 1 Cor. 6. 10.
and Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. as excluding from the Kingdom of heaven, we are to
behold our own guilts arraigned, and to resolve that the same crimes will as
certainly shut heaven gates against us, as those to whom those Epistles were
immediately directed. In all the precepts of good life, and Christian virtue, we
are to think our selves as nearly and particularly concerned, as if we had bin
Christ's Auditors on the Mount. So proportionably in all the threats and
promises we are either to tremble or hope, according as we find our selves
adhere to those sins or virtues to which they are affixt.

41. THIS close application would render what we read operative and effective,
which without it will be useless and insignificant. We may see an instance of
it in David; who was not at all convinced of his own guilt by Nathans parable
(tho the most apposite that was imaginable) till he roundly applied it, saying,
thou art the man: 2 Samuel 12. And unless we treat our selves at the same rate,
the Scripture may fill our heads with high notions, nay with many speculative
truths, which yet amounts to no more then the Devils theology, Ja. 2. 19. and
will as little advantage us.

42. IT now remains that we speak of what we are to do after our reading; which
may be summed up in two words: Recollect and practice. Our memories are very
frail as to things of this nature. And therefore we ought to impress them as
deep as we can, by reflecting on what we have read. It is an observation out of
the Levitical Law, that those beasts only were clean, and fit for sacrifice,
that chewed the cud, Lev. 11. 4. And tho the ceremony were Jewish, the moral is
Christian, and admonishes us how we should revolve and ruminate on spiritual
instructions. Without this what we hear or read slips insensibly from us, and
like letters writ in chalk, is wip^t out by the next succeeding thought: but
recollection engraves and indents the characters in the mind. And he that would
duly use it, would find other manner of impressions; more affective and more
lasting, then bare reading will leave.

43. WE find it thus in all Sciences: he that only reads over the rules, and
lays aside the thoughts of them together with his Book, will make but a slow
advance; whilst he that plods and studies upon them, repetes and reinforces
them upon his mind, soon arrives to an eminency. By this it was that David
attained to that perfection in Gods Law as to outstrip his teachers, and
understand more then the Ancients, Ps. 119. 99, 100. because it was his
meditation as himself tells us, ver. 97, 99.

44. LET us therefore pursue the same method; and when we have read a portion
of Scripture, let us recollect what observable things we have there met with:
what exhortations to virtue, or determents from vice; what promises to
obedience, or menaces for the contrary: what examples of Gods vengeance against
such or such sins, or what instances of his blessing upon duties. If we do this
daily, we cannot but amass together a great stock of Scripture documents, which
will be ready for us to produce upon every occasion. Satan can assault us no
where, but we shall be provided of a guard, a Scriptum est; which we see was
the sole armor the captain of our salvation used in his encounter with him.
Mat. 4. ver. 4, 7, and 10. and will be as successful to us, if we will duly
manage it.

45. THE last thing required as consequent to our reading, is practice. This is
the ultimate end, to which all the foregoing qualifications are directed. And
if we fail here, the most assiduous diligence in all the former will be but
lost labor. Let us mean never so well, attend never so close, recollect never
so exactly; if after all we do not practice, all the rest will serve but to
enhance our guilt. Christianity is an active Science, and the Bible was given
us not merely for a theme of speculation, but for a rule of life.

46. And alas, what will it avail us that our opinions are right, if our
manners be crooked? When the Scripture has showed us what God requires of us,
nay, has evinced to us the reasonableness of the injunctions, the great
agreeableness which they have to the excellency of our nature: and has backed
this with the assurance that in keeping of them there shall be a great reward,
Ps. 19. 11. if in the midst of such importunate invitations to life we will
choose death; we are indeed worthy, as the wise man speaks, to take part with
it, Wis. 1. 16. our crimes are hereby increased to a monstrous bulk, and also
deprived of that veil and shelter which darkness and ignorance would have given
them. And a vicious Christian may have cause at the last day to wish that he
had studied the Alcoran rather then the Bible. His sensualities might then have
pleaded, that they were but the anticipating his Paradise, taking up that
before hand, which his Religion proposed to him as his summum bonum, his final
and highest aim. But with what confusion must a Christian then appear, whose
institution obliges him to mortify the slesh: and yet has made it the business
of his life, not only to satisfy, but even to enrage, and inflame its
appetites? that has set up a counter-discipline to that of the Gospel he
professes; and when that requires austerities and self-denials, to reduce
corrupt nature to a tameness and subjection; has not only pulled off the
bridle, but used the spur; contrived Arts to debauch even corruption it self;
and has forced his relucting nature upon studied and artificial leudness? Such
men may be thought to have read the Scripture with no other design but to be
sure to run counter to it; that by informing themselves of Gods will, they may
know the more exactly how to affront and contradict it.

47. NAY, so it is, too many unto malice add contemt; are not content only
sullenly to resist its Precepts, but despise and revile them also; arraign the
wisdom of God, and pronounce the divine Laws to be weak and impertinent; lay
their Scenes of ridiculous mirth in the Bible; rally in the sacred Dialect, and
play the Buffoons with the most serious thing in the world. An impious
licentiousness which is now grown to that height, that it is one of the wonders
of Gods long-suffering, that there are not as many eminent instances of the
vengeance, as there are of the guilt. I have formerly complained of it, and
must still crave leave to do so. It is indeed so spreading an infection, that
we can never be sufficiently armed against it. Some degrees of it have tainted
many who have not utterly renounced their reverence for the Bible: there being
those who in their solemn moods own it as Gods word and profess they must
finally stand or fall by its verdict; who yet in their jocular humors make
light and irreverent applications of its phrases and sentences, furnish out
their little jests in its attire, and use it as if they thought it good for
nothing else.

48. AND certainly this abuse in men that own the Bible, is infinitely more
monstrous then in those who defy it: the later look on it as a common thing,
and use it as such: but for those who confess it sacred, thus to prostitute it,
is a flat contradiction as much against the rules of Discourse as Religion:
it is to offer the same abuse to Christ in his Word, which the rude soldiers did
to his person; to bow the knee before it, and yet expose it as an object of
scorn and laughter. But sure there cannot be two things more inconsistent, then
the avowing it to be dictated by God in order to the most important concern of
man, and yet debase it to the vilest purposes; make it the drudg and hackney to
our sportful humors, and bring it out as the Philistims did Samson, only to
make us merry, Jud. 16. 25.

49. INDEED one would wonder how that should become a proper instrument for
that purpose, that those doctrins of righteousness, temperance and judgment to
come (every where scattered through that Book) which set heathen Felix a
trembling, should set Christians a laughing: and yet should men cite the same
things and phrases out of another Author, there would be no jest in it. It
seems therefore that the spirit and essence of this sort of wit lies in the
profaneness. How absurd is it then for men that do not utterly abjure Religion,
to affect this impious sort of raillery, which has nothing but daring
wickedness to recommend it? For certainly, of all the ways of discourse that
ever pretended to wit, this has the least claim to it.

50. WHAT strength of reason, or height of fancy is there, in repeting of
phrases and fragments of Books, when what they would say, they might much more
properly express in their own words? In any other instance but this of the
Bible, it would pass rather for a defect then an excess of wit. But that which
I suppose renders it so taking, is, that it is the cheapest expedient for men
to arrive to that reputation. Men that cannot go to the cost of any thing that
is truly ingenious, can by this means immediately commence wits; if they can but
charge their memories with half a dozen Texts, they need no other furniture for
the trade: these mangled and transposed, will be ready at all turns, and render
them applauded by those who have no other mesure of wit, but its opposition to
Piety. But would God, men would look a little before them, and consider what
the final reckoning will be for such divertisements; and if the whole world be
an unequal exchange for a soul, what a miserable Merchant is he that barters
his for a bald insipid jest? such as a sober man would avoid were there no sin
in it.

51. I know men are apt to flatter themselves, that these lighter frolics will
pass for nothing, so long as they do not seriously and maliciously oppose Gods
word: but I fear they will find God in earnest, tho they be in jest. He that
has magnified his Word above all things, Psalm. 138. 2. cannot brook that we
should make it vile and cheap, play and dally with it. And if it were a capital
crime to convert any of the perfume of the Sanctuary to common use, Ex. 30. 32.
can we think God can be pleased to see his more sacred Word, the theme of our
giddy mirth, and have his own words echoed to him in profane drollery?

52. BUT besides it is to be considered that this wanton liberty is a step to
the more solemn and deliberate contemt of Gods word: custom does strangely
prescribe to us; and he that a while has used any thing irreverently, will at
last bring his practice into argument, and conclude that there is no reverence
due to it. God knows we are naturally too apt to slight and easy apprehensions
of sacred things; and had need to use all Arts and Instruments to impress an
awe upon our minds.

53. IT will sure then be very unsafe for us to trifle with them, and by so
undue a familiarity draw on that contemt which we should make it our care to
avoid. The wise man says, he that contemns small things, shall fall by little
and little, Eccl. 19. 1. And tho no degree of irreverence toward God or his
Word, can be called a small thing absolutely considered, yet comparatively with
the more exorbitant degrees it may: and yet that smaller is the seed and parent
of the greatest. It is so in all sins; the kingdom of Satan, like that of God,
may be compard' to a grain of mustard seed, Mat. 13. 31. which tho little in it
self, is mighty in its increase.

54. No man ever yet began at the top of villainy, but the advance is still
gradual from one degree to another; each commission smoothing and glibbing the
way to the next. He that accustoms in his ordinary discourse, to use the sacred
Name of God with as little sentiment and reverence, as he does that of his
neighbor or servant; that makes it his common byword, and cries Lord and God
upon every the lightest occasion of exclamation or wonder, this man has a very
short step to the using it in oaths, and upon all frivolous occasions; and he
that swears vainly, is at no great distance from swearing falsely. It is the
same in this instance of the Scriptures: He that indulges his wit to rally with
them, will soon come to think them such tame things that he may downright
scorn them: And when he is arrived to that, then he must pick quarrels to
justify it, till at last he arrive even to the height of enmity.

55. LET every man therefore take heed of setting so much as one step in this
fatal circle; guard himself against the first insinuation of this guilt: and
when a jest offers it self as a temtation, let him balance that with a sober
thought, and consider whether the jest can quit the cost of the profanation.
Let him possess his mind with an habitual awe, take up the Bible with solemner
thoughts, and other kind of apprehensions then any human Author: and if he
habituate himself to this reverence, every clause and phrase of it that occurs
to his mind, will be apter to excite him to devout ejaculations then vain
laughter.

56. IT is reported of our excellent Prince, King Edward the sixth; that when
in his Council Chamber, a Paper that was called for happened to lie out of
reach, and the Person concerned to produce it, took a Bible that lay by, and
standing upon it reached down the Paper: the King observing what was don, ran
himself to the place, and taking the Bible in his hands, kissed it, and laid it
up again. Of this it were a very desirable moral, that Princes, and all persons
in authority, would take care not to permit any to raise themselves by either a
hypocritical or profane trampling upon holy things. But besides that, a more
general application offers its self; that all men of what condition soever,
should both themselves abstain from every action that has the appearance of a
contemt of the holy Scripture; and also when they observe it in others,
discountenance the insolence: and by their words and actions give Testimony of
the veneration which they have for that holy Book, they see others so
wretchedly despise.

57. BUT above all let him who reads the Scripture seriously, set himself to
the practice of it, and daily examine how he proceeds in it: he that diligently
does this, will not be much at leisure to sport with it: he will scarce meet
with a Text which will not give him cause of reflection, and provide him work
within his own breast: every duty enjoined will promt him to examine how he has
performed; every sin forbid, will call him to recollect how guilty he has bin,
every pathetic strain of devotion will kindle his zeal, or at least upbraid his
coldness: every heroic example will excite his emulation. In a word, every part
of Scripture will, if duly applied, contribute to some good and excellent end.
And when a thing is proper for such noble purposes, can it be the part of a
wise man to apply it only to mean and trivial? Would any but an Idiot wast that
Sovereign Liquor in the washing of his feet, which was given him to expel
poison from his heart? And are not we guilty of the like folly when we apply
Gods word to serve only a ludicrous humor: and make our selves merry with that
which was designed for the most serious and most important purpose; the
salvation of our souls. And indeed who ever takes any lower aim then that, and
the virtues preparatory to it in his study of Scripture, extremely debases it.

58. LET us therefore keep a steady eye upon that mark, and press toward it as
the Apostle did; Phil. 3. 14. walk by that rule the holy Scripture proposes;
faithfully and diligently observe its precepts, that we may finally partake its
promises. To this end continually pray we in the words of our holy mother the
Church unto Almighty God, who has caused all holy Scripture to be written for
our learning; that we may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and
inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort of his holy Word, we may
embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting Life, which he has
given in our Savior Jesus Christ.

THE CONTENTS.
SECTION.
Sect. 1. The several methods of Gods communicating the knowledge of himself.
Page 1. Sect. 2. The divine Original, Endearments, and Authority of the Holy
Scripture. p. 9. Sect. 3. The Subject Matter treated of in the holy Scripture
is excellent, as is also its end and design. p. 63. Sect. 4. The Custody of the
holy Scripture is a privilege and right of the Christian Church, and every
member of it, which cannot without impiety to God, and injustice unto it and
them, be taken away or empeacht. p. 123. Sect. 5. The Scripture has great
propriety and fitness toward the attainment of its excellent end. p. 145. Sect.
6. The suffrage of the primitive Christian Church, concerning the propriety and
fitness which the Scripture has, toward the attainment of its excellent end. p.
165. Sect. 7. Historical reflections upon the events which have happened in the
Church, since the withdrawing of the holy Scripture. p. 180. Sect. 8.
Necessary Cautions to be used in the reading of the holy Scripture. p. 193.
FINIS.

