Imprimatur,

Guil. Sill, Revdo Episc. Land. a Sacris Domest.
Jan. 24. 1677.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the PERIOD OF Humane Life: Whether Mutable or Immutable.

By the Author of The Duty of Man laid down in Express Words of Scripture.

LONDON, Printed by H. C. for Enoch Wire, at the White Heart in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1677.

To the Honorable College of Physicians at London.
Generous Gentlemen,
THat I presume to prefix your great Name to so mean a Book, proceeds not from
any confidence I have of its value; but from the nature of the Discourse, which
your excellent Profession is so much concerned in. For I must say, that since I
could understand the Debate, I have thought their opinion, who maintain the
Period of every man's Life to be unalterably fixed by an absolute Decree, does
endanger your Profession so much, that the truth is, if it be true, you may
seek out some new world for your practice; for here you should be only like the
Idol-Gods, who could neither do good nor evil.

This the excellent Jo. Beverovicius did prudently foresee, and partly
endeavored to satisfy both himself and others, by asking the advice of the
Learned men of his age.

But that the Period of Humane Life may be both extended and shortened, common
experience does sufficiently attest. How many have been hurried to their Graves
by the unskilfulness of Empericks; and are there not multitudes also that can
witness, you have been (under God) the cause their Lives have been prolonged.

Gentlemen, I know you can expect no Panagyrick from such an unfit person as I
acknowledge my self to be. And methinks I also hear all men say, that that is a
business only for a Homer to perform. If (...) meanness of this Present be
censured by some, yet I know you are more generous than to do so; especially
since the bestowing of a more valuable and signal evidence of respect, is only
impeded by the inability of,

Honored Gentlemen, Your most devoted Servant, R. E.

The Preface.
Reader,
THE following Discourse is of so small bulk, that a Preface may seem as
needless and ridiculous as an Index. In some few hours it may be perused, and
then both the design of the Author and of the Book may be known. It may be thou
desire to know, what was the occasion of the following Discourse. But I know
not if I be obliged to answer this and such like idle questions; yet to
satisfy thy curiosity, know, that the Author was unhappily engaged to converse
with a society of men, who frequently debated this and such like queries; and
mostly he was opposed by the greater part, as maintaining an unreasonable
position. Whether their charge be true or false, is a thing better determined
by others unconcerned, than either by them or me. I know very well their
clamorous calumnies and reproaches, which since I cannot shun, I shall
endeavor to slight, as indeed unworthy to be regarded.

If men of good consideration dislike any thing in the discourse, I promise
them, upon Information I shall either endeavor to satisfy them, or to rest
satisfied with what they say. Nay further, if there be any Line in it
inconsistent with Piety and Religion, freely reject it; for I persuade thee (if
the Author knew any such) he would burn the Book for its sake.

But I hope upon trial there shall be found no harsh notion in it to offend the
most squeamish conscience. For the opinion I have rejected is, in my judgment
inconsistent with the Divine Goodness and Holiness, repugnant to the freedom of
Humane Nature, and destructive of all lawful means for the preservation of a
man's life. While as that sentiment I embrace, begets in men's minds, noble and
generous conceptions to promote real Piety and Religion, and to shun all manner
of wickedness and intemperance; upon the account that Piety is the means to
prolong our lives, and wickedness the cause of our short lives. And that this
is no cheat or delusion, the wisest of men has left upon record, Prove. 11. 19.
As righteousness tends to life so he that pursues evil, pursues it to his
own death. This brings to my memory the Psalmists advice, with which I shall
conclude; What man is he that desires life, and loves many days, that he may
see good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Depart
from evil, and do good. Seek peace, and pursue it. But the wicked and deceitful
man shall not live out half his days.

OF THE PERIOD OF Humane Life.
Job xiiij. 5, 6. Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are
with thee, that he cannot pass.

Turn from him, that he may rest, till he shall accomplish as an hireling his
days.


THis excellent Book of Job represents to us a plain and unquestionable
instance of the various successes all humane actions are liable to, and of the
promiscuous administration of Divine Providence to particular persons. Here we
may read of Job's happy and flourishing condition, that he was the greatest of
all the men of the East. And of his low and afflicted state, poor even to a
Proverb, and in a condition that only pleaded pity and compassion; and how
again the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning.

From this various administration of Providence, men have taken occasion to
make diverse inferences. The scoffing Atheist has from thence wickedly
concluded, that God has no care of humane affairs. If God (say these scoffers)
had any care of this world, he would never suffer those men who have corrupted
their ways by treachery and deceit, to prosper and enjoy an affluence of all
worldly delights; whereas the virtuous and godly man, who takes heed to his
ways, lest he sin, and who throughout the whole course of his life has
carefully studied to keep a conscience void of offense toward God and man, is
notwithstanding a man of sorrow, and acquainted with grief; as plagued all the
day long, and chastened every morning, and has waters of a full Cup wrung out
to him. If God (say they) concerned himself with humane affairs, he would never
suffer the Tabernacles of Robbers to prosper, and the house of the upright to
be ruined and destroyed.

This is without all contradiction a great stumbling block and offense to the
blind Atheist; and has even been a sad trial to the best of Gods people.
Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that
deal very treacherously? was a question Jeremy could hardly at first resolve.
And we find Job and the Prophet Habbakkuk very much puzzled with it; and the
Psalmist plainly consesseth, that his feet were almost gone, and that his steps
had well nigh slipped, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 73.

To see bad men prospering in their wicked purposes and undertakings, and good
men unsuccessful and frustrated in their just attempts, has been none of the
least Topics the Epicurean Atheists have made use of, in their exempting this
world from the Divine Rule and Dominion. It was this single consideration that
made Cato. (who was once a Preacher of Providence; how orthodox, I enquire not)
accuse the Dominion and Government of the Gods, of instability and unjustness,
that Caesar who tyrannically invaded the Rights of the Commonwealth of Rome,
should be successful in so unjust attempts; and Pompey put to the worst, and
overthrown in the lawful defense of his Country: this stumbled him exceedingly.
It Is true, some few of the learned and sober Heathens did not thus rashly fall
foul upon Providence; but very wisely inferred the being of a future state,
where the virtuous shall be rewarded, and the vicious punished. And those holy
men in Scripture, who did fret because of the prosperity of the wicked, quickly
perceived their folly and error, and that the wicked were only fed like sheep
for the slaughter; and as the Poet excellently expresses it, tolluntur in
altum ut lapsu graviore ruant.

Job's Friends, though they did not directly fall foul upon the Divine
Providence, yet it is evident they were of opinion, that God would never have
afflicted Job with such sad calamities, if he had been upright and sincere.
Remember (says Eliphaz) who ever perished being innocent? or where were the
righteous cut off? chapter 4. 7. Bildad tells Job, If thou were pure and upright,
surely now he would awake for thee, chapter 8. 6. To both these Zophar succeeds,
with a charge as grievous and bitter, For thou have said, my Doctrine is pure,
and I am clean in thine eyes: But O that God would speak, and open his lips
against thee, chapter 11. v. 4, 5.

These were the Cordials Job's Friends afforded him, while-as his afflicted
condition pleaded pity from his friends. These accusations were heavy; but he
saw it was needless to tell them, that God might destroy the perfect as well as
the wicked; and although he would not plead not guilty, for then he confesses his
own lips should prove him perverse; yet he humbly conceived, that it was a
dangerous principle to conclude love or hatred from any such outward
dispensations.

Therefore finding all his entreaties rejected, and his plea's for his own
defense slighted; he is at length forced to beg their silence, desiring far
rather to plead his cause with his Maker, who could discern his sincerity; and
therefore having ordered his cause, chapter 13. 18. and taken an exact and accurate
examination of his former ways, he begins his pleadings for a mitigation of his
present calamity, from v. 23, which he continues till interrupted by Eliphas,
chapter 15. and amongst the many arguments he urges, that taken from the
determined days, and unpassable bounds prefixed to men is not the smallest:
Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with thee; thou
have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. Turn from him that he may rest,
till he shall accomplish as an hireling his day.

These words being the ground of the following Discourse, it is but reasonable
I should spend a little time in their explanation.

Seeing his days are determined, etc. The word which our Translators render
seeing, is in the Original (...) if, which some Expositors think is used by way
of query, thus, If his days be determined? But the Context seems to warrant our
Vulgar Translation, and there is no doubt, but it is very emphatick; for it
contains an implicit affirmation, a phrase very ordinary, when the thing for
its certainty is confessed and acknowledged. But let us suppose, that the words
should be rendered by way of query, yet there are two doubts that must be
removed, else their quarrelling with our Translation is vain and impertinent.
1. It seems to be very evident, that it has then been a received opinion, that
the days of men are determined; else Job had never made use of this argument,
in his pleadings for a cessation from trouble. 2. If Job had indeed doubted,
that man's days were determined, it was no wise nor rational plea, especially
since he was pleading with God, who knew whether it were so or not; and since
he might have made use of indubitable Topics. But I pass by this debate as
trivial.

His days, etc. It is debated by some, why Job makes use of the third person,
and not of the first. The reason some give is this, because the third person
used for the first, denotes contempt and modesty; and therefore Job in his low
state is pleased thus to abase himself, especially since pleading with his
Maker. But this conjecture is not fully satisfactory, for Job in several of his
other pleas, makes use of the first person; which methinks he would not have
done, if he had made use of the third person upon the account of the former
consideration; therefore from the promiscuous usurpation of the persons, we may
easily conjecture, that when the argument he brings does in a more peculiar
manner reach his own private condition, then he makes use of the first person:
an instance of this we have chapter 13. 23, 24, etc. But now this argument taken
from the determined days, and unpassable bounds set to men, is a general one,
which all men as well as he might plead; therefore he speaks in the third
person, yet always eying his own condition. The like instance we find in the
beginning of this Chapter, Man that is born of a woman, is of few days, and
full of trouble. Here he speaks in the third person, and not in the first; for
to be of few days, and full of trouble, is the character of every man. Few and
evil (says Jacob to Pharaoh) have the days of the years of my life been, Genesis
47. 9.

Are determined, etc. This word in the Original properly signifies to dig, or
cut through; here it is to be understood metaphorically; because God does as
exactly know the number of men's days, as if the most accurate search were made.
It Is true, in all humane determinations, it is reasonable that consultation
preceed. Some space must intervene betwixt their knowing of a thing and their
determinations about it. I confess, it is disputed, whether the Humane Will be
of it self a knowing faculty? or if it must follow in its choice the dictates
of the intellect? I will not dispute this now; but there is truth in that
general Maxim, ignoti nulla cupido. But to fancy that there is any such
priority between the Divine knowledge and volition, is a gross mistake,
irreconcilable with the Infinite and Eternal perfections of God: who uno actu
and ictu, (as they speak) comprehends and wills all future Events.

The number of his Months are with thee, etc. This Phrase holds out these two
things: First, the Exactness and Infiniteness of the Divine knowledge; and
Secondly the Divine rule and dominion. First, it holds out the Divine knowledge
to be Infinite and Exact, The number of his months are with thee. That is, thou
art a God whose knowledge reaches the smallest portion of our time, even to
months and days; thou alone know all those circumstances; and to know the
particular portion of days allowed to every man, does certainly require an
infinite and exact knowledge. I will not curiously enquire, what truth there is
in the pretended diabolical predictions of future Events; and whether
Star-gazers from the Conjunctions, and contrary Aspects of Celestial Bodies,
can foretell the future number of the days and months of terrestial and
inferior Sublunary beings: a passing view of this I will have occasion to take
afterward; at present we rest satisfied with this; that an exact and
comprehensive knowledge of our days and months; is only the prerogative of him
who holds our lives in being; the pretended knowledge any Creature boasts of,
is conjectural and uncertain, if not (as frequently it is) fictitious, unless
when the Divine wisdom for some secret, and to us unknown ends, reveals to his
creatures such future Events. But Secondly, the Phrase holds out the Divine
Rule and Dominion, The number of his months are with thee: that is, they are in
thy power, thou may either prolong or shorten the days of Men: and I think
the meaning of this whole verse is comprehended under these two heads, which I
shall afterward discourse of at more length.

Thou have appointed his bounds, etc. It is not Fate or Fortune, but the wise
God who appoints to every Man his time; now the bounds set to Men may be
considered under a two fold notion. First, As it signifies that common and
ordinary Period which the God of Nature has settled, which Men by the common
course of Nature may fulfill, if no accidental circumstance hinder: and it
seems the Psalmist only understands this common term of Humane Life, Psalm. 90.
10. The days of our years are Threescore years and Ten, and if by reason of
Strength they be fourscore; etc. or Secondly, It may be understood in a more
strict sense, as it is taken for the last moment of every individual and
particular person; and of both these I shall more fully discourse afterward
and show, that the words seem to refer to the common term of Humane Life; or if
they mean this particular term, in what sense they are to be understood
determined, appointed, etc.

These and such like condescending Phrases, have been most unhappily used, and
sadly misunderstood in the Schools. Some men no sooner read in Scripture of
Gods determining or appointing, but they instantly conclude a physical previous
necessitating act, which inevitably and irresistibly determines Men: and this
kind of determination they plead for in all cases: so that Men even in their
vicious actions are irresistibly determined to do so. I know no opinion which
has rendered the reformed Church more odious than this: would to God I could
say the Censure is causeless, and that I were forced to apologize, for saying
our Divines have erred in this case. But alas the opinion is grown strong, and
not long since it was not much less than Heresy to condemn it: and even to
this day it is the study of some Teachers, to instill it into the hearts of
their Hearers. For the correcting of this sour opinion, I shall have occasion
to add some things in this following discourse; now I shall desire it to be
considered, that while we speak of the Divine determinations, appointment, etc.
we speak of things our knowledge cannot reach, the best conceptions we can frame
to our selves of the Divine volitions, are dangerous and imperfect; our
capacities in this lapsed state are more narrow than we are aware of: and although
they were raised to a higher pitch, yet we can never comprehend his way of
working, who in all his ways is unsearchable. It Is truly sad to see the
contending World so serious and restless in digging those deeps that are
unfathomable; it were to be wished that Men did not found their pretended
knowledge of the Divine volitions, on the basis of their own silly volitions and
did not argue from what we find in our selves to be the same in God. It Is true
the holy Spirit has condescended to express things suitable to our
Understanding and mean capacities, therefore we read in Scripture of the Divine
determinations, appointments, etc. but yet to abuse such condescending
expressions, and to imagine that there were really such purposes, and volitions
in God as these we perceive in our selves: this were a heinous crime, pray let
us satisfy our selves with this, that God in an eminent and transcending manner
does these things, which we cannot do without willing, decreeing, etc.

That he cannot pass, or as others render it, and he shall not pass; which
Phrase is not to be understood, as if the particular Period of every Man's life
were so fatally fixed that he can neither shorten nor prolong it, for this is
contrary to many clear Texts of Scripture, as shall afterward fully appear:
but by this Phrase, we are to understand the common term of Humane Life, which
is not mutable as the particular term is, and yet is not so fixed, that it
cannot be altered; for God has still reserved in his own power the shortening
and prolonging of it. And further we must not apprehend that the particular
term of Humane Beings is so mutable, that God knows them not, and cannot
foretell the precise Period of every man's life, or that the Divine Counsel
concerning things Future is mutable; no sure, God has declared the contrary, I
am God, and there is none like me, (says the Almighty) declaring the End from
the Beginning, and from ancient time the things that are not yet done; saying,
my Cousenl must stand, and I will do all my pleasure, Isa. 46. 9. Two things
there be which occasion men to change their purposes and resolutions. 1. Their
want of Power to execute them. 2. their finite and shallow Knowledge, which
cannot foresee those future circumstances which render their Designs
ineffectual. But now there is no difficulty that can pose the Almighty; with
him all things are possible, it is the Prophets argument, the Lord of Hosts
has purposed, who shall disanull it? his hand is stretched out, and who shall
turn it back? Isa. 24. 17. And further there is no circumstance or condition
that lies in the dark, and unseen to him, whose knowledge is infinite, and who
equally comprehends things past, present and to come. Therefore is it that men
cannot pass these bounds prefixed by the Divine foreknowledg: But of this
afterward.

Turn from him, etc. it is queryed whether Job here petitioneth a withdrawing
of Gods supporting presence, and a cessation by death, or a cessation from the
affliction and trouble he lay under. There be three things that plead for the
former Interpretation. 1. Because the word (...) placed absolutely, signifies
to cease by death, 1. Sam. 2. 5. and they that were hungry ceased, i. e. died.
2. Because the supporting hand of Providence being removed, men return to the
Dust. Thou hidest thy face they are troubled, thou take away their Breath,
they dye, and return to their dust, Psalm. 104. 29. 3. It is not inconsistent
with Jobs former desires, Chap. 3. and 6. Why died I not from the Womb? why did
I not give up the Ghost when I came out of the belly? for now should I have
lien [still] and been [quiet;] I should have [sleept,] then had I been at
[rest]: O that I might have my request, even that it would please God to
destroy me!

That the phrase can never admit the former gloss evidently appears from the
words immediately following, for if Job had been pleading for death, why is
that reason added, that he might accomplish his day? It is only then a
cessation from his grievous affliction that he so earnestly entreats; as if
he had said, Lord, thy afflicting hand is heavy, and what am I but weak dust,
not able to bear thy heavy Chastisments? my Soul is overburdened with grief,
and will thou set thy terrors before me to afright me? has not poor man in
this lapsed state, Troops of miseries attending him, from which he may expect
no freedom till Mortality be swallowed up in Life? and are not his few days
labor and sorrow, pain and affliction? and will thou to those inseparable
evils, superadd a burden of pain more grievous and insufferable? O do not
measure out so dismal a Condition to thy silly Creature! make me not the object
of thy direful vengeance, but in the midst of wrath remember mercy. Art thou
not Goodness it self, and far more compassionate than the most tender parent?
and shall it be said thou have measured out so acute torments to vex thy poor
Creatures? I confess Perfection is not the thing I plead; yet may not I say, it
is not for my iniquity, nor for my sin, that thou have afflicted me? and let
this Consideration also prevail with thee, that my untender friends sadly
mistake thy design in afflicting me; they conclude it is for some secret
heinous crime, that thy judgments are upon me: O that thou would turn from
thy wrath, that I may enjoy some rest, before I go whence I shall not return?

This phrase turn from him, is sometimes taken in a very bad sense. Thus we
find the wicked sadly characterized, as a people who desire God to depart from
them; but as it is uttered by the people of God under the pressure of
afflictions, it implies no more but a serious desire that God would be pleased
to remove that burden. Now in such innocent petitions there appears no crime,
for it is certain, that afflictions simply considered, are grievous even to the
best of Mankind: there is no affliction (says the Apostle) for the present
that is joyous but grievous. It Is true impatience under affliction is an excess
which no excuse whatsoever can pardon: there are some persons of such hasty
complexions, that they rise in passion against God if they meet with the least
affliction; just like that wretched man who said, this evil is of the Lord why
should we wait any longer upon him? But those petitions of the Faithful in holy
writ, although at the first view they seem to be peremptory and absolute, yet they
are truly qualified and submissive; and at the most, only express the harmless
resentments of innocent nature, that cannot but express how contrary
afflictions are to it.

That he may rest; ut quiescat sc. paululum, that his affliction being removed
he may yet enjoy a little space to solace himself, till he accomplish his day.
I will purposely decline the answer of that querie, Whether it is lawful to
wish death when our condition is charged with a surplusage of calamity; for the
brevity I design will not suffer me to survey the difficulties of that case,
only in the general I shall add two things. 1. If the affliction be violent,
fierce, and seemingly durable, rendering us incapable of exercising any duty; I
question not but common reason will suggest to every sober man, that in that
case Death is more eligible than Life. Yet 2. since we are ignorant what God
designs to us, by sending us such afflicti-ons, it is our part to submit to the
Lords will, and say, Good is the will of the Lord. Thus although we may
comparatively and submissively wish Death upon the account of some acute
trials, yet it is never lawful to be peremptory and absolute in such desires;
for frequently the happy event makes men conclude that it was good for them
they were afflicted.

Rest, etc. Methinks the very sound of this word is full of ravishing sweetness
and pleasure, and yet to those who are stated in a condition of Woe and Misery,
it is bitter and harsh; as the most ravishing and pleasant Music is in the Ear
of him who is sad: those who never tasted the honeycomb, know not its
sweetness: the men who have been always drudges and slaves, have no discerning
what Liberty is; and those who from their birth have been accustomed to pain,
know not their misery so sensibly. But to have once enjoyed blessings, and on a
sudden to be deprived of them, not only the unexpected change, but also their
former happiness, adds to their misery, and makes their condition more
unsufferable. If man had been created to toil and labor, his eating of bread
in the sweat of his face, had been no curse: but to have been placed in a
blessed and happy state, and by his folly to be hurled into a state of misery
and pain, that compleats his calamity, and makes him sensible, how miserable a
thing it is to have been happy.

This single consideration seems to add very much to Jobs misery, his condition
was once more than ordinary happy; and the amission of the comforts he formerly
enjoyed, makes him pathetically cry out, O that I were as in months past, as in
the days when God preserved me; but now (as he sadly complains) they that are
younger than I, have me in derision.

If Job in this state of woe had been persuaded of the certain change of his
condition, and that his latter end should be more blessed than his beginning,
the expected hopes of this had served to allay and mitigate his sorrow, and to
render his case more sufferable and easy. It is the hops of rest, that puts
strength in the wearied traveller; it was the expected reward and assurance of
a future blessedness and better resurrection, which made those Worthies Heb.
11. so cheerfully undergo suffering. What the happiness of the Saints rest is,
I am not able to represent, it being so far above any thing we can in this
imperfect state conceive or imagine. The advantages that attend our present
tranquillity and rest, are many and great, which to enumerate would be prolix
and tedious: but if from that, we should frame to our selves an Idea of that
Celestial Rest, how imperfect would it be? any Rest we enjoy here, is
uncertain: an unthought-of causality may impair it, but the Rest that remains
for the people of God is everlasting, there is no fear of losing it: Heaven is
a place free from trouble, and there is nothing that can imbitter that pleasant
state.

Philosophers have a saying, that the end of Motion is Rest; this is indeed
true of all those motions and trials the servants of God meet with; the way to
the Kingdom is spread over with thistles; through many tribulations we must
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: but those Waves of affliction will quickly
over; and when the day breaks, these shadows will flee away. This Winter will
soon be past; and the singing of the Birds will come; and Christians, who by
says and patience continue in well-doing, shall ere be long be placed in those
mansions of Rest, that are in Emanuels land.

Alas, how insensible do we remain under the enjoyment of our outward comforts!
when we are blessed with food, liberty and health, we are but sensibly stupid
and ignorant, what is the value of those mercies: but if hunger and want begin
to pinch us, if our former liberty be hedged in, if sickness and pain seize
upon us, then we begin to gather some sense, and we accuse our selves for our
ingratitude to God.

Till he shall accomplish as an Hireling his day: for the better understanding
of this similitude, I shall in four particulars compare the days of man with
the days of an Hierling, and in each of them make application to Jobs case. 1.
The days of an Hierling, denotes a time, set, prefixed and limited for the
performance of some particular piece of service; and are not the days of man
also allotted him for to do his masters business? We were not born to be idle
and negligent, sure God had some greater design in the Creation of man than
this: now this particular quadrates very well with Jobs case, and seems to make
the meaning of Jobs words to run thus; Lord, thou have given me a being, and
appointed me a work to accomplish: but alas while I am thus excruciated with
horror and pain, I am unfitted for thy service, the surplusage of misery
measured out to me, disinables me to go about thy work, be entreated therefore
O merciful father to turn from thy displeasure, remove the present heavy
calamity I am overburdened with; that I may yet accomplish the remainder of my
time in thy work and service. 2. This set and fixed day of the Hireling is full
of pain, labor and toil; he is (poor wretch) both late and early at work, and
seldom has he any interwals of rest, unless his master be more than ordinary
gentle and benign; and when he is thus indulged a little ease, he must not with
the sluggard say, O si hoc esset laborare, he must to his work again, for upon
this depends his payment; no wages is the result of not working; and in some
cases stripes and whipping is the fruit of negligence. And what is man's life?
at the best state it is but sorrow and trouble, till mortality be swallowed up
in life. Our pleasures (upon which we put the highest value) are either
purchased, or accompanied with pain and labor. If we be in a prosperous state,
our minds are either distracted with care to make it more prosperous; or with
fears puzzled and perplexed, lest it be overcleuded, and if we be in a low and
adverse state, we grieve and repine; nay knowledge, the most excellent of
earthly pleasures, is yet in the judgment of the wisest of men, but vexation of
spirit; for in much Wisdom there is much grief, and he that increases Knowledge
increases Sorrow. The life of man is not unfitly compared to Ezekiels Roll,
which was full of woes. If one misery or woe passes, behold another comes, as
one wave succeeds another. And by all these calamities we may learn what an
evil Sin is, the fruit of which are all those calamities we meet with; in the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread till thou return unto the ground.
And upon this account Job may be supposed to plead with God thus; Lord, is not
my time at best but lamentable and miserable? and will thou superadd to this
inevitable misery, a surplusage of pain and affliction? O deal kindly with thy
servant who is devoted to thy fear, turn from me that I may rest till I shall
accomplish as an Hireling my day. Thirdly, True it is that the Hirelings day is
but Labor and Pain; yet the brevity and shortness thereof makes him regard it
the less. It is but a day, and that will quickly be over and gone; and what is
the life of man? it is but as a hand-bredth of a small extension; or like to a
passing shadow, which we scarce sooner perceive than it vanishes. Man that is
born of a Woman is of few days, he comes forth like a Flower and is cut down:
his decaying is within some few minutes of his budding; as the Poet speaks of
Roses, and dum nascuntur consenuisse Rosas. Now from this reason Job may be
supposed to argue thus; Lord, thou know how frail and brittle I am, and if
thou contend thus with me, how quickly shall I return to the dust. I beseech
thee consider that my time is however but short, and let thy Goodness appear in
removing thy stroke away from me, for I am consumed by the blow of thine hand;
O spare me that I may recover strength, before I go hence and be no more.
Fourthly, Therest and wages the Hireling expects, makes the accomplishing of
his day more easy and tolerable. The word rendered accomplish, signifies to
will and delight in a thing earnestly; donec optata veniat dies. It Is a day
wished and longed for, and much delighted in when it comes. And indeed the
strength of the comparison seems to ly in this, which makes the meaning of Jobs
words to be this; Lord, now my trouble and pain excruciats and torments me, and
my life is more wearisome to me than the Hirelings day can be to him; therefore
turn away thy wrath from me, that in the finishing of my course I may be as
jovial and cheerful, as the Hiereling is when his day is accomplished: and thus
I have done with the Explanation of these words.

The next thing I designed in this undertaking, is to enquire how the days of
every man's life may be said to be determined; and whether the Period of every
man's life were so fixed and bounded, that by his care, good managery, and use
of the means, it cannot be extended; nor shortened by his negligence,
intemperance, or exposing of himself to Famine, Sword, or Plague, it is very
certain from this plain text of Scripture, that the days of every man's life are
determined; but the manner how, is left unexplained: and this we do not learn
from Scripture. And it were to be wished that our curiosity would forbear any
enquiry into things that are hid: but alas our inclinations are so wicked and
perverse, that nitimur in vetitum, we are always bent and eager in our
enquiries after things of a mysterious alloy; and God knows how miserably some
men have mistaken in their enquiries after a solution of the present doubt: and
if I could promise to my self to rectify those huge mistakes some men have
fallen into, this would be a sufficient justification of my present undertaking.

But in order to the unfolding of this doubt, I shall premise four things which
will contribute to the better understanding of it.

First, There is no doubt that every man's life has a Period. It is appointed
for all men once to dye; this is a warfare from which there is no discharge:
what man is he that lives and shall not see death? as to this, the Prince and
Peasant stand upon even terms, and as the wiseman tells us, the rich and poor
meet together: there is no justling in the Grave for precedence. I confess it
were not worth the pains to consider the trivial instances, taken from the
translation of Euoch and Elias, to infringe this position. For first, we are
not to debate what God may do, he has a Sovereignty over his Creatures, and
must not be called to give a reason of his actions; all whose ways are tracts
of wisdom and goodness. Secondly, We know nothing of the manner of their
translation: he who will positively say, that they did not undergo that which
is equivalent to death, will say more than he can prove. I am apt to believe
that no sober man will say, that they entered their Heavenly habitation with
their unrefined bodies; no more than those who rise at the sound of the last
Trumpet, in the twinkling of an eye, are carried into Heaven without any change.

Secondly, It is also unquestionable, that Sin introduced this Period to every
man's life; the primitive threatening runs thus, in the day thou eats thou shall
dye. And the Apostle has as plainly expressed it as it can be, wherefore as by
one man sin entered into the World, and death by sin, and so death passed upon
all men for that all have sinned, Romans 5. 12. where it is plain, that Death is
a punishment inflicted for Sin, so that if man had never sinned, we have no
reason to think he should have died. I confess without Revelation, we could
never have guessed this to be the cause of Death. The Heathen Philosophers were
exceedingly confused in their notions concerning the origin of Sin, and the
cause of Death: many of them thought that Death was a natural accident,
originally appurtenant to Humane Nature. And indeed if Revelation had not
declared the contrary, I had been fully satisfied, that Death had been no other
thing but such a natural accident; but it is strange that any man that has
conversed with sacred writ, should be of this opinion. And yet we find, the
Pelagians of old were great sticklers for it: hence is it that the ancient
Fathers and Councils have condemned it with a Curse. In the Milevitan Council
Can. 2. we read thus Placuit, ut quicunque dicit, Adam primum hominem mortalem
sactum, ita ut sive peccaret, sive non peccaret, moreretur in corpore, hoc est,
de corpore exiret, non peccati meri^o sed necessitate naturae, anathema sit. In
after-ages the Scotists (the most subtle of all Scholastic writers) inclined
much to this opinion, against whom the Thomists (their irreconcilable Enemies)
took up the cudgels: amongst modern writers the seemingly rational Socinians,
have owned this groundless conceit. But I cannot stay to debate this at length,
only in brief, if Death had been natural to man in the state of Innocence, it
behoved to have been because of these following reasons.

1. Because Adams natural constitution implied mortality; the Materials of his
constitution were not so amicable as to entertain a lasting amity and
friendship. 2. It was the primitive precept, be fruitful and multiply; now it
is plain that procreation includes mortality in its notion; and farther it
seems to be unconceivable how this little Map of Earth should have contained a
numerous multiplying and never-dying offspring. 3. Humane Nature in the state
of Innocence did stand in need of Meat and Drink, as is plain from Genesis 1. 19.
now the end of eating and drinking is not only to hold up, but to repair the
decays of our Bodies, which would sudenly return to dust, if they were not this
renewed and strengthened. 4. If Death were only the effect of Sin, and the
Devil were called a Murderer from the beginning, because of his tempting our
first parents to eat of the forbidden Fruit, it will follow, that since Christ
came to take away the sins of the World, and to destroy the works of the Devil,
that he also took away the wages of sin, which is Death; than which nothing is
more contrary to daily experience. 5. Immortality seems to be entailed only to
the state of future Glory, where Corruption shall put on Incorruption, and
Mortality shall be swallowed up in life: and then there shall be no more death,
Rev. 21. 4. These are the most material reasons I can find for the proof of
this opinion, in answer to which I shall desire the Five following
considerations may be weighed.

Consid. 1. It is not to be doubted that the Eternal wisdom, furnished our
first parents with all these accomplishments their specific nature could
suffer: the signatures of Wisdom and Goodness were legible in the lowest and
least regarded piece of the creation; but in Man in a more eminent manner
conspicuous. It is almost impossible for us in this fallen state, to conceive
what those endowments (...) is taken Conditionally: and so under various
considerations it may be attributed either, First, To perfected Saints who are
stated in Glory, where the primitive Image lost by man's fall, is renewed and
perfected; and of those our Savior in the Gospel of Luke tells us, that they
can dye no more, Luke 20. 36. or Secondly, to our first parents in the State of
Innocence. For so long as they remained obedient to the Laws of Heaven,
Immortality was entailed upon their nature: for the tenor of the primitive
threatening is, in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye: where temporal
Death seems to be threatened, which had been idle and vain if men had died although
they had never eaten the forbidden Fruit. I know some men think that Sin only
laid a necessary obligation upon men to dye; and provoked God to remove that
Supernatural and Superadded quality and gift, which preserved them from Death.
With such sort of men I have no great quarrel, although I think that God could as
easily have made man's constitution so lasting, and the constituent parts of his
fabric so harmonious, that he should have never dyed if he had not sinned, as
to create a superadded being to preserve him safe. For reason would plead, that
that superadded gift required another, and so in infinitum.

But farther, it is very unreasonable to infer man's corruption from that
precept, be fruitful and multiply; for although in some sense generatio unius est
alterius corruption, yet the state of being, even since the fall, (to which that
axiom has only respect) is not so brittle, as that the production of the Child
infers the destruction of the Parent.

Neither does that curious query concerning the place for that supposed
numerous offspring, carry with it more reason; for First, It is not to be
doubted, but the Wise Creator who gave being to man, knew well enough how to
provide an habitation for his offspring. Secondly, the precept be Fruitful
and Multiply, carries with it a Limitation, and replenish the Earth; so that we
can never well conclude from it, that Generation should have continued after
the replenishing of the Earth. But Thirdly, What suppose this little Map of
Earth had not been able to contain so numerous an offspring could not God have
translated man after he had lived some space upon the Earth to some better
habitation, as he did with Enoch and Elijah?

Consid. 3. Though man in the state of Innocence stood in need of Meat and
Drink, yet his nutriment was not noxious and hurtful to him, as now it is. It
was for man's disobedience that a Curse was upon the ground, before which there
was no fear of hurt from the Fruit of the Trees, and the Herbs of the Field:
(which were the only things granted to men for food in that state.) And indeed
if we but consider that even in this fallen state, there is a huge difference
between the lives of those who live upon wholesome food, and observe a moderate
diet; and of those who are careless in their diet, and feed upon husks; we
cannot but think the former consideration reasonable, especially since that
blessed state excluded all manner of excess.

Consid. 4. Great and Manifold are the blessed benefits that are conferred upon
Mankind, upon the account of his Redeemer: now Man* who was at odds with his
Maker upon the account of his Rebellion, is again taken into favor; and the
disobedient World is reconciled unto God. And although the being of sin is not
quite abolished, yet the Curse is removed; and Death is not properly now a
punishment.

Consid. 5. Immortality conjoined with a state of perfect felicity, is reserved
for Heavens favorites: in the state of Innocence our first parents were liable
to Death if they rebelled, but the Saints above are confirmed in their blessed
state: and as our Lord Christ tells us, they can dye no more. But this much may
suffice for the removing the former doubts.

The Third thing I premise is, that it is very usual in Scripture, as it is in
all Languages, to put the Whole sometimes for the Part: thus Man is said to
dye, to cease, to be mortal, because the Body is liable to Corruption, and not
that the whole Man, or all the Essential constituent parts cease. And thus when
we dispute concerning the Period of every Man's life, we must not foolishly
fancy that a Period is put to the being of the Soul, but only that its union
with the body is dissolved: otherwise a dismal stroke would be given to our
Religion, and what would become of the virtuous? I confess it is very hard and
difficult to demonstrate the immortality of our Souls by natural reason: it is
true, by reason I may prove that our Natures are spiritual, and that we elicite
acts which are beyond the power of matter; but yet we could never be fully
ascertained that there is a Life after this; if Revelation had not plainly
discovered it. The Heathen Philosophers very wisely entertained some hopes of a
life after this; upon moral arguments taken from the goodness of God, and his
justice in distributing Rewards and Punishments: but alas how doubtful were
their hopes, and with how much hesitation did they discourse of it! But by the
help of Revelation, these doubts are fully removed, and we now know that there
is a Resurrection from the dead, and that the Souls of Believers at death go
immediately into glory.

Fourthly, Because the explication of terms is very necessary for the unfolding
of doubts; I shall consider the twofold notion and acception, the Period of
Humane Life is liable to. 1. Sometimes it is taken in a large sense, for that
common and ordinary Period which the Author of our natures has settled, which
Men by the common course of nature arrive at: now many learned men upon good
grounds think that this is the determined bounds mentioned in Scripture. 2.
Sometimes it is taken for the last moment of every man's life at whatever time
it happens; whether 1. in the beginning of man's days; or 2. in the midst of
his days; thus the Psalmist prays, that God would not cut him off in the midst
of his days. or 3. When men come to be of a good old age and full of years, as
it is said of Abraham, he died in a good old age, an old man and full of years,
Genesis 25. 8.

That there is such a common Period of Humane life seems to be certain and
indubitable: we evidently enough perceive that men in the age and place wherein
we live, exceed not (unless rarely) the bounds fixed upon Psalm. 90. 10. The
days of our years are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of more
strength they be fourscore years, etc. and if we shall descend to the
consideration of other Animals and Vegetables, we will find it true enough that
the individuals of every specific nature, have a common Period which does not
sensibly alter; but where there is a manifest difference of the climate,
temperature, and soil. Again it is very unquestionable that this common Period
has not been equally extended in all ages and places. It Is true for many
hundred years bypast it has suffered very little alteration, but sure from
the beginning it was not so, nor can we upon any good ground be ascertained
that it will continue the same that it is now, till the end of all flesh come.
Tho I will not positive affirm that men's lives will be insensibly shortened,
till they become incapable for procreation.

But to determine what has been the common Period of Humane Life in by
past-ages of the World, is a Theme very difficult and hard: for 1. Although from
Abraham's time till this present age it has altered but little or nothing, as
we may collect from Genesis 15. 13, and 16. where a generation is equalled to an
Hundred years (as the verses collated make it evident); yet before the Flood
and in some few ages following it, this common Term was not concluded within
the short bounds it is now; although then it was indeed exceedingly mutable.
Before the fatal Flood we read not of any who lived not above seven hundred
years, (unless Abel who was murdered, and Enoch whom God took to himself): nor
of any who exceeded nine Hundred sixty and nine years. Now the common Period
not being so denominated from some few particular instances, but from what
happens to the most of Mankind in every age who dye a natural death, we may
suppose that Eight Hundred years was the common Period before the Flood. But
then after the Flood, the mutability of this common Period is conspicuous; for
in the next age after the Flood, it was cut short two hundred years; and in the
next three succeeding generations it was abridged to four hundred years; and in
the three succeeding ages to the former it was reduced to two hundred years;
and in Abraham's time it seems not to have been extended to an hundred years.

In reducing the Life of Mankind into shorter bounds now than it was in the
infancy of the World, the Divine wisdom and goodness do very plainly appear:
for 1. Although it is true that Sin was the cause of Misery, yet it is manifest
that as Men began to multiply, so they became more corrupted; and as the Earth
was replenished with Men, so with multiplied Miseries; and those not only
particular but common. War and bloodshed, slavery and toil, pains and deseases,
were in the first ages of the World very rare and singular; now these are
ordinary and common: and is it not then a great mercy that the days of our life
are few, since so full of evils? But 2. If Men lived as long now as in the
first ages of the World, a Land would not be able to contain its inhabitants:
and this is a far greater inconvenience and disadvantage, than the shortening
the lease of our beings can be supposed to be. In the first ages of the World,
the lives of Men were extended, that the earth might be replenished; and it is
very plain, that this common Period was shortened according as Man miultplyed.
I confess God threatens to destroy the inhabitants of a Land for their
transgressions; it was because Men had corrupted themselves, that God brought a
Flood of waters upon the World: and yet the Divine Justice was accompanied with
astonishing goodness; for he did not (as justly he might have) instantly cut
off that perverse generation, but he gave them the space of an Hundred and
Twenty years to repent. Yet (says God) his days shall be an Hundred and Twenty
years, Genesis 6. 3. That is, altough this be a perverse and corrupt geueration,
yet because Man is but flesh, I will give him this time to repent of his
wickedness; and if notwithstanding he will not after such warning mend his
manners, I will destroy him. I know many learned Men think that God here only
threatens to shorten the common Period of Men's lives, and that it should be
contracted within the bounds of an Hundred and twenty years: but this
exposition is not agreeable to the experiences of some ages next following the
Flood, in which Men lived much longer than an Hundred and Twenty years.

But they say, God uses not toanticipate his time in bringing judgments upon a
nation or people: to which I answer, it is very true; but methinks men have no
ground to think, that in the present case God anticipates the time in bringing
judgments upon them; for we cannot think that Noah was complete five Hundred
years old, when God threatened to destroy the World. And indeed any Man who is
but a little acquainted with the Jewish custom of reckoning of years, knows how
usual it is with them, to name the greater part of any thing for the whole. St.
Austin is so clear in this, I Will rather set it down in his words than my own:
Intelligendum est hoc Deum dixisse, cum circa finem quing entorum annorum esset
Noah. i. e. quadragintos octoginta vitae annos agere^, quos more suo Scriptura
quingentos vocat; nomine totius maximam partem plerumque significans. Aug. de
Civ. Dei, lib. 15. c. 24.

Thus much I have spoken of the common Period of Humane Life, in respect of the
ages of the World. I shall now add a little concerning its changeableness, in
respect of places: and I confess in this case it is so variable, that it is a
hard matter to pitch upon particulars; only in the general it is certain, that
this common Period is not the same in all places: in a temperat climate this
common term is extended; but where there is an excess of heat, or an
unconstancy of the weather, in those places this common Period is shortened.

But passing this I come now to consider the particular Period of every man's
life: there be two ways it is commonly taken. 1. As it implies the disunion of
the parts, by reason of the excess of some one quality or other: or 2. as it
implies the Period of Humane Life whatever way it is occasioned, without any
relation either to the defect, or excess of any quality: and thus the learned
Episcopius states the case in his first Epistle to Jo. Beverovicius. But to
make this yet more plain, I shall consider that text, 1. Sam. 26. 10. As the
Lord lives the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he shall
descend into battle and perish. Tho David was anointed King, yet he durst not
stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed; neither would he permit
Abishai, (who inconsideratly offered) to do it; knowing, none could do so and
be guiltless. Therefore he comforts and solaces himself with this
consideration, that God should rid him of Saul one of these three ways: 1. By
smiteing him with some disease; and now to what a numberless number of diseases
are our frail natures incident? variety of maladies prey upon frail man, and
millions of miseries attend him; the Pestilence walks at noonday, and the
Air which he breaths may blow out the spark of his life. 2. Or his day will
come; that is, or he will dye a natural Death: now Saul was well-stricken in
years, and he knew that by the course of nature he could not live long. 3, Or
he shall descend into battle and perish: That is, if some disease cut him not
off, or if his day come not, yet he shall be exposed to a violent Death, or he
shall descend into battle. Sometimes a violent Death is purely casual; thus it
was with those eighteen upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell, Luke 13. 4.
Sometimes it is only improperly casual, as when one of two equally exposed to
danger is only killed: and sometimes it is only and properly violent, such was
Saul's death, such was Achitophels and Hamans.

The way to this discourse in hand being thus far cleared, I shall now
prosecute the design of it in this method. 1. I shall set down those erroneous
opinions into which some men have unhappily fallen in their enquiry for
satisfaction in the present case. 2. I shall lay down the two common opinions
that offer fairest for solving this doubt. 3. I shall attempt a full and
satisfactory answer: and lastly I shall conclude with some reflections upon the
whole discourse.

I begin with the first to give an account of those erroneous sentiments some
men have unhappily embraced in their inquiry for satisfaction in this matter.
And that I may shun tediousness, I shall reduce them to the two following
heads. 1. Some have foolishly imagined that the Period of Humane Life is fatal
and necessary. 2. Others upon the contrary extreme, have as groundlesly
thought, that it is altogether fortuitous and casual.

Amongst those who ascribe every thing to the dispensation of a sure and
inevitable destiny, the Stoics have been been always reckoned the chiefest
combatants. It is well known that those stupid and senseless Philosophers did
teach, that all effects were necessarily produced by the natural order and
series of causes, which were from the outgoings of Eternity inseperably chained
together; so that neither Humane industry, nor the Divine power could alter
what such a conjunction of causes was to produce.

That humane Industry, care, and good menagery, cannot alter the decree of
Fate, the Stoic moralist Seneca very fairly confesses.

Fatis agimur, cedite fatis:
Non solicitae possunt curae
Mutare rati stamina fusi.
Seneca in Oedip. The same Seneca also affirms that the supreme being is so
strictly tyeh to the Sempeternal series and order of Causes, that he must
follow, but cannot gainsay what is thus established. Quicquid est quod nos sic
vivere jussit, sic mori, eadem necessitate Deos alligat, irrevocabilis humana
ac Divina pariter cursus vehit. Sen. lib. de provid. 5.

There are two very dangerous Authors of great name and fame, who amongst many
other bad opinions, have recalled this Stoical dream, which was long since
rejected; the one is the famous Mr. Hobs; the other the subtle author of that
Book, entitled Tractatus Theologico policitus: Both which I may perhaps have
occasion to examine more particularly.

But if all things were thus established by a fatal necessity, sound reason
would suggest to sober Men, that it were a needless thing for the sick to call
for the Physicians aid. And indeed Cicero very ingeniously confesses this: Si
fatum tibi est ex hoc morbo convalescere, sive tu medicum adhibueris, sive non
adhibueris, convalesces. -- Si fatum tibi est non convalescere, sive medicum
adhibueris, sive non non convalesces, and alterutrum fatum est, medicum ergo ad
hibere nihil valet. Cic. lib. de fato. And although Seneca thinks he has fallen
upon a very good answer, yet it is truly never a whit better. Cum sanitas
(inquit) videatur de fato debetur et medico, quia ad nos beneficium fati per
hujus manus venit, lib. 2. not. cap. 35. By which means the Physician is as
fatally determined to prescribe the cure, as the sick man's recovery is
destinated.

The ages in which these Men lived being dark and blind, we ought as much to
pity their case, as correct and reprehend them. It is our happiness that we are
not left to the conduct of natural reason; and would God our thankful
acknowledgments were answerable to the greatness of this blessing. I shall not
need to stand in rejecting this Dream, I think the hazards this speculation
has exposed some of its favorites to, will be forcible enough to afright
others from embracing it. I remember I have read of some whom this conceit had
so far distracted, that they did cast away their Swords and other weapons when
their Enemies approached: saying, If it be our Fate to dye to keep our weapons
will never preserve us from Death. It Is also reported of the deluded
Mahumetans, that in battle they take courage from this, that they are no sooner
born than fate seals upon their foreheads, how long they shall live, and what
death they shall dye. Alas who would not pity Men thus infatuated and
bewitched! surely, as St. Augustine excellently speaks Si cor tuum non esset
fatuum, non crederes fatum, Tract. 37. in Joh.

Next the Stoic stand the Stargazers and Astrologers, who attribute the
shortness or extension of our lives to the bad or benign Aspect and Conjunction
of the Stars in the time of our Nativity. Now although I deny not that the
Heavens have an influence upon inferior things, yet surely this secret and
occult dominion Star-gazers plead for, is so manifestly cross to reason and
daily experiences, that no man in his wit will affirm it. The Prophet has long
since advised us, not to be dismayed at the signs of Heaven; adding, the
Heathen they are dismayed at them, Ier. 10. 2. As if it had been only peculiar
to the Heathen part of the World, who were ignorant of Gods Providence, to
believe the vain predictions of Astrologers. Babylon was upbraided for her
trusting Astrologers, Star-gazers, and monthly prognosticators. Isa. 47. 13.
These men confidently presumed to foretell the time of Men's Death, and the
easlly deceived multitude gave a ready assent to whatever they speak: so easy
a matter it is to impose any thing upon the belief of the vulgar. The Palmaster
as foolishly pretends, that God has sealed upon every man's hand how long he
shall live, and that observing men (as they would have us believe they are) can
understand this by the lines and draughts in the palm of the hand. And or
proof of this they aledg. Job 37. 7. where it is said, he seals up the hand
of every man; that all men may know his work. But from this place no such thing
can be collected: for Elihu is there taken up in expressing the greatness of
Gods works, and the Divine power in commanding the Snow and the Rain, small and
great, to be on the Earth; and he adds, he seals up the hand of every man.
That is, when Snow and Rain are upon the Earth, men cannot labor and toil;
their hand is sealed up, they cannot work.

Epicurus and his followers could never be reconciled to this opinion, but yet
the account they give of this matter is every whit as extravagant and
irrational: they being equally unhappy in the account they give of the beginning
and Period of beings.

The account these men give of the original of beings is so incredible, that no
rational man can have any temptation to believe it; but this belongs not to the
present discourse. I shall therefore only consider what they say of the Period
of beings; and briefly their opinion is, that it is no more but the casual and
fortuitous separation of those particles of Matter that were united by a happy
chance and hit.

This error is of an old date, and had long ere now past prescription, if it
had not been so suitable to the humors of bad men. The Saducees, whose
Religigion it was to contradict the Pharisees, were very great sticklers for
this dream: some men have confined the Divine providence to the Stars, and
plucked our sublunary beings from his immediate Rule and Dominion. Cicero could
not be persuaded that God had any knowledge of things contingently future. Some
to mend the matter, confess God may know the general kinds of things, but they
will not allow that he knows every particular. For this they think is
inconsistent with the immutability of the Deity: But others have been more
illiberal in their concessions, thinking it enough if they grant that God has
a care of Mankind, although he never regard lesser matters: and that,

Curat magna Deus, fortunae parva relinquit. By means of these wild conceits
this Error has proceeded from bad to worse, yet very few of the old
Philosophers, or any other rank of men; (Atheists those Anomalus births
excepted) had ever that confidence in impiety, to say with the Epicureans, that
the World is perfectly left to its own fortuitous and casual resolutions, or
that I may express it in their Poets own phrase.

Sive nihil positum est, sed sors incerta vagatur,
Fertque refertque vices, and habent mortalia casum.
That the Period of every man's life is not so casual and fortuitous as these
men imagine, may be made evident by clear testimonies from Scripture concerning
the particular Providence whereby God takes care of every particular thing in
the World. But because I will have occasion to consider this afterward, I
shall now add only an instance or two from Scripture, whereby it may appear
that the most seemingly casual Periods of men are ordered by an infinite
Wisdom, and fall under the Divine Rule and Dominion. And first the manslayer,
who kills his Neighbor unawars, seems to be as casual a business as can be:
and yet we may read how far the Divine providence is concerned in this
particular, Exodus 21. 13. But farther, one of Epicurus Discples would readily
conclude that Ahabs death was a piece of chance, and governed by no Supreme
power. It was but an Archer's drawing his Bow at a venture, which by chance
killed Ahab. But the word of truth informs us, that by this means the prophecy
1 Kings, 21. 19. was fulfilled: and that it came not to pass without the Divine
providence, who rules among the children of Men.

And now I have done with the two erroneous extremes which some men have
inconsideratly run to for shelter: the next thing I premised was to lay down
the two common opinions that offer fair for removing the difficulty; but I must
say (for the thing is palpable,) that I am now only to give the two former
rejected opinions of the Stoics and Epicureans dressed up in better apparel,
and much refined from the impure dregs of Heathenism: as,

1. Some run to the absolute and inconditionate Decrees of God, and tell us,
that from the outgoings of Eternity, previous to the Divine consideration of
circumstances in which men are to be placed, God has so absolutely determined
the Period of every man's life, that it can neither be lengthned nor extended by
care and diligence; nor shortened by intemperance, Sword or Plague. 2. Others
who see the inconveniences and absurdities that follow upon the granting that
opinion to be true, are induced to believe that the Period of every man's life
is ordinarily mutable; and may be both extended and shortened: yet still they
grant that God may, as it seems good to him, either extend or shorten it.
There are four very considerable particulars that seem to strengthen the first
opinion. First, There are many plain places of Scripture that conclude the days
of every man to be bounded by the Divine determination. Secondly, There are
many examples in Scripture which show that the Period of every Man's Life is
from the outgoings of Eternity, set and bounded in by the Divine will.
Thirdly, It is a common opinion that the futurition of all things depends upon
the Divine will, antecedently to which, things are only possible: and
therefore, Fourthly, we can never give a rational and satisfying account, how
the Divine knowledge concerning the Period of Humane Life is infallible and
certain, if it be not founded upon the Basis of the sure absolute Decree.

Upon the other hand those who plead for the mutability of the Period of every
Man's Life, endeavor to remove the forenamed doubt, and to show the great
inconveniences it is liable to: That it quite evacuates the use of the means,
and encourages men to expose themselves to any danger; etc. as I shall
endeavor to make appear afterward.

And now I come to the chief thing I aimed at in this undertaking. viz. To
attempt a satisfying answer of the present doubt, in the prosecution of which
intendment I shall observe this Method. First, I shall endeavor to show how
the Period of every Man's Life may be said to be determined. Secondly, I shall
show in what sense it is not determined: and Thirdly, how it is mutable and may
be extended or shortened. I begin with the first, how the Period of every Man's
Life may be said to be determined: and I shall endeavor to do this in the two
following particulars.

1. The Period of every man's Life is so far determined that it is not without a
Period. To determine, signifies properly to set bounds or limits to any thing.
Now since it is appointed for all men once to dye, every man's life is enclosed
and bounded within a certain number of years. And I must add, that if I be not
very much mistaken, this is the genuin sense of the most, if not of all, those
places of Scripture that express the determination of Man's days: and indeed
Jobs words seeing his days are determined, etc. seem to mean no other thing but
this; and in this sense it is unquestionable that God has appointed our bounds
which we cannot pass.

But 2. the Period of every particular Man's Life is determined in respect of
the Divine prescience. Now because this is a very considerable particular, and,
as I told in the explaining of the text, that which was intended by Job when he
says, the number of his months is with thee; I shall therefore endeavor to
make out this truth by the plainest and most convincing evidence that can be.

In order to this I shall show that God has a perfect comprehension of all
things, past, present, or to come; and by consequence fore-knows the Period of
every Man's Life. Secondly, I shall prove this by plain evidence from Scriptural
Examples. Thirdly, I shall make it appear, that it is solely the prerogative of
our Maker to know the Period of every Man's Life. And lastly, I shall answer the
most Material objections and doubts that are brought against it. First, that God
has a perfect comprehension of all things past, present, and to come, is so
reasonable a principle of natural Religion, that it has been generally owned
by the wisest and most learned Heathen. And those impious wretches who at every
turn take the name of God in vain, in attesting him in the truth of what
sometimes themselves know is false, sufficiently implie that they believe Gods
Infinite knowledge. Besides the truth of this is plainly held out in Scripture;
it was to this city of refuge Peter did flee when his love was seemingly called
in question; Lord (says he) Thou know all things, John. 21. 17. And the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews makes use of this Topic to induce us to
circumspection, all things are naked and open to the eyes of him with whom we
have to do. Heb. 4. 13. And God himself appeals to the infinity of his knowledge
in the demonstration of his Deity, and challenges the Idol-Gods to produce
their cause; and show what shall happen that the latter end of things may be
known, Isa. 41. 21, 22. The Psalmist upbraids the Idol Gods, in that they have
eyes and see not: but he always comforts himself with this consideration, that
the God in whom he trusts does behold his condition; all which instances make
it undoubtable that God has an infinite cognizance, and that nothing can be
hid from his eyes, who equally beholds things past, present, and to come.

Now if it be so plain and evident that God has such an Infinite knowledge, no
man can reasonably doubt that God knows the Period of every Man's Life; but if
any shall ask how is it that God knows certainly the Period of Humane Life, I
answer, that it is a very bold and fruitless enquiry, which concerns not us to
know; his understanding is infinite, and shall silly Man think to comprehend
and measure it by his finite knowledge? The Psalmist modestly acknowledges that
such knowledge is too wonderful for him, it is high (says he) I cannot attain
unto it, Psalm. 139. 6. and elsewhere he tells us, it is only bold Atheists who
ask, How does God know, and is there knowledge in the most high?

I confess the Schoolmen (as they are called) weary themselves with such vain
Disputes, and they are as peremptory in determining the the manner of Gods
knowledge of future things, as if they had proved their assertions with
Mathematical demonstrations. Some of them tell us, that things future are
really present with God in Eternity; which methinks is a very noble Paradox.
Others run to the Divine decree, and make it the Basis of the Divine knowledge.
Others tell us that God in contemplating his own essence sees all the
representations and Ideas of future things; and therefore knows them certainly.
We might add many other conjectures, but these may let us know how vainly
curious such wits are: but that which may satisfy any sober enquirer is this,
that God is Infinite in knowledge, and therefore knows certainly the Period of
every Man's Life, it being truly future.

The Second thing I premised was to prove that God knows the Period of Humane
Life by examples from Scripture. Now I think this will need but little proof,
since the predictions concerning the Period of persons are so many and plain;
so many Hundred years foretold, and so punctually fullfilled without a failure
in a tittle. The death of Eli's two Sons, Hophni and Phineas was foretold, 1 Samuel, 2. 24. and punctually fulfilled, as we may read, chap. 4. 11. both the
mannet and place of Jezebels death was foretold, and the Dogs shall eat Iezebel
in the Portion of Iezreel, and there shall be none to bury her, 2 King. 9. 10.
which prediction was fulfilled without a failure in any circumstances, as we
read in the close of that Chapter. But the most remarkable instances are those
manifold predictions concerning the death of Holy Jesus. All the Prophets (as
the Apostle observes Act. 3) have foretold that Christ should suffer; they
have condescended upon the manner of his suffering, upon the time, and upon the
circumstances relating to it. The Psalmist in a figurative speech, (a very
usual way of expressing things amongst the Prophets) speaks of his being
pierced: so does the Prophet Zechariah, and they shall look upon me whom they
have pierced, Zech. 12. 10. Daniel did punctually speak of the time. And after
threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself, Dan 9.
26.

But farther God does not only know the actual, but also the possible bounds of
every Man's Life; that is, God does know that a Period should have been put to
the days of many Men, if they had not by their hearty repentance and devoute
prayers prevented its lash. It was King Hezekia's prayer to God that extended
his life fifteen years, for the message which God did send to Hezekiah was
this; Set thine house in order, for thou shall dye and not live. But he having
prayed to God gets this return; I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears,
behold I will add unto thy days fifteen years. Isa. 38. 5. from which it is
plain, that God knew that a Period should have been then put to his days, if
his prayer had not prevented it. It was the people of Nineves repentance that
prevented the threatened judgment that should have put a Period to their lives.
Which Method if the old World had observed, they had prevented that Fatal Flood
in which they were drowned.

Thirdly, That it is only the prerogative of God Almighty to know the Period of
every Man's Life will be easily granted. For those who deny Gods universal
cognizance, will never attribute it to any creature: and those who do
acknowledge the infinity of the Divine knowledge, will never say it belongs to
the creature. The only thing that we are to consider are these pretensions to a
foreknowledg of things which the Heathen world bragged of, but this Plea is
easily removed. For 1. in those dark ages of the World it was an easy thing to
impose upon the faith of the vulgar, who in all ages have been very credulous
and apt to be thus deceived. Secondly, It is well known that there pretended
predictions were very enigmatical and dubious. Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere
posse, was a Problem, rather than a Prophecy, which might have concluded both
ways. Thirdly, The most part of their pretended predictions were only guesses
and conjectures, which for the most part were false and groundless; yet
Fourthly* I do not deny but God may for ends known to himself reveal the Period
of particular persons, when, and to whom he thinks fit. It is therefore singly
the property of God Almighty who grasps all times, and who can never be
impeached for giving a wrong divination, to know the Period of every Man's Life.

In the last place I come to consider those Material doubts and objectione this
principls may be urged with. As 1. It is hardly credible that God does
certainly know the Period of Humane Life, it being only contingently future:
this objection Cicero could not answer, therefore being persuaded that some
things were contingently future, he thought God could not know such things. But
the difficulty is not so great as to make us deny God has perfect knowledge of
things contingently future. For 1. The light of nature may teach us that we
must not reject what is plain, because we cannot comprehend what is obscure.
That there is in man a rational Soul is beyond doubt; and yet how
irreconcilable are the opinions of learned men about its original, whether it
be by seminal production, or by immediate creation. Again the union of Soul and
Body is a very mysterious riddle, and the most ingenious hypothesis has been
confessed to be unsatisfactory; and yet no man was ever so far infatuated as to
deny that in man there is a Soul and Body. In like manner, what although Humane
Reason cannot reconcile the Divine knowledge with the contingency of actions?
yet may it not rest satisfied with this, that God knows all contingencies
because his understanding is infinite. And indeed the predictions in Scripture
are so remarkable and plain evidences that God knows all things, that now it
cannot be reasonably questioned. But suppose Revelation had taught us nothing
of this, yet we might by natural principles know that God is the most perfect
being that can be imagined, and therefore of Infinite comprehension; that he is
our Maker, and therefore must know all the intrigues of his creatures.

But Secondly, the Divine foreknowledg is not the cause of things (for
otherwise criminal actions which do not escape his eye, should be caused by him
who cannot tempt any man to sin) which is impossible: if God should reveal to
me that Titius were certainly to do such a thing the next day, my foreknowledg
does not necessitate Titius to do that act: so that upon the one hand as the
foreknowledg of it has no influence upon the manner of its production, nor
crosses the Humane liberty; for the Divine foreknowledg is not the cause why
things exist, but it supposes the existence of things: so upon the other hand
the contingency of the Period of Humane Life does not inser, that it cannot be
certainly known by an infinite understanding who grasps all things and seasons.

But the great difficulty is, how the Divine foreknowledg can be reconciled
with the Divine promises, commands, comminations and prohibitions: how it can
consist with the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, to threaten men with shortness of
life if they continue wicked and rebellious; and to pramise longth of days if
men will obey his commandments, while-as he well knows that the wicked man will
continue in his wickedness, and be filthy still, and that the virtuous and good
man will persevere in well doing.

I confess, this is a very great difficulty, and has induced many learned men
to doubt if God knows things contingently future, not that they would impeach
any of the Divine perfections, or derogate from the infinity of his knowledge;
but only they think that the nature of things contingently future, is such that
they cannot be known; as it is no diminution from Omnipotency, to say things
impossible, or which imply a contradiction; fall not under its object.

But yet since Scripture has so clearly revealed to us the Divine foreknowledg
of future actions, methinks he is very rash and inconsiderate that doubts it:
it is a remarkable sentence of Tertullian's, Praescientia Dei tantos habet
testes, quantos fecit prophetas. Hence the learned Episcopius tells us, that
his Religion and the reverence he had to the Divine Majesty would never suffer
him to admit this argument, which reflected so much upon the truth of Divine
Predictions.

But I answer more particularly, that Gods promises and threatenings are
serious, because although God knows that some men who are threatened will continue
in their wickedness; yet it being in their power to turn from their Sins, and
the Divine threatening being an argument which should prevail upon men; no man
can doubt but God is serious with sinners in such cases. If a parent did
certainly know that his Son were to commit a criminal act, would any man think
that that Parents threatening of his Son, if he did commit that act, were void
of sincerity. But 2. As God knows that some wicked men, notwithstanding of the
severest threatening, will continue in their sins: yet 1. He knows that even
such obdurate persons may do otherwise* and 2. He knows that many men would
have continued in their sins, if they had not been threatened with punishments.
We have no reason to think that the people of Ninevie would have turned unto
God if they had never been threatened. Now though God knew that Ninevie when
threatened would repent, yet since he also knew that if they had not been
threatened they should have continued in their wickedness; therefore no man can
question the seriousness of the Divine threatenings.

And thus I have dispatched the first particular, how the Period of every Man's
Life may be said to be determined. I come in the next place to enquire in what
sense it is not determined. Now because I have already rejected the Stoical
Fate all that I shall speak concerning this head may be comprehended in this
following particulars: viz.

The Period of every Man's Life is not fatally limited and bounded by any
absolute or inconditionate decree of God Almighty. Now because many learned men
violently urge, that God has from the outgoings of Eternity absolutely decreed
the bounds of every Man's Life, without any consideration of those circumstances
in which they are to be placed; so that men, do what they please, can neither
extend nor shorten the lease of their life: I shall therefore endeavor to make
this assertion plain, and remove those objections that it may seem liable to;
and the rather, because in such kind of assertions as are besides the common
opinion, men will be ready to suspect some sinisturous design.

That the Period of every Man's Life is not Fatally determined by any secret
inconditional decree, will appear from the arguments we shall make use of in
proving the inobility of the Period of every Man's Life. Now I shall only
consider those absurdities and inconveniences that follow upon the admission
of the contrary opinion. As first, if the Period of Humane Life were Fatally
determined, then those wretched miscreants who with their own hands put a
Period to their Lives, may easily excuse themselves before their Judge: for
since it is supposed that they are physically predetermined to do so, how can
it be imagined that they could do otherwise? is there any resisting of the
Divine decree? alas, it was not in their power to help it, and how then can
they be condemned for it. It is a known Maxim, Nemo peccatin eo quod vitare non
potest: the necessity they are placed in, seems to excuse their sin, but if
notwithstanding we shall suppose that such brutish actions are really criminal,
we run our selves upon another absurdity, and that is, we reflect upon the
Divine holiness and goodness; for if God has truly determined those brutish
actions by a previous, secret, and unalterable decree, if he has before
irrevocably determined, and so entangled in such a train of causes as should
necessarily make them offer violence to themselves; how can we vindicate the
Divine Sancty from the blot of being the author of sin? alas, daily experience
shows us, how apt men are to make use of this argument for their own
vindication, when they do what is criminal; they tell us they were fatally
determined by an external power in acting them. And with this consideration
they solace themselves, as if they were as innocent as Fools or Madmen.

But let no man deceive himself in arguing so foolishly, the Apostle St. James,
very forcibly rejects this opinion. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am
tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any
man. But every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and
enticed Jam. 2. 13, 14. The wiseman in his sense, after the certainty of
things, concludes his 7th Chapter of the Book of Ecclesiastes thus, Lo, this
only have I found, that God has made man upright: but they have sought out
many inventions. Pray then let us reject every opinion that teaches God does
necessitate men to sin, for nothing can be more injurious to God* than this. To
think to palliat the business by saying God is under no law, is but a lawless
and unreasonable pretext; for the everlasting rectitude of his spotless nature,
is more than any external Law: and pray, what can truth and justice do, but
what holy is and just? The distinction between the act and the pravity of the
act, the former of which God determins man to; but not to the latter, is as
vain and frivolous. For the pravity of every wicked act is inseparable from it.
And farther, the Divine commands particularly prohibit the act, and I think
upon no other ground, but because the formality of Sin consists in the act it
self. It is indeed strange to consider those Platonic and imaginary notions
some men run to: but I think it needless to take a particular view of such
dreams.

But as this Opinion sadly reflects upon the Holiness of God, so it is highly
inconsistent with the liberty of Man's Will in the choice of the means. That
there is a free Principle in Man, is so plain, that he who denies this, must
engage himself against Experience and Reason. There is no Man who does
wickedly, but he perceives he may do otherwise: the sick man is not constrained
to neglect the means for his recovery; neither is the Physician forced to
prescribe this and no other remedy: Men act not as Machines, but they have a
Free Principle, whereby they may choose what they think is best and most
convenient: It Is true, the Will, since Adam's Fall, is corrupted, and mostly
inclined to that which is evil; but yet the Fall did not destroy Man's Freedom,
it made no Physical change, only the Faculties of the Soul are morally vitiated
and corrupted.

But if the Will were Physically (as they speak) determined ad unum, it were
unreasonable to think that the sick person, who neglects the means, could do
otherwise. And alas! does not Experience convince us, that men of this
Persuasion neglect the use of lawful means which God has appointed, only
because they dream that if God has decreed that they shall die, then it is
needless to use the means; and if God has determined that they shall live,
whether they use or neglect the means, they shall live.

But you will say, God does not only Decree the End, but also the Means. I
answer, This Plea does not a whit diminish or remove the difficulty, since they
suppose that the Means are as absolutely decreed as the End: which quite
destroys the liberty of Man's Will, and leaves no place for any choice.

Thirdly, This Opinion leaves no place for praise to the Learned Physician, nor
for dispraise to the unskilful Empyrick. First, The skilful Physician can claim
no praise; for although it be granted that he has wisely considered the condition
of the sick, and the nature of the Disease; tho he has prescribed apt
Remedies, and in allthings behaved well, yet since he did no other thing but
what he was determined to do by an external force, who can think he merits any
praise, if he could have done otherwise but would not, then he might in reason
claim it; but the case according to the present Hypothesis is quite opposite.
But, Secondly, neither can we in reason blame the unskilful Quack-Doctor, who
neither knows the nature of the Disease, nor of those Medicines he prescribes.
Alas! poor man does no more than what he was forced to do, and he could not do
otherwise; why then should he be blamed for any failure or mistake he commits.

Fourthly, The natural and genuine Consequence of this Doctrine, is, to make
men like Fools or Madmen, expose themselves to any danger: For instance, What
need we be afraid to run upon any Precipice, if God has determined the period
of every man's life, there is no fear to encounter with any seeming danger; men
may safely enough leap into the fire, or cast themselves into the deep, for
there is no fear that they shall be hurt or perish, unless* the Almighty has
determined it; and if this be, they may persuade themselves they could not do
otherwise, for the Decree is unalterable, and cannot be repealed.

Nor is this true only in Theory and Speculation, but it may appear to have
such bad effects, by the sad experience of poor deluded Creatures. Alas! do we
not hear the Vulgar frequently comfort any who are in trouble with this
consideration, that God has decreed it should be so, if these persons did only
mean that God exercises a special Providence in the world, and rules among
the Children of men, no body had ever blamed them: but this is not their
meaning, for they plainly declare by such kind of speech, that all things come
to pass farally. I have heard some wretched Sinners, who had committed great
and scandalous sins, excuse themselves, by saying, they were decreed to do so,
and God's will must be accomplished,

It were very easy to multiply many Absurdities which flow from this Doctrine
by a natural Consequence; but these few I have named. may abundantly satisfy
every considering man, and show him how pernicious and dangerous it is; but
before I conclude, I shall consider, the four Arguments I mentioned before,
which I said, seemed to strengthen and confirm this Opinion, as

First, There are many places of Scripture which seem to conclude, That the
Period of every Man's Life is determined. I shall mention some of the most
remarkable Texts of Scripture brought to defend this, as first, Psalm. 31. 15.
My times are in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine Enemies. From hence
some draw this unexpected Conclusion, That God has absolutely decreed the
Period of every Man's Life. Now I think no considering man should ever have
guessed this to be the Psalmist's meaning; for the Text only holds out the
Divine care and Providence, whereby he does superintend and continue every
individual thing in the world in their Beings, and therefore is it that David
makes his application to God, that he would deliver him from the hand of his
Enemy; which methinks had been a needless Petition, if he had imagined that God
had absolutely determined the period of his life. Secondly, Psalm. 39. 5. Lord,
make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days what it is, that I may
know how frail I am, This place is strangely brought to confirm the former
Opinion: For the Psalmist does not desire the knowledge of the Period of his
life; he does not ask when he shall die, only he begs the Divine aid and
assistance, that he may wisely improve the short time he has to live. I cannot
stand to consider such Texts of Scripture as these, which are no ways
acquainted with the Doctrine they are brought to defend. There is only one Text
that seems to favor this Opinion, viz. Job 14. 5* Seeing his Days are
determined, the number of his Months are with thee, thou have appointed his
bounds that he cannot pass. But I have considered this all along in this
Discourse. I confess, some in return to this say, that all Job's words are not
approved of God, therefore it is hard to conclude any thing from them; but this
is a very insufficient answer. That which satisfies me is this, that Job here
only says that our days are determined, but he speaks nothing how they are
determined; now in what sense the Period of every Man's life may be said to be
determined, I have already considered,

Secondly, There are many Examples in Scripture, which show that the Period of
every Man's Life is bounded and limited by an absolute Decree. The most
remarkable is, that Act. 4. 28, Both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles and the people of Israel were gathered together for to do whatsoever
thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done: The Scribes and
Pharisees frequently stirred up the multitude to lay hands upon Christ, but
their endeavors were always to no purpose; and the account the Scripture gives
for this, is, because his hour was not come. In return to this, I shall desire
it may be considered, that when we say the Period of every Man's Life may be
extended or shortened, the meaning is not, that it is impossible that it can be
otherwise: we never doubted but the great Governor of the World may make what
reserved Cases he pleases from the ordinary course of things; and no wonder
though the present Case, which is upon all accounts so extraordinary, be exempt
from the general Rule; and for such exempt Cases, to which there ought to be
allowance made, no reasonable man can think they do any prejudice to the thing
I have been proving.

Thirdly, It is a common opinion, that the futurition of things depend only
upon the Divine will; antecedently to which things are only possible. In answer
to which, I easily grant, that there is nothing that comes to pass contrary to
the Divine will; the most criminal actions are ordered by his Infinite Wisdom;
and permitted to be. But yet we have no ground to think that he decrees every
future action. Else it were hard to vindecate the holiness of God; upon which
consideration many Learned Men have been induced to deny Gods immediate
concurring with the Creature in all its operations; and yet we need not run our
selves upon this Rock; for we may safely enough maintain that the Divine will
is immediately efficatious; for God who created man with a freedom of will,
designed that he should act without constraint, and the reason why man acts
freeiy, is because God wills men to act so; which plainly discovers, that the
most contingent actions depend immediately upon the Divine will.

Fourthly, We can never give a rational nor satisfying account how the Divine
knowledge concerning the Period of Humane Life is infallible and certain, if it
be not founded upon the sure Basis of an absolute decree. This objection I have
partly removed already, while I showed that God knows whatso ever is true,
because his cognizance is Infinite; wherefore it is unreasonable to think that
God could not have a perfect comprehension of things; if he had not decreed
them absolutely. Now to make this yet more plain, I shall prove by instances
from Scripture, that God has a certain knowledge of those things which he never
decreed: as absolutely future. And First, It is a very remarkable instance which
we have, 1. Sam. 23. 11, 12. where David hearing that Saul was to come to
Keilah, he earnestly beseeches God to tell him, if the men of Keilah will
deliver him and his men into the hand of Saul; and if Saul will come down. To
both which he gets this answer, That Saul will come down; and that the Keilites
will deliver him up. And yet tho Event shows that none of those came to pass,
because the fulfilling of both did depend upon David's staying in Keilah. And
yet God certainly knew, that it David had not departed from Keilah, they should
have delivered him into the hands of Saul. And farther it is very evident, that
David was not inquiring what were the present propensions, and inclinations of
the Keilites; but what should be the event of his staying, and accordingly he
receives an answer from God. Another Instance we have 2 Kings, 13. 19. where
Elisha the Prophet is very wroth with Joash King of Israel, because he did not
smite upon the ground five or six times; and the reason the Prophet adds, is,
for then had thou smitten Syria till thou had consumed it. Which makes it
as evident as any thing can be* that God foreknew that Joash should have
smitten Syria till he had consumed it, if he had smitten upon the ground five
or six times. It were no difficult task to prove this by a multitude of
instances from Scripture, but I think I need add no more for the satisfaction
of considering Men; and for others, a Million of demonstrations will be urged
to no purpose. And thus I have done with the Second thing I proposed, that God
has not by any absolute or inconditionate Decree fatally determined the Period
of every Man's Life.

I proceed to the Third thing proposed, namely, whether the Period of every
Man's Life be mutable. And before I prove it to be so, I must premise two
cautions. First, when we say the Period of every Man's Life is mutable, we mean
no more but that it may be shortened by our intemperance, or neglect of the
means; and be extended by our good managery and religious manner of living.
Secondly, When I say the Period of every Man's Life is moveable, the meaning is
not that it is necessarily so, and that it cannot be otherwise; for this would
not be consistent with our dependent condition; therefore there is allowance to
be made to extraordinary cases. The acts of Divine providence in the government
of Humane affairs, are sometimes extraordinary, and therefore it must be left
to his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, to make what reserved cases he thinks fit
from the general rule. Yet for ordinary the Period of Humane Life is mutable;
and God does not exclude the power of second causes in governing the World.

These things being premised, I doubt not but to offer such arguments for the
proof of the mutability of the Period of every Man's Life, as shall be
sufficient for the conviction of any man who is not blinded by prejudice, or
prepossessed with some contrary notion. And

First, Upon the observance of the Divine laws, there are many promises in
Scripture assuring us of length of days; and on the other side, there are many
threatenings of cuting short the days of the wicked. Thus God promises length of
days to obedient Children. Exodus 20. 12. Honor thy Father and Mother, that thy
days may be long upon the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee. Deuteronomy. 4.
40. Thou shall keep therefore his Statutes and his Commandments which I
command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with thy Children
after thee, and that thou may prolong thy days upon the earth, which the
Lord thy God gives thee. And particularly the Lord tells Solomon. 1 King. 3.
4. If thou will* walk in my ways to keep my Statutes and my Commandments, as thy
father David did walk, then I will lengthen thy d^ys. The Psalmist encourages
men to consider the case of the poor upon this Motive. Psalm 42. 1, 2. Blessed
is he that considers the Poor, the Lord will preserve him and keep him alive,
etc. And upon this acount the Wiseman also persuades men to observe and keep
Gods laws. Prove. 3. 1, 2. My Son forget not my law, but let thine heart keep my
Commandments: for length of days, and long life, and peace shall they add to
thee.

How much the observance of the duties of Religion conduce to our health, is a
thing daily experience attests; and therefore the Apostle very excellently
exhorts Timothy, to exercise himself unto Godliness, for it is profitable unto
all things, having promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to
come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Religion is as a bridle to keep men within due bounds in
their eating and drinking; it forbids all manner of excess which impares our
bodily health, and obliges men to make use of lawful means for their
preservation and recovery. If we consult experience, we shall find these to be
the men who for ordinary enjoy the longest lives: it is true some good men may
be naturally of a brittle constitution, and others God may remove for secret
ends known to himself; yet for ordinary, the Godly man, whose natural temper is
strong, has the advantage of the wicked man; and certainly Religion in its due
tendency prescribes the best rules for long life.

As Righteousness tends to life, so he that pursues evil (as the Wiseman
tells us) pursues it to his own death, Prove. 11. 19. We have a large Catalogue
of the Punishments inflicted for sin, Exodus 26. Where more particularly v. 16.
the Lord threatens to appoint over those who obey not his Laws, terror,
consumption, and the burning ague: and that Men may not foolishly think all
these are but threatenings which God intends not to inflict upon poor Man, the
Prophet Isaiah tells us, if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the
Sword, for the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Isa. 1. 20. And the wiseman
concluds it as certain, Prove. 10. 27. The years of the wicked shall be
shortened: and to conclude, the Psalmist also tells us, bloody and deceitful men
shall not live out half their days. Psalm. 55. 23. which the Poet very well
expresses,

Ad Generum Cereris, sine caede ac sanguine pauci,
Descendunt Reges, et sicca morte Tyranni.
And the truth of this may be evident likewise from common Experience, by which
it will appear, that no men are so obnoxious to Diseases as the wicked, who
spend their time in chambering and wantonness, in riot and excesss. Who has
woe? who has sorrow? who has wounds without cause? they that tarry long at
the wine, Prove. 23. 29, 30. What the Wiseman says of one kind of Vice, may be
said of all, They lead down to the Chambers of death, Prove. 7. 27. But these
things are so obvious, that I need not to enlarge upon them. I shall conclude
this Argument with this consideration, that since God Almighty promises to
extend and lengthen out, or prolong their life, who walk piously and observe
his Statutes, and threatens to shorten the days of the wicked, who refuse to
obey his Laws, it cannot be rationally imagined that the Period of every Man's
Life is absolutely determined.

Another Argument to confirm our Assertion, may be taken from the pious and
devout prayers of the righteous, and their turning from their sins by an hearty
repentance, both which conduce to the lengthening out of their days. I put
Repentance and Prayer together, because of their near affinity to one another.
Now that both these may be the Moral Cause of extending our Lives, may appear
to be true from common Experience, besides the many Assertions and Promises in
Scripture to this purpose. First, The truth of this may be evident from
Experience, by which it will appear, that if Men had hearkened to Noah's
Doctrine, if they had repented of their wickedness within the space allowed to
them, they had not perished in the Deluge of Water. Of repenting Nineve we
read* That God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way, and God
repented of the evil he had said that he would do unto them, and he did it not,
Jonah 3. 10. It was Hezekiah's Prayers and Tears that prolonged his life. Go
(says the Lord to his Prophet Isaiah) and say to Hezekiah, Thus says the
Lord, the God of David thy Father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy
tears, behold I will add unto thy days fifteen years, Isa. 38. 5. And if Prayer
were of no force, to what purpose were men so earnest in their sickness, to beg
the prayers of others on their behalf. I confess if the Period of every Man's
Life were fatally determined, our Prayers should be very needless. For can we
be so senseless as to imagine, that our Prayers can move God to change his
unalterable Statutes and Decrees.

But besides common experience, the truth of this is likewise attested by plain
evidences from Scripture. At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation,
and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If
that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent
of the evil that I thought to do unto them. And at what instant. I shall speak
concerning a kingdom to plant it; If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not
my voice, then will I repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit them,
Ier. 18* 7, 8, 9, 10. Methinks this is so plain an evidence of the efficacy of
repentance, that no reasonable man can have any doubt concerning it. But alas,
if God had from the outgoings of Eternity fatally determined the destruction of
Nations and Kingdoms by an absolute and inconditionate decree, Repentance could
never alter the determination.

It is the Apostles advice Jam. 5. 14. Is any sick among you? let him call for
the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him. I know there are other
means to be made use of in order to the procuring of health than repentance and
prayer, and of these we shall speak anon: but yet this I think may be truly
said, that sometimes, when all other remedies have been either ineffectual or
not to be had, repentance and prayer have done the business, and completed the
cure. And surely these are duties profitable at all times.

I know the Church of Rome tell us many extravagant Stories of the wonders and
miracles that have been performed by the prayers of Holy Men: those I shall not
now mention, only I shall say, that although it is not credible that the Prayers
of Saints upon the Earth, do either mitigate and alleviate the pains of those
that are in Hell; or free them from that miserable state, (as some men have
confidently enough reported:) yet it is sufficiently credible that the
effectual fervem prayer of the righteous avails much, Jam. 5. 16.

A Third Argument to prove that our lives may be extended or shortened, may be
taken from the use of medicaments. Common reason will teach Men, that it is
needless to prescribe any Medicine to those that are dead; and truly the case
would be much alike, if the Period of every Man's Life were determined by an
inconditionate Decree. For although men might then make use of medicaments, yet I
think I may truly say that their operation should be very ineffectual. But that
men may to good purpose employ the Physician when they are sick, and expect by
the blessing of God, benefit by the use of Medicaments applied by the art of
Physic, no reasonable man can doubt.

That the lives of many have been lengthned and prolonged by the excellent
remedies, applied by the expert and skillful Physician, is a truth so obvious
to common experience, that I need not enlarge upon it. And on the other side,
how many have died before their time, only by their employing ignorant
Physicians! It is a famous instance that we have recorded of one Manes, the
Father of the Manichees, who having returned into Persia at that time when the
Kings Son lay sick of a dangerous disease, he amongst many other Physicians was
present: all the others plainly declared that the disease was dangerous; but
Manes, who was only a pretended Physician, confidently desired that they might
be all removed, and he would take care of the Kings Son, and withal promised
to restore him to health in a short space: but the event was quite contrary,
for within a short time the Kings Son died; which did so provoke the King of
Persia, that he instantly caused Manes to be put to a miserable Death. What
mischief has been done by unskilful Physicians, too many sad examples do daily
attest; but yet if the Period of every Man's Life were determined by an,
absolute and inconditionate decree, no man could blame the ignorant Physician,
nor needs any person be troubled if they neglect the means; for God had
determined they should do so. Which indeed makes Marthas speech to our Lord
Christ to be ridiculous, if thou had been here my Brother had not died.

That Naaman the Syrian should wash himself in the River of Jordan seven, times
and then be clean of his Leprosy, was indeed miraculous: But yet it is plain,
that if he had not done so, his Leprosy had remained.

Whether that custom in the primitive Christian Church of anointing the sick
with Oil was miraculous, or not, I shall not dispute; but this is certain, that
it was then a mean used for the recovery of the Sick.

There is one objection which some men very impertinently urge against what I
have been speaking, and that is, Asa his going to the Physicians, which the
Scripture seems to disallow. To this I answer, that King Asa is not therefore
reprehended, because he asked advice of the Physicians, but because he trusted
only in them, and sought not the Lord: as it is very plain from 2 Chronicles. 16.
12. And sure no reasonable man will have any doubt but this was a very culpable
neglect in Asa.

Fourthly, Nothing is more evident than that there are several things which
have a Physical efficacy in the shortning of Men's lives; as all kinds of
excess, namely immoderate eating and drinking; all inordinate passions of mind,
etc. as also the bad and unwholesome constitution of a Kingdom. And on the
other side, there are many things which effectually conduce to the lengthning
of our days; namely all kind of moderation and temperance; the wholsomness of
the region wherein we live, and our good managery. What kind of persons are
those who for ordinary live longest? are they not those who carefully moderate
their sensual appetites, and who govern their passions, and who live in the
wholesomest places? We commonly say that Men who live in a Populous City are
shorter-lived than those who live in the Country. I have already showed how
some vices in their proper tendency shorten Men's Lives, and that in some
Nations and Kingdoms men live much longer than in others: all which methinks
plainly tells us the Period of every Man's Life is not Fatal but Mutable,
according as men are careful or negligent of themselves.

I shall only add another condesirable argument, and so draw this discourse to
a conclusion. And that is, don't we evidently perceive that many men had lived
longer if they had notwretchedly* and unreasonably exposed themselves to
danger; and is it not evident that many Millions who have died in battle would
have had their days prolonged if they had never descended into battle? That God
has from the outgoings of Eternity by an absolute and inconditionate decree
determined both the time and manner of every man's death, this is more than we
can learn from Revelation; and me thinks it is very inconsistent and
irreconcilable with those many plain texts that show it is lawful in time of
eminent danger to flee for our safety, in time of Famine, and when any
egregious contagion, such as the Pestilence, spreads in any place. How many
Hundreds prolonged their lives by their flight from battle? If David and his
Men had remained in Keilah it is certain they should have been delivered up
into the hands of Saul; and what the Event* should have been we may easily
conjecture, if God by a special providence had not interposed for their safety.
But besides the many instances we might produce, we have a positive precept to
flee from any eminent danger, Mat. 10. 23. When they persecute you in this City
flee into another. Which plainly shows that this is a lawful means of
prolonging our lives in such cases. It is a notable instance we have, Jer. 27.
18 Thus says the Lord, behold I set before you the way of life, and the way of
death: he that abides in this City shall dye by the Sword, and by the Famine,
and by the Pestilence: but he that goes out and falls to the Chaldeans that
besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be unto him for a prey. Which
place plainly shows, that God had not decreed the Period of their Lives by any
inconditionate decree; for the means both of prolonging and of cutting short
their Lives, are put in their choice. And this is all that I shall say to the
Third thing I proposed to speak, concerning the mutability of the Period of
every Man's Life for ordinary.

All that now remains is to conclude with some practical reflections upon what
has been said. And first, whatever debates there may be concerning the Period
of every Man's Life, yet there is no doubt but Man's Life has a Period. It is
appointed for all men once to dye, and from this warefare there is no
discharge. Pray what is become of all those who lived in former ages? have they
not gone the way of all living? and shall we think to shun the approach of this
last Enemy may not the multiplied experiences we have of other Men's frailty and
mortality, convince us that we are brittle, and must return to the dust? we are
of the like constitution that they were of, and we cannot expect to be
otherwise dealt with. What man is he that lives and shall not see death? and
yet many men live as unconcerned as if they had the perpetuity of their beings
ensured to them, and had concluded an agreement with Death, and had secret
intelligence with the Grave.

It is truly a business worthy to be regrated that men who are living, as it
were in the House of mourning, daily visited with pains and diseases, and have
no promise, at least, for one moments security, yet live unconcerned and never
mind those pleasures. It was indeed a praise worthy and commendable custom
amongst the Jews, to build their Sepulchers in their Gardens (as we may guess
from Joh. 19. 4^.) that so in the midst of their pleasures, they might behold
Monuments of their mortality.

Truly if we did frequently meditate upon our latter end, we should live more
like Christians than we now do. The end has has a very great influence upon
men's endeavors; hence is that general Maxim, Finis ultimus praescrib at
regulas totius vitae. And it seems that the Psalmist upon this account prays,
Lord make me know mine end, and the measure of my days, that I may know how
frail I am. It is not to be doubted but we should order our conversation
aright, if we had this consideration in our view. We should have but low and
contemptible thoughts of the perishing pleasures which we now so much delight
in. Then we should be argued out of our folly in spending our years as a tale
that is told.

It is threatened as a sad Plague to the oppressor, that the number of his
years are hidden from him, Job. 15. 20. He is a person that never considers
that his appointed time approaches, and that God will bring him into the
Grave, the place appointed for all living: and it is laid down as the cause why
Jerusalem came down wonderfully, that she remembered not her last end. I am. 1.
9. And truly it may be also reckoned as the cause why Christians live so
contrary to the commendable rules of the Gospel they profess. If we did but
entertain somewhat more familiar thoughts of our appointed time, we could not
but rectify those abuses we are guilty of. But alas, all the passages of our
time are filled up with cares about things that perish: we can walk to the
Grave with our friends, whom we once loved as entirely as our own lives, and
reap as little advantage by their death as if we had never been acquainted with
them, never remembering, that we must go to them but they cannot return to us.

But Secondly, although the Period of every Man's Life is fixed in respect of
the Divine foreknowledg, yet to us it is uncertain; we know not when this Enemy
may surprise us. Of this we may say what our Lord Christ says of the day of
judgment, but of that day and hour we know not. When we least suspect its
approach it may call us to go hence and be no more. How many millions of
strange and unexpected accidents attend us? the Pestilence walks in darkness,
and Destruction wastes at noonday, astonishing dispensations may allarm us by
night, and the devouring Arrow flees by day, Psalm. 91. 5. 6. When we go
abroad, we cannot promise to our selves a safe return, and at home when we put
off our cloths, we cannot tell if we shall ever put them on again: the Grave is
always ready for us. What strange kind of unknown diseases does our age
produce, from which we cannot promise to our selves any exemption? We live
amongst cruel and mad Men, and do we know but those Beasts of prey may devour
us? When we look for peace, destruction may come. This was the Rich Man's Fate,
who while he was promising himself rest for many days, that same night his Soul
was required of him. We are always apt to put the thoughts of this day fat from
us; when we enjoy health we never think of any change, and that sickness may
seir upon us and put a Period to our lives. We live indeed at a great deal of
uncertainty; man also knows not his time, as the Fishes that are taken in an
evil Net, and as the Birds that are caught in the snare: so are the sons of men
snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them, Eccl. 9. 12. We
look upon Death as the unfaithful Servant did upon his Masters coming, we think
Death does delay its coming; but if we were not fools we should always realize
the quickness of its approach. May be we are young and strong, how many such
have been called away in the morning of their ago? Go too now (says the
Apostle James) ye that say to day or to morrow we will go into such a ^^y and
continue there a year, and buy and sell and get gain; whereas ye know not what
shall be on the morrow, Jam. 4. 13. 14. Alas our days at best are but labor
and sorrow, for they are soon cut off, and we flee away. When a few years are
gone, we must go the way of all flesh: and yet upon the happy improvement of
this depends our everlasting happiness or misery; for there is no work, nor
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the Grave whither we are going, Eccl. 9.
10.

FINIS.

