Imprimatur,

RAD. BATHVRST. Vice-Cancel. Oxon.
Januarii 24. 1675.
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE TONGVE


THE Government OF THE TONGUE. By the Author of THE WHOLE DUTY OF MAN, etc.

Death and Life are in the power of the Tongue, Prove. 18. 21. The fifth
Impression.

At the THEATER in OXFORD. M. DC. LXVII.

THE PREFACE
THE Government of the Tongue has ever bin justly reputed one of the most
important parts of human Regiment. The Philosopher and the Divine equally
attest this; and Solomon (who was both) gives his suffrage also; the
persuasions to, and encomiums of it taking up a considerable part of his Book
of Proverbs. I shall not therefore need to say any thing, to justify my choice
of this subject, which has so much better authorities to commend it: I rather
wish that it had not the super addition of an accidental fitness grounded upon
the universal neglect of it, it now seeming to be an art wholly out-dated. For
tho some lineaments of it may be met with in Books, yet there is scarce any
footsteps of it in practice, where alone it can be significant. The attemt
therefore of reviving it I am sure is seasonable, I wish it were half as easy.

2. Indeed that skill was never very easy, it requiring the greatest vigilance
and caution, and therefore not to be attained by loose trifling spirits. The
Tongue is so slippery, that it easy deceives a drousy or heedless guard. Nature
seems to have given it some unhappy advantage toward that. It Is in its frame
the most ready for motion of any member, needs not so much as the flexure of a
joint, and by access of humors acquires a glibness too, the more to facilitate
its moving. And alas, we too much find the effect of this its easy frame: it
often goes without giving us warning; and as children, when they happen upon a
rolling Engine, can set it in such a carriere, as wiser people cannot on a
sudden stop; so the childish parts of us, our passions, our fancies, all our
mere animal faculties, can thrust our Tongues into such disorders, as our
reason cannot easily rectify. The due managery therefore of this unruly member,
may rightly be esteemed one of the greatest mysteries of Wisdom and Virtue.
This is intimated by St. James, if any man offend not in word, the same is a
perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body, Ja. 3.2. It Is storied of
Bembo a primitive Christian, that coming to a friend to teach him a Psalm, he
began to him the thirty ninth, I said I will look to my ways, that I offend
not with my Tongue; upon hearing of which first verse, he stopped his Tutor,
saying, This is enough for me if I learn it as I ought; and being after six
months rebuked for not coming again, he replied, that he had not yet learned
his first Lesson: nay, after nineteen years he professed, that in that time he
had scarce learned to fulfill that one line. I give not this instance to
discourage, but rather to quicken men to the study, for a lesson that requires
so much time to learn, had need be early begun with.

3. But especially in this age, wherein the contrary liberty has got such a
prepossession, that men look on it as a part of their birthright, nay do not
only let their Tongues loose, but studiously suggest inordinaces to them, and
use the spur where they should the bridle. By this means conversation is so
generally corrupted, that many have had cause to wish they had not been made
sociable creatures. A man secluded from company can have but the Devil and
himself to temt him; but he that converses, has almost as many snares as he has
companions. Men barter vices, and as if each had not enough of his own growth,
transplant out of his neighbors soil, and that which was intended to cultivate
and civilize the world, has turned it into a wild desert and wilderness.

4. This face of things, I confess, looks not very promising to one who is to
solicit a reformation. But what ever the hopes are, I am sure the needs are
great enough to justify the attemt. For as the Disease is Epidemic, so it is
mortal also, utterly inconsistent with that pure Religion, which leads to life.
We may take St. James's word for it, If any man seem to be religious, and
bridleth not his tongue, that man's religion is vain, James 1.26. God knows we
have not much Religion among us: it is great pity we should frustrate the little
we have, render that utterly insignificant, which at the best amounts to so
little. Let therefore the difficulty and necessity of the task, prevail with us
to take time before us, not to defer this so necessary a work till the Night
come; or imagine that the Tongue will be able to expiate its whole age of guilt
by a feeble Lord have mercy on me at the last. Tho indeed if that were
supposable, 'twere but a broken reed to trust to, none knowing whether he shall
have time or grace for that. He may be surpised with an Oath, a Blasphemy, a
Detraction in his mouth: many have bin so. It Is sure there must be a dying
moment; and how can any man secure himself, it shall not be the same with that
in which he utters those, and his expiring breath be so employed? Sure they
cannot think that those incantations (tho hellish enough) can make them
shot-free, render them invulnerable to deaths darts; and if they have not that,
or some other as ridiculous reserves, it is strange what should make them run
such a mad adventure.

5. But I expect it should be objected, that this little despicable Tract is
not proportionable to the encounter to which it is brought, that besides that
unskilful managing of those points it does touch, it wholly omits many proper
to the subject, there being faults of the Tongue which it passes in silence. I
confess there is color enough for this objection, but I believe if it were put
to votes, more would resolve I had said too much, rather then too little.
Should I have enlarged to the utmost compass of this Theme, I should have made
the volume of so affrighting a bulk, that few would have attemted it; and by
saying much, I should have said nothing at all to those who most need it. Men's
stomacs are generally so queasie in these cases, that it is not safe to
over-load them. Let them try how they can digest this; if they can so as to
turn it into kindly nurishment, they will be able to supply themselves with the
remainder. For I think I may with some confidence affirm, that he that can
confine his Tongue within the limits here prescribed, may without much
difficulty restrain its other excursions. All I shall beg of the Reader, is but
to come with sincere intentions, and then perhaps these few Stones and Sling
used in the name, and with invocation of the Lord of hosts, may countervail the
massive armor of the uncircumcised Philistin. And may that God, who loves to
magnify his power in weakness, give it the like success.

THE CONTENTS.
Sect. 1. Of the Use of Speech. p. 1. Sect. 2. Of the manifold abuse of Speech.
7 Sect. 3. Of Atheistical Discourse. 12 Sect. 4. Of Detraction, 39 Sect. 5. Of
Lying Defamation. 49 Sect. 6. Of Uncharitable Truth. 62 Sect. 7. Of Scoffing
and Derision. 133 Sect. 8. Of Flattery. 134 Sect. 9. Of Boasting. 155 Sect. 10.
Of Querulousness. 174 Sect. 11. Of Positiveness. 188 Sect. 12. Of Obscene Talk.
204 The Close. 206
OF THE Government of the Tongue.
SECT. I. Of the use of Speech.
1. MAN, at his first creation, was substituted by God as his Vicegerent, to
receive the homage, and enjoy the services of all inferior Beings: nay farther,
was endowed with Excellencies fit to maintain the port of so vast an Empire.
Yet those very excellencies, as they qualified him for dominion, so they
unfitted him for a satisfaction or acquiescence in those his Vassals: the
dignity of his nature set him above the society or converse of mere Animals: so
that in all the pomp of his Roialty, amidst all the throng and variety of
creatures, he still remained solitary. But God, who knew what an appetite of
society he had implanted in him, judged this no agrecable state for him; It is
not meet that man should be alone, Genesis 2.18. And as in the universal frame of
Nature, he ingraffed such an abhorrence of vacuity, that all Creatures do
rather submit to a preternatural motion then admit it; so, in this emty, this
destitute condition of man, he relieved him by a miraculous expedient, divided
him that he might unite him, and made one part of him an associate for the
other.

2. NEITHER did God take this care to provide him a companion, merely for the
entercourses of Sense: had that bin the sole aim, there needed no new
productions, there were sensitive Creatures enough: the design was to entertain
his nobler principle, his Reason, with a more equal converse, assign him an
intimate, whose intellect as much corresponded with his, as did the outward
form, whose heart, according to Solomon's resemblance, answered his, As in water
face answers face, Prove. 27.19. with whom he might communicate minds, traffic
and enterchange all the notions and sentiments of a reasonable soul.

3. BUT tho there were this sympathy in their sublimer part, which disposed
them to the most intimate union; yet there was a cloud of flesh in the way,
which intercepted their mutual view, nay permitted no intelligence between
them, other then by the mediation of some Organ equally commensurate to soul
and body. And to this purpose the infinite wisdom of God ordained Speech;
which, as it is a sound resulting from the modulation of the Air, has most
affinity to the spirit, but as it is uttered by the Tongue, has immediate
cognation with the body, and so is the fittest instrument to manage a commerce
between the rational yet invisible powers of human souls clothed in flesh.

4. AND as we have reason to admire the excellency of this contrivance, so have
we to applaud the extensiveness of the benefit. From this it is we derive all
the advantages of society: without this men of the nearest neighborhood would
have signified no more to each other, then our Antipodes now do to us. All our
Arts and Sciences for the accommodation of this life, had remained only a rude
Chaos in their first matter, had not speech by a mutual comparing of notions
ranged them into order. By this it is we can give one another notice of our
wants, and solicit relief; by this we interchangably communicate advises,
reproofs, consolations, all the necessary aids of human imbecility. This is
that which possesses us of the most valuable blessing of human Life, I mean
Friendship, which could no more have bin contracted amongst dumb men, then it
can between Pictures and Statues. Nay farther, to this we owe in a great degree
the interests even of our spiritual being, all the oral, yea and written
revelations too of Gods will: for had there bin no language there had bin no
writing. And tho we must not pronounce how far God might have evidenced himself
to mankind by immediate inspiration of every individual, yet we may safely rest
in the Apostles inference, Romans 10.14. How shall they believe in him whom they
have not heard, and how shall they hear without a preacher?

5. FROM all these excellent uses of it in respect of man, we may collect
another in relation to God, that is, the praising and manifying his goodness,
as for all other effects of his Bounty, so particularly that he has given us
language, and all the consequent advantages of it. This is the just inference
of the son of Syrach, Ecclus. 51.22. The Lord has given me a tongue, and I
will praise them therewith. This is the sacrifice which God calls for so often
by the Prophets, the calves of our lips, which answers to all the oblations out
of the herd, and which the Apostle makes equivalent to those of the floor and
wine press also, Heb. 13.15. The fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name.
To this we frequently find the Psalmist exciting both himself and others, Awake
up my glory, I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the people, and I will
sing unto thee among the nations, Psalm. 57.9, 10. And O p raise the Lord with
me, and let us magnify his name together, Psalm. 34.3. And indeed whoever
observes that excellent magazine of Devotion, the Book of Psalms, shall find
that the Lands make up a very great part of it.

6. BY what has bin said, we may define what are the grand uses of speech,
viz. the glorifying of God, and the benefiting of men. And this helps us to an
infallible test by which to try our words. For since every thing is so far
approvable as it answers the end of its being, what part soever of our
discourses agrees not with the primitive ends of speech, will not hold weight
in the balance of the sanctuary. It will therefore nearly concern us to enter
upon this scrutiny, to bring our words to this touchstone: for tho in our
depraved estimate the Eloquence of Language is more regarded then the
innocence, tho we think our words vanish with the breath that utters them, yet
they become records in Gods Court, are laid up in his Archives as witnesses
either for, or against us: for he who is truth it self has told us, that by
thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned,
Matthew. 12.37.

SECT. II. Of the manifold abuse of Speech.
1. AND now since the original designs of speaking are so noble, so
advantageous, one would be apt to conclude no rational creature would be temted
to pervert them, since it is sure he can substitute none for them, that can
equally conduce either to his honor or interest.

2. YET Experience (that great baffler of speculation) assures us the thing is
too possible, and brings in all Ages matter of fact to confute our
suppositions. So liable alas is speech to be depraved, that the Scripture
describes it as the source of all our other depravation. Original sin came
first out of the mouth by speaking, before it entered in by eating. The first
use we find Eve to have made of her Language, was to enter parley with the
temter, and from that to become a temter to her husband. And immediately upon
the fall, guilty Adam frames his tongue to a frivolous excuse which was much
less able to cover his sin, then the fig leaves were his nakedness. And as in
the infancy of the first world, the tongue had licked up the venem of the old
Serpent, so neither could the Deluge wash it off in the second. No sooner was
that small colony (wherewith the depopulated Earth was to be replanted) come
forth of the Ark, but we meet with Cham a delator to his own father, inviting
his brethren to that execrable spectacle of their Parents nakedness.

3. NOR did this only run in the blood of that accursed person; the holy seed
was not totally free from its infection, even the Patriarchs themselves were
not exemt. Abraham use a repeted collusion in the case of his Wife, and exposed
his own Integrity to preserve her Chastity. Isaac the Heir of his blessing, was
Son of his Infirmity also, and acted over the same scene upon Rebecca's
account. Jacob obtained his Fathers Blessing by a flat lie. Simeon and Levi
spoke not only falsely, but insidiously, nay hypocritically, abusing at once
their Proselytes, and their Religion, for the effecting their cruel designs
upon the Sichemites. Moses, tho a man of an unparellel'd meekness, yet spoke
unadvisedly with his lips, Psalm. 106.33. David uttered a bloody Vow against
Nabal, spoke words smoother then oil to Vriah, when he had don him one injury,
and designed him another. 'Twere endless to reckon up those several instances
the old Testament gives us of these lapses of the Tongue: neither want there
diverse in the new; tho there is one of so much horror, as supersedes the naming
more, I mean that of St. Peter in his reiterated abjuring his Lord, a crime
which (abstracted from the intention) seems worse then that of Judas: that
traitor owned his relation, cried Master, Master, even when he betrayed him, so
that had he bin mesured only by his tongue, he might have past for the better
Disciple.

4. THESE are sad instances, not recorded to patronize the sin, but to excite
our caution. It was a Politic inference of the Elders of Israel in the case of
Jehu, Behold two Kings stood not before him, how then shall we stand? 2 Kings
10. And we may well apply it to this; if persons of so circumspect a Piety,
have bin thus overtaken, what Security can there be for our wretchless
oscitancy? If those who kept their mouths as it were with a bridle, Psalm. 39.1.
could not always preserve them innocent, to what guilts may not our
unrestrained licentious Tongues hurry us? Those which, as the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm 73.9. go through the world, are in that unbounded range very
likely to meet with him who walks the same round, Job 2.2. and by him be tuned
and set to his key, be scrued and wrested from their proper use, and made
subservient to his vilest designs.

5. AND would God this were only a probable supposition! but alas, experience
supplants the use of conjecture in the point: we do not only presume it may be
so, but actually find it is so. For amidst the universal depravation of our
Faculties, there is none more notorious then that of Speech. Whither shall we
turn us to find it in its pristine integrity? Amidst that infinity of words in
which we exhaust our breath, how few are there which do at all correspond with
the original designation of speech; nay, which do not flatly contradict it? To
what unholy, uncharitable purposes is that useful faculty perverted? That which
was meant to serve as the perfume of the Tabernacle, to send up the Incenses of
Praises and Prayers, now exhales in impious vapors, to eclipse if it were
possible the Father of Light, That which should be the storehouse of relief
and refreshment to our brethren, is become a magazine of all offensive weapons
against them, spears, and arrows, and sharp swords, as the Psalmist often
phrases it. We do not only fall by the slipperiness of our Tongues, but we
deliberately dicipline and train them to mischief. We bend our tongues as our
bows for lies, as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 9.3. And in a word, what God
affirmed in the old World in relation to thoughts, is too appliable to our
words, they are evil, and that continually, Genesis 6.5. and that which was
intended for the instrument, the aid of human society, is become the disturber,
the pest of it.

6. I shall not attemt a particular discussion of all the vices of the Tongue:
it does indeed pass all Geography to draw an exact Map of that World of
iniquity, as St. James calls it. I shall only draw the greater lines, and
distribute it into its principal and more eminent parts, which are
distinguishable as they relate to God, our Neighbor, and our selves; in each of
which l shall rather make an Essay by way of instance, then attemt an exact
enumeration or survey.

SECT. III. Of Atheistical Discourse.
1. I Begin with those which relate to God; this poor despicable member the
Tongue, being of such a gigantic insolence, tho not size, as even to make war
with Heaven. It Is true, every disordered speech does remotely so, as it is a
violation of Gods Law; but I now speak only of those which as it were attaque
his person, and immediately fly in the face of Omnipotency. In the higest rank
of these we may well place all Atheistical Discourse, which is that bold sort
of rebellion, which strikes not only at his authority, but himself. Other
blasphemies level some at one Attribute, some another; but this by a more
compendious impiety, shoots at his very being, and as if it scorned those piece
meal guilts, sets up a single monster big enough to devour them all: for all
inferior profaneness is as much out-dared by Atheism, as is Religion it self.

2. TIME was, when the inveighing against this, would have bin thought a very
impertinent subject in a Christian nation, and men would have replied upon me
as the Spartan Lady did, when she was asked what was the punishment for
Adulteresses, There are no such things here. Nay even amongst the most
barbarous people, it could have concerned but some few single persons; no
numbers, much less societies of men, having ever excluded the belief of a
Diety. And perhaps it may at this day concern them as little as ever; for
amidst the various Deities and Worships of those remoter Nations, we have yet
no account of any that renounce all. It Is only our light has so blinded us: so
that God may upbraid us as he did Israel, Has a nation changed their Gods
which yet are no gods? but my people have changed their glory for that which
does not profit, Jer. 2.11. This madness is now the enclosure, the peculiarity
of those who by their names and institutions should be Christians: as if that
natural Aphorism, that when things are at a height they must fall again, had
place here also, and our being of the most excellent, most elevated Religion,
were but the preparative to our being of none.

3. IT IS indeed deplorable to see, how the Professors of no God begin to vie
numbers with all the differing persuasions in Religion, so that Atheism seems
to be the gulf that finally swallows up all our sects. It has struck on a
sudden into such a reputation, that it scorns any longer to sculk, but owns it
self more publicly then most men dare do the contrary. It Is set down in the
seat of the scorner, and since it cannot argue, resolves to laugh all Piety out
of countenance; and having seized the mint, nothing shall pass for wit that
has not its stamp, and with it there is no metal of so base an alloy, but
shall go current. Every the dullest creature that can but stoutly disclaim his
Maker, has by it sufficiently secured its title to Ingenuity; and such mesures
being once established, no wonder at its sholes of proselytes, when it gives on
the one hand license to all sensual inordinaces, permits them to be as much
beasts as they will, or can; and yet tells them on the other, that they are the
more men for it. Sure it is not strange that a hook thus doubly baited should
catch many. Either of those allurements single, we see has force enough. The
charms of sensuality are so fascinating, that even those who believe another
world, and the severe revenges that will there attend their Luxuries, yet choose
to take them in present with all the dismal reversions. And then sure it cannot
but be very good news to such a one to be told, that that after-reckoning is
but a false alarm; and his great willingness to have it true, will easily
incline him to believe it is so. And doubtless were Atheism traced up to its
first causes, this would be found the most operative; it is so convenient for a
man that will have no God to control or restrain him, to have none to punish
him neither; that that utility passes into argument, and he will rather put a
cheat upon his understanding, by concluding there is no future account, then
leave such a sting in his plesures, as the remembrance of it must needs prove.
This seems to be the original and first rise of this impiety, it being
impossible for any man that sees the whole, nay but the smallest part of the
Universe, to doubt of a first and supreme Being, until from the consciousness
of his provocations, it becomes his interest there should be none.

4. THIS is indeed, considering the depravation of the world, a pretty fast
tenure for Atheism to hold by; yet it has of late twisted its cord, and got
that other string to its bow we before mentioned. Its bold monopolizing of wit
and reason compels, as the other invited men. This we may indeed call the
Devils press, by which he has filled up his Troops: men are afraid for being
reproached for silly and irrational, in giving themselves up to a blind belief
of what they do not see. And this bugbear frights them from their religion;
resolving they will be no fools for Christ's sake, 1 Cor. 4.13. I dare appeal to
the breasts of many in this age, whether this have not bin one of the most
prevalent temtations with them to espouse the tenet: and tho perhaps they at
first took it up, only in their own defense, for fear of being thought fools,
yet that fear soon converts into ambition of being thought Wits. They do not
satisfy themselves with deserting their Religion, unless they revile it also;
remembering how themselves were laughed out of it, they essay to do the like by
others. Yea so zealous propugners are they of their negative Creed, that they
are importunately diligent to instruct men in it, and in all the little
sophistries and colors for defending it: so that he that would mesure the
Opinions by their industry, and the remissness of Believers, would certainly
think that the great interest of Eternity lay wholly on their side. Yet I take
not this for any argument of the confidence of this persuasion, but the
contrary: for we know they are not the secure, but the desperate undertakings,
wherein men are most desirous of partners, and there is somewhat of horror in an
uncouth way, which makes men unwilling to travel it alone.

5. THE truth is, tho these men speak big, and prescribe as positively to their
pupils, as if they had some counter revelation to confute those of Moses and
Christ; yet were their secret thoughts laid open, there would scarce be found
the like assurance there. I will not say to what reprobate sense some
particular persons may have provoked God to deliver them, but in the
generality, I believe one may affirm, that there is seldom an infidelity so
sanguine as to exclude all fears. Their most bold Thesis, That there is no God,
no Judgment, no Hell, is often met with an inward tremulous Hypothesis, What if
there be? I dare in this remit me to themselves, and challenge (not their
consciences, who profess to have none, but) their natural Ingenuity to say,
whether they have not sometimes such damps and shiverings within them. If they
shall say, that these are but the relics of prepossession and education,
which their reason soon dissipates, Let me then ask them farther, whether they
would not give a considerable sum to be infallibly ascertained there were no
such thing: now no sensible man would give a farthing to be secured from a
thing which his reason tells him is impossible; therefore if they would give
any thing (as I dare say they themselves cannot deny that they would) it is a
tacit demonstration, that they are not so sure as they pretend to be.

6. I might here join issue upon the whole, and press them with the
unreasonableness, the disingenuousness of embracing a Profession to which their
own hearts have an inward reluctance, nay the imprudence of governing their
lives by that position, which for ought they know may be (nay they actually
fear is) false, and if it be, must inevitably immerse them in endless ruin. But
I must remember my design limits me only to the faults of the Tongue, and
therefore I must not follow this chase beyond those bounds. I shall only extend
it to my proper subject, that of Atheistical talk, wherein they make as mad an
adventure as in any other of their enormous practices, nay perhaps in some
respects a worse.

7. IN the first place it is to be considered, that if there be a God, he, as
well as men, may be provoked by our words as well as deeds. Secondly, it is
possible he may be more. Our ill deeds may be don upon a vehement impulse of
temtation; some profit or pleasures may transport and hurry us; and they may at
least have this alleviation, that we did them to please or advantage our
selves, not to spite God. But Atheistical words cannot be so palliated: they
are arrows directly shot against Heaven, and can come out of no quiver but
malice: for it is certain there never was man that said, There was no God, but
he wished it first. We know what an enhancement our injuries to each other
receive from their being malicious: and sure they will do so much more to God,
whose principal demand from us is, that we give him our heart. But thirdly,
This implies a malice of the highest sort. Human spite is usually confined
within some bounds, aims sometimes at the goods, sometimes at the fame, at most
but at the life of our Neighbor: but here is an accumulation of all those,
backed with the most prodigious insolence. It Is God only that has power of
annihilation, and we (vile Worms) seek here to steal that incommunicable right,
and retort it upon Himself, and by an anticreative power, would unmake Him who
has made us. Nay lastly, by this we have not only the utmost guilt of single
rebels, but we become ringleaders also, draw in others to that accursed
association: for it is only this liberty of Discourse that has propagated
Atheism. The Devil might perhaps by inward suggestions have drawn in here and
there a single Proselyte; but he could never have had such numbers, had he not
used some as decoies to ensnare others.

8. AND now let the brisk Atheist a little consider, what these aggravations
will amount to. 'Twas good counsel was given to the Athenians, to be very sure
Philip was dead, before they expressed their joy at his death, lest they might
find him alive to revenge that hasty triumph. And the like I may give to these
men, Let them be very sure there is no God, before they presume thus to defy
him, lest they find him at last assert his being in their destruction.
Certainly nothing less then a demonstration can justify the reasonableness of
such a daring. And when they can produce that, they have so far outgon all the
comprehensions of mankind, they may well challenge the liberty of their Tongue,
and say, They are their own, who is Lord over them, Psalm 12.4.

6. BUT 'till this be don, 'twere well they would soberly balance the hazards
of this liberty with the gains of it. The hazards are of the most dreadful
kind, the gains of the slightest: the most is but a vain applause of wit, for
an impious jest, or of reason for a deep considerer: and yet even for that they
must incroach on the Devils right too, who is commonly the promter, and
therefore if there be any credit in it may justly challenge it. Indeed it is to
be feared he will at last prove the master wit, when as for those little loans
he makes them, he gets their souls in morgage. Would God they would consider
betimes, what a woeful raillery that will be, which for ought they know may end
in gnashing of teeth.

10. THE next impiety of the Tongue, is Swearing, that foolish sin, which
plays the Platonic to damnation, and courts it purely for it self; without any
of the appendant allurements which other sins have: a vice, which for its
guilt, may justify the sharpest; and for its customariness, the frequentest
invectives which can be made against it. But it has bin assaulted so often by
better Pens, and has showed it self so much proof against all Homily, that it
is as needless as di^couraging a task for me to attemt it. It Is indeed a thing
taken up so perfectly without all sense, that it is the less wonder to find it
maintain its self upon the same Principle it is founded, and continue in the
same defiance to Reason wherein it began.

11. ALL therefore that I shall say concerning it, is to express my wonder, how
it has made a shift to twist it self with the former sin of Atheism, by which,
according to all rules of reasoning it seems to be superseded: and yet we see
none own God more in their oaths, then those that disavow him in their other
discourse. Nay, such men swear not only to swell their Language, and make it
sound more full and blustering, but even when they most desire to be believed.
What an absurdity of wickedness is this? Is there a God to swear by, and is
there none to believe in, none to pray to? We call it frenzy to see a man fight
with a shadow: but sure it is more so, to invoke it. Why then do these men of
reason make such solemn appeals (for such every Oath is) to a mere Chimera and
Phantasm? It would make one think they had some inward belief of a Deity, which
they upon surprizal thus blurt out: if it argue not this, it does something
worse, and becomes an evidence how much the appearance of a sin recommends it
to them, that they thus catch at it, without examining how it will consist with
another they like better. These are indeed wholesale chapmen to Satan, that do
not truck and barter one crime for another, but take the whole herd: and tho by
reason of their disagreeing kinds they are apt to gore and worry each other,
yet he still keeps up his old policy, and will not let one Devil cast out
another. A league shall be made between the most discordant sins, and there
shall be God, or there shall be none, according as opportunity serves to
provoke him: so assuming to himself a power which even Omnipotence disclaims,
the reconciling contradictions. And he succeeds it in as far as his concerns
reaches: for tho he cannot solve the repugnancies in reason, yet as long as he
can unite the sins in men's practice, he has his design; nay, has at once the
gain and the sport of fooling these great pretenders to ratiocination.

12. A third sort of impious discourse there is, which yet is bottomed on the
most sacred, I mean those profane paraphrases that are usually made upon the
Holy Text, many making it the subject of their cavils, and others of their
mirth. Some do it out of the former Atheistical principle, and I cannot but
confess they act consonantly to themselves in it, for it is but a needful
artifice for men to disparage those testimonies, which they fear may be brought
against them. But there are others who not only profess a God, but also own the
sacred Scripture for his word, and yet use it as coursly as the others. And
these I confess, are riddles of profaneness, that hang, as some have pictured
Solomon between Heaven and Hell, borrow the Christian Faith, and the Atheists
drollery upon it: and it is hard to say in which they are more in earnest. It is
indeed scandalous to see, to what despicable uses those holy Oracles are put:
such as should a Heathen observe, he would little suspect them to be owned by
us as the rule of our Religion, and could never think they were ever meant for
any thing beyond a whet-stone for wit. One tries his Logic upon them, and
objects to the sense; another his Rhetoric, and quarrels at the phrase; a third
his contrivance, and thinks he could have woven the parts with a better
contexture: never considering, that unless they could confute the Divinity of
their original, all these accusations are nothing else but direct blasphemy,
the making God such a one as themselves, Psalm. 50.21. and charging him with
those defects which are indeed their own. They want learning or industry to
sound the depth of those sacred tresures, and therefore they decry the
Scripture as mean and poor; and to justify their own wisdom, dispute Gods. This
is as if the mole should complain the Sun is dark, because he dwells under
ground, and sees not his splendour. Men are indeed in all instances apt to speak
ill of all things they understand not, but in none more then this. Their
ignorance of local Customs, Idioms of Language, and several other
circumstances, renders them incompetent Judges (as has bin excellently evinced
by a late Author.) Twill therefore befit them, either to qualify themselves
better, or to spare their Criticisms. But upon the whole, I think I may
challenge any ingenious man, to produce any Writing of that antiquity, whose
phrase and genious is so accomodated to all successions of Ages. Styles and
ways of address we know grow obsolete, and are almost antiquated as garments:
and yet after so long a tract of time, the Scripture must (by considering men)
be confessed to speak not only properly, but often politely and elegantly to the
present age: a great argument that it is the dictate of him that is, The same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.7.

13. BUT besides these more solemn Traducers, there are a lighter ludicrous
sort of Profaners, who use the Scripture as they do odd ends of Plays, to
furnish out their Jests; clothe all their little impertinent conceits in its
Language, and debase it by the mixture of such miserable trifles, as themselves
would be ashamed of, were they not heightened and inspirited by that
profaneness. A Bible phrase serves them in discourse as the haut-goust does in
diet, to give a relish to the most insipid stuff. And were it not for this
Magazine, a great many men's raillery would want supplies: for there are diverse
who make a great noise of wit, that would be very mute if this one Topic were
barred them. And indeed it seems a tacit confession, that they have little of
their own, when they are fain thus to commit sacriledg to drive on the Trade.
But sure it is a pitiful pretense to Ingenuity that can be thus kept up, there
being little need of any other faculty but memory to be able to cap Texts. I am
sure such repetitions out of other books would be thought pedantic and silly.
How ridiculous would a man be, that should always enter lard his discourse
with fragments of Horace, or Virgil, or the Aphorisms of Pythagoras, or Seneca?
Now it is too evident, that it is not from any speculative esteem of sacred
Writ, that it is so often quoted: and why should it then be thought a specimen
of wit to do it there, when it is folly in other instances? The truth is, it is
so much the reserve of those who can give no better testimony of their parts,
that methinks upon that very score it should be given over by those that can.
And sure were it possible for any thing that is so bad to grow unfashionable,
the world has had enough of this to be cloied with it: but how fond soever men
are of this divertisement, 'twill finally prove that mirth Solomon speaks of,
which ends in heaviness, Prove. 14.13. for certainly whether we estimate it
according to human or divine mesures, it must be a high provocation of God.

14. LET any of us but put the case in our own persons: suppose we had written
to friend, to advertise him of things of the greatest importance to himself,
had given him ample and exact instructions, backed them with earnest
exhortations and conjurings not to neglect his own concern; and lastly,
enforced all with the most moving expressions of kindness and tenderness to
him: suppose, I say, that after all this, the next news we should hear of that
letter, were to have it put in doggrel rhyme, to be made sport for the rabble,
or at the best have the most eminent phrases of it picked out and made a common
byword: I would fain know how any of us would resent such a mixture of
ingratitude and contumely. I think I need make no minute application. The whole
design of the Bible does sufficiently answer, nay outgo the first part of the
parallel, and God knows our vile usage of it does too much (I fear too
literally) adapt the latter. And if we think the affront to base for one of us,
can we believe God will take it in good part? That were to make him not only
more stupid then any man, but as much so as the heathen Idols, that have eyes
and see not, Pselm 115.5. And it is sure, the highest madness in the world, for
any man that believes that there is a God, to imagine he will finally sit down
by such usage.

15. BUT if we weigh it in the scale of religion; the crime will yet appear
more heinous. Mere natural Piety has taught men to receive the Responses of
their Gods with all possible veneration. What applications had the Delphic
Oracle from all parts, and from all ranks of men? What confidence had they in
its prediction, and what obedience did they pay to its advice? If we look next
into the Mosaical Economy, we shall see with what dreadful Solemnities that
Law was promulged, what an awful reverence was paid to the Mount whence it
issued, how it was fenced from any rude intrusions either of Men or Beasts: and
after it was written in Tables, all the whole equipage of the Tabernacle, was
designed only for its more decent Repository, the Ark it self receiving its
value only from what it had in custody. Yea such a hallowing influence had it,
as transfused a relative sanctity even to the meanest Utensils, none of which
were after to be put to common uses: the very Perfume was so peculiar and
sacred, that it was a capital crime to imitate the composition. Afterward,
when more of the Divine Revelations were commieted to Writing, the Jews were
such scrupulous reverers of it, that 'twas the business of the Masorites, to
number not only the Sections and Lines, but even the words and letters of the
Old Testament, that by that exact calculation they might the better secure it
from any surreptitious practices.

19. AND sure the New Testament is not of less concern then the Old: nay the
Apostle asserts it to be of far greater, and which we shall be more accountable
for, For if the word spoken by Angels were steadfast, and every transgression
and disobedience received a just recompense, how shall we escape if we neglect
so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken to us by the Lord,
and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him? Heb. 2.23. And it is in
another place the inference of the same Apostle, from the excellency of the
Gospel above the Law, that we should serve God acceptably with reverence and
godly fear, Heb. 12.28. And certainly it is but an ill essay of that reverence
and godly fear, to use that very Gospel so irreverently and ungodly as men now
do. If we pass from the Apostolic to the next succeeding ages of the Church, we
find the Primitive Christians looked on their Bibles as their most important
tresure. Such was the outward respects they paid to them, (of which the
standing up at the reading of the Gospel, still in use among us, is a faint
memorial) that the Heathen Persecutors made it one part of their examination of
the Christians brought to their Tribunals, What those Books were which they
adored while they read them? Such was their intimate esteem, that they exposed
all things else to the rapine of their Enemies, so they might secure those
Volumes. Nor was this only a heroic piece of zeal in some, but indispensably
required of all: insomuch, that when in the heat of Persecution, they were
commanded to deliver up their Bibles to be burnt, the Church gave no indulgence
for that necessity of the Times, but exhorted men rather to deliver up their
lives: and those whose courage failed them in the encounter, were not only
branded by the infamous name of Traditors, but separated from the communion of
the Faithful, and not readmitted till after many years of the severest penance.

17. I have given this brief narration, with a desire, that the Reader will
compare the practice of former Times with those of the present, and see what he
can find either among Heathens, Jews, or Christians, that can at all patronize
our profaneness. There was no respect thought too much for the false Oracles of
a falser God: and yet we think no contemts too great for those of the true. The
Moral Law was so sacred to the Jews, that no parts of its remotest retinue,
those ceremonial attendants, were to be looked on as common: and we who are
equally obliged by that Law, laugh at that by which we must one day be judged.
The Ritual, the Preceptive, the Prophetic, and all other parts of sacred Writ,
were most sedulously, most religiously guarded by them: and we look upon them
as a Winter nights tale, from which to fetch matter of sport and merriment.
Lastly, the first Christians paid a veneration to, nay sacrificed their Lives
to rescue their Bibles from the unworthy usage of the Heathens, and we our
selves expose them to worse: they would but have burnt them; we scorn and
vilify them, and outvy even the Persecutors malice with our contemt. These are
miserable Antithesis's; yet this God knows is the case with too many. I wonder
what new state of Felicity hereafter these men have fancied to themselves: for
sure they cannot think these retrograde steps can ever bring them so much as to
the Heathens Elyzium, much less the Christians Heaven.

18. IT will therefore concern those who do not quite renounce their claim to
that Heaven, to consider soberly, how inconsistent their practice is with those
hopes. A man may have a great Estate conveid to him; but if he will madly burn,
or childishly make paper Kites of his Deeds, he forfeits his Title with his
Evidence: and those certainly that deal so with the Conveiances of their
Eternal Inheritance. will not speed better. If they will thus dally and play
with them, God will be as little in earnest in the performance, as they are in
the reception of the promises; nay he will take his turn of mocking too, and
when their scene of mirth is over, his will begin. A dreadful menace of this we
have, Prove. 1.24. which deserves to be set down at large, Because I have
called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand* and no man regarded: But
ye have set at noughe all my counsel, and would none of my reproof, I also will
laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes. When your fear
comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind: when distress
and anguish comes upon you, then shall they call upon me, but I will not
answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. Would God I could
as well transcribe this Text into men's hearts, and there would need no more to
secure the whole Canon of Scripture from their profanation. Could men but look
a little before them, and apprehend how in the days of their distress and
agony, they will gasp for those comforts which they now turn into ridicule;
they would not thus madly defeat themselves, cut off their best and only
reserve, and with a pitiful contemt cast away those Cordials, which will then
be the only support of their fainting spirits. As for those who deride
Scripture upon Atheistical grounds, all I shall say, is, to refer to what I
have said in the beginning of this Section; they had need be very well assured
that foundation be not sandy: for if it be, this reproching Gods Word will be a
considerable addition to the guilt of all their other hostility, and how jolly
soever they seem at present, it may be when that question they are so willing
to take for granted, is by death drawing near a decision, some of their
confidence will retire, and leave them in an amazed expectation of somewhat,
which they are sure cannot be good for them, who have so ill provided for it.
Then perhaps their merry vein will fail them, and not their infidelity, but
their despair may keep them from invocating that Power they have so long
derided. It Is certain it has so happened with some: for as Practical, so
Speculative wickedness, has usually another aspect, when it stands in the
shadow of death, then in the dazzling beams of health and vigor. It would
therefore be wisdom beforehand to draw it out of this deceitful light, and by
sober serious thoughts place it as near as may be in those circumstances in
which 'twill then appear: and then sure to hearts that are not wholly
petrified, 'twill seem safer to own a God early and upon choice, then late upon
compulsion.

19. HOWEVER, if they will not yield themselves Homagers, yet the mere
possibility of their being in the wrong, should methinks persuade them at least
to be civil adversaries. A generous man will not pursue even a falling enemy
with revilings and reproach, much less will a wise man do it to one who is in
any the lest probability of revenging it: it being a received Maxim, That there
is no greater folly, then for a man to let his tongue betray him to mischief.
Let it therefore in this case at least stand neuter, that if by their words
they be not justified, yet by their words they may not be condemned. They can
be no loosers by it: for at the utmost, it is but keeping in a little unsavory
breath, which (supposing no God to be offended with it) is yet nauseous to all
those men who believe there is one. To those indeed who have a zeal for their
Faith, there can be no Discourse so intolerable, so disobliging: it turns
conversation into skirmishing, and perpetual disputes. The Egyptians were so
zealous for their brutish Deities, that Moses presumed the Israelites
sacrificing of those Beasts they adored, must needs set them in an uproar,
Exodus 8.26. And sure, those who do acknowledge a Divine Power, cannot
contentedly sit by to hear him blasphemed. It Is true, there are some so cool,
that, they are of the same mind for God, that Gideons father was for Baal,
Judge. 6.31. Let him plead for himself, they will not appear in his defense: yet
even these have a secret consciousness that they ought to do so, and therefore
have some uneasiness in being put to the Test: so that it cannot be a pleasant
entertainment even for them. And therefore those who have no fear of God to
restrain them, should methinks, unless they be perfectly of the temper of the
unjust Judge, Luke 17.1. in respect of men, abstain from all sorts of impious
discourse; and at least be civil, tho they will not be pious.

SECT. IV. Of Detraction.
WE have seen in the last Section, the insolence of the Tongue toward God; and
sure we cannot expect it should pay more reverence to men. If there be those
that dare stretch their mouths against Heaven, Psalm 7.39. we are not to wonder
if there be more that will shoot their arrows, even bitter words, against the
best on Earth, Psalm 64.3. I shall not attempt to ransack the whole quiver, by
showing every particular sort of verbal injuries which relate to our neighbors,
but rather choose out some few which either for the extraordinariness of their
guilt, or the frequency of their practice are the most eminent. I begin with
Detraction, in which both those qualities concur: for as in some instances it is
one of the highest sins, so in the general it is certainly one of the most
common, and by being so becomes insensible. This vice (above all others) seems
to have maintained not only its Empire, but its reputation too. Men are not yet
convinced heartily that it is a sin: or if any, not of so deep a die, or so
wide an extent as indeed it is. They have, if not false, yet imperfect notions
of it, and by not knowing how far its Circle reaches, do often like young
Conjurers, step beyond the limits of their safety.

THIS I am the apter to believe, because I see some degree of this fault cleave
to those, who have eminently corrected all other exorbitancies of the Tongue.
Many who would startle at an Oath, whose stomachs as well as consciences recoil
at an obscenity, do yet slide glibly into a Detraction: which yet methinks,
persons otherwise of strict conversations should not do frequently and
habitually, had not their easy thoughts of the guilt smoothed the way to it.

IT may therefore be no unkind attemt, to try to dis-entangle from this snare
by displaying it; showing the whole contexture of the sin, how it is woven with
threads of different sizes, yet the least of them strong enough to nooz and
entrap us. And alas, if Satan fetter us, it is indifferent to him whether it be
by a cable or a hair. Nay, perhaps the smallest sins are his greatest
stratagems. The finer his line is spun, the less shadow it casts, and is less
apt to fright us from the hook: and tho there be much odds between a talent of
lead and a grain of sand, yet those grains may be accumulated till they
outweigh the talent. It was a good reply of Plato's, to one who murmured at
his reproving him for a small matter, Custom, says he, is no small matter. And
indeed, supposing any sin were so small as we are willing to fancy most, yet an
indulgent habit, even of that, would be certainly ruinous: that Indulgence
being perfectly opposite to the love of God, which better can consist with the
indeliberate commissions of many sins, then with an allowed persistance in any
one.

BUT in this matter of Detraction, I cannot yield that any is small, save only
comparatively with some other of the same kind which is greater: for absolutely
considered, there is even in the very lowest degrees of it, a flat
contradiction to the grand rule of Charity, the loving our Neighbor as our
selves. And surely, that which at once violates the sum of the whole second
Table of the Law, for so our Savior renders it, Luke 10.7. must be looked on
as no trifling inconsiderable guilt. To evidence this, I shall in the
Anatomizing this sin, apply this Rule to every part of it: first consider it in
gross, in its entire body, and after descend to its several limbs.

1. DETRACTION in the native importance of the word, signifies the withdrawing
or taking off from a thing: and as it is applied to the reputation, it denotes
the impairing or lessening a man in point of fame, rendering him less valued and
esteemed by others, which is the final aim of Detraction, tho pursued by
various means.

2. THIS is justly looked on as one of the most unkind designs one man can have
upon another, there being implanted in every man's nature a great tenderness of
Reputation: and to be careless of it, is looked on as a mark of a degenerous
mind. On which account Solon in his ^aws presumes, that he that will sell his
own fame, will also sell the public interest. It Is true, many have improved
this too far, blown up this native spark into such flames of Ambition, as has
set the World in a combustion; Such as Alexander, Caesar, and others, who
sacrificed Hecatombs to their Fame, fed it up to a prodigy upon a Canibal diet,
the flesh of men: yet even these Excesses serve to evince the universal consent
of mankind, that Reputation is a valuable and desirable thing.

3. NOR have we only the suffrage of man, but the attestation of God himself,
who frequently in Scripture gives testimony to it: A good name is better then
great riches, Prove. 22.1. And again, A good name is better then precious
ointment, Eccles. 7.1. And the more to recommend it, he proposes it as a reward
to Piety and Virtue, as he menaces the contrary to wickedness. The memory of
the just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot, Prove. 10.7.
And that we may not think this an invitation fitted only to the Jewish
Economy, the Apostle goes farther, and proposes the endeavor after it as a
duty, Whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things, Phil. 4.8.

4. AND accordingly good men have in their estimate ranked their names the next
degree to their Souls, preferred them before Goods or Life. Indeed it is that
which gives us an inferior sort of Immortality, and makes us even in this world
survive our selves. This part of us alone continues verdant in the grave, and
yields a perfume, when we are stench and rottenness: the consideration whereof
has so prevailed with the more generous Heathens, that they have cheerfully
quitted life in contemplation of it. Thus Epaminondas alacriously expired, in
confidence that he left behind him a perpetual memory of the Victories he had
achieved for his Country. Brutus so courted the fame of a Patriot, that he
brake through all the obstacles of gratitude and humanity to attemt it: he
cheerfully bare the defeat of his attemt, in contemplation of the glory of it.
'Twere endless to recount the stories of the Codri, Decii, and Curtii, with the
train of those noble Heroes, who in behalf of their Countries devoted them
selves to certain death.

5. BUT we need no Foreign Mediums to discover the value of a good name: let
every man weigh it but in his own Scales, retire to his Breast, and there
reflect on that impatience he has when his own Repute is invaded. To what
dangers, to what guilts does sometimes the mere fancy of a reproach hurry men?
It makes them really forfeit that Virtue from whence all true Reputation
springs; and, like Esops Dog, lose the substance by too greedy catching at the
shadow; an irrefragable proof how great a price they set upon their Fame.

6. AND then, since Reason sets it at so high a rate, and Passion at a higher,
we we may conclude the violating this interest, one of the greatest injuries in
Human commerce; such as is resented not only by the rash, but the sober; so
that we must pick out only blocks and stones, the stupid and insensible part of
mankind, if we think we can inflict this wound without an afflictive smart. And
tho the power of Christianity does in some so moderate this resentment, that
none of these blows shall recoil, no degree of revenge be attemted; yet that
does not at all justify or excuse the inflicter. It may indeed be a useful
trial of the patience and meekness of the defamed, yet the defamer has not the
less either of crime or danger: not of crime, for that is rather enhanced then
abated by the goodness of the person injured; nor of danger, since God is the
more immediate avenger of those who attemt not to be their own. But if the
injury meet not with this meekness (as in this vindictive Age it is manifold
odds it will not) it then acquires another accumulative guilt, stands
answerable not only for its own positive ill, but for all the accidental which
it causes in the sufferer, who by this means is robbed not only of his repute,
but his innocence also, provoked to those unchristian returns, which draw God
also into the enmity, and set him at once at war with Heaven and Earth. And tho
as to this immediate judgment, he must bear his iniquity, answer for his
impatience: yet as in all civil Insurrections, the ringleader is looked on with
a peculiar severity, so doubtless in this case, the first provoker has by his
seniority and primogeniture a double portion of the guilt, and may consequently
expect of the punishment, according to the doom of our Savior, Woe be to that
man by whom the offense comes, Matthew. 28.7.

8. INDEED there is such a train of mischiefs usually follow this sin, that
it is scarce possible to make a full estimate of its malignity. It Is one of the
grand Incendiaries which disturbs the peace of the world, and has a great share
in most of its quarrels. For could we examine all the feuds which harrass
Persons, Families, nay sometimes Nations too, we should find the greater part
take their rise from injurious reprochful words, and that for one which is
commenced upon the intuition of any real considerable interest, there are many
which owe their being to this licentiousness of the Tongue.

9. IN regard therefore of its proper guilt, and all those remoter sins and
miseries which ensue it, it is every man's great concern to watch over himself.
Neither is it less in respect both of that universal aptness we have to this
sin, and its being so perpetually at hand; that for others we must attend
occasions and convenient seasons, but the opportunities of this are always
ready: I can do my neighbor this injury, when I can do him no other. Besides
the multitude of objects do proportionably multiply both the possibilities and
incitations; and the objects here are as numerous, as there are Persons in the
World I either know, or have heard of. For tho some sorts of Detractions seem
confined to those to whom we bear particular malice, yet there are other kinds
of it more raging, which fly indifferently at all. Lastly, this sin has the aid
almost of universal example, which is an advantage beyond all the others, there
being scarce any so irresistible insinuation as the practice of those with whom
we converse, and no subject of converse so common as the defaming our Neighbors.

10. SINCE then the path is so slippery, it had not need be dark too. Let us
then take in the best light we can, and attentively view this sin in its
several branches, that by a distinct discovery of the diverse acts and degrees
of it, we may the better be armed against them all.

SECT. V. Of Lying Defamation.
1. DETRACTION being (as we have already said) the lessning and impairing a man
in his repute, we may resolve, that what ever conduces to that end, is properly
a Detraction. I shall begin with that which is most eminent, the spreading of
Defamatory Reports. These may be of two kinds, either false, or true; which tho
they seem to be of very different complexions, yet may spring from the same
stock, and drive at the same design. Let us first consider of the false.

2. AND this admits of various circumstances. Sometimes a man invents a perfect
falsity of another: sometimes he that does not invent it, yet reports it, tho he
know it to be false: and a third sort there are, who having not certain
knowledge whether it be false or no, do yet divulge it as an absolute certainty,
or at least with such artificial Insinuations, as may biass the hearer on that
hand. The former of these is a crime of so high, so dis-ingenious a nature,
that tho many are vile enough to commit it, none are so impudent as to avow it.
Even in this age of insulting Vice, when almost all other wickedness appears
barefaced, this is fain to keep on the vizard. No man will own himself a false
accuser: for if modesty do not restrain him, yet his very malice will; since to
confess would be but to defeat his design. Indeed it is of all other sins the
most Diabolical, it being a conjunction of two of Satan's most essential
properties, Malice and Lying. We know it is his peculiar title to be the Accuser
of the brethren: and when we transcribe his copy, we also assume his nature,
entitle our selves to a descent from him, Ye are of your father the Devil, Joh.
8.44. We are by it rendered a sort of Iacubus brats, the inf^mous Progenies of
the Lying spirit. It is indeed a sin of so gross, so formidable a bulk, that
there needs no help of Optics to render it discernible, and therefore I need
not farther expatiate on it.

3. The next degree is not much short of it; what it wants is rather of
invention then malice: for he that will so adopt another lie, shows he would
willingly have bin its proper father. It does indeed differ no more then the
maker of adulterate wares, does from the vender of them: and certainly there
cannot be a more ignominious Trade, then the being Hucksters to such vile
Merchandise. Neither is the sin less then the baseness: we find the Lover of a
lie ranked in an equal form of guilt with the Maker, Rev. 21. And surely he
must be presumed to love it, that can descend to be the broker of it, help it
to pass current in the World.

4. THE third sort of Detractors look a little more demurely, and with the
Woman in the Proverbs. chap. 30. wipe their mouths, and say they have don no
wickedness. They do not certainly know the falsity of what they report, and
their ignorance must serve them as an Amulet against the guilt both of deceit
and malice: but I fear it will do neither. For first, perhaps they are
affectedly ignorant: they are so willing it should be true, that they have not
attemted to examine it. But secondly, it does not suffice that I do not know
the falsity; for to make me a true speaker, it is necessary I know the truth of
what I affirm. Nay, if the thing were never so true, yet if I knew it not to be
so, its truth will not secure me from being a liar: and therefore whoever
endeavors to have that received for a certainty, which himself knows not to be
so, offends against truth. The utmost that can consist with sincerity, is to
represent it to others as doubtful as it appears to him. Yet even that how
consonant soever to truth, is not to charity. Even doubtful accusations leave a
stain behind them, and often prove indelible injuries to the party accused: how
much more then do the more positive and confident aspersions we have hitherto
spoken of? Let me add only this concerning this latter sort, that they are
greater advancers of defamatory designs, then the very first contrivers. For
those upon a consciousness of their falsness, are obliged to proceed
cautiously, to pick out the credulous and least discerning persons, on whom to
impose their fictions, and dare not produce them in all companies for fear of
detection: but these in confidence that the untruth (if it be one) lies not at
their door, speak it without any restraint in all places, at all times; and
what the others are fain to whisper, they proclaim; like our new Engine, which
pretends to convey a whisper many miles off. So that as in the case of Stealing
it is proverbially said, that if there were no receivers there would be no
thieves; so in this of Slander, if there were fewer spreaders, there would be
fewer forgers of Libels: the manufacture would be discouraged, if it had not
these retailers to put off the wares.

5. Now to apply these practices to our rule of Duty, there will need no very
close inspection to discern the obliquity. The most superficial glance will
evidence these several degrees of Slanderers to do what they would not be
willing to suffer. Who among them can be content to be falsely aspersed? Nay,
so far are they from that, that let but the shadow of their own calumny reflect
on themselves, let any but truly tell them that they have falsely accused
others, they grow raving and impatient, like a dog at a Looking-glass, fiercely
combating that Image which himself creates: and how smoothly soever the
original lie slides from them, the Echo of it grates their ears. And indeed
it is observable, that those who make the greatest havoc of other men's
reputation, are the most nicely tender of their own; which sets this sin of
calumny in a most Diametrical opposition to the Evangelical Precept of loving
our neighbors as our selves.

6. THUS much is discernable even in the surface of the crime: but if we look
deeper, and examine the motives, we shall find the foundation well agrees to
the superstructure, they being usually one of these two, Malice or Interest.
And indeed the thing is so dis-ingenuous, so contrary to the dictates of
Humanity as well as Divinity, that I must in reverence to our common nature,
presume it must be some very forcible impellent, that can drive a man so far
from himself. The Devil here plays the Artist: and as the fatallest Poisons to
man are (they say) drawn from human bodies, so here he extracts the venem of
our Irascible and Concupiscible part, and in it dips those arrows, which we
thus shoot at one another.

7. It Is needless to harangue severally upon each. The World too experimentally
knows the force of both. Malice is that whirlwind, which has shook States and
Families, no less then private Persons; a passion so impetuous and precipitate,
that it often equally involves the Agent and the Patient: a malicious man being
of like violence with those who flung in the three Children, Dan. 3. consumed
by those flames into which he cast others. As for Interest, it is that universal
Monarch to which all other Empires are Tributaries, to which men sacrifice not
only their Consciences and Innocence, but (what is usually much dearer) their
Sensualities and Vices. Those whom all the Divine (either) threats or promises,
cannot persuade to mortify, nay but restrain one Lust; at Mammons beck will
disclame many, and force their inclinations to comply with their Interest.

8. AND whilst this sin of Calumny has two such potent Abettors, we are not to
wonder at its growth: as long as men are malicious and designing, they will be
traducing; those Cyclops's will be perpetually forming Thunderbolts against
which no Innocence or Virtue can be proof. And alas, we daily find too great
effects of their industry. But tho these are the forgers of the more solemn
deliberate Calumnies, yet this sportive Age has produced another sort; there
being men that defame others by way of divertisement, invent little stories
that they may find themselves exercise, and the Town talk. This, if it must
pass for sport, is such as Solomon describes, Prove. 26.18, 19. As a mad man
that casts firebrarnds, arrows and death, so is he that deceives his
neighbor, and says, am not I in sport? He that shoots an arrow in jest, may
kill a man in earnest; and he that gives himself liberty to play with his
Neighbors fame, may soon play it away. Most men have such an aptness to
entertain sinister opinions of others, that they greedily draw in any
suggestion of that kind; and one may as easily persuade the thirsty Earth to
refund the Water she has soakt into her veins, as them to deposite a prejudice
they have once taken up. Therefore such experiments upon Fame, are as dangerous
as that which Alexander is said to have made of the force of Naptha upon his
Page, from which he scarce escaped with life. These jocular slanders are often
as mischievous as those of deeper design, and have from the slightness of the
temtation an enhancement of guilt. For sure, he that can put such an interest
of his Neighbors in balance with a little fit of laughter, sets it at lower
price then he that hopes to enrich or advance himself by it: and tho it pass
among some for a specimen of Wit, yet it really lists them among Solomon's
fools, who make a mock at sin, Prove. 14.9. In the mean time, since slander is a
Plant that can grow in all Soils; since the frolic humor as well as the morose
betraies to the guilt, who can hope to escape this Scourge of the Tongue, as
the Wiseman calls it, Ec. 26.6. which communicates with all? Persons of all
ranks do mutually asperse, and are aspersed: so that he who would not have his
credulity abused, has scarce a securer way, then (like that Astrologer, who
made his Almanac give a tolerable account of the weather by a direct inversion
of the common Prognosticators) to let his belief run quite counter to reports.
Yea so Epidemic is this Disease grown, that even Religion (at least those
Parties and Factions which assume that name) has got a taint of it; each Sect
and Opinion seeking to represent his Antagonist as odious as it can. And whilst
they contend for speculative Truth, they by mutual calumnies forfeit the
practic: a thing that justly excites the grief of good men, to see that those
who all pretend to the same Christianity, should only be unanimous in the
violating that Truth and Charity it prescribes.

10. AND if these be the weapons of our spiritual warfare, what may we think of
the carnal? How are our secular animosities pursued, when our Speculations are
thus managed? How easily do we run down the reputation of any who stand in the
way either of our spleen or avarice? When Joseph's resolute purity had changed
the scene of his Mistress's passion, she does readily shift that of guilt too,
and fixes her crime upon him, Genesis 39.14. So when Ziba had a mind to undermine
Mephibosheth in his estate, he first practices upon his fame in a false
accusation, 2 Samuel 16.3. And alas, how familiarly do we now see both these
scenes reacted? Those who will not take vice in their bosoms, shall yet have it
bespatter their faces: they who will not run to the same excess of riot, must
expect to be evil spoken of, 1 Pet. 4.4. Nay not only pious men, but Piety it
self partakes of the same fate, falls under the two-edged slander both of
deceit and folly. And if men cannot be permitted quietly to enjoy their Piety,
much less will they those things whereof the World has more gust, I mean
secular advantages. There are still crimes to be discovered in the possessors
of Honors or Estates, and they wonderfully excite the zeal of those who would
supplant them. What artifices are there to make them appear unworthy of what
they have, that others more unworthy may succeed them? Nor are those storms
only in the upper region, in the higher ranks of men; but if we pass through all
degrees, we shall find the difference is rather in the value of the things,
then in the means of pursuing them. He that pretends to the meanest office,
does studiously disparage his competitor, as he that is rivaled for a kingdom.
Nay, even he that has but a merry humor to gratify, makes no scruple to do it
with the loss of another man's reputation.

11. THUS do we accomodate every petty temporal interest at the cost of our
eternal: and as an unskilful Fencer, whilst he is pursuing his thrust, exposes
his body; so whilst we thus actuate our own malice, we abandon our selves to
Satan's, receive mortal wounds from him, only that we may give a few light
scratches to one another. For as I have before said, there is nothing does more
secure his title to us, then this vice of Calumny, it bearing his proper
impress and figure. And we may fear, Christ will one day make the same Judgment
of Persons as he did of Coin, and award them to him whose Image and
superscription they bear, Matthew. 22:20.

12. AND now how great a madness is it to make costly Oblations to so vile an
Idol? This is indeed the worshipping our own Imaginations, preferring a
malicious fiction before a real felicity: and is but faintly resembled by him,
who is said to have chosen to part with his Bishopric, rather then burn his
Romance. Alas, are there not gross corporal sins enough to ruin us, but must
we have aereal ones too, damn our selves with Chimera's, and by these forgeries
of our brains dream out selves to destruction?

13. LET all those then who thus unhappily employ their Inventive Faculty,
timely consider, how unthriving a trade it is finally like to prove; that all
their false accusations of others will rebound in true ones upon themselves. It
does often so in this world, where many times the most clandestine contrivances
of this kind meet with detection. Or if they should happen to keep on the
disguise here, yet 'twill infallibly be torn off at the great day of
manifestation, when before God, Angels, and Men, they will be rendered
infinitely more vile, then 'twas possible for them here to make others.

SECT. VI. Of Uncharitable Truth.
1. IN the next place we are to consider of the other Branch of Defamatory
reports, viz. such as are true: which tho they must be confessed to be of a lower
form of guilt then the former, yet as to the kind, they equally agree in the
definition of Detraction, since it is possible to impair a man's credit by true
reports as well as by false.

2. To clear this I shall first observe, that although every fault has some penal
effects which are coetanous to the act, yet this of Infamy is not so: this is a
more remote consequent; that which it immediately depends upon, is the
publishing. A man may do things, which to God and his own conscience render him
abominable, and yet keep his reputation with men: but when this stifled crime
breaks out, when his secret guilts are detected, then, and not till then, he
becomes infamous: so that although his sin be the Material, yet it is the
discovery that is the formal cause of his Infamy.

3. THIS being granted, it follows, that he that divulges an unknown conceled
fault, stands accountable for all the consequences that flow from that
divulging; but whether accountable as for guilt, must be determined by the
particular circumstances of the cause. So that here we must admit of an
exception: for tho every discovery of another fault be in the strict natural
sense of the word a Detraction, yet it will not always be the sin of
Detraction, because in some instances there may some higher obligation
intervene, and supersede that we ow to the fame of our neighbor; and in those
cases it may not only be lawful, but necessary to expose him.

4. Now all such cases I conceive may summarily be reduced to two heads,
Justice and Charity. First as to Justice: that we know is a Fundamental Virtue,
and he that shall violate that, to abound in another, is as absurd, as he that
undermines the foundation to raise the walls. We are not to steal to give alms,
and God himself has declared, that he hates robbery for a Burnt-offering; so
that no pretense either of Charity or Piety can absolve us from the duty we ow
to Justice. Now it may often fall out, that by conceling one man's fault, I may
be injurious to another, nay to a whole community: and then I assume the guilt
I concele, and by the Laws both of God and Man am judged an accessory.

5. AND as Justice to others enforces, so sometimes Justice to a man's self
allows the publishing of a fault, when a considerable Interest either of Fame
or Fortune cannot otherwise be rescued. But to make loud outcries of injury,
when they tend nothing to the repress of it, is a liberty rather assumed by
rage and impatience, then authorized by Justice. Nay, often in that case the
complainer is the most injurious person; for he inflicts more then he suffers,
and in lieu of some trivial right of his which is invaded, he assaults the
other in a nearer interest, by wounding him in his good Name: but if the cause
be considerable, and the manner regular, there lies sure no obligation upon any
man to wrong himself, to indulge to another.

6. NEITHER does Charity retrench this liberty: for tho it be one act of
Charity to concele another man's faults, yet sometimes it may be inconsistent
with some more important Charity, which I owe to a third person, or perhaps to
a multitude; as in those cases wherein public benefit is concerned. If this
were not allowable, no History could lawfully be written, since if true, it
cannot but recount the faults of many: no evidence could be brought in against
a Malefactor: and indeed, all Discipline would be subverted; which would be so
great a mischief, that Charity obliges to prevent it, what Defamation soever
fall upon the guilty by it. For in such instances it is a true rule, That Mercy
to the evil proves cruelty to the innocent. And as in a competition of
mischiefs we are to choose the least, so of two goods the greatest, and the more
extensive, is the most eligible.

7. Nay, even that Charity which reflects upon my self, may also sometimes
supersede that to my Neighbor, the rule obliging me to love him as, not better
then my self. I need not sure silently assent to my own unjust Defamation, for
fear of proving another a false accuser, nor suffer my self to be made a
beggar, to concele another man's being a Thief. It Is true, in a great inequality
of interests, Charity those Character it is, Not to seek her own, 1 Cor. 13.5.)
will promt me to prefer a greater concern of my Neighbors, before a slight one
of my own: but in equal circumstances, I am sure at liberty to be kind first to
my self. If I will recede even from that, I may; but that is then to be
accounted among the Heroic flights of Charity, nor her binding and
indispensible Laws.

8. HAVING now set the boundaries, the excepted cases; as all instances within
them will be legitimated, so all without them will (by the known rule of
Exceptions) be precluded, and fall under that general duty we owe to our
Neighbor, of tendering his credit: an Obligation so universally infringed, that
it is not imaginable the breach should always happen within the excepted cases.
When it is remembered how unactive the Principles of Justice and Charity are now
grown in the World, we must certainly impute such incessant Effects, to some
more vigorous Causes: of which it may not be amiss to point out some of the
most obvious, and leave every man to examine which of them he finds most
operative in himself.

9. IN the first place, I may reckon Pride, a humor which as it is always
mounting, so it will make use of any footstool toward its rise. A man who
affects an extraordinary splendour of Reputation, is glad to find any foils to
set him off; and therefore will let no fault nor folly of another enjoy the
shade, but brings it into the open light, that by that comparison his own
Excellences may appear the brighter. I dare appeal to the breast of any proud
man, whether he do not upon such occasions, delight to make some Pharisaical
reflections on himself, whether he be not apt to say, I am not like other men,
or as this Publican, Luke 18. tho probably he leave out the God I thank thee.
Now he that cherishes such resentments as these in himself, will doubtless be
willing to propagate them to other men; and to that end render the blemishes of
others as visible as he can. But this betraies a degenerous spirit, which from
a consciousness that he wants solid worth, on which to bottom a reputation, is
fain to found it on the ruins of other men's. The true Diamond sparkles even in
the Sunshine: it is but a glowworm virtue, that ows its luster to the darkness
about it.

10. ANOTHER promter to Detraction is Envy, which sometimes is particular,
sometimes general. He that has a pique to another, would have him as hateful to
all mankind as he is to him; and therefore as he grieves and repines at any
thing that may advance his estimation, so he exults and triumphs when any thing
occurs which may depress it, and is usually very industrious to improve the
opportunity, nay has a strange sagacity it hunting it out. No vultur does more
quickly scent a carcass, then an envious person does those dead flies which
corrupt his Neighbors ointment, Ecclesiast. 10.1. the vapor whereof his h^^e,
like a strong wind, scatters and disperses far and near. Nor needs he any great
crime to practice on: every little infirmity or passion, looked on through his
Optics, appears a mountainous guilt. He can improve the least speck or freckle
into a Leprosy, which shall overspread the whole man: and a cloud no bigger
then a man's hand, like that of Elisha, 1 Kings 18.44. may in an instant, with
the help of prejudice, grow to the utter darkning of the brightest reputation,
and fill the whole Horizon with tempest and horror. Sometimes this envy is
general, not confined to any man persons, but diffused to the whole nature.
Some tempers there are so malign, that they wish ill to all, and believe ill of
all; like Timon the Athenian, who professed himself a universal Man-hater. He
whose guilty Conscience reflects dismal Images of himself, is willing to put
the same ugly shape upon the whole Nature, and to conclude that all men are the
same, were they but closely inspected. And therefore when he can see but the
least glimmering of a fault in any, he takes it as a proof of his Hypothesis,
and with an envious joy calls in as many spectators as he can. It Is certain
there are some in whose ears nothing sounds so harsh as the commendation of
another; as on the contrary, nothing is so melodious as a Defamation. Plutarch
gives an apt instance of this upon Aristides's banishment, whom when a mean
Person had proposed to Ostracism, being asked what displesure Aristides had don
him, he replied, None, neither do I know him, but it grieves me to hear every
body call him a just man. I fear some of our keenest accusers now a days may
give the same answer. No man that is eminent for Piety (or indeed but Moral
Virtue) but he shall have many insidious eyes upon him, watching for his
halting: and if any the least obliquity can be espied, he is used worse then
the vilest Malefactor: for such are tried but at one bar, and know the utmost
of their doom; but these are arraigned at every Table, in every Tavern. And at
such variety of Judicatures, there will be as great variety of Sentences; only
they commonly concur in this one, that he is an Hypocrite: and then what
complacency, what triumph have they in such a discovery? There is not half so
much Epicurism in any of their most studied luxuries, no spectacle affords them
so much pleasure, as a bleeding fame thus lying at their mercy.

11. ANOTHER sort of Detractors there are, whose designs are not so black, but
are equally mean and sordid, much too light to be put in balance with a
Neighbors credit. Of those some will pick up all the little stories they began
get, to humor a Patron: an artifice well known by those Trencher-guests, who,
like Rats, still haunt the best Provisions. These men do almost come up to a
literal sense of what the Psalmist spoke in a figurative, Psalm 14. and eat up
people for bread, tear and worry men in their good names, that themselves may
eat. It was a Curse denounced against Eli's offspring, that they should come
and crouch for a morsel of bread, 1 Samuel 2.39. But such men court this as a
preferment, and to bring themselves within the reach of it, stick not to assume
that vilest office of common Delators. There are others, who when they have got
the knowledge of another man's fault, think it an endearing thing to whisper in
the ear of some Friend or Confident. But sure, if they must needs sacrifice
some secret to their Friendship, they should take David's rule, and not offer
that which cost them nothing. If they will express their confidence, let them
acquaint them with their own private crimes. That indeed would show something of
trust: but those experiments upon another man's cost, will hardly convince any
considering person of their kindness.

12. THERE still remains a yet more trifling sort of Defamers, who have no
deliberate design which they pursue in it, yet are as assiduous at the Trade as
the deeper contrivers. Such are those who publish their Neighbors failings as
they read Gazets, only that they may be telling news; an Itch wherewith some
Peoples tongues are strangely overrun, who can as well hold a glowing Coal in
their mouths, as keep any thing they think new; nay will sometimes run
themselves out of breath, for fear least any should serve them as Ahimaaz did
Cushi, 2 Samuel 18.23. and tell the tale before them. This is one of the most
Childish Vanities imaginable: and sure men must have Souls of a very low level,
that can think it a commensurate entertainment. Others there are who use
Defamatory discourse, neither for the love of News, nor Defamation, but purely
for love of talk: whose speech, like a flowing current, bears away
indiscriminately whatever lies in its way. And indeed such incessant Talkers,
are usually people, nor of depth enough to supply themselves out of their own
store, and therefore can let no foreign accession pass by them, no more then
the Mill which is always going, can afford any Waters to run wast. I know we
use to call this Talkativeness a Feminine vice; but to speak impartially, I
think, tho we have given them the enclosure of the Scandal, they have not of
the fault, and he that shall appropriate Loquacity to Women, may perhaps
sometimes need to light Diogenes's Candle to seek a man: for it is possible to
come into masculine company, where 'twill be as hard to edg in a word, as at a
Female Gossiping. However, as to this particular of Defaming: both the Sexes
seem to be at a vie: and I think he were a very Critical Judge, that could
determine between them.

13. NOW lest these later sort of Defamers should be apt to absolve themselves,
as men of harmless intentions, I shall desire them to consider, that they are
only more impertinent, not less injurious. For tho it be granted, that the
proud and envious are to make a distinct account for their pride and envy; yet
as far as relates to the Neighbor, they are equally mischievous. Anacreon that
was choked with a Grape-stone, died as surely as Julius Caesar with his three
and twenty wounds; and a man's reputation may be as well fooled and pratled
away, as maliciously betrayed. Nay perhaps more easily; for where the speaker
can least be suspected of design, the hearer is apter to give him credit: this
way of insinuating by familiar discourse, being like those Poisons that are
taken in at the pores, which are the most insensibly sucked in, and the most
impossible to expel.

14. BUT we need not dispute which is worst, since it is certain all are bad,
none of them (or any that hold proportion with them) being at all able to
pretend their warrant either from Justice or Charity. And then what our Savior
says in another case, will be appliable to this, He that is not for us, is
against us, Matthew. 12.30. He that is publishing his Neighbors faults, acts not
upon the dictates of Justice or Charity, acts directly in contradiction to
them: for where they do not upon some particular respects command, they do
implicity, and generally forbid all such discoveries.

15. FOR first, if a fault divulged be of a light nature, the offender cannot
thereby merit so much as to be made a public Discourse. Fame is a tender thing,
and seldom is tossed and bandied without receiving some bruise, if not a crack:
for reports we know, like snowballs gather still, the farther they roll: and
when I have once handed it to another, how know I how he may improve it? And if
he deliver it so advanced to a third, he may give his contribution also to it,
and so in a successive transmitting, it may grow to such a monstrous bulk, as
bears no proportion to its Original. He must be a great stranger to the World,
that has not experimentally found the truth of this. How many persons have laid
under great and heavy scandals, which have taken their first rise only from
some inadvertence or indiscretion? Of so quick a growth is Slander, that the
least grain, like that of Mustard Seed, mentioned Matthew. 13.32: immediately
shoots up into a Tree. And when it is so, it can no more be reduced back into
its first cause, then a Tree can shrink into that little seed from whence it
first sprang. No ruins are so irreparable as those of reputation: and therefore
he that pulls out but one stone toward the breach, may do a greater mischief
then perhaps he intends; and a greater injustice too: for by how much the more
strictly justice obliges to reparation in case of injuries done, so much the
more severely does it prohibit the doing those injuries which are incapable of
being repared. In the Levitical Law, he that knew his Ox was apt so gore, and
yet kept him not up, stood responsible for any mischief he happened to do,
Exodus 21.29. I think there is no considering man can be ignorant how apt little
trivial accusations are, to tear and mangle ones Fame: and yet if the lavish
Talker restrain them not, he certainly stands accountable to God, his Neighbor,
and his own Conscience, for all the danger they procure.

16. BUT if the report concern some higher and enormous Crime, it is true, the
delinquent may deserve the less pity, yet perhaps the reporter may not deserve
the less blame: for often such a discovery serves, not to reclame, but to
enrage the Offender, and precipitate him into farther degrees of ill. Modestly
and fear of shame, is one of those natural restraints, which the Wisdom of God
has put upon mankind, and he that once stumbles, may yet by a check of that
bridle recover again: but when by a public detection he is fallen under that
infamy he feared, he will then be apt to discard all caution, and to think he
owes himself the utmost plesures of his vice, as the price of his reputation.
Nay, perhaps he advances farther, and sets up for a reverst sort of Fame, by
being eminently wicked: and he who before was but a clandestine Disciple,
becomes a Doctor of Impiety. And sure it were better to let a conceled crime
remain in its wished obscurity, then by thus rouzing it from its covert, bring
it to stand at bay, and set it self in this open defiance; especially in this
degenerous age, when vice has so many well-willers, that, like a hoping party,
they eagerly run into any that will head them.

17. AND this brings in a third Consideration relating to the public, to which
the divulging of private (especially if they be novel unusual) Crimes, does but
an ill piece of service. Vice is contagious, and casts pestilential vapors: and
as he that should bring out a Plague-sick person, to inform the World of his
disease, would be thought not to have much befriended his Neighborhood; so he
that displaies these vicious Ulcers, whilst he seeks to defame one, may perhaps
infect many. We too experimentally find the force of ill Examples. Men often
take up sins, to which they have no natural propension, merely by way of
conforty and imitation. But if the instance happen in a crime, which more suits
the practice of the hearers, tho it cannot be said to seduce, yet it may
encourage and confirm them; embolden them not only the more frequently to act,
but even to avow those sins wherein they find they stand not single, and by
discovering a new accessory to their Party, to invite them the more heartily
and openly to espouse it.

18. These are such effects as surely do not very well correspond with that
Justice and Charity we owe either to particular persons, or to mankind in
general. And indeed no better can be expected, from a practice which to
perfectly contradicts the grand rule both of Justice and Charity, the doing as
we would be don to. That this does so, every man has a ready conviction within
him, if he please but to consult his own heart. Alas, with what solicitude do
we seek to hide our own guilts with false dresses, what varnishes have we for
them? There are not more arts of disguising our Corporal blemishes, then our
Moral: and yet whilst we thus paint and parget our own deformities, we cannot
allow any the least imperfection of another to remain undetected, but tear off
the veil from their blushing frailties, and not only expose but proclaim them.
And can there be a grosser, a more detestable partiality then this? God may
sure in this instance (as in many others) expostulate with us as he did with
Israel, Ezekiel. 33. Are not your ways unequal? What Barbarism, what Inhumanity
is it thus to treat those of the same common nature with our selves, whom we
cannot but know have the same concern to preserve a Reputation, and the same
regret to lose it, which we have? And what shame is it, that that Evangelical
Precept, of doing as we would be don to, which met with so much reverence even
from Heathens, that Severus the Emperor preferred it to all the Maxims of
Philosophers; should be thus contemned and violated by Christians, and that
too, upon such slight inconsiderable motives, as usually prevail in this case
of Defamation?

19. BUT we are not to consider this fault only in its root, as it is a defect
of Ju^tice and Charity, but in its product too, as it is a Seminary of more
Injustice and Uncharitableness. Those disadvantageous reports we make of our
neighbors, are almost seen to come round: for let no man persuade himself, that
the hearers will keep his counsel any better then he does that of the defamed
person. The softest whisper of this kind, will find others to Echo it, till it
reach the ears of the concerned Party, and perhaps with some enhancing
circumstances too. And when it is considered how unwilling men are to hear of
their faults, tho even in the mildest and most charitable way of admonition,
it is not to be doubted a public Defamation, will seem disobliging enough to
provoke a return; which again begets a rejoinder, and so the quarrel is carried
on with mutual recriminations; all malicious inquiries are made into each
others manners, and those things which perhaps they did in closets, come to be
proclaimed upon the house top: so the wildfire runs round, till sometimes
nothing but Blood will quench it; or if it arrive not to that, yet it usually
fixes in an irreconcilable feud. To this is often owing those distances we see
among Friends and Relations; this breeds such strangeness, such animosities
amongst Neighbors, that you cannot go to one, but you shall be entertained with
invectives against the other; nay perhaps you shall lose both, because you are
willing to side with neither.

20. THESE are the usual consequences of the liberty of the Tongue: and what
account can any man give to himself, either in Christianity or Prudence, that
has let in such a train of mischiefs, merely to gratify an impotent childish
humor of telling a tale? Peace was the great Legacy Christ left to his
followers, and ought to be guarded, tho we expose for it our greatest Temporal
Concerns, but cannot without despite to him, as well as our brethren, be thus
prostituted.

21. YET if we consider it abstractedly from those more solemn mischiefs which
attend it, the mere levity and unworthiness of it sets it below an ingenuous
Person. We generally think a tatler and busy-body a title of no small reproach:
yet truly I know not to whom it more justly belongs, then to those, who busy
themselves first in learning, and then in publishing the faults of others: an
emploiment which the Apostle thought a blot, even upon the weaker sex, and
thinks the prevention of such importance, that he prescribes them to change
their whole condition of life; to convert widow-hood (tho a state which in
other respects he much prefers, 1 Cor. 7.8.) into marriage, rather then expose
themselves to the temtation, 1 Timothy 5.13.14. And if their impotence cannot
afford excuse for it, what a debasement is it of men's nobler Faculties to be
thus entertained? The Historian gives it as an ill indication of Domitians
temper, that he emploi'd himself in catching and tormenting Flies: and sure
they fall not under a much better Character, either for Wisdom, or good Nature,
who thus snatch up all the little fluttering reports, they can meet with to the
prejudice of their Neighbors.

22. BUT besides the divulging the faults of others, there is another branch of
Detraction naturally springing from this root, and this is Censuring and severe
Judging of them. We think not we have well played the Historians, when we have
told the thing, unless we add also our Remarks, and Animadversions on it. And
although it is, God knows, bad enough to make a naked relation, and trust it to the
severity of the hearers; yet few can content themselves with that, but must
give them a sample of rigor, and by the bitterness of their own censure invite
them to pass the like: a Process contrary to all rules of Law or Equity, for
the Plaintiff to assume the part of a Judge. And we may easily divine the fate
of that man's fame, that is so unduly tried.

23. IT IS indeed sad to see how many private Tribunals are every where set up,
where we scan and judge our Neighbors action, but scarce ever acquit any. We
take up with the most incompetent Witnesses, nay often suborn our own surmises
and jealousies, that we may be sure to cast the unhappy Criminal. How nicely
and scrupulously do we examine every circumstance; (Would God we were but half
as exact in our own penitential inquisitions) and torture it to make it confess
something which appears not in the more general view of the fact, and which
perhaps never was in the actors intention? In a word, we do like witches with
their Magical Chemistry, extract all the venem, and take none of the allay. By
this means we confound the degrees of sins, and sentence deliberate and
indeliberate, an habit or an act all at one rate, that is commonly, at the
utmost it can amount to, even in its worse acception: and sure this were a most
culpable corruption in judgment, could we show our commission to judge our
brethren.

24. BUT here we may every one of us interrogate our selves in our Saviors
words, Who made me a Judge? Luke 12.14. And if he disclaimed it, who in respect
of his Divinity had the Supreme right, and that too in a case wherein one (at
least) or the Litigants had desired his interposition, what a boldness is it in
us to assume it, where no such appeal is made to us, but on the contrary, the
party disowns our Authority? Nay (which is infinitely more) it is superseded by our
great Lawgiver, in that express prohibition, Matthew. 7.1. Judge not, and that
backed with a severe penalty, that ye be not judged? As God has appropriated
Vengeance to himself, so has he Judicature also; and it is an invasion of his
peculiar, for any (but his Delegates the lawful Magistrates) to pretend to
either. And indeed, in all private judgment, so much depends upon the intention
of the Offender, that unless we could possess our selves of Gods Omniscience,
'twill be as irrational as impious to assume his Authority. Until we know men's
hearts, we are at the best but imperfect Judges of their actions. At our rate
of judging, St. Paul had surely passed for a most malicious Persecutor, whereas
God saw he did ignorantly in unbelief, and upon that intuition had mercy on
him, 1 Timothy 1.13. It Is therefore good counsel which the Apostle gives, 1 Cor.
4.5. Judge nothing before the time until the Lord come. For tho it is said, The
Saints shall judge the World, 1 Cor. 6.3. yet it must be at the great Assize,
and he that will needs intrude himself into the office before the time, will be
in danger to be rather passive then active in the Judicatory. I do not here
advise to such a stupid charity as shall make no distinction of Actions. I know
there is a woe pronounced as well to those who call evil good, as good evil.
Surely when we see an open notorious sin committed, we may express a
detestation of the Crime, tho not of the Actor; nay it may sometimes be a
necessary Charity, both to the Offender, and to the innocent Spectators, as an
Amulet to keep them from the Contagion of the Example. But still even in these
cases, our Sentence must not exceed the evidence, we must judge only according
to the visible undoubted circumstances, and not aggravate the crime upon
presumtions and conjectures; if we do, how right soever our guesses may be, our
judgment is not, but we are as Saint James speaks, Judges of evil thoughts,
Chap. 2.4.

25. INDEED this rash judging is not only very unjust both to God and man, but
it is an act of the greatest pride. When we set our selves in the Tribunal, we
always look down with contemt on those at the Bar. And certainly there is
nothing does so gratify, so regale a haughty humor, as this piece of usurpt
Soverainty over our Brethren: but the more it does so, the greater necessity
there is to abstain from it. Pride is a hardy kind of vice, that will live upon
the barest pasture: you cannot starve it with the most industrious
mortifications: how little need is there then of pampering and heightning it,
which we cannot more effectually do, then by this censorious humor? for by that
we are so perpetually emploi'd abroad, that we have no leisure to look
homeward, and see our own defects. We are like the inhabitants of Ai, Jos. 8.
so eager upon the pursuit of others, that we leave our selves exposed to the
ambushes of Satan, who will be sure still to encourage us in our chase, draw us
still farther and farther from our selves, and cares not how zealous we are in
fighting against the crimes of others, so he can but keep that zeal from
recoiling upon our own.

26. LASTLY, This judging others, is one of the highest violations of Charity.
The Apostle gives it as one of the properties of that grace, that it thinks no
evil (i. e.) is not apt to make severe constructions, but sets every thing in
the fairest light, puts the most candid interpretations that the matter will
bear. And truly, this is of great importance to the reputation of our
Neighbors. The world we know is in many instances extremely governed by
Opinion, but in this it is all in all; it has not only an influence upon it, but
is that very thing: Reputation being nothing but a fair opinion and estimation
among others. Now this Opinion is not always swaied by due motives: sometimes
little accidents, and often fancy, and oftest prepossession governs in it. So
that many times he that puts the first ill Character, fixes the stamp which
afterward goes current in the World. The generality of people take up
prejudices (as they do Religions) upon trust: and of those that are more
curious in inquiring into the grounds, there are not many who vary on the more
charitable hand, or bring the common sentence to review, with intent to
moderate but inhance it. Men are apt to think it some disparagement to their
acuteness and invention, if they cannot say something as sharp upon the subject,
as has bin said before; and so it is the business of many to lay on more load,
but of few to take off: and therefore he that passes the first condemnatory
sentence, is like the Incendiary in a popular Tumult, who is chargeable with
all those disorders to which he gave the first rise, tho that free not his
Abettors from their share of the guilt.

27. AND as this is very uncharitable in respect of the injury offered, so also
is it in reflection on the grand rule of Charity. Can we pretend to love our
Neighbors as our selves, and yet shall our love to him have the quite contrary
effects to that we bear our selves? On self-love lessen our beam into a mote,
and yet can our love to him magnify his mote into a beam? No certainly, true
Charity is more sincere, does not turn to us the reverse end of the
Perspective, to represent our own faults at a distance, and in the most
diminitive size, and yet shuffle the other to us when we are to view his. No,
these are Tricks of Legerdemain we read in another Schole, even in his, whose
style is the accuser of the brethren. We know how frequently God protests
against false weights and false mesures. And sure it is not only in the shop or
market that he abhors them, they are no less abominable inconversation then in
traffic. To buy by one mesure and sell by another, is not more unequal, then it
is to have these differing standards for our own and our neighbors faults, that
our own shall weigh, in the Prophet Jeremiahs phrase, lighter then vanity, yea
nothing, and yet his (tho really the lighter) shall prove Zacharies talent of
lead. This is such a partiallity, as consists not with common honesty, and can
therefore never be reconciled with Christian Charity: and how demurely soever
such men may pretend to Sanctity, that interrogation of God presses hard upon
them, Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of
deceitful weights? Mich. 6.11. Such bitter invectives against other men's
faults, and indulgence or palliation of their own, shows their zeal lies in
their spleen, and that they consider not so much what is don, as who does it:
and to such the sentence of the Apostle is very applicable, Romans 2.1.
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge, for
wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge
do the same thing. But admit a man have not the very same guilts he censures
in another, yet it is sure every man has some; and of what sort soever they be,
he desires not they should be rigorously scanned, and therefore by the rule of
Charity, yea and Justice too, he ought not to do that which he would not
suffer. If he can find extenuations for his own crimes, he is in all reason to
presume others may have so for theirs: the common frailty of our nature, as it
is apt alike to betray us to faults, so it gives as equal share in the excuse;
and therefore what I would have pass for the effect of impotency or
inadvertence in my self, I can with no tolerable ingenuity give a worse name to
in him.

28. WE have now viewed both these branches of Detraction, seen both the sin
and mischiefs of them; we may now join them together in a concluding
Observation, which is, that they are as imprudent as they are unchristian. It
has bin received among the maxims of civil Life, not unnecessarily to
exasperate any body; to which agrees the advice of an ancient Philosopher,
Speak not evil of thy Neighbor, if thou do thou shall hear that which will
not fail to trouble thee. There is no person so inconsiderable, but may at some
time or other do a displesure: but in this of Defaming men need no harnessing,
no preparation; every man has his Weapons ready for a return: so that none can
shoot these arrows, but they must expect they will revert with a rebounded
force: not only to the violation of Christian Unity (as I have before observed)
but to the Aggressors great secular demerit, both in Fame, and oftentimes
Interest also. Revenge is sharp-sighted, and over-looks no opportunity of a
retaliation; and that commonly not bounded as the Levitical ones were, An eye
for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, Exodus 21.24. no nor by the larger proportions
of their restitutions fourfold, Exodus 21.1. but extended to the utmost power
of the Inflicter. The examples are innumerable of men who have thus laid
themselves open in their greatest concerns, and have let loose the hands as
well as tongues of others against them, merely because they would put no
restraint upon their own; which is so great indiscretion, that to them we may
well apply that of Solomon, A fools mouth is his destruction, and his lips are
the snare of his soul, Prove. 18.7.

29. AND now who can sufficiently wonder, that a practice that so thwarts our
interest of both worlds, should come universally to prevail among us? Yet that
it does so, I may appeal to the Consciences of most, and to the Observation of
all. What so common Topic of Discourse is there, as this of backbiting our
Neighbors? Come into company of all Ages, all Ranks, all Professions, this is
the constant entertainment: And I doubt, he that at night shall duly recollect
the Occurences of the day, shall very rarely be able to say, he has spent it
without hearing or speaking (perhaps both) somewhat of this kind. Nay even those
who restrain themselves other liberties, are often apt to indulge to this: many
who are so just to their Neighbors property, that as Abraham once said, Genesis
14.23. they would not take from him, even from a thread to a shoe latchet, are
yet so inconsiderate of his Fame, as to find themselves discourse at the
expense of that, tho infinitely a greater injury then the robbing of his Coffer:
which shows what false mesures we are apt to take of things and evinces that
many of those, who have not only in general abjured the world in their Baptism,
but do in many instances seem to themselves (as well as others) to have gained
a superiority over it, do yet in this undiscernibly yield it the greatest
Ensign of Sovereignty, by permitting it to set the standards and estimates of
things, and taking its customary Prescriptions for Laws. For what besides this
unhappy servility to Custom, can possibly reconcile men that own Christianity,
to a practice so widely distant from it? It Is true, those that profess
themselves men of this world, who design only their portion in this life, may
take it up as sometimes conducing (at least seemingly) to their end: but for
those who propose higher hopes to themselves, and know that Charity is one of
the main props to those hopes, how foolishly do they undermine themselves, when
they thus act against their Principles, and that upon no other Authority, but
that of popular usage? I know men are apt to excuse themselves upon their
indignation against vice, and think that their zeal must as well acquit them
for this violation of the second Table, as it once did Moses for the breaking
both, Exodus 32.19. But to such I may answer in Christ's words, Luke 9.55. Ye
know not what manner of spirit ye are of. Meekness and Charity are the
Evangelical Graces, which will most recommend and assimilate us to him, who was
meek and lowly in heart. But after all this pretext of Zeal, I fear it is but a
cheat we put on our selves, the elder Brothers raiment only to disguise the
Supplanter, Genesis 27. Let men truly ransack their own breasts, and I doubt the
best will find there is something of vanity that lies at the bottom, if it be
not the positive sort mentioned before, of designing to illustrate my self by
others blemishes, yet at least the negative, that I am unwilling to incur the
contemt incident to those, who scruple at small sins. Besides I observe
perhaps, that it is the common entertainment of the World, to defame their
Neighbors, and if I strike not in upon the Theme, I shall have nothing to
render me acceptable company; perhaps I shall be reproched as morose or dull,
and my silence shall be construed to proceed not from the abundance of my
Charity, but the defect of my Wit.

20. BUT sure they that can thus argue, do hereby give a more demonstrative
proof of that defect. He whose Wit is so precarious, that it must depend only
upon the folly or vice of another, had best give over all pretense to it. He
that has nothing of his own growth to set before his Guests, had better make no
invitations, then break down his Neighbors Enclosure, and feast them upon his
plunder. Besides, how pitiful an attestation of Wit is it, to be able to make a
disgraceful relation of another? No scolding Woman but may set up such
Trophies: and they that can value a man upon such an account, may prefer the
Scarabes, who feed upon dung, and are remarked by no other property, before the
Be that sucks Flowers and returns Honey.

31. BUT in the next place, admit this restraint should certainly expose one to
that reproach; methinks this should be no news to those who know the condition
of Christianity is to take up the Cross: and sure it cannot weigh lighter then
in this instance. What am I the worse, if a vain Talkative Person think me too
reserved? Or if he, whose frolic levity is his disease, call me dull, because I
vapor not out all my spirits into froth? Socrates when informed of some gating
Speeches one had used of him behind his back, made only this facetious reply,
Let him beat me too when I am absent. And he that gets not such an indifference
to all the idle censures of men, will be disturbed in all his Civil
Transactions, as well as his Christian: it being scarce possible to do any
thing, but there will be descants made on it. And if a man will regard those
winds, he must, as Solomon says, never sow, Eccl. 11.4. He must suspend even
the necessary actions of common life, if he will not venture them to the being
mis-judged by others.

32. BUT there is yet a farther consideration in this matter: for he that upon
such a despicable motive will violate his duty in one particular, lets Satan
get a main point of him, and can with no good Logic deny to do it in others.
Detraction is not the only sin in fashion: Profaneness, and Obscenity, and all
sorts of Luxury are so too, and threaten no less reproach to those who scruple
at them. Upon the same grounds therefore that he discards his Charity to his
Neighbor, he may also his Piety, his Modesty, his Temperance, and almost all
other Virtues. And to speak the truth, there is not a more fertile womb of sin,
then this dread of all men's reproach. Other corruptions must be gratified with
cost and industry, but in this the Devil has no farther trouble then to laugh
men out of their souls. So prolific a vice therefore had need be weeded out of
men's hearts: for if it be allowed the least corner, if it be indulged too in
this one instance, 'twill quickly spread it self farther.

33. YET after all, this fear of reproach is a mere fallacy, started to disguise
a more real cause of fear: for the greatest danger of reproach does indeed lie
on that other side. Common estimation puts an ill Character upon pragmatic
meddling people. For tho the inquisitiveness and curiosity of the hearer, may
sometimes render such discourses grateful enough to him, yet it leaves in him no
good impressions of the speaker. This is well observed by the Son of Sirach,
Ecclus. 19.8, 9. Whether it be to friend or foe, talk not of other men's lives,
and if thou can without offense, revele them not, for he heard and observed
thee, and when time comes he will hate thee. In a word, all considering
Persons will be ever upon their guard in such company, as foreseeing that they
will talk no less freely of them, then they do of others before them. Nor can
the commonness of the guilt obviate the censure, there being nothing more
frequent then for men to accuse their own faults in other Persons. Vice is like
a dark Lantern, which turns its bright side only to him that bears it, but
looks black and dismal in another hand: and in this particular none has so
much reason to fear a Defamer, as those who are themselves such: for (besides
the common prudential motive) their own consciousness gives them an inward
alarm, and makes them look for a retribution in the same kind. Thus upon the
whole matter we see, there is no real temtation, even to our vanity, to comply
with this uncharitable custom, we being sure to lose more repute by it then we
can propose to our selves to gain. The being esteemed an ill man, will not be
balanced by being thought pleasant, ingenuous company, were one sure to be so.
But it is odds, that will not be acquired by it neither, for the most assiduous
tale-bearers, and biterest revilers, are often half-witted people: there being
nothing more frequently observed, then such men's aptness to speak evil of
things they understand not, Jude v. 10.

34. O let not then those that have repudiated the more inviting sins, show
themselves philter'd and bewitched by this, but instead of submitting to the
ill example of others, set a good one to them, and endeavor to bring this
unchristian custom out of fashion. I am sure if they do not, they will be more
deeply chargeable then others: for the more command they have over their other
corruptions, the more do they witness against themselves. Their remissness and
willing subjection to this, besides their example when ill, is more ensnaring
then other men's, and is apt to insinuate easy thoughts of the sin. Men are apt
to think themselves safe while they follow one of noted Piety, and the authority
of his Person often leads them blindfold into his failings. Thus when Peter
dissembled, St. Paul tells us, that the other Jews, and even Barnabas also, was
carried away with his dissimulation, Galat. 2.13. And I doubt not in this
particular many are encouraged by the liberty they see even good men take. So
that such have a more accumulative guilt, for they do not only commit, but
patronize the fault: the consideration whereof has kept me, I confess, longer
upon this Head, then is proportionable to the brevity of the rest; but I think
not longer then agrees to the importance of the subject.

35. AND now since we have considered the malignity of this sin of Detraction,
and yet withal find that it is a sin, which as the Apostle speaks, does so
easily beset us, it is but a natural Corollary that we enforce our vigilance
against it. And where the importance and difficulty are both so great, 'twill
be a little necessary to consider what are the likliest means, the most
appropriate Antidote against this so dangerous, and yet so Epidemic a disease.

36. AND here the common rule of Physic is to be adverted to, viz. to examine
the causes, that the remedies may be adapted to them. I shall therefore in the
first place desire every man seriously to study his own constitution of mind,
and observe what are his particular temtations to this sin of Detraction,
whether any of those I have before mentioned, as Pride, Envy, Levity, etc. or
any other which lies deeper, and is only discernible to his own inspection. Let
him, I say, make the scrutiny, and then accordingly apply himself to correct
the sin in its first principle. For as when there is an eruption of Humor in
any part, it is not cured merely by outward applications, but by such alterative
Medicines as purify the blood; so this Leprosy of the Tongue will still spread
farther, if it be not checked in its spring and source, by the mortifying of
those corrupt inclinations, which feed and heighten it.

37. THIS is an inquisition I must leave to every man's own Conscience, which
alone can testify by what impulses he acts. Yet as the Rabbis were wont to
say, that in every signal Judgment which befell the Jews, there was some grain
of the Golden-calf; so I think I may venture to say, that in all Detraction,
there is some mixture of Pride: and therefore I suppose, a Caution against
that, will be so generally seasonable, that it may well lead the Van of all
other advices in this matter. And here it is very observable, that God who has
made of one blood all Nations of the Earth, Acts 17. has so equally distributed
all the most valuable privileges of Human-nature, as if he designed to preclude
all insulting of one man over another. Neither has he only thus insinuated it
by his Providence, but has enforced it by his commands In the Levitical Law we
find what a particular care he takes to moderate the rigor of Judicial
correction, upon this very account, lest thy Brother be despised in thine eyes,
Deuteronomy. 25.3. So unreasonable did he think it, that the crime or misery of one,
should be the exultation of another. And S. Paul brands it as a great guilt of
the Corinthians, that they upon the occasion of the incestuous person were
puffed up, when they should have mourned, 1 Corin. 5.2. When we see a dead
Corpse, we are not apt to insult over it, or brag of our own health and vigor;
but it rather damps us, and makes us reflect, that it may (we know not how
soon) be our own condition. And certainly the spectacles of Spiritual mortality
should have the same operation. We have the same principles of Corruption with
our lapsed Brethren, and have nothing but Gods grace, to secure us from the
same effects, and by these insulting reflections we forfeit that too; for he
gives grace only to the humble, James 4.6. Saint Paul's advice therefore is very
apposite to this case, Gallat. 6.1. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault,
restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, least thou
also be temted. In a word, the faults of others ought to excite our pity
toward them, our caution as to our selves, and our thankfulness to God, if he
has hitherto preserved us from the like, For who made thee to differ from
another? 1 Cor. 4.7. But if we spread our Sails and triumph over these wrecks,
we expose our selves to worse. Other sins like Rocks may split us, yet the
lading may be preserved: but Pride like a Gulf swallows us up; our very virtues
when so levened, becoming weights and plummets to sink us to the deeper ruin.
The counsel therefore of the Apostle, is very pertinent to this matter, Romans
11.20. Be not high minded, but fear.

38. BUT God knows we can insult over others when we are not only under a
possibility, but are actually involved in the same guilt: and then what are all
our accusations and bitter censures of others, but indictments and condemnatory
sentences against our selves? And we may justly expect God should take us at
our word, and reply upon us as the Prophet did upon David, Thou art the man, 2 Samuel 12.7. For tho our officious vehemence against another crime, may blind
the eyes of men, yet God is not so mocked. As therefore when a thief or
murderer is detected, it gives an alarm to the whole confederacy; so when we
find our own guilts pursued in other men's Persons, it is not a time for us to
join in the prosecution, but rather by humble and penitent reflections on our
selves to provide for our own safety. When therefore we find our selves (upon
any misdemeanor of our brother) ready to mount the Tribunal, and pronounce our
sentence, let us first consider how competent we are for the office, calling to
mind the decision Christ once made in the like case, He that is without sin let
him first cast a stone, Job. 8.7. And if we did this, many perhaps of our
fiercest impeachers, would think fit to retire, and leave the delinquent (as
they themselves finally desire to be) to the merciful indulgence of a Savior.
In short, would we but look into our own hearts, we should find so much work
for our inquisitions and censure, that we should not be at leisure to ramble
abroad for it. And therefore as Lycurgus once said to one, who importuned him
to establish a popular parity in the state, Do thou, says he, begin it first
in thine own family: so I shall advise those that will be judging, to practice
first at home. And if they will confine themselves to that, till there be
nothing left to correct, I doubt not their neighbor will be well enough secured
against their Detractions.

39. ANOTHER preservation against that sin is the frequent contemplation of the
last and great judgment. This is indeed a Catholicon against all: but we find
it particularly applied by St. Paul to this of judging and despising our
Brethren. Why do thou judge thy brother? or why do thou set at naught thy
brother? We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, Romans 14.10.
That is the great day of Revelation and Retribution, and we are not to
anticipate it by our private inquests or sentences: we have business enough to
provide our own accounts against that day. And as it were a spightful folly for
Malefactors, that were going together to that bar, to spend their time in
exaggerating each others crimes: so surely is it for us, who are all going
toward the dreadful tribunal, to be drawing up Charges against one another. And
who knows but we may then meet with the fate of Daniels accusers, see him we
censured acquit, and our selves doomed. The penitence of the criminal may have
numbered him among the Saints, when our unretracted uncharitableness may send us
to unquenchable Flames. I conclude this consideration with the words of St.
James, There is one Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy, who art thou
that judge another? Jam. 4.12.

50. A third expedient may be, to try to make a revulsion of the humor, to draw
it into another chanel. If we must needs be talking of other peoples faults,
let it not be to Defame, but to amend them, by converting our Detraction and
backbiting into Admonition and fraternal correption. This is a way to extract
medicine out of the viper, to consecrate even this so unhollow'd a part of our
temper, and to turn the ungrateful meddling of a busy-body, into the most
obliging office of a friend. And indeed had we that zeal for virtue, which we
pretend when we inveigh against vice, we should surely lay it out this way; for
this only gives a possibility of reforming the offender. But alas we order the
matter so, as if we feared to lose the occasion of Clamor, and will tell all
the world but him that it most concerns. Indeed it is a deplorable thing to see
how universally this necessary Christian duty is neglected; and to that neglect
we may in a great degree impute that strange overflowing of Detraction among
us. We know the receiving any thing into our Charge, insensibly begets a love
and tenderness to it (a nurse upon this account comes often to vie kindness
with the mother:) and would we but take one another thus into our care, and by
friendly vigilance thus watch over each others souls, it is scarce imaginable
what an endearment it would create: such certainly as would infallibly supplant
all our unkind reportings and severe descants upon our brethren; since those
can never take place, but when there is at least an indifference, if not an
enmity.

41. THE next cure I shall propose for Detraction, is to substract its
nurishment, by suppressing all Curiosity and inquisitiveness concerning others.
Were all supplies thus cut off, it would at last be subdued. The King of
Ethiopia in a vie of Wit with the King of Egypt, proposed it as a Problem to
him, to drink up the Sea, to which he replied, by requiring him first to stop
the access of Rivers to it: and he that would drain this other Ocean, must take
the same course, dam up the avenues of those Springs which feed it. He that is
always upon the scent, hunting out some discovery of others, will be very apt
to invite his neighbors to the quarry; and therefore twill be necessary for
him, to restrain himself from that range: not like jealous States, to keep
Spies and pensioners abroad to bring him intelligence, but rather discourage
all such officious pick-thanks: for the fuller he is of such informations, the
more is his pain if he keep them in, and his guilt if he publish them. Could
men be persuaded to affect a wholesome ignorance in these matters, it would
conduce both to their ease and innocence: for it is this Itch of the ear which
breaks out at the Tongue: and were not Curiosity the Purveior, Detraction would
soon be starved into a tameness.

42. BUT the most infallible receipt of all, is the frequent recollecting, and
serious applying of the grand rule, of doing as we would be don to: for as
Detraction is the violation of that, so the observation of that must certainly
supplant Detraction. Let us therefore when we find the humor fermenting within
us, and ready to break out in Declamations against our brethren, Let us, I say,
check it with this short question, Would I my self be thus used? This voice
from within, will be like that from heaven to St. Paul, which stopped him in the
height of his carrier. Act. 9.4. And this voice every man may hear, that will
not stop his ears, nor gag his conscience, it being but the Echo of that native
Justice and equity which is planted in our hearts: and when we have our remedy
so near us, and will not use it, God may well expostulate with us, as he did
with the Jews, Why will ye die, O house of Israel? Ezekiel. 33.11.

43. THESE are some of those many receipts which may he prescribed against this
spreading disease. But indeed there is not so much need to multiply remedies,
as to persuade men to apply them. We are in love with our Malady, and as loath
to be cured of the Luxury of the Tongue, as St. Augustine was of his other
Sensuality, against which he prayed with a Caveat, that he might not be too
soon heard. But it is ill dallying, where our Souls are concerned: for alas it is
they that are wounded by those darts, which we throw at others. We take our aim
perhaps at our Neighbors, but indeed hit our selves: herein verifying in the
highest Sense that Axiom of the Wiseman, He that diggeth a pit, shall fall
into it, and he that roleth a stone, it shall return upon him, Prove. 25.27. If
therefore we have no tenderness, no relenting to our Brethren, yet let us have
some to our selves; so much compassion, nay so much respect to our precious
immortal Souls, as not to set them at so despicable a price, to put them in
balance with the satisfying of a petulant peevish vanity. Surely the showing
our selves ill-natured (which is all the gain Detraction amounts to) is not so
enamouring a design, that we should sacrifice to it our highest interest. It Is
too much to spend our breath in such a pursuit; O let not our souls also exhale
in the vapor; but let us rather pour them out in prayers for our brethren, then
in accusations of them: for tho both the one and the other will return into our
own bosoms, yet God knows to far differing purposes, even as differing as those
wherewith we utter them. The Charity of the one like kindly exhalations will
descend in showers of blessings, but the rigor and asperity of the other, in a
severe doom upon our selves: for the Apostle will tell us, He shall have
judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy, James 2.13.

SECT. VII. Of Scoffing and Derision.
THERE is also another fault of the Tongue injurious to our neighbor, and that
is Derision and Mockery, and striving to render others as ridiculous and
contemtible as we can. This in respect of the subject matter differs from the
other of Detraction, as much as folly or deformity does from vice: yet since
injuries as well as benefits, are to be mesured by common estimation, this may
come in balance with the other. There is such a general aversation in human
nature to contemt, that there is scarce any thing more exasperating. I will not
deny but the excess of that aversation may be levelled against Pride: yet sure
scorn and disdain never sprung from humility, and therefore are very
incompetent Correctors of the other; so that it may be said of that, as once it
was of Diogenes, that he trampled on Plato's Pride with greater of his own.

2. NOR is this injury enhanced only by the resentment of the sufferer, but
also by the way of inflicting it. We generally think those are the severest
marks of infamy, which are the most indelible. To be burnt in the hand or
pilloried, is a more lasting reproach then to be scourged or confined; and it is
the same in this case, for here commonly Wit is the Lictor, which is armed with
an edged tool, and leaves scars behind it. The reproach of rage and fury seem to
be writ in Chalk or Lead, which a dispassionate hearer easily wipes out, but
those of wit are like the Gravers burine upon Copper, or the corrodings of
Aquafortis, engrave and indent the Characters that they can never be defaced.
The truth of this daily experience attests. A dull contumely quickly vanishes,
no body thinking it worth remembering, but when it is steeled with Wit, it pierces
deep, leaves such impressions in the fancy of the hearers, that thereby it gets
rooting in the memory, and will scarce be eradicated: nay sometimes it happens
to survive both speaker and hearer, and conveys it self to posterity; it being
not unusual for the sarcasms of Wit to be transmitted in story. And as it thus
gives an edg, so also does it add wings to a reproach, makes it fly abroad in an
instant. Many a poor man's infirmities had bin confined to the notice of a few
relations or neigbors, had not some remarkable strain of drollery scattered and
dispersed them. The jest recommends the Defamation, and is commonly so
incorporate with it, that they cannot be related apart. And even those who like
it not in one respect, yet are many times so transported with it in the other,
that they choose rather to propagate the contumely, then stifle the conceit.
Indeed Wit is so much the Diana of this Age, that he who goes about to set any
bounds to it, must expect an uproar, Acts 19.28. or at least to be judged to
have imposed an envious inhibition on it, because himself has not stock enough
to maintain the trade. But how ever sharp or unexpected the censure may seem to
be, yet it is necessary that plain downright truth should sometimes be spoken; and
I think that will bear me out, if I say it is possible men may be as oppressive
by their parts, as their power; and that God did no more design the meaner
intellectuals of some for triumphs to the pride and vanity of the more acute,
then he did the possessions of the less powerful, as a prey to the rapine and
avarice of the mighty.

3. AND this suggests a yet farther aggravation of this sin, as it is a
perverting of Gods design, and abuse of the talent he has committed to men in
trust. Ingenuity and quickness of parts, is sure to be reckoned in the highest
ranks of Blessings, and an instrument proper for the most excellent purposes:
and therefore we cannot suppose the Divine Wisdom so much short of Human, as
not in his intention to assign it to uses worthy of it. Those must relate
either to God, our selves, or our neighbors. In respect of God, it renders us
more capable of contemplating his Perfections, discerning the Equity and
Excellence of his Laws, and our obligations to obedience. In regard of our
selves it makes us apprehend our own interest in that obedience; makes us
tractable and perswasible, contrary to that Brutish stub bornness of the Horse
and Mule, which the Psalmist reproaches, Psalm. 32.9. Besides it accommodates us
in all the concerns of Human life, forms it self into all those useful
contrivances, which may make our being here more comfortable: especially it
renders a man company to himself, and in the greatest dearth of Society,
entertains him with his own thoughts. Lastly, as to our neighbors, it renders
us useful and assistant. All those Discoveries and Experiments, those Arts and
Sciences, which are now the common tresure of the world, took their first rise
from the ingenuity of particular persons: and in all personal Exigencies
wherein any of us are at any time involved, we need not be told the usefulness
of a wise adviser. Now all these are emploiments commensurable to the faculty
from whence they flow, and that answer its excellence and value; and he that so
bestows his talent, gives a good account of his trust. But I would fain know
under which of these Heads Derision of our Neighbor comes in: certainly not
under that of being assistant to him. It would be a sorry relief to a poor
indigent wretch, to lavish out wit upon him, in upbraiding of his misery. And
is not this a parallel case? Is it not the same Barbarism, to mock and reproach
a man that wants the gifts of Nature, as him that wants those of Fortune? Nay
perhaps it may be more, for a Beggar may have impoverisht himself by his own
fault, but in Natural defects there is nothing to be charged, unless we will
fly higher, and arraign that Providence that has so dispensed. In a word, as
the Superfluities of the Rich are by God assigned as the storehouse of the
poor, so the Abilities of the Wise are of the ignorant: for it is a great
mistake, to think our selves Stewards in some of Gods gifs, and proprietaries
in others. They are all equally to be employed, according to the designation of
the Donor, and there is nothing more universally designed by him, then that
mankind should be equally helpful to one another. Those therefore whom God has
blessed with higher degrees of sagacity and quickness, ought not to look down on
others as the objects of their contemt or scorn, but rather of their care and
pity, endeavoring to rescue them from those mischiefs, to which their weakness
may expose them, remembering still, that God might have changed the Scene, and
made themselves what they see others. It is part of Jobs justification of his
integrity, that he was eyes to the Blind, and feet to the Lame, Job. 29.25. (
i. e.) he accommodated his assistances to all the wants and exigencies of
others: and sure it is no less the part of a good man to do it in the Mental then
in the Corporeal defects.

4. BUT alas many of us would rather put a stumbling block in the way of the
Blind, pull away the Crutch from the Lame, that we may sport our selves to see
them tumble: such a sensuality we have in observing and improving the
imperfections of others, that it is become the grand excellence of the Age to
be Dextrous at it, and Wit serves some men for little else. We are got indeed
into a merry world, Laughing is our main business; as if because it has bin
made part of the Definition of man, that he is Risible, his manhood consisted
in nothing else. But alas, if that be all the use men have of their
understandings, they were given them to little purpose, since mere Idiots can
laugh with as much pleasure and more innocence then they; and it is a great
instance how extremes may be brought to meet, that the excess of Wit in the
one, and of Folly in the other, serve to produce the same effect.

5. YET so voracious is this humor now grown, that it draws in every thing to
feed it. There is not game enough from the real folly of the world, and
therefore that which is the most distant from it must be stamped with its mark.
It Is a known story of the Friar who on a fasting day bid his Capon be Carp, and
then very Canonically ate it; and by such a transubstantiating power our Wits
bid all seriousness and consideration be formality and foppery, and then under
that name endeavor to hunt it out of the world. I fear moral honesty fares not
better with some of them then moral prudence. The old Philosophical virtues of
Justice, Temperance, and Chastity are now hist off the stage, as fit only for
the Antiquated set of Actors, and he that appears in that equipage, is by many
thought more ridiculous, then he that walks the street in his Ancestors
trunk-hose. Nay indeed vice its self is scarce secure if it have not the grand
accomplishment of impudence: a puny blushing sinner is to be laughed out of his
Modesty, tho not out of his sin; and to be proof against their scorns he must
first be so against all the regrets of his own mind.

6. AND if mere Ethnic virtue, or shame-fac'd vice have this treatment,
Christian Piety must expect worse: and so indeed it finds, its possessors being
beyond all others exposed to their scorn and contemt. Nor is it strange it
should be so, such men being made, as it is Wisd. 2.14. to reprove their ways,
they think in their own defense they are to deride theirs. This is it indeed
which gives a secret sting and venem to their reproaches: other men they abuse
as an exercise of their Wit, but these in defense of the party. So Julian after
his Apostasy, thought it a more effectual way to persecute the Christians by
taunts and ironies, then by racks and tortures, as thinking it more possible to
shame, then fright them out of their religion. And the stratagem seems to have
bin reassumed by many in this Age, and I fear with too great success: for I
doubt not there are diverse who have herded themselves amongst these profane
Scoffers, not that they are convinced by their reasons, but terrified by their
contumelies; and as some Indians are said to worship the Devil, that he may not
hurt them; so these choose to be active, that they may not be passive in the
contemts flung upon Religion: such men forget the dreadful denunciation of
Christ against those that shall be ashamed of him and his words, Mat. 8.38.

7. As for those who, upon a juster estimate, find the advantages of piety
worthy to be chosen, and take it with all its necessary ignominies, they have
the encouragement of very good company in their sufferings. The Psalmist long
ago had his share, when not only Those that sa^e in the gate spoke against him,
but the drunkards made songs upon him, Psalm. 69.12. It Was also the Prophet
Jeremies complaint, I am in Derision daily, every one mocketh me, Jer. 20.7.
Nay our blessed Lord himself was derided in his life by the Pharisees, Luke
16.14. mocked and reviled at his death by the Priests, the Elders, the
Soldiers; nay by casual passengers, Mat. 27.39. And shall the servant think
himself greater then his Lord? Shall a Christian expect an immunity from what
his Savior has born before him? (He that does so, is too delicate a member for
a crucified head.) No sure, let us rather animate our selves, as the Apostle
exhorts, by considering him who as well despised the shame, as endured the
cross for us, Heb. 12.3. and who has not only given an example, but proposed a
reward, a Beatitude to those who are reviled for righteousness sake, Mat. 3.11.
And when this is soberly pondered, 'twill sure make it easy for us to resolve
with holy David in a like case, I will be yet more vile, 2 Samuel 6.22.

8. BUT to return from this digression, to those who thus unhappily employ
their parts, let me propose to them, that they would borrow every day some few
minutes from their mirth, and seriously consider, whether this be (I need not
say a Christian, but) a manly exercise of their faculties. Alas when they have
rallied out the day from one company to another, they may sum up their account
at night in the wise man's simile, their Laughter has bin but like the crackling
of Thorns under a pot, Ecclus. 6.7. made a little brisk noise for the present,
and with the sparkles perhaps annoied their Neighbors, but what real good has
it brought to themselves? All that they can fancy is but the repute of Wit. But
sure that might be attainable some other way. We find the world affected to new
things, and this of Derision and Abuse to others is so beaten a road, that
perhaps the very variety of a new way would render it acceptable. They are the
lighter substances that still swim away with the stream, the greater and more
solid bodies do sometimes stop the current: and sure 'twere a noble essay of
man's parts to stem this tide, and by a more useful application of their own
faculties, convince others that theirs might be better employed. It Is said of
Anacharsis, that at a feast he could not be got to smile at the affected
railleries of common Jesters, but when an Ape was brought in he freely laughed,
saying, an Ape was ridiculous by nature, but men by art and study. And truly
it is a great contemt of human nature to think their intellects were given them
for no better end then to raise that laughter, which a brute can do as well or
better.

9. I would not be thought to recommend such a Stoical sourness, as shall admit
of nothing of the cheerful pleasant part of Conversation. God has not sure bin
more rigid to our Minds then to our Bodies: and as he has not so devoted the
one to toil, but that he allows us some time to exercise them in recreation as
well as labors, so doubtless he indulges the same relaxation to our Minds;
which are not always to be scrued up to the height, but allowed to descend to
those easinesses of Converse, which entertain the lower Faculties of the Soul.
Nor do I think those are ill employed in those little skirmishes of Wit, which
pass familiarly between intimates and acquaintances, which besides the present
divertisement, serve to whet and quicken the fancy. Yet I conceive this liberty
is to be bounded with some Cautions: as first in these encounters, the Charge
should be Powder, not Bullets; there should nothing be said that should leave
any ungrateful impressions, or give any umbrage of a spightful intent. The
world wants not experiments of the mischiefs have happened by too severe
Railleries: in such Fencing, jest has proved earnest, and Florets have often
turned to Swords, and not only the Friendship, but the Men have fallen a
Sacrifice to a Jest.

19. SECONDLY this is to have the same restriction with all other recreations,
that it be made a divertisement, not a trade. It Is an insinuating thing, and is
apt to encroch too much upon our time, and God knows we have a great deal of
business of this world, and much more for the next, which will not be don with
laughing, and therefore it is not for us to play away too much of that time,
which is exacted by more serious concerns. It Is sure we shall die in Earnest,
and it will not become us to live altogether in Jest. But besides this stealth
of our time, it is apt to steal away men's hearts too, make them so dote upon this
kind of entertainment, that it averts them from any thing more serious. I
believe I may appeal to some who have made this their business, whether it go
not against the hair with them to set to any thing else: and having espoused
this as their one excellence, they are willing to decry all others, that they
may the more value themselves upon this. By this means it is, that the gift of
Raillery has in this Age, like the lean kine, devoured all the more solid
worthy qualifications; and is counted the most reputable accomplishment. A
strange inverted estimate, thus to prefer the little ebullitions of Wit, before
solid reason and judgment. If they would accommodate their Diet at the same
rate, they shall eat the Husk rather then the Kernel, and drink nothing but
froth and bubbles. But after all, Wisdom is commonly at long running justified
even of her Despisers; these great Idolaters of Wit often dashing themselves
upon such Rocks, as make them too late wish, their Sails had bin less, and
their Ballast more. For the preventing therefore of more such wracks, I wish
the present caution may be more adverted to, not to bestow an unproportionable
part of our time or value on this slight exercise of man's slightest Faculty.

11. A third Caution in this matter, is to confine our selves to present
Company, not to make absent Persons the Subject of our mirth. Those freedoms we
use to a man's face as they are commonly more moderate, so they are more
equitable, because we expose our selves to the like from him; but the back
blows are disingenuous, and give suspicion we intend not a fair trial of Wit,
but a cowardly murder of a man's fame. It Was the precept of the Philosopher,
Deride not the absent, and I think it may well be so of the Politician: there
being nothing more imprudent as to our civil concerns then the contrary
liberty. For those things never die in the company they are first vented in
(nay perhaps the hearer is not willing his wit should so soon expire;) and when
they once take air, they quickly come to the notice of the derided Person, and
then nothing in the world is more disobliging. It Was a sober precept given one,
not so much as to laugh in compliance with him that derides another, for you
will be hated by him he derides. And if an accessory be hated, sure much more
the principal: and I think I may say, there are many can sooner forgive a
solemn deep contrivance against them, then one of their jocular reproaches: for
he that designs seems to acknowledge them considerable, but he that mocks them,
seems to think them too low for any thing but contemt: and we learn from
Aristotle, that the mesure of anger is entirely taken thence; men being so far
provoked, as they imagine they were slighted or affronted. In mere secular
wisdom it will therefore become men to consider, whether this trade be like to
turn to account, or whethere it be worth the while, at once to make a jest and
an enemy.

12. AND if it be imprudent to make man our enemy, it is much more to make God
so, by levelling our blows at any thing sacred: but of that I have already had
occasion to speak, and shall not repete; only give me leave to say, that
besides the profaner sort of jests, which more immediately reflect on him, he
is concerned in all the unjust reproaches of our brethren, our love to them
being confirmed by the same divine Sanction with our reverence to him: and sure
nothing is more inconsistent with that love, then the exposing them to that
contemt we are our selves so impatient of. In a word what repute soever this
practice now has of Wit, it is very far from wisdom to provoke God that we may
also disoblige man: and if we will take the Scripture estimate, we shall find a
Scorn is no such honorable Epithet as we seem to account it. Solomon does
almost constantly set it in opposition to a Wise man: thus it is, Prove. 9.8.
and again, Chap. 13.1. and many other places; and on the other side, closely
links it with the Fool: and that not only in title, but in punishment too,
Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of fools, Prove.
19.29. So that if our Wits think not Solomon too dull for their Cabal, we see
what a turn he will give to their present verdict.

13. AND if these reproaches which aim only at ostentation of Wit, be so
unjustifiable, what shall we say to those, that are drawn with blacker lines,
that are founded in Malice or Envy, or some undermining design? Every man that
is to be supplanted, cannot always be attaqued with a downright battery:
perhaps his integrity may be such, that, as 'twas said of Daniel, Chap. 6.4.
They can find no occasion against him: and when they cannot shake the main
Fort, they must try if they can possess themselves of the outworks, raise some
prejudice against his discretion, his humor, his carriage, and his most
extrinsic adherents, and if by representing him ridiculous in any of these,
they can but abate men's reverence to him, their confidence of him will not long
hold out; bare honesty without some other adornment, being looked on as a
leaf-less tree, no body will trust himself to its shelter. Thus the enemies of
Socrates, when they could no other way suppress his reputation, hired
Aristophanes a Comic Poet to personate him on the stage, and by the
insinuations of those interludes, insensibly conveied first a contemt, and then
a hatred of him into the hearts of the people. But I need not bring instances
of former times in this matter, these being sufficiently verst in that mystery.

14. IT is not strange that men of such designs, should summon all their Wit to
the service, make their Railleries as picquant as they can, that they may wound
the deeper: but methinks it is but a mean office they assign their Wit, to be (I
will not say the Pander, that being in this Age scarce a title of reproach, but)
the executioner or hangman to their malice. Christ bids us be wise as Serpents,
yet adds withal harmless as Doves; Mat. 10.18. but here the Serpent has quite
eat up the Dove, and puts a Vultur in the place, a creature of such sagacity
and diligence in pursuit of the prey, that it is hard for any art or innocence
to escape its talons.

15. THERE is yet another sort of Contumelious Persons, who indeed are not
chargeable with that circumstance, of ill employing their Wit, for they use
none in it. These are people whose sole talent is Pride and Scorn; who perhaps
have attained the Sciences of dressing themselves finely, and eating well, and
upon the strength of those excellences, look fastidiously, and speak
disdainfully on any that want them; concluding if a man fall short of their
Garniture at the Knees and Elbowes, he is much inferior to them in the
furniture of his Head. Such people think crying, O ridiculous! is an ample
Confutation of any thing can be said; and so they can but despise enough, are
contented not to be able to say why they do so. These are, I confess, the most
innocent kind of Deriders in respect of others, what they say having not edg
enough to cause any smart. The greatest hurt they do is to themselves, who tho
they much need, yet are generally little capable of a rescue, and therefore I
shall not clog the present discourse with any advise to them: I shall choose
rather to conclude with enforcing my Suit to the former, that they would
soberly and sadly weigh the account they must one Day give of the Emploiment of
their Parts, and the more they have hitherto embeazled them, the more to
endeavor to expiate that unthriftiness, by a more careful Managery for the
future; that so instead of that vain, emty, vanishing Mirth they have courted
here, they may find a real, full, and eternal Satisfaction in the Joy of their
Lord.

SECT. VIII. Of Flattery.
1. THE last of Verbal injuries to our Neighbor which I shall mention, is
Flattery. This is indeed the fatallest wound of the Tongue, carries least
Smart, but infinitely more of Danger, and is as much superior to the former, as
a Gangrene is to a Gall or Scratch; this may be sore and vexing, but that
stupifying and deadly. Flattery is such a Mystery, such a Riddle of iniquity,
that its very softnesses are its cruellest rigors, its Balm corrodes, and (to
comprize all in the Psalmists excellent Description) its words are smoother
then oil, and yet be they very swords, Psalm. 56.21.

1. BUT besides the mischiefs of it to the Patient, it is the most dishonoring,
the most vilifying thing to the Agent. I shall not need to empannel a Jury
either of Moralists or Divines, every man's own breast sufficiently instructing
him in the unworthiness of it. It Is indeed a Collective accumulative Baseness,
it being in its Element a compound and complex of the most sordid, hateful
qualities incident to Mankind. I shall instance in three, viz. Lying,
Servility, and Treachery, which being detestably deformed single, must in
Conjunction make up a loathsome Monstrous guilt. Now tho Flattery has two
Branches, yet these lie so at the Root as equally to influence both: for
whether you take it as it is the giving of praise where it is not due, or the
professing of kindness which is not real, these Properties are still its
Constitutive parts.

3. AND first we may take Lying to be the very corner Stone of the Fabric; for
take it away, and the Whole falls to the ground. A Parasite would make but a
lean trade of it, that should confine himself to truth. For tho it is possible so
to order the manner and circumstances, as to flatter even in the representing a
man's real virtues to him, yet commonly if they do not falsify as to the kind,
they are forced to do it as to the degree. Besides as there are but few such
subjects of Flattery, so neither are men of that Worth so receptive of it. Such
sort of addresses are less dangerous to those who have the perspicacity to see
through them: so that these Merchants are under a a necessity of dealing with the
more ignorant Chapmen, and with them their counterfeit wares will go off best.
It is indeed strange to consider, with what gross impudent falsehoods men of
this trade will court their Patrons. How many in former Ages have not only
amassed together all sublunary excellences, but have even ransacked heaven to
supply their Flattery, Deified their Princes, and persuaded them they were
Gods, who at last found they were to die like men? And tho this strein be now
out-dated, yet perhaps it is not that the vice is grown more modest, but that
Atheism has robbed it of that Topic. Those that believe no God, would rather
seem to annihilate then magnify the person to whom they should apply the title.
But I do not find that the practice has any other bounds. A great man's vices
shall still be called virtues; his deformities, beauties; and his most absurd
follies, the height of ingenuity. Such a subtle Alchymist is this Parasite,
that he turns all he touches into gold, imaginary indeed as to the deluded
Person, but oft-times real to himself. Nor is Lying less natural to the other
part of Flattery, the Profession of service and kindness. This needs no
evidencing, and to attemt it would be a self-Confutation: for if those
Professions be true, they are not Flattery, therefore if they be Flattery, they
must needs be Lies. It will be almost as needless to expatiate on the baseness
and meaness of that sin; for tho there is no Subject that affords more matter
for Declamation, yet Lying is a thing that is ashamed of it self, and therefore
may well be remitted to its own convictions. It Is Aristotle's observation, that
all Elements but the Earth, had some Philosopher or other, that gave it his
vote to be the first productive Principle of all things: and I think we may now
say, that all Crimes have had their Abettors and fautors, some body that would
stand up in their defense; only Lying is so much the dregs and refuse of
wickedness, that none has yet had Chemistry enough to sublimate it, to bring it
into such a reputation, that any man will think fit to own it: the greater
wonder that what is under so universal a reproach, should be so commonly
admitted in practice. But by this we may make an estimate, what the whole body
of Flattery is, when in one limb of it we find so much corruption.

4. A second is Servility and Abjectness of humor: and of this there needs no
other proof then has bin already given; this charge being implicitly involved
in the former of Lying, the condescending to that, being a mark of a
disingenuous spirit. And accordingly the nobler Heathens looked on it as the
vice of Slaves and vassals, below the liberty of a free man, as well as an
honest. But tho I need no other evidence to make good the accusation, yet every
Sycophant furnishes me with many supernumerary proofs. Look upon such a one,
and you shall see his eyes immoveably fixed on his Patrons face, watching each
look, each glance, and in every change of his countenance (like a Star-gazer)
reading his own destiny, his Ears chained (like Gally-slaves at the oar) to his
dictate, sucking in the most insipid discourses with as much greediness, as if
they were the Apothegms of the seven Sages, his Tongue tuned only to Panegyrics
and Acclamations, his feet in winged motion upon every nod or other
signification of his pleasure: in a word, his whole body (as if it had no other
animal spirits then what it derived from him) varies its postures, its
exercises, as he finds agreeable to the humor he is to serve. And can humanity
contrive to debase it self more? Yes it can, and does to often, by enslaving
its Diviner part to, taking up not only opinions, but even crimes also in
compliance, playing the incarnate Devil, and helping to act those villainies
which Satan can only suggest: and if this be not a state of abject slavery,
sure there is none in the world. Plutarch tells us, that Philoxenus for
despising some dull Poetry of Dionysius, was by him condemed to dig in the
Quarries: from whence being by the mediation of friends remanded, at his return
Dionysius produced some other of his verses, which as soon as Philoxenus had
heard, he made no reply, but calling to the Waiters, said, Let them carry me
again to the Quarries. And if a heathen Poet could prefer a corporeal slavery
before a mental, what name of reproach is low enough for those, who can submit
to both, in pursuit of those poor sordid advantages they project by their
Flatteries? Nor is this baseness more observable in these mean fawnings and
observances, then it is in the protestations of kindness and Friendship. Love
is the greatest gift any man has to bestow, and Friendship the sacredest of all
moral bonds, and to prostitute these to little pitiful designs, is sure one of
the basest cheats we can put upon our common nature, in thus debasing her
purest and most current coin, which by these frequent adulterations is become
so suspected, that scarce any man knows what he receives. But Christian Charity
is yet worse used in the case: for that obliging to all sincerity, is hereby
induced to give gold for dross, exhibit that Love indeed, and in truth, which
is returned only in word and in Tongue, 1 John 3.18. And so it does in those
who observe its rules: but in those who own, yet observe them not, it is yet a
greater sufferer, by laboring under the scandal of all their dissimulations. It
was once the Character given Christians, even by their Enemies, Behold how they
love one another: but God knows we may now be pointed out by a very differing
mark, Behold how they deceive and delude one another. And sure this violation
we herein offer to our Religion, does not allay but aggravate the baseness of
this practice: for if in the other we sell our selves, in this we sell our God
too, sacrifice our interest in him to get a surreptitious title to the favor of
a man. And this I conceive does in the second place not much commend the art of
Flattery, which is built up of so vile materials.

5. AND to complete this infamous composition, in the third place Treachery
comes in; a crime of so odious a kind, that to name it is to implead it: yet
how intrinsic a part this is of Flattery, will need no great skill to evidence,
daily experience sufficiently doing it. It Is a common observation of Flatterers,
that they are like the Heliotrope, open only toward the sun, but shut and
contract themselves at night, and in cloudy weather. Let the object of their
adoration be but eclipsed, they can see none of those excellences which before
dazzled their eyes: and however inconstant they may seem in it to others, they
are indeed very constant to themselves, true to their fixed principle, of
courting the greatness, not the man; in pursuit whereof their old Idol is often
made a sacrifice to their new: all malicious discovery is made of their falling
friend, to buy an interest in the rising one. Of this there are such crowds of
examples in Story, that it would be impertinent to single out any, especially
in an Age that is fitter to furnish presidents for the future, then to borrow
of the past-times. But supposing the Parasite not actually guilty of this base
revolt (which yet he seldom fails to be upon occasion) yet is he no less
Treacherous even in the height of his Blandishments; and while he most courts a
man, he does the most ruinously undermine him. For first he abuses him in his
understanding, precludes him from that which wise men have judged the most
essential part of Learning, the knowledge of himself, from which it is the main
business of the Flatterer to divert him. And to this abuse there is another
inevitably consequent: for this ignorance of his faults or follies, necessarily
condemns him to the continuing in them, it being impossible for him to think of
correcting either the one or the other, who is made believe he has neither.
This is like the treachery of a bribed officer in a Garrison, who will not let
the weak parts be fortified, and lays the man as open to assaults as that does
the Town. Yet this is not all, he does not only provide for the continuance,
but the improving of his crimes and errors, which alas are too prolific of
themselves, but being cultivated and manured with perpetual soothings and
encouragements, grow immesurably luxuriant. And accordingly we see that men
used only to applauses, are so swelled with them, that their insolences are
intolerable. And this they are sometimes taught to their cost, when they happen
among freemen, who will not submit to all they say, nor commend all they do.
And finding these uneasy contradictions when they come abroad, they are willing
to retire to their most complaisant company: and so this Sycophant Devil having
once got them within his circle, may enchant them as he pleases, lead them from
one wickedness to another, And as Caligula and other voluptuous Emperors, by
being adored as Gods, sunk in their sensuality below the Nature of man, so
these celebrated Persons are by that false veneration animated to all those
reprochful practices, which may expose them to a real contemt; their follies,
as well as their vices still get head, till they answer the description the
Wise man gives of the old Giants, Who fell away in the strength of their
foolishness. Ecclus. 16.7.

6. AND sure he that betraies a man to all these mischiefs, may well be thought
perfidious. But that which infinitely amplifies and enhances the Treachery is,
that all this is acted under the notion and disguise of a friend; a relation so
venerable, that methinks it is the nearest secular transcript of the treason,
which is storied of those who have administered Poison in the Eucharist. The
name of a friend is such an endearment, as nothing human can equal. All other
natural or civil ties take their greatest force from this. What signifies an
unfriendly Parent, or Brother, or Wife? It Is friendship only that is the cement
which really and effectively combines mankind: and therefore we may observe,
that God reckoning up other relations, illustrates them by several notes of
endearment, but when he comes to that of friendship, it is the friend who is as
thine own soul, Deuteronomy. 13.6. nothing below the highest instance was thought
expressive enough of that union. What a Legion of Fiends then possesses men
that can break these chains Mat. 5.4. nay that can hammer and forge those very
chains into Daggers and Stillettoes, and make their friendship an engine of
ruin? This is certainly the blackest color wherein we can view a Parasite, his
false light makes the shadow the more dismal. As the Ape has a peculiar
deformity above other brutes by that awkward and ungraceful resemblance he has
to a man, so sure a Flatterer is infinitely the more hateful for being the ugly
counterfeit of a Friend. And as this Treachery lies at the bottom of the
Panegyrics, so also does it of all the caresses and exuberant kindness of a
Flatterer, which if they aimed not at any particular end of circumvention, must
yet in the general be treacherous by being false. A man looks on the love of his
friend as one of the richest possessions (upon which account the Philosopher
thought friends were to be Inventoried as well as goods.) What a defeat and
discomfiture is it to a man when he comes to use this wealth, to find it all
false metal, such as will not answer any of those purposes for which he
depended on it. There cannot sure be a greater Treachery, then first to raise a
confidence and then deceive it. But besides this fundamental falseness, there
are also many incidental Trecheries, which fall in upon occasion of particular
designs. A pretense of kindness is the universal stale to all base projects: by
this men are robbed of their fortunes, and women of their honor: in a word all
the wolfish designs walk under this sheeps clothing; and as the world goes, men
have more need to beware of those who call themselves friends, then those who
own themselves enemies.

7. THESE are the lineaments of this vice of Flattery, which sure do together
make up a face of most extreme deformity. I might upon a true account add
another, and charge it with folly too. I am sure according to the Divine
estimate it is always so: and truly it does not seldom prove so in the secular
also. Men of this art do sometimes drop their vizard before they have got the
prize, and then there is nothing in the world that appears to contemtible, so
silly; a barefaced Flatterer being every bodies scorn. The short is, wherever
this game is played there is always a fool in the case: if the parasite be
detected, it falls to his share: if he be not, to his whom he deludes. But at
the best it is but subtilty and cunning he can boast of; and if he can in his own
fancy raise that to the opinion of true Wisdom, it is a sign he is come round to
practice his deceits upon him self, and is as much his own Flatterer as he has
bin others.

8. AND now I know not whether it be more shame or wonder, to see that men can
so put off ingenuity, and the native greatness of their kind, as to descend to
so base, so ignoble a vice: yet alas we daily see it don, and that not only by
the scum and refuse of the people, such as Job speaks of, who are viler then
the earth, Cap. 30.8. but by Persons of all conditions. Flattery like a spring
forced upwards ascends, as cares are by the wise man said to descend, Ecclus.
40.4. from him that wears a linen frock to him that wears a crown: all
intermedial degrees are but like pipes, which as they suck from below, so
transmit it still upwards. There are few so low but find some body to cajole
and flatter them. Some interest or other may sometimes be to be served even upon
the meanest; and those that find themselves thus solicited for benefits, are
easily taught by it how to address to their immediate superiors, from whom they
expect greater: and as it is thus handed from one rank to another, the art still
is more subtilized and refined (God help poor Princes the while, who commonly
meet with the Elixir, and quintessence of this venem:) and thus it passes through
all states and conditions: as they are passive on the one side, and are
flattered by some, so they are active on the other, and flatter others.

9. I say all conditions, I do not say all Persons in those conditions, for no
truly generous soul can stoop so low: but it is too evident to what a low ebb
Generosity as well as Christianity is grown, by the numbers of those who thus
degrade themselves, every little petty interest being thought worth these base
submissions. And truly it is hard to find, by what Topic of persuasion to
assault such men. The meanness, or the sin will scarce be disswasives to those
who have reconciled themselves to both: if any thing can be pertinently said to
them, it must be upon the score of Interest, for that being their grand
principle, they can with no pretense disclame the inferences drawn thence.

10. LET them therefore duly balance the advantages they project from this
practice with the mischiefs and dangers of it. What they expect is commonly
either Honor or wealth, these they hope may be acquired by their prostrations
to those, who can dispense or procure them. It Is true, as Honor signifies
Greatness and Power, it is sometimes attained by it, but then as it signifies
Reputation and Esteem, it is as sure to be lost. He that thus ascends, may be
looked on with fear, but never with reverence. Now I think it is no good bargain
to exchange this second notion of Honor for the first: for besides the
difference in the intrinsic value, it is to be considered how tottering a Pinnacle
unmerited Greatness is. He that raised him to satisfy his humor at one time,
can (with more ease and equal justice) throw him down at another: and when such
a man does fall, he falls as without pity, so without remedy, has no foundation
on which to rebuild his fortune. His Sycophanting arts being detected, that
Game is not to be played the second time: whereas a man of a clear reputation,
tho his barque be split, yet he saves his Cargo, has something left toward
setting up again, and so is in capacity of receiving benefit not only from his
own industry, but the friendship of others. A sound piece of Timber, if it be
not thought fit for one use, yet will be laid by for another: and an honest man
will probably at one time or other be thought good for something.

11. As for the other aim, that of Wealth, it is very possible that may sometimes
be compassed; and well it may, the flatterer having several Springs to feed it
by. For he that has a great Patron, has the advantage of his countenance and
Authority, he has that of his bounty and liberality, and he has another
(sometimes greater then both) that of his negligence and deceivableness. But yet
all these acquisitions are many times like Fairy money, what is brought one
night is taken away the next. Men of this mold seldom know how to bear
prosperity temperately, and it is no new thing to see a Privado carry it so
high, as to awaken the jealousy of his promoter, which being assisted by the
busy industry of those who envy his fortune, twill be easy enough to find some
flaw in the Gettings, by which to unravel the whole Web: an event that has bin
often experimented not only in the private managery of Families, but in the most
public administrations. And these are such hazards, that laid all together
would much recommend to any the Moral of Horaces Fable, and make one choose the
Country Mouses plain fare and safety, rather then the delicacies of the City
with so much danger. This then is the state of the prosperous Parasite. But
alas how many are there who never arrive to this, but are kicked down ere they
have climbed the two or three first rounds of the Ladder, whose designs are so
humble, as not to aspire above a Major-Domo, or some such domestic preferment
(for, in this trade there are adventures of all sizes.) But upon all these
considerations, methinks it appears no very inviting one to any. At the long
run an honest freedom of speech will more recommend a man, then all these
sneaking flatteries: we have a very wise man's word for it, he that rebukes a
man, afterward shall find more favor, then he that flattereth with his lips,
Prove. 28.23.

12. BUT after all that has or can be said, the suppression of Flattery will
most depend upon those Persons to whom it is addressed: if it be not repulsed
there, nothing else will discourage it; and if it be, it is crushed in the egg,
and can produce no viper. These Vulturs prey only on carcasses, on such stupid
minds, as have not life and vigor enough to fray them away. Let but Persons of
quality entertain such customers with a severe brow, with some smart expression
of dislike, those Leeches will immediately fall off. In Sparta when all laws
against theft proved ineffectual, at last they fixed the penalty on them that
were robbed, and by that did the business: and in the present case, if 'twere
made as infamous to be flattered as it is to flatter, I believe it might have
the like effect. Indeed there is pretense enough to make it so: for first as to
Wit, the advantage is clear on the Flatterers side: he must be allowed to have
more of that (which in this Age is more then a counterpoise to honesty; and as
for virtue, the balance (as to the principal motive) seems to hang pretty even:
it is the vice of Avarice that temts the one to flatter, and the vice of Pride
that makes it acceptable to the other. The truth is, there is the bottom of the
matter: it is that secret confederate within, that exposes men to those assaults
from without. We have generally such an appetite to praise, that we greedily
suck in without staying to examine whether it belong to us or no, or whether it
be designed as a kindness or an abuse. Other injuries rush upon us with
violence, and give us notice of their approach: they may be said to come like
water into our bowels; but this like oil into our bones, Ps. 109.18. penetrates
easily, undiscernibly, by help of that native propension we have to receive it.
It Is therefore the near concern of all, especially of those whose quality most
exposes them, to keep a guard upon that treacherous immate, not to let that step
into the scale to make a base Sycophant outweigh a true friend. And when ever
they are attacqued with extravagant Encomiums, let them fortify themselves with
this Dilemma, either they have those excellences they are praised for, or they
have not: if they have not, it is an apparent cheat and gull, and he is of a
pitiful forlorn understanding that delights to be fooled; but if they have,
they are too good to be exposed to such worms who will instantly wither the
fairest gourd, John. 4.7.

For as it is said of the Grand Signior, that no grass grows where his horse
once treads: so we may say of the Flatterer, no virtue ever prospers where he
is admitted: if he find any he hugs it till he stifles it, if he find none, he
so indisposes the soil, that no future seeds can ever take root. In fine, he is
a mischief beyond the description of any Character. O let not men then act this
Part to themselves by being their own Parasites! and then twill be an easy
thing to escape all others.

SECT. IX. Of Boasting.
1. WE have now seen some effects of an ungoverned Tongue, as they relate to
God and our Neighbor. There is yet a third sort which reflect upon a man's self.
So unboundedly mischievous is that petulant member, that heaven and earth are
not wide enough for its range, but it will find work at home too; and like the
viper, that after it had devoured its companions, prei'd upon its self, so it
corrodes inward, and becomes as fatal to its owner, as to all the world besides.

2. OF this there are as many instances, as there are imprudent things said,
for all such have the worst reflection upon the speaker: and therefore all that
have given rules for civil life, have in order to it put very severe restraints
upon the Tongue, that it run not before the judgment. It Was the advice of Zeno
to dip the Tongue in the mind before one should permit it to speak.
Theophrastus used to say, It was safer trusting to an unbridled, horse, then to
intemperate speech. And daily experience confirms the Aphorism; for those that
set no guard upon their Tongues, are hurried by them into a thousand
indecences, and very often into real considerable mischiefs. By this means men
have proved their own delators, discovered their own most important secrets:
and whereas their heart should have kept a lock upon their Tongues, they have
given their Tongue the key of their heart, and the event has bin often as unhappy
as the proceeding was preposterous. There are indeed so many ways for men to
lose themselves in their talk, that I should do the like if I should pretend to
trace them. Besides my subject leads me not to discourse Ethically, but
Christianly of the faults of the Tongue, and therefore I have all along
considered the one no farther then it happens to be twisted with the other.

3. IN the present case I shall insist only upon one fault of the Tongue, which
partakes of both kinds, and it is at once a vice and a folly, I mean that of
Boasting and vaunting a man's self: a strain to which some men's tongues have a
wonderful glibness. No discourse can be administered, but they will try to turn
the tide, and draw it all into their own Chanel, by entertaining you with long
stories of themselves: or if there be no room for that, they will at least
screw in here and there some intimations of what they did or said. Yea so
stupid a vanity is this, that it works alike upon all materials: not only their
greater and more illustrious acts or sentences, but even their most slight and
trivial occurrences, by being theirs, they think acquire a considerableness,
and are forcibly imposed upon the company; the very dreams of such people
strait commence prophesy, and are as seriously related, as if they were
undoubted revelations. And sure if we reflect upon our Saviors rule, that Out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, we cannot but think these men
are very full of themselves; and to be so, is but another phrase for being very
proud. So it is Pride in the heart, which is the spring that feeds this perpetual
current at the mouth, and under that notion we are to consider it.

4. AND truly there is nothing can render it more infamous, Pride being a vice
that of all others is the most branded in Scripture as most detestable to God,
and is signalized by the punishment to be so. This turned Lucifer out of
Heaven, Nebuchadnezzar out of his Throne, nay out of Human society. And indeed
it seems still to have something of the same effect, nothing rendering a man so
inconsiderable; for it sets him above the meaner sort of company, and makes him
intolerable to the better, and to complete the parallel, he seldom comes to
know himself till he be turned a grazing, be reduced to some extremities.

5. BUT this Boasting arrogant humor, tho always bad, yet is more or less so
according to the Subject on which it works. If it be only on Natural
excellences, as Beauty, Wit; or accidental acquisitions, as Honor, Wealth, or
the like, yet even here it is not only a Theft, but a Sacriledg; the glory of
those being due only to the Donor, not to the receiver, there being not so much
as any predisposition in the subject to determine Gods bounty. He could have
made the most deformed Beggar as handsome and as rich, as those who most pride
themselves in their wealth and beauty. No man fancies himself to be his own
Creator, and tho some have assumed to be the Architects of their own fortunes,
yet the frequent defeats of men's industry and contrivance, do sufficiently
confute that bold pretense, and evince, that there is something above them,
which can either blast or prosper their attemts. What an invasion then is it of
Gods right, to ingross the honor of those things being don, which were not at
all in their power to do? And sure the folly is as great in respect of men, as
the sin is toward God. This boasting like a heavy Nurse, over-laies the Child:
the vanity of that quite drowns the notice of the things in which it is founded;
and men are not so apt to say, such a man is Handsome, Wise, or Great, as that
he is proud upon the fancy of being so. In a word, he that celebrates his own
excellences, must be content with his own applauses, for he will get none of
others, unless it be from those fawning Sycophants, whose praises are worse
then bitterest Detraction.

6. AND yet so sottish a vice is Pride, that it can make even those insidious
Flatteries matter of boast, which is a much more irrational object of it then
the former. How eagerly do some men propagate every little Encomium their
Parasites make of them? With what gust and sensuality will they tell how such a
Jest of theirs took, or such a Magnificence was admired? It Is pleasant to see
what little arts and dexterities they have to wind in such things into
discourse: when alas it amounts to no more then this, that some have thought
them fools enough to be flattered, and it is odds but the hearers will think them
enough so to be laughed at.

7. BUT there is yet another Subject of Boasting more foolish, and more
criminal too then either of the former, and that is when men vaunt of their
Piety, which if it were true, were yet less owing to themselves then any
natural endowment. For tho we do not at all assist toward them, yet do we
neither obstruct; but in the operations of Grace it is otherwise; we have there a
principle of opposition, and God never makes us his own till he subdue that:
and tho he do it not by an irresistible force, but by such sweet and gentle
insinuations, that we are sometimes captivated ere we are aware: yet that does
not impeach his right of conquest, but only shows him the more gracious
conqueror. It Is true in respect of the event we have great cause of exultance
and joy, Gods service being the most perfect freedom; yet in regard of the
efficiency, we have as little matter of Boast, as the surprised City has in the
triumphs of its victor.

8. BUT secondly either this vaunted Piety is not real, and then it is good for
nothing, or else by being vaunted becomes so. If it be not real, it is then the
superadding Hypocrisy to the former sacriledg, an attemt at once to rob God and
cheat men, and in the event usually renders them hateful to both; to God (who
cannot be mocked) it does so at the instant, and seldom misses to do so at last
to men. An Hypocrite has a long part to act, and if his memory fail him but in
any one scene, his play is spoiled: so that his hazards are so great, that it is
as little prudent as it is honest to set up the trade, especially in an age when
Piety it self is at so low a price, that its counterfeit cannot pass for much.
But if the Piety be indeed true, the Boasting it blasts it, makes it utterly
insignificant. This we are told by Christ himself, who assures us that even the
most Christian actions of prayer, alms, and fasting, must expect no other
reward (when boasted) then the sought-for applause of men. Mat. 6. When a man
shall make his own tongue the trumpet of his Alms, or the echo of his Prayers,
he carves, or rather snatches his own reward, and must not look God should heap
more upon him: the recompense of his pride he may indeed look for from him, but
that of his virtue he has forestalled. In short, piety is like those lamps of
old, which maintained their light some ages under ground, but as soon as they
took air expired. And surely there cannot be a more deplorable folly, then thus
to lose a rich Jewel, only for the pitiful pleasure of showing it: its the humor
of Children and Idiots, who must be handling their birds till they fly away,
and it ranks us with them in point of discretion, tho not of innocence.

9. FROM the view of these particulars we may in the gross conclude that this
ostentation is a most foolish sin, such as never brought in advantage to any
man. There is no vice so undermines it self as this does: it is glory it seeks,
and instead of gaining that, it loses common ordinary estimation. Every body
that sees a bladder puffed up, knows it is but wind that so swells it: and there is
no surer argument of a light frothy brain then this bubbling at the mouth.
Indeed there is nothing renders any man so contemtible, so utterly useless to
the world: it excludes him almost from all commerce, makes him incapable of
receiving or doing a benefit. No man will do him a good turn, because he
fore-sees he will arrogate it to himself, as the effect of his merit: and none
(that are not in some great exigence) will receive one from him, as knowing it
shall be not only proclaimed, but magnified much above the true worth. There
seems to be but one purpose for which he serves, and that is to be sport for
his company: and that he seldom fails to be, for in these gamesome days men
will not lose such an opportunity of divertisement, and therefore will
purposely give him hints, which may put him upon his Rhodomontades. I do not
speak this by way of encouragement to them, but only to show these vaporers, to
what scorn they expose themselves, and what advantage they give to any that
have a mind to abuse them: for they need not be at any pains for it, they do
but swim with their stream; an approving nod or smile serves to drive on the
design, and make them display themselves more disadvantagiously, more
ridiculously, then the most Satirical Character could possibly do.

10. BUT besides these sportive projects, such a man lays himself open to more
dangerous circumventions. He that shows himself so enamored of praise, that (
Narcissus like) dotes on his own reflections, is a fit prey for Flatterers, and
such a Carcass will never want those Eagles: when his weak part is once
discerned (as it must soon be when himself publishes it) he shall quickly be
surrounded with assailants. The last Section has showed the misery of a man so
besieged, therefore I shall not enlarge on it here, this mention being only
intended to evince how apt this vain glorious humor is to betray men to it.

11. THESE are competent Specimens of the folly of this vice: but it has yet a
farther aggravation, that it precludes all means of growing wiser. It Is Solomon's
assertion, See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a
Fool then of him, Prove. 26.12. and the reason is evident, for he discards the
two grand instruments of Instruction, Admonition and Observation. The former he
thinks superseded by his own Perfections, and therefore when any such friendly
office is attemted toward him, he imputes it either to Envy, and a desire to
eclipse his luster by finding some spot, or else to Ignorance and incapacity of
estimating his worth: the one he entertains with Indignation, the other with
disdainful Pity. As for observation, he so circumscribes it within himself,
that it can never fetch in any thing from without. Reading of men has bin by
some thought the most facile and expedite Method for acquiring Knowledge; and
sure for some kinds of Knowledge it is: but then a man must not only read one
Author, much less the one worst he can pick out for himself. It Is an old true
saying, He that is his own Pupil shall have a Fool for his Tutor: and truly he
that studies only himself, will be like to make but a sorry Progress. Yet this
is the case of arrogant men: they lose all the benefit of Conversation, and
when they should be enriching their Minds with foreign tresure, they are only
counting over their own store. Instead of adverting to those sober discourses
which they hear from others, they are perhaps watching to interrupt them by
some pompous Story of themselves, or at least in the abundance of their
self-sufficiency, think they can say much better things, Magisterially obtrude
their own notions, and fall a teaching when it is fitter they should learn: and
sure to be thus forward to lay out, and take no care to bring in, must needs
end in a Bunkrupt state. It Is true I confess the study of a mans-self is
(rightly taken) the most useful part of Learning, but then it must be such a
Study as brings him to know himself, which none do so little as these men, who
in this are like those silly women the Apostle describes, 2 Timothy 3.7. who are
ever learning yet never attain. And it is no wonder, for they begin at the wrong
end, make no inquiry into their faults or defects, but fix their Contemplation
only on their more splendid qualities, with which they are so dazzled, that when
you bring them to the darker parts of themselves, it fares with them as with
those that come newly from gazing on the Sun, they can see nothing.

12. AND now having dissected this swelling vice, and seen what it is that
feeds the tumor, the cure suggests it self. If the disease be founded in Pride,
the abating that is the most natural and proper remedy: and truly one would
think that mere weighing of the foregoing considerations, might prove
sufficient allaies to it. Yet because where humors are turgent, it is necessary
not only to purge them, but also to strengthen the infested parts, I shall
adventure to give some few advices by way of Fortification and Antidote.

13. IN the first place, that of the Apostle offers it self to my hand, Look
not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others.
Phil. 2.4. A counsel which in a distorted sense seems to be too much practiced.
We are apt to apply it to worldly advantages, and in that notion not to look on
our own things with thankfulness, but on other men's with envy. We apply it also
to errors and sins, and look not on our own to correct and reform, but on
others to despise and censure. Let us at last take it in the genuine sense, and
not look on our own excellencies, but those of others. We see in all things how
desuetude does contract and narrow our faculties, so that we can apprehend only
those things wherein we are conversant. The droiling Pesant scarce thinks there
is any world beyond his own Village, or the neighboring Markets, nor any gaity
beyond that of a Wake or Morris; and men who are accustomed only to the
admiration of themselves, think there is nothing beside them worthy of regard.
The unbred minds must be a little sent abroad, made acquainted with those
excellencies which God has bestowed on other men, and then they will not think
themselves like Gideons fleece to have sucked up all the dew of heaven: nay
perhaps, they may find they rather answer the other part of the miracle; and
are drier then their neighbors. Let them therefore put themselves in this
course, observe diligently all the good that is visible in other men: and when
they find themselves mounting into their altitudes, let them clog their wings
with the remembrance of those who have out-soar'd them, not in vain opinion,
but in true worth. It Is nothing but the fancy of singularity that puffs us up To
breath, to walk, to hear, to see, are excellent powers, yet no body is proud of
them, because they are common to the whole kind: and therefore if we would
observe the great number of those that equal, or exceed us, even in the more
appropriate endowments, we should not put so excessive a price upon our selves.

14. SECONDLY if we will needs be reflecting upon our selves, let us do it more
ingenuously, more equally: let us take a true survey, and observe as well the
barren as the fertile part of the soil: and if this were don, many men's value
would be much short of what they are willing to suppose it. Did we but compare
our crop of Weeds and Nettles, with that of our Corn, we must either think our
ground is poor, or our selves very ill husbands. When therefore the
recollection of either real or fancied worth begins to make us aerie, let us
condense again by the remembrance of our sins and folly: it is the only possible
service they can do us, and considering how dear they are to cost us, we had
not need lose this one accidental advantage. In this sense Satan may cast out
Satan, our vilest guilts help to eject our pride; and did we well manage this
one stratagem against him, 'twould give us more cause of triumph, then most of
those things for which we so spread our plumes: I do not say we should contract
new guilts to make us humble, God knows we need not, we have all of us enough
of the old stock if we would but thus employ them.

15. IN the last place I should advise those who are apt to talk big things of
themselves, to turn into some other road of discourse: for if they are their
own Theme, their tongues will as naturally turn into Eulogies, as a horse does
into that Inn to which he is customed. All habits do require some little excess
of the contrary to their cure: for we have not so just a scantling of our
selves, as to know to a grain what will level the scales, and place us in the
right Mediocrity. Let men therefore that have this infirmity, shun (as far as
prudence and interest permits) all discourse of themselves, till they can sever
it from that unhappy appendage. They will not be at all the less acceptable
company, it being generally thought none of the best parts of breeding, to talk
much of ones self: for tho it be don so as not to argue pride, yet it does
ignorance of more worthy subjects.

16. I should here conclude this Section, but that there is another sort of
vaunting Talk, which was not well reducible to any of the former Heads, the
Subject matter being vastly distant: for in those the Boasting was founded in
some either real or supposed worth, but in this in Baseness and villainy. There
are a Generation of men, who have removed all the Landmarks which their
Fathers (nay even the Father of Spirits) have set, reverst the common notions
of Humanity, and call evil good, and good evil, and those things which a
moderate impudence would blush to be surprised in, they not only proclaim but
boast of, blow the Trumpet as much before their crimes, as others before their
good deeds. Nay so much do they affect this inverted sort of Hypocrisy, that
they own more wickedness then they act, assume to have made Practical the
highest Speculations of villainy, and like the Devils Knights errant, pretend to
those Romantic achievements, which the veriest Fiend incarnate could never
compass. These are such Prodigies, such Monsters of villainy, that tho they are
the objects of Grief and Wonder, they are not of Counsel. Men who thus rave, we
may conclude their brains are turned, and one may as well read Lectures at
Bedlam as treat with such. Yet we know that there sharp corrections recover
crazed men to Sobriety; and then their Cure lies only in the hand of Civil
Justice: if that would take them at their words, receive their brags as
Confessions, and punish them accordingly, it may be a little real smart would
correct this mad Itch, and and teach them not to glory in their shame, Phil.
3.19.

IN the mean time let others who are not ^et arrived to this height, consider
betimes, that all indulgent practice of sin is the direct Road to it, and
according to the degrees of that indulgence, they make more or less have. He
that constantly and habitually indulges, rides upon the Spur, and will quickly
overtake his Leaders. Nay if it be but this once vice of vanity, it may finally
bring him to their state. He that loves to brag, will scarce find exercise
enough for that faculty in his virtues, and therefore may at last be temted to
take in his vices also. But that which is more seriously considerable is, that
Pride is so provoking to Almighty God, that it often causes him to withdraw his
Grace, which is a Donative he has promised only to the humble, Jam. 4.6. And
indeed when we turn that Grace into wantonness, as the Proud man does who is
pampered by it into high conceits of himself, it is not probable God will any
longer prostitute his favors to such abuse. The Apostle observes it of the
Gentiles, who had in contradiction of their natural light abandoned themselves
to vile Idolatries, that God after gave them up to a reprobate mind and vile
affections* Romans 1.25 26. But the Proud now stifle a much clearer light, and
give up themselves to as base an Idolatry, the adoration of themselves. And
therefore it is but equal to expect God should desert them, and (as some Nations
have De^fied their diseases) permit them to celebrate even their fowlest
enormities. The application of all I shall sum up in the words of the Apostle,
Romans 11.21. Take heed also that he spare not thee.

SECT. X. Of Querulousness.
1. TO this of Boasting may not unfitly be subjoined another inordinancy of the
Tongue, viz. murmuring and complaining. For tho these faults seem to differ as
much in their complexions, as Sanguine does from Melancholy, yet there is
nothing more frequent then to see them united in the same Person. Nor is this a
conjunction of a later date, but is as old as St. J^de's days, who observe
that the murmurers and complainers are the very same with those who speak great
swelling words, Jude 16.

2. NOR are we to wonder to find them thus conjoined, if we consider what an
original cognation and kindred they have, they being (however they seem
divided) streams issuing from the same fountain. For the very same Pride which
promts a man to vaunt and overvalue what he is, does as forcibly incline him
to contemn and disvalue what he has; whilst mesuring his enjoiments by that
vast Idea he has formed of himself, it is impossible but he must think them
below him.

3. THIS indeed is the true original of those perpetual complainings we hear
from all sorts and conditions of men. For let us pass through all Degrees, all
Ages, we shall rarely find a single Person, much less any number of men, exemt
from this Querulous, this sullen humor: as if that breath of life wherewith God
originally inspired us, had bin given us not to magnify his bounty, but to
accuse his illiberality, and like the dismaller sort of instruments, could be
tuned to no other Streins but those of Mourning and Lamentation. Every man
contributes his note to this doleful Harmony, and after all that God has don to
oblige and delight mankind, scarce any man is satisfied enough, I will not say
to be thankful, but to be patient. For alas what Tragical complaints do men
make of their infelicity, when perhaps their prosperity is as much the envious
outcry of others? Every little defeat of a design, of an appetite, every little
dis-regard from those above them, or less solemn observance from those below
them, makes their Heart hot within them, Psalm. 39.3. and the tongue (that
combustible part) quickly takes fire and breaks out into extravagant
exclamations. It is indeed strange to see how weighty every the trivialliest
thing is when a passion is cast into the scale with it, how every the slightest
inconvenience or petty want preponderates hundreds of great substantial
blessings: when indeed were it in an instance never so considerable, it could
be no just Counterpoise. Yet so closely is this corruption interwoven with our
constitution, that it has sometimes prevailed even upon good men. Jacob tho he
had twelve sons, yet upon the supposed death of one de^pis'd the comforts of
all the rest, and with an obstinate sorrow resolves to go mourning to his
Grave, Genesis 35.37. David after that signal victory which had preserved his
life, reinstated him in his Throne, and restored him to the Ark and Sanctuary,
yet suffered the loss of his rebellious son, who was the Author of his danger,
to overwhelm the sense of his deliverance, and instead of Hymns and praises,
breaks out into ejulations and effeminate wailings, 2 Samuel 18.33.

4. BUT God knows the most of our complaints cannot pretend to such
considerable motives: they are not the bowels of a Father, the impresses of
Nature that excite our repinings, but the impulses of our lusts and inordinate
appetites. Our discontents are usually such as Ahab's for his neighbors
vineyard, Haman's for Mordecai's obeisance, Achitophel's for having his counsel
rejected. Every disappointment of our avarice, ambition, and pride, fill's our
heart with bitterness and our mouths with clamors. For if we should examine the
numerous complaints which sound in every corner, it would doubtless be found
that the greatest part of them have some such original: and that, whether the
pretended grievances be public or private. For the first: many a man is a state
malcontent, merely because he sees another advanced to that honor or wealth
which he thinks he has better deserved. He is always inveighing against such
unequal distributions, where the best services (such you may be sure his own
are) are the worst rewarded: nor does he ever cease to predict public ruins,
till his private are repared. But as soon as that is don, his Augury grows more
mild: and as if the estate and he were like Hippocrates's twins, his recruites
give new vigor to that, and till his next suit is denied, every thing is well
administered. So full alas men are of themselves, that it is hard to find any the
most splendid pretense which has not something of that at the bottom: and would
every man ransack his own heart, and resolve not to cast a stone till he had
first cleared it of all sinister respects, perhaps the number of our
complainers would be much abated.

5. NOR is it otherwise in private discontents. Men are apt to think themselves
ill used by any man who will not serve their interest or their humor, nay
sometimes their vices; and are prone in all companies to arraign such an
unpliant Person, as if he were an enemy to mankind, because he is not a slave
to their will. Nay many have quarreled even with their dearest friends, because
they would not assist them to their own ruin, or have striven to divert them
from it: so forcible are our propensions to mutiny, that we equally take
occasions from benefits or injuries.

6. BUT the highest and most unhappy instance of all is our behavior toward
God, whose allotments we dispute with the same or rather greater boldness then
we do those of men. What else mean those impatient murmurs at those things
which are the immediate issues of his Providence? Such are our native blemishes,
diseases, death of friends, and the like. Nay what indeed are our displesures
even at those things which we pretend to fasten upon a Second Cause? For those
being all under this subordination of the first, cannot move but by its
permission. This holy Job well discerned, and therefore does not indite the
Chaldeans or Sabeans for his plunder, but knowing they were but instruments, he
submissly acknowledges, that there was a higher agent in his loss, The Lord
has taken away, Job. 1.28. When therefore we ravingly execrate the rapine of
one man, the deceit of another for our impoverishment, when we angrily charge
our defamation on the malice of our maligners, our disappointments on the
treachery or negligence of our friends, we do interpretatively conclude either
that there is no overruling providence which could have restrained those
events, or else (which is equally horrid) we accuse it as not having don well
in permitting them. So that against whomsoever we direct our clamors, their
last rebound is against Heaven: this Querulous humor carrying always an
implicit repugnance to Gods disposals: but where it is indulged to, it usually
is its own expositor, and explicitly avows it, charges God foolishly, and by
impious murmurs blasphemes that power which it cannot resist. Indeed the
progress is very natural for our impatiences at man to swell into mutinies
against God: for when the mind is once imbiter'd, it distinguishes not of
objects, but indifferently lets fly its venem. He that frets himself, the
Prophet tells us, will curse his King, nay his God, Isa. 8.21. and he that
quarrels at Gods distributions, is in the direct road to defy his Being.

7. BY this we may estimate the danger of our discontents, which tho at first
they are introduced by the inordinate love of our selves, yet are very apt to
terminate in hatred and Blasphemies against God. He therefore that would secure
himself from the highest degree, must watch against the lowest; as he that
would prevent a total Inundation, must avert the smallest breach in his Banks.
Not but that even the first beginnings are in themselves well worth our
guarding: for abstracting from all the danger of this enormous increase, these
murmurings (like a mortiferous Herb) are poisonous even in their first Spring,
before they arrive to their full maturity. To be always moralizing the Fable
of Prometheus upon one's self, playing the Vultur upon one's own entrails, is
no desirable thing, tho we were accountable to none but our selves for it: to
dip our tongues in gall, to have nothing in our mouth but the extract, and
exhalation of our inward bitterness, is sure no great Sensuality. So that did
we consult only our own ease, we might from that single Topic draw Arguments
enough against our mutinies.

8. BUT besides our duty and ease, our credit and reputation make their plea
also. Fortitude is one of the noblest of moral virtues, and has the luck to
appear considerable even to those who despise all the rest. Now one of the most
proper and eminent acts of that is, the bearing adverse events with an evenness
of temper. This passive valor is as much the mark of a great mind as the
active, nay perhaps more, the later being often owing to the Animal, this to
the Rational part of man. And sure we must strangely have corrupted the
principles of Morality as well as Religion, if every turbulent unruly Spirit,
that fills the world with blood and rapine, shall have his ferity called
gallantry; yet that sober courage, that maintains it self against all the
shocks of Fortune, that keeps its Post in spite of the rudest encounters,
shall not be allowed at least as good a name. And then on the contrary we may
conclude, that to sink under every cross accident, to be still whining and
complaining, crying out upon every touch, is a note of a mean degenerous soul,
below the dionity of our reasonable nature. For certainly God never gave us
reason for so unkind a purpose, as only to quicken and inhance the resentment
of our sufferings, but rather to control those disorders, which the more
tumultuous part of us, our senses, are apt to raise in us: and we are so far
men and no farther, as we use it to that end. Therefore if the dictates of
Religion cannot restrain our murmurs, if we are not Christians enough to submit
to the divine precepts of meekness and acquiescence: yet let us at least keep
within these bounds which ingenuous nature has set us, and not by our manly
impatiencies enter common with Brutes and Animals.

9. NAY I may farther add, if neither for Gods nor our own sakes, yet for
others, for humane society sake, this querulous inclination should be suppressed;
there being nothing that renders a man more unplesant, more uneasy company. For
(besides that it is very apt to vent it self upon those with whom he converses,
rendering him capricious and exceptious; and it is a harsh, a grating sound to
hear a man always in the complaining Key) no man would willingly dwell within
the noise of shreeks and groans; and the exclamations of the discontented
differ from those only by being more articulate. It is a very unwelcome
importunity, to entertain a man's company with remonstrances of his own
infelicites and misadventures; and he that will relate all his grievances to
others, will quickly make himself one to them. For tho he that is full of the
inward sense of them, thinks it rather an ease then oppression to speak them
out, yet the case is far otherwise with his Auditors: they are perhaps as much
taken up with themselves; as he is, and as little at leisure to consider his
concerns, as he theirs. Alas we are not now in those primitive days, when
there was as it were one common sense among Christians, when if one member
suffered, all the members suffered with it, 1 Cor. 12.26. That Charity which
gave that sympathetic motion to the whole, is now it self benumbed, flows rarely
beyond the narrow compass of our personal interest; and therefore we cannot
expect that men should be very patient of our complaints who are not concerned
in the causes of them. The Priests answer to Judas does speak the sense of most
men in the case, What is that to us? See thou to that, Mat. 27.4. I do not deny
but that the discharging ones griefs into the bosom of a true friend, is both
innocent and prudent: nay indeed he that has such a tresure, is unkind to
himself if he use it not. But that which I would dissuade, is the promiscuous
use of this liberty in common conversation, the satisfying our Spleen, when we
cannot ease our hearts by it, the loud declamings at our misery, which is
seldom severed from as severe reflections on those whom we suppose the causes
of it; by which nothing can be acquired but the opinion of our Impatience, or
perhaps some new grievance from some, who think themselves concerned to
vindicate those whom we asperse. In a word it is as indecent as it is
unacceptable, and we may observe all men are willing to slink out of such
company, the Sober for the hazards, and the Jovial for the unplesantness. So
that the murmurer seems to be turned off to the company of those doleful
Creatures which the Prophet mentions, which were to inhabit the ruins of
Babylon, 13.21. For he is ill Conversation to all men, tho the worst of all to
himself.

10. AND now upon the force of all these considerations, I may reasonably
impress the Wise man's Counsel, Therefore beware of murmuring, Wisd. 1.11. And
indeed it is not the precept of the Wise man alone, but of all who have made
any just pretense to that title. For when we consider those excellent lectures
of contentation and acquiescence, wherewith the writings of Philosophers
abound, it is hard to say whether they speak more of instruction or reproach to
us. When their confused notions of a Deity had given them such impressions of
his Wisdom and goodness, that they would not pretend to make any elections for
themselves: how does it shame our more explicit knowledge, who dare not depend
on him in the smallest instance? who will not take his disposals for good,
unless our senses become his sureties? which amounts but to that degree of
credit, which the most faithless man may expect from us, the trusting him as
far as we see him. This is such a contumely to him, as the Ethnic world durst
not offer him, and is the peculiar insolence of us degenerated Christians, who
sure cannot be thought in earnest when we talk of singing Hallelujahs in the
next world to him, whilst we entertain him here only with the sullen noise of
murmurs and repinings. For we are not to think that Heaven will Metamorphose us
on a sudden, and turn our exclamations and wild clamors into Lauds and
Magnificats. It does indeed perfect and crown those graces which were here
inchoate and begun, but no man's conversion ever succeeded his being there: for
Christ has expressly told us, That except we be converted, we shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven, if we go hence in our froward discontents, they
will associate us with those, with whom is weeping and wailing and gnashing of
teeth.

SECT. XI. Of Positiveness.
1. ANOTHER very unhandsom circumstance in discourse is the being over
confident and peremtory, a thing which does very much unfit men for
conversation, it being looked on as the common birthright of mankind, that
every man is to opine according to the dictates of his own understanding, not
another. Now this Peremtoriness is of two sorts, the one a Magisterialness in
matters of opinion and speculation, the other a Positiveness in relating
matters of fact: in the one we impose upon men's understandings, in the other on
their faith.

2. FOR the first, he must be much a stranger in the world who has not met with
it: there being a generation of men, who as the Prophet speaks, Are wise in
their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight, Isa. 5.21. Nay not only so, but
who make themselves the standards of wisdom, to which all are bound to conform,
and whoever weighs not in their balance, be his reasons never do weighty, they
write Tekel upon them. This is one of the most oppressive Monopolies
imaginable: all others can concern only something without us, but this fastens
upon our nature, yea and the better part of it too, our reason; and if it meet
with those who have any considerable share of that within them, they will often
be temted to rally it, and not too tamely resign this native liberty. Reason
submits only to Reason, and he that assaults it with bare Authority (that which
is Divine always excepted) may as well cut flame with his sword, or harden wax
in the sun.

3. IT IS true indeed these great Dictators do sometimes run down the company, and
carry their Hypothesis without contest: but of this there may be diverse reasons
besides the weight of their arguments. Some unspeculative men may not have the
skill to examine their assertions, and therefore an assent is their safest
course; others may be lazy and not think it worth their pains; a third sort may
be modest and awed by a severe brow and an imperious nod: and perhaps the wiser
may providently foresee the impossibility of convincing one who thinks himself
not subject to error. Upon these or other like grounds it is very possible all
may be silenced when never a one is convinced: so that these great Masters may
often make very false estimates of their conquests, and sacrifice to their own
nets, Heb. 1.16. when they have taken nothing.

4. NAY indeed this insolent way of proposing is so far from propagating their
notions, that it gives prejudice against them. They are the gentle insinuations
which pierce, (as oil is the most penetrating of all liquors;) but in these
Magisterial documents men think themselves attackt, and stand upon their guard,
and reckon they must part with Honor together with their Opinion, if they
suffer themselves to be hectored out of it. Besides, this imposing humor is so
unaimable, that it gives an aversion to the Person; and we know how forcible
personal prejudices are (tho it is true they should not be) toward the biassing
of Opinions. Nay indeed men of this temper do cut themselves off from the
opportunities of Proselyting others, by averting them from their company.
Freedom is the endearing thing in Society, and where that is controlled, men are
not very fond of associating themselves. It Is natural to us to be uneasy in the
presence of those who assume an Authority over us. Children care not for the
company of their Parents or Tutors, and men will care less for theirs, who
would make them Children by usurping a Tutorage.

5. ALL these inconveniences are evidently consequent to this Dogmatizing,
supposing men be never so much in the right: but if they happen to be in the
wrong, what a ridiculous pageantry is it, to see such a Philosophical gravity
set to man out Solecism? A concluding Face put upon no concluding Argument, is
the most contemtible sort of folly in the world. They do by this sound a
trumpet to their own defeat: and whereas a modest mistake might slip by
undiscerned, these Rodomontade errors force themselves upon men's observation,
and make it as impossible for men not to see, as it is not to despise them when
they do. For indeed Pride is as ill linkt with Error, as we usually say it is
with Beggary, and in this as well as that, converts pity into contemt.

6. AND then it would be considered, what security any man that will be
imposing has, that this will not be his case. Human nature is very fallible,
and as it is possible a man may err in a great many things, so it is certain
every man does in something or other. Now who knows at the instant he is so
positive, but this may be his erring turn? Alas how frequently are we mistaken
even in common ordinary things! for as the Wise man speaks, hardly do we judge
aright even in things that are before us, Wisd. 9.16. our very senses do
sometimes delude us. How then may we wander in things of abstruse speculations?
The consideration of this has with some so prevailed, that it has produced a
Sect of Skepticism, and tho I press it not for that purpose, yet sure it may
reasonably be urged to introduce some modesty and calmness in our assertions.
For when we have no other certainty of our being in the right, but our own
persuasions that we are so: this may often be but making one error the gage for
another. For God knows confidence is so far from a certain mark of truth, that
it is often the seducer into falsehood, none being so apt to lose their way as
those who, out of an ungrouded persumtion of knowing it, despise all direction
from others.

7. LET all this be weighed, and the result will be, that this peremtoriness is
a thing that can befit no form of understanding. It renders Wise men
disobliging and troublesome, and fools ridiculous and contemtible. It casts a
prejudice upon the most solid reasoning, and it renders the lighter more
notoriously despicable. It Is pity good parts should be leven'd by it, made a
snare to the owners, and useless to others. And it is pity too that weak parts
should by it be condemned to be always so, by despising those Aids which
should improve them. Since therefore it is so ill calculated for every Meridian,
would God all Climes might be purged from it.

8. AND as there are weighty objections against it in respect of its effects,
so there are no inconsiderable prejudices in relation to its causes, of which
we may reckon Pride to be the most certain and universal: for whatever else
casually occurs to it, this is the fundamental constitutive principle; nothing
but a great overweening of a man's own understanding being able to instate him
in that imaginary empire over other men's. For here sure we may ask the Apostles
question, Who made thee to differ from another? When God has made Rationality
the common portion of mankind, how came it to be thy enclosure? or what
Signature has he set upon thine, what mark of excellency, that thine should be
paramount? Doubtless if thou fanciest thou have that part of Jacobs blessing,
To be Lord of thy brethren, and that all thy mothers sons should bow down to
thee, Genesis 27.29. thou have got it more surreptiously then he did, and with
less effect: for tho Isaac could not retract his mistaken benediction, God will
never ratify that fantastic, thou have pronounced to thy self, with his real
effective one.

9. BUT there happens many times to be another ingredient besides Pride, and
that is Ignorance: for those qualities however they may seem at war, do often
very closely combine. He who has narrow notions, that knows but a few things,
and has no glimpse of any beyond him, thinks there are no such: and therefore
as if he had (like Alexander) no want but that of worlds to conquer, he thinks
himself the absolute Monarch of all knowledge. And this is of all others the
most unhappy composition: for ignorance being of its self like stiff clay, an
infertile soil, when Pride comes to scorch and harden it, it grows perfectly
impenetrable: and accordingly we see none are so inconvincible as your
half-witted people, who know just enough to excite their pride, but not so much
as to cure their ignorance.

10. THERE remains yet a 2d kind of Peremtoriness which I am to speak to, and
that is of those who can make no relation without an attestation of its
certainty: a sort of hospitable people, who entertain all the idle vagrant
reports, and send them out with passports and testimonials, who when they have
once adopted a story, will have it pass for legitimate how spurious soever it
originally was. These somewhat resemble those Hospitals in Italy, where all
bastards are sure of reception, and such a provision as may enable them to
subsist in the world: and were it not for such men, many a Fatherless he would
be stifled in its birth. It is indeed strange to see, how suddenly loose rumors
knit into formal stories, and from thence grow to certainties; but 'its
stranger to see that men can be of such profligated impudence, as knowingly to
give them that advance. And yet it is no rarity to meet with such men who will
pawn their honor, their souls, for that unworthy purpose: nay and that too with
as much impertinence as baseness, when no interest of their own, or perhaps any
man's else is to be served by it.

10. THIS is so prodigious a thing, as seems to excite ones Curiosity to
inquire the cause of so wonderful an effect. And here, as in other unnatural
productions, there are several concurrents. If we trace it from its original,
its first Element seems to be Idleness: this diverting a man from serious
useful entertainments, forces him upon (the usual refuge of vacant Persons) the
inquiring after News; which when he has got, the venting of it is his next
business. If he be of a credulous Nature, and believe it himself, he does the
more innocently impose it on others: yet then to secure himself from the
imputation of Levity and too easy Faith, he is often temted to lend some
probable circumstance. Nay if he be of a proud humor, and have that miserable
vanity of loving to speak big, and to be thought a man of greater
correspondence and intelligence then his Neighbors, he will not bate an Ace of
absolute certainty; but however doubtful or improbable the thing is, coming
from him it must go for an indisputable truth. This seems to be the descent of
this unhappy folly, which yet is often nursed up by a mean or imprudent
Education. A man that has converst only with that lower sort of company, who
durst not dispute his veracity, thinks the same false Coin will pass over the
world, which went current among his Fathers Servants or Tenants: and therefore
we may observe that this is more usual in young men, who have come raw into
company with good fortunes and ill breeding. But it is too true also that too
many never lose the habit, but are as morosely positive in their Age, as they
were childishly so in their Youths. Indeed it is impossible they should be
otherwise, unless they have the wit to disentangle themselves first from the
love of Flattery, and after from the company of Flatterers: for (as I have
before observed) no vice will ever wither under their shade. I think I shall do
the Reader no ill office to let in a little light upon them, and show him some
of those many mischiefs that attend this unworthy practice.

12. FIRST, it engages a man to Oaths, and for ought he knows to Perjuries.
When he has lancht out boldy into an incredible relation, he thinks he has put
his Credit upon the forelorn hope, and must take care to relieve it: and there
is no succor so constantly ready at hand as that of Oaths and imprecations, and
therefore whole vollies of them are discharged upon the doubtful. Thus do we
make God a witness, and our Souls parties in the cause of every trifling rumor,
as if we had modeled our Divinity by the Scheme of that Jesuitical Casuist, who
legitimates the Killing of a man for an Apple.

13. A second mischief is, that it betraies man to quarrels. He that is
peremtory in his own Story, may meet with another that is as peremtory in the
contradiction of it, and then the two Sr. Positives must have a skirmish
indeed. He that has attested the truth of a false, or the certainty of a
doubtful thing, has brought himself into the same strait with Baalams Ass, he
must either fall down flat, or run upon a sword, Number. 22.27. For if his Hearers
do but express a diffidence, either he must sink to a downright Confession that
he was a Liar: or else he must huff and bluster till perhaps he raise a
counter-storm, and as he fooled himself out of his truth, so be beaten out of
his pretense to it. Indeed there is scarce any quality that does so temt and
invite affronts as this does: for he that can descend to such a meanness, may
reasonably enough be presumed to have little (as of true worth, so) even of
that which the world calls Gallantry, and so every puny sword-man will think
him a good tame Quarry to enter and flesh himself upon.

14. IN the third place it exposes him to all the contemt and scorn which
either good or ill men can fling upon him: the good abominate the sin, the ill
triumph over the folly of it. The truth is there can be nothing more wretchedly
mean. To be Kinght of the Post to every fabu^ous relation, is such a sordid
thing, that there can scarce be any name of reproach too vile for it. And
certainly he that can pawn his faith upon such miserable terms, will by those
frequent mortgages quickly be snapt upon a forfeiture; or however will have his
credit so impar'd by it, that no man will think his word a competent gage for
the slightest concern.

15. AND this may pass for a fourth consideraton, That this Positiveness is so
far from gaining credit to his present affirmation, that it destroies it for
the future: for he that sees a man make no difference in the confidence of his
asserting realities and fictions, can never take his mesures by any thing he
avers, but according to the common Proverb, will be in danger of disbelieving
him even when he speaks truth. And of this no man can want conviction, who will
but consult his own observation. For what an allay do we find it to the credit
of the most probable event, that it is reported by one who uses to stretch?
This unhappily do such men defeat their own designs: for while they aver
stoutly that they may be believed, that very thing makes them doubted, the
world being not now to learn how frequently Confidence is made a supplement for
Truth. Nor let any man who uses this, flatter himself that he alone does (like
Jobs messenger) escape the common fate: for tho perhaps he meet with some who
in civility or pity will not dispute the probability of his narrations, or with
others who for raillery will not discourage the humor, with which they mean (in
his absence) to divert themselves, yet he may rest assured he is discerned by
all, and derided for it.

16. IT therefore concerns men who either regard their truth, or their
reputation, not to indulge to this humor, which is the most silly way of
shipwracking both. For he that will lay those to stake upon every flying story,
may as well wager his estate which way the wind will sit next morning, there
being nothing less to be confided in, then the breath of fame, or the whispers
of private tale-bearers. Wise men are afraid to report improbable truths: what
a fool-hardiness is it then to attest improbable falsities, as it often is the
luck of these Positive men to do?

17. CERTAINLY there is nothing which they design by this, which may not be
obtained more effectually by a modest and unconcerned relation. He that barely
relates what he has heard, and leaves the hearer to judge of the probability,
does as much (I am sure more civilly) entertain the company, as he that throws
down his gauntlet in attestation. He as much satisfies the itch of telling
news; he as much persuades his hearers: nay very much more; for these over
earnest asseverations serve but to give men suspicion that the Speaker is
conscious of his own falseness: and all this while he has his retreat secure,
and stands not responsible for the truth of his relations. Nay indeed tho men
speak never so known and certain truths, it is most advisable not to press them
too importunately. For boldness, like the Bravoes and Banditti, is seldom
employed but upon desperate services, and is so known a Pander for lying, that
truth is but defamed by its attendance.

18. To conclude, modesty is so amiable, so insinuating a thing, that all the
rules of Oratory cannot help men to a more agreeable ornament of discourse. And
if they will try it in both the foregoing instances, they will undoubtedly find
the effects of it: a modest proposal will soonest captivate men's reasons, and a
modest relation their belief.

SECT. X. Of Obscene Talk.
1. THERE is another vice of the Tongue which I cannot but mention, tho I knew
not in which of the former Classes to place it: not that it comes under none,
but that it is so common to all, that it is not easy to resolve to which
peculiarly to assign it, I mean obscene and immodest talk, which is offensive
to the purity of God, dammageable and infectious to the innocence of our
Neighbors, and most pernicious to our selves: and yet is now grown a thing so
common, that one would think we were fallen into an Age of Metamorphosis, and
that the Brutes did, not only Poetically and in fiction, but really speak. For
the talk of many is so bestial, that it seems to be but the conceptions of the
more libidinous Animals clothed in human Language.

2. AND yet even this must pass for Ingenuity, and this vile descent below
Humanity, must be counted among the highest streins of Wit. A wretched
debasement of that sprightful Faculty, thus to be made the interpreter to a
Goat or Boar: for doubtless had those Creatures but the organs of Speech, their
Fancies lie enough that way to make them as good company, as those who more
studiously apply themselves to this sort of entertainment.

3. THE crime is comprehensive enough to afford abundance of matter for the
most Satirical zeal: but I consider the dissecting of putrid Bodies may cast
such pestilential fumes, as all the benefits of the scrutiny will not
recompense. I shall therefore in respect to the Reader dismiss this noisome
Subject, and thereby give an example with what abhorrence he should always
reject such kind of discourse, remembering the advice of St. Paul, That all
uncleanness should not be once named among those who would walk as becomes
Saints, Ephesians. 5.3.

The Close.
1. I Have now touched upon those enormities of Speech which I principally
designed to observe, wherein I have bin far from making a full and exact
Catalogue: therefore I would have no man take this little Tract for a just
Criterion, by which to try himself in reference to his words. Yet God grant
that all that read it, may be able to approve themselves even by this imperfect
essay, and he that does so, makes fair approches toward being that perfect man
St. James speaks of, chap. 3.1. these being such faults of the Tongue as are
the harder to avoid, because they are every day exemplified to us in common
practice (nay some of them recommended as reputable and ingenuous.) And it is a
strange insinuative power which example and custom have upon us. We see it in
every trivial secular instance, in our very habit: those dresses which we
laughed at in our forefathers wardrobes or pictures, when by the circulation of
time and vanity they are brought about, we think very becoming. It Is the same in
our diet: our very palates conform to the fashion, and every thing grows
amiable to our fancies, according as it is more or less received in the world.
And upon this account all sobriety and strict virtue lies now under a heavy
prejudice, and no part of it more, then this of the Tongue, which custom has
now enfranchized from all the bonds Moralists or Divines had laid upon it.

2. BUT the greater the difficulties are, the more it ought to awake our
diligence: if we lie loose and carelessly, it is odds we shall be carried away
with the stream. We had need therefore fix our selves, and by a sober
recollection of the ends for which our Speech was given us, and the account we
must one day give of it, impress upon our selves the baseness and the danger of
misemploying it. Yet a negative innocence will not serve our turns, twill but
put us in the condition of him, who wrapped up the talent he was commanded to
employ, Mat. 25.25. Nay indeed twill be impossible to preserve even that if we
aspire no farther. The Tongue is a busy active Part, twill scarce be kept from
motion: and therefore if that activity be not determined to good objects, twill
be practicing upon bad. And indeed I believe a great part of its licentiousness
is owing to this very thing. There are so few good themes of discourse in use,
that many are driven to the ill for want of better. Learning is thought
Pedantic, Agriculture Peasant-like, and Religion the most insufferable of all:
so by excluding all useful subjects of converse, we come together (as St. Paul
in another case says) Not for the better but for the worse, 1. Cor. 11.17. And
if the Philosopher thought he had lost that day wherein he had not learnt
something worthy his notice, how many days do we worse then lose, by having
them not only emty of solid useful acquisitions, but full of noxious and
pernicious ones? And indeed if they be the one, they will not miss to be the
other also: for the mind is like the stomac, which if it be not supplied with
wholesome nurishment, will at last suck in those humors with which the body
most abounds. So that if in our converse we do not interchange sober useful
notions, we shall at the best but traffic toies and baubles, and most
commonly infection and poison. He therefore that would keep his tongue from
betraying himself or others to sin, must tune it to a quite contrary Key, make
it an instrument, and incentive to virtue, by which he shall not only secure
the negative part of his duty, but comply with the positive also, in employing
it to those uses for which it was given him.

3. IT would be too vast an undertaking to prescribe the particular subjects of
such discourse, nay indeed impossible, because many of them are occasional,
such as cannot aforehand be reduced to any certain account. This only in the
general we may rest upon, that all speech tending to the Glory of God or the
good of man, is aright directed. Which is not to be understood so
restrictively, as if nothing but Divinity or the necessary concerns of human
life, may lawfully be brought into discourse: something is to be indulged to
common civility, more to the intimaces and endearments of friendship, and a
competency to those recreative discourses which maintain the cherefulness of
society; all which are, if moderatly used, within the latitude of the rule, as
tending (tho in a lower degree) to the well-being of men, and by consequent to
the honor of God, who indulges us those innocent refreshments. But if the
subordinate uses come to encroch upon the higher, if we dwell here and look no
farther, they then become very sinful by the excess, which were not so in their
nature. That inordinacy sets them in opposition to Gods designation, in which
they were allowed only a secondary place. We should therefore be careful to
improve all opportunities of letting our tongues pay their more immediate
homage to God, in the duties of prayers and praises, making them not only the
interpreters of our pious affections, but the promoters of the like in others.
And indeed he can scarce be thought in earnest, who prays, Hallowed be thy
name, and does not as much endeavor it with men, as he solicites it from God.

4. AND if we answer our obligations in this point, we shall in it discharge
the highest part of our duty to man also: for in whose heart soever we can
implant a true reverentialaw of God, we sow the seed of immortality, of an
endless happy being, the greatest the most superlative good whereof he is
capable. Besides in the interim, we do by it help to manumit and release him
from those servile drudgeries to vice, under which those remain who live
without God in the world. And these indeed are benefits worthy the dignity of
human nature to communicate. And it is both sad and strange to see among the
multitude and variety of Leagues that are contracted in the world, how few
there are of these pious combinations; how those who show themselves concerned
in all the petty secular interests of their friends, never take this at all
into their care; a pregnant evidence how little true friendship there is among
men:

5. I Know some think they sufficiently excuse themselves when they shift off
this office to Divines, whose peculiar business they say it is. But this is as
if one who sees a poor fainting wretch, should forbear to administer a Cordial
he has at hand, for fear of intrenching on the Physicians Faculty. Many
opportunities a Friend or Companion may have which a Divine may want. He often
sees a man in the very fit, and so may more aptly apply: for where there is an
intimacy of Converse, men lay themselves open, discover those passions those
vices, which they carefully veil when a strange, or severer eye approches.
Besides, as such a one may easier discern the disease, so he has better
advantages for administering remedies: so Children will not take those Medicines
from the Doctors hand, which they will from a Nurse or Mother: and we are
usually too Childish in what relates to our Souls; look on good counsel from an
Ecclesiastic as a Divinity Potion, and set our stomacs against it; but a
Familiar may insensibly insinuate it into us, and ere we are aware beguile us
into health. Yet if Lay Persons will needs give the Clergy the enclosure of
this office, they should at least withdraw those impediments they have laid in
their way, by depositing those prejudices which will certainly frustrate their
endeavor. Men have in these later days bin taught to look on Preaching as a
thing of form to the Hearers, and of profit only to the Speakers, a craft
whereby, as Demetrius says, They get their living, Acts 16.25. But admit it
were so in this last respect, yet it does not infer it should be so in the
former. If it be a Trade, it was sure thought (as in all Ages but this) a very
useful one, else there would never have bin such encouragement given to it. No
state ever alloted public certain Salaries for a set of Men that were thought
utterly useless: and if there be use to be made of them, shall we lose our
advantages merely because they gain theirs? We are in nothing else so
senseless, no man will refuse counsel from a Physician, because he lives by the
Profession. It Is rather an argument on his side, that because such an interest
of his own depends on it, he has bin the more industrious to fit himself for
it. But not to run farther in this digression, I shall apply it to my purpose,
by making this equitable proposal, that Lay men will not so moralize the common
Fable, as neither to admonish one another themselves, nor suffer Ministers to
do it without them. And truly it is hard if neither of these can be granted when
both ought. I am sure all is little enough that can be don, tho we should have,
as the Prophet speaks, Precept upon precept, Line upon Line, here a little and
there a little, Is. 28.13. Man's nature is so unattentive to good, that there
can scarce be too many monitors. We see Satan, tho he have a much stronger
party in our inclinations, dares not rely upon it, but is still employing his
emissaries, to confirm and excite them: and if whilst he has so many Agents
among us, God shall have none, we are like to give but an ill account of our
zeal either to God or our neighbor, or of those tongues which were given us to
glorify the one, and benefit the other. Indeed without this, our greatest
officiousness in the secular concerns of others is no kindness. When we strive
to advance the fame, to increase the fortune of a wicked man, what do we in it,
but enable him to do the more mischiefs, by his wealth to foment his own
luxuries, and by his reputation commend them to the practice of others? He only
makes his friend truly rich and great, who teaches him to employ those
advantages aright: and would men turn their tongues to this sort of Oratory,
they would indeed show they understood for what ends they were given them.

6. BUT as all good receives enhancement from its being more diffusive, so
these attemts should not be confined to some one or two intimates or relatives,
but be as extensive as the common needs, or at least as our opportunities. It Is
a generous ambition to benefit many, to oblige communities: which can no way so
well be don, as by endeavoring to subvert vicious customs, which are the pests
and poisons of all societies. The heathens had many ceremonies of lustrations
for their cities and countries, but he that could purify and refine their
manners, would indeed attain to the substance of those shadows. And because the
Apostle tells us, that Evil words corrupt good manners, Cor. 15.33. twould be a
fundamental piece of reformation, to introduce a better sort of converse into
the world: which is an instance so agreeable to my present subject, that I
cannot close more pertinently, then to commend the endeavor to the Readers;
who, if he have bin by this Tract at all convinced of the sin and mischief of
those Schemes of discourse deciphered in it, cannot be more just to his
convictons, then by attemting to supplant them.

7. IT were indeed a design worthy of a noble soul, to try to new model the Age
in this particular, to make it possible for men to be at once conversable and
innocent. I know twill be objected, it is too vast a project for one or many
single Persons to undertake: yet difficulties use to animate generous spirits,
especially when (as here) the very attemt is laudable. But as Christ says of
Wisdom, so may we of Courage, The Children of this world are more daring then
the Children of light. The great corrupters of discourse have not bin so
distrustful of themselves: for it is visible to any that will reflect, that it is
within man's memory since much of this monstrous exorbitancy of discourse grew
in fashion, particularly the Atheistical and Blasphemous. The first propugners
of it were but few, and durst then but whisper their black rudiments: yet the
world now sees what a harvest they have from their devilish industry.

8. AND shall we give over our Clime as forlorn and desperate, and conclude
that nothing which is not venomous will thrive in our Soil? Would some of parts
and authority but make the experiment, I cannot think that all places are yet so
vitiated, but that they may meet with many, who would relish sober and
ingenuous discourse, and by their example be animated to propagate it to
others: but as long as Blasphemy, Ribaldry, and Detraction set up for Wit, and
carry it without any competition, we do implicitly yield that title we dispute
not: and it is hard to say, whether their triumphs be more owing to the boldness
of ill men, or the pusillanimity of the good. What if upon the trial they
should meet with the worser part of St. Paul's fate at Athens, That some will
mock, Acts 17.32. yet perhaps they may partake of the better also, and find
others that would be willing to hear them again, and some few at least may
cleave unto them. And sure they are too tender and delicate, that will run no
hazard, nor be willing to bear a little share in that profane drollery, with
which an Apostle was, and their God is daily assaulted: especially when by this
exposing themselves, they may hope to give some check to that impious liberty.
However besides the satisfaction of their own consciences, they may also gain
this advantage by the attemt, that it may be a good test by which to try their
company. For those whom they find impatient of innocent and profitable
converse, they may assure themselves can only ensnare, not benefit them; and he
is a very weak Gamester, that will be drawn to play upon such terms as make it
highly probable for him to lose, but impossible for him to win. Therefore in
that case the advice of Solomon is very proper, Go from the presence of a
foolish man, when thou perceivest not in him the lips of Knowledge, Prove. 14.7.

9. BUT he that will undertake so Heroic an enterprise, must qualify himself
for it, by being true to his own pretensions. He must leave no uneven thread in
his loom, or by indulging to any one sort of reprovable discourse himself,
defeat all his endeavors against the rest. Those aerie Speculators that have
writ of the Philosophers Stone, have required many Personal qualifications,
strict abstinences and purities in those who make the experiment. The thing may
have this sober application, that those who would turn this Iron Age into Gold,
that would convert our rusty drossy Converse into a purer strein, must be
perfectly clean themselves. For alas what effect can that man hope from his
most zealous reprehensions, who lays himself open to recrimination? He that
hears a man bitterly inveigh against blasphemy and profaneness, and (yet in
that almost the same breath) hears his monitor inveigh as bitterly against his
Neighbor, will scarce think him a good guide of his tongue, that has but half
the mastery of his own. Let every man therefore be sure to begin at the right
end of his work, to wash his own mouth clean, before he prescribe Gargarisms to
others. And to that purpose let him impartially reflect on all the undue
liberties he has given his tongue, whether those which have bin here remarked,
or those others which he may find in all Practical books, especially in (the
most Practical of all books) his own Conscience. And when he has traced his
talk through all its wild rambles, let him bring home his stray; not like the lost
sheep with joy, but with tears of penitence and contrition, and keep a strict
watch over it that it break not loose again; nay farther require it to make
some restitution for the trespass it has committed in its former excursions: to
restore to God what it has robbed of his Honor, by devoting it self an
instrument of his service; to his Neighbor what it has detracted from him, by
wiping off that sullage it has cast upon his Fame, and to himself by defacing
those ill Characters of vanity and folly it has imprinted on him. Thus may the
Tongue cure its own sting, and by a kind of Sympathetic virtue, the wound may
be healed by dressing the weapon. But alas when we have don all, the Tongue is
so slippery that it will often be in danger to deceive our watch: nay it has a
secret intelligence with the heart, which like a corrupted Jailer is too apt to
connive at its escape. Let us therefore strengthen our guards, call in him who
sees all the secret practices of our treacherous hearts, and commit both them
and our tongues to his custody. Let us say with the Psalmist, Try me, O Lord,
and seek the ground of my heart, Psa. 229.23. And with him again, Set a watch,
O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips, O let not my heart he
inclined to any evil thing, Psa. 141.3. And if hand thus join in hand, Prove.
16.5. if Gods grace be humbly invoked, and our own endeavor honestly employed,
even this unruly evil of the Tongue (as St. James calls it) Chap. 3.8. may be
in some degree tamed. If now and then it get a little out by stealth, yet it
will not like the Demoniac be so raving, as quite to break all its chains. If
we cannot always secure our selves from inadvertence and surprise, but that a
forbidden word may sometimes escape us, yet we may from deliberate wilful
offenses of the Tongue. And tho we should all aspire higher, yet if we can but
reach this, we ought not to excuse our selves (upon remaining infirmities) from
the Christian generous undertaking, I was recommending, the reforming of
others. Indeed I had made a very impertinent exhortation to that, if this
degree of fitness may not be admitted; for I fear there would be none upon
earth could attemt it upon other terms: the world must still remain as it is,
and await only the Tongues of Angels to reduce it. Nor need we fear that
censure of Hypocrisy which we find, Mat. 7.5. for the case is very differing.
It Is indeed as ridiculous as insolent an attemt, for one that has a Beam in his
own eye, to pretend to cast a Mote out of his brothers: but it holds not on the
contrary, that he that has a Mote in his own, should not endeavor to remove the
Beam in his Brothers. Every speck does not blind a man, nor does every
infirmity make one unable to discern, or incompetent to reprove the grosser
faults of others.

10. YET after all let us as much as is possible clear our eyes even of this
Mote, and make our Copy as worth transcribing as we can: for certainly the best
instrument of reformation is example: and tho admonition may sometimes be
necessary, yet there are many circumstances required to the right ordering of
that, so that it cannot always be practicable, but a good example ever is.
Besides it has a secret magnetic virtue: like the Loadstone it attracts by a
power of which we can give no account: so that it seems to be one of those
occult qualities, those secrets in nature, which have puzzled the enquirers,
only experience demonstrates it to us. I am sure it does (too abundantly) in
ill examples, and I doubt not, might do the like in good, if they were as
plentifully experimented. And that they may be so, let every man be ambitious
to cast in his mite: for tho two make but a farthing, yet they may be
multiplied to the vastest sum. However if a man cannot reform others, yet I am
sure twill be worth his while, so to save himself from this untoward
generation, Act. 2.40. I have now presented the Tongue under a double aspect,
such as may justify the ancient Definition of it, that it is the worst and best
part of man, the best in its original and design, and the worst in its
corruption and degeneration. In David the man after Gods heart it was his
glory, Ps. 57.8. The best member that he had, Psalm. 108.1. But in the wicked it
cuts like a sharp Razor, Psalm. 52.2. It Is as the venem of Asps, 140.3. The
Tongues from heaven were Cloven, Act. 2.2. to be the more diffusive of good:
but those that are fired from hell are forked, Jam. 3.6. to be the more
impressive of mischief: it must be referred to every man's choice, into which of
the forms he will mold his. Solomon tells us Death and Life are in the power of
the Tongue, and that not only directly in regard of the good or ill we may do
to others, but reflexively also, in respect of what may rebound to our selves.
Let Moses then make the inference from Solomon's premises, Therefore choose life,
Deuteronomy. 30.15. a proposal so reasonable, so agreeable to nature, that no florishes
can render it more inviting. I shall therefore leave it to the Readers
contemplation, and shall hope that if he please but to revolve it with that
seriousness which the importance exacts, he will new set his tongue, compose it
to those pious Divine streins, which may be a proper preludium to those
Allelujahs he hopes eternally to sing.

FINIS.

