

The Whole DUTY of MAN laid down IN A PLAIN WAY for the use of the MEANEST
READER. Dwided into XVII CHAPTERS One whereof being read every LORDS DAY the
whole may be Read over, thrice in the Year

Necessary for all Families.

With PRIVATE DEVOTIONS.

London Printed for T. Garthwait, at the little North Door of S. Paul's. 1659

Mr. GARTHWAIT,
YOu needed not any Intercession to recommend this task to me, which brought
its Invitations and Reward with it. I very willingly read over all the sheets,
both of the Discourse, and the Devotions annexed, and find great cause to bless
God for both, not discerning what is wanting in any part of either, to render
it with Gods blessing, most sufficient, and proper to the great End designed,
the Spiritual supplies and advantages of all those that shall be exercised
therein. The Subject matter of it, is indeed, what the Title undertakes, The
Whole Duty of Man, Set down in all the Branches, with those advantages of
brevity and Partitions, to invite, and support, and engage the Reader, That
Condescension to the meanest capacities, but with all, That weight of Spiritual
Arguments, wherein the best Proficients will be glad to be assisted, that it
seems to me equally fitted for both sorts of Readers, which shall bring with
them a sincere desire of their own, either present or future advantages. The
Devotion part in the Conclusion is no way inferior, being a seasonable aid to
every man's Infirmities, and has extended it self very particularly to all our
principal concernments; The Introduction has supplied the place of a Preface,
which you seem to desire from me, and leaves me no more to add, but my Prayers
to God, That the Author which has taken care to convey so liberal an Alms to
the Corban so secretly, may not miss to be rewarded openly, in the visible
power, and benefit of this Work, on the hearts of the whole Nation, which was
never in more need of such supplies, as are here afforded. That his
All-sufficient Grace will bless the seed sown, and give an abundant increase,
is the humblest request of

March 7. 1657 Your assured Friend, H. HAMMOND.

A PREFACE To the ensuing TREATISE, showing the Necessity of Careing for the
Soul.
Sect. 1. THE only intent of this ensuing Treatise, is to be a short and Plain
Direction to the very meanest Readers, to behave themselves so in this world,
that they may be happy for ever in the next. But because it is in vain to tell
men their Duties, till they be persuaded of the necessity of performing it; I
shall before I proceed to the Particulars required of every Christian,
endeavor to win them to the practice of one general Duty preparatory to all
the rest, and that is the Consideration and CARE of their own SOULS, without
which they will never think themselves much concerned in the other.

2. MAN, We know is made up of two parts, a BODY and a SOUL: The Body only the
husk or shell of the Soul, a lump of flesh, subject to many diseases and pains
while it lives, and at last to Death it self, and then it is so far from being
valued, that it is not to be endured above ground, but laid to rot in the
Earth. Yet to this viler part of us we perform a great deal of Care, all the
labor and toil we are at, is to maintain that. But the more precious part, the
Soul is little thought of, no care taken, how it fares, but as if it were a
thing that nothing concerned us, is left quite neglected never considered by us.

3. This Carelessness of the Soul is the root of all the sin we commit, and
therefore whosoever intends to sit upon a Christian course, must in the first
place amend that. To the doing whereof, there needs no deep learning, or
extraordinary parts, the simplest man living (that is not a natural fool) has
understanding enough for it, if he will but act in this by the same Rules of
common Reason, whereby he proceeds in his worldly business. I will therefore
now briefly set down some of those Motives, which use to stir up our care of
any outward thing, and then apply them to the Soul.

4. There be FOUR things especially, which use to awake our care, the first is
the Worth of the thing, the Second the Usefulness of it to us, when we cannot
part with it without great damage and mischief, the Third the great Danger of
it, and the Fourth the Likelihood that our care will not be in vain, but that
it will preserve the Thing cared for.

5. For the First, we know our care of any worldly thing is answerable to the
The worth of the Soul.
worth of it; what is of greatest Price, we are most watchful to preserve, and
most fearful to lose; no man locks up dung in his chest, but his money or what
he counts precious, he does. Now in this respect the Soul deserves more care,
then all the things in the world besides, for it is infinitely more worth. First
in that it is made after the Image of God, it was God that breathed into man
this breath of life, Genesis 2. 7. Now God being of the greatest Excellency and
worth, the more anything is like him, the more it is to be valued. But it is
sure that no Creature upon the earth is at all like God, but the Soul of man,
and therefore nothing ought to have so much of our care. Secondly, the Soul
never Dies, We use to prize things according to their Durableness: what is most
Lasting, is most Worth. Now the Soul is a thing that will last for ever, when
Wealth, Beauty, Strength, nay our very bodies themselves fade away, the Soul
still Continues. Therefore in that respect also, the Soul is of the greatest
worth; and then what strange madness is it for us to neglect them as we do? We
can spend Days, and Weeks, and Months, and Years, nay our whole lives in
hunting after a little wealth of this world, which is of no Durance or
continuance, and in the mean time let this great durable treasure, our Souls,
be stolen from us by the Devil.

6. A second Motive to our care of any The misery of loosing the Soul.
thing is the USEFULNES of it to us, or the great Mischief we shall have by the
loss of it. Common Reason teaches us this in all things of this life: If our
Hairs fall, we do not much regard it, because we can be well enough without
them: But if we are in danger to lose our Eyes or Limbs, we think all the care
we can take little enough to prevent it, because we know it will be a great
misery. But certainly there is no Misery to be compared to that misery that
follows the Loss of the Soul. It Is true, we cannot Lose our Souls, in one
sense, that is so lose them, that they shall cease to Be; but we may lose them
in another, that we shall wish to lose them even in that. That is we may lose
that happy estate, to which they were created, and plunge them into the
extremest misery. In a word we may Lose them in Hell, whence there is no
fetching them back, and so they are lost for ever. Nay, in this consideration
our very bodies are concerned, those Darlings of ours, for which all our care
is laid out: for they must certainly after Death be Raised again, and be
joined again to the Soul, and take part with it in whatever state; if then our
care for the body take up all our Time and Thoughts, and leave us none to
bestow on the poor Soul, it is sure the Soul will for want of that care, be
made for ever Miserable. But it is as sure, that that very Body must be so too.
And therefore if you have any true kindness to your Body, show it by taking
Care of your Souls. Think with your selves, how you will be able to Endure
Everlasting Burnings; if a small spark of Fire, lighting on the least part of
the body be so intolerable, what will it be to have the Whole cast into the
hottest flames? And that not for some few hours or days, but for ever; so that
when you have spent many Thousands of years in that unspeakable Torment, you
shall be no nearer coming out of it, then you were the First Day you went in:
think of this I say, and think this withal, that this will certainly be the end
of Neglecting the Soul, and therefore afford it some care, if it be but in pity
to the Body, that must bear a part in its Miseries.

7. The Third Motive to tke care of any thing is its being in DANGER; The
danger the Soul is in.
now a thing may be in danger two ways first, by Enemies from without: This is
the Case of the Sheep, which is still in danger of being Devoured by Wolves,
and we know that makes the Shepherd so much the more watchful over it. Thus is
it with the Soul, which is in a great deal of Danger, in respect of its
enemies: those we know are the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, which are all
such noted enemies to it, that the very First Act we do in behalf of our Souls,
is to Vow a continual War against them. This we all do in our Baptism; and
whoever makes any Truce with any of them, is false not only to his Soul, but to
his Vow also, becomes a Forsworn creature: A Consideration well worthy our
laying to heart. But that we may the better understand, what Danger the Soul is
in, let us a little consider the quality of these enemies.

8. In a War you know there are diverse things that make an Enemy terrible. The
first is Subtilty, and Gunning, by which alone many victories have been won,
and in this respect the Devil is a dangerous Adversary, he long since gave
sufficient proof of his Subtilty, in beguiling our first Parents, who yet were
much wiser then we are, and therefore no wonder if he deceive and cheat us.
Secondly, the Watchfulness and Diligence of an Enemy, makes him the more to be
Feared; and here the Devil exceeds; it is his trade and business to destroy us,
and he is no loiterer at it, he goes up and down seeking whom he may devour, 1
Pet. 5. 8. He watches all Opportunities of Advantage against us, with such
diligence, that he will be sure never to let any slip him. Thirdly, an Enemy
near us is more to be feared then one at a Distance, for if he be far off, we
may have time to arm, and prepare our selves against him, but if he be near he
may steal on us unawares. And of this sort is the flesh, it is an Enemy, at our
Doors, shall I say? Nay in our Bosoms, it is always near us, to take occasion
of doing us mischiefs. Fourthly, the Baser and Falser an Enemy is, the more
dangerous; he that Hides his malice under the show of Friendship will be able
to do a great deal the more hurt. And this again is the flesh, which like Joab
to Abner, 2 Samuel 3. 27. Pretends to speak peaceably to us, but wounds us to
death; it is forward to purvey for Pleasures and Delights for us, and so seems
very kind, but it has a hook under that bait, and if we bite at it we are
lost. Fifthly, the Number of Enemies make them more Terrible; and the World is
a vast Army against us: There is no state or condition in it, nay scarce a
creature which does not at sometime or other fight against the Soul: The
Honors of the world seek to wound us by pride, the Wealth by covetousness; the
Prosperity of it tempt us to Forget God, the Adversities to murmur at him. Our
very Table becomes a snare to us, our me at draws us to Gluttony, our drink to
Drunkenness, our Company, nay, our nearest Friends often bear a part in this
War against us, whilst either by their example, or persuasions they entice us
to sin.

9. Consider all this, and then tell me, whether a Soul thus beset has leisure
to sleep: even Dalilah could tell Sampson, it was time to awake when the
Philistines were upon him. And CHRIST tells us, if the good man of the house
had known in what hour the Thief would come, he would have watched, and not
have suffered his house to be broken up, Mat. 24. 43. But we live in the midst
of Thieves, and therefore must look for them every hour, and yet who is there
among us, that has that common providence for this precious part of him, his
Soul, which he has for his house, or indeed the meanest thing that belongs to
him? I fear our Souls may say to us, as Christ to his Disciples. Mat. 26. 40.
What could ye not watch with me one hour? For I doubt it would pose many of us
to tell when we bestowed one Hour on them, though we know them to be
continually beset with most Dangerous Enemies. And then alas! What is like to
be the case of these poor Souls, when their Adversaries bestow so much Care,
and Diligence to destroy them, and we will afford none to preserve them? Surely
the same as of a Besieged Town, where no Watch or Guard is kept, which is
certain to fall a prey to the enemy. Consider this ye that forget God, nay ye
that forget your selves, lest he pluck you away, and there be none to deliver
you, Psalm. 50. 22.

10. But I told you there was a Second way, whereby a thing may be in Danger,
and that is from some Disorder or Distemper within it self. This is often the
case of our Bodies, they are not only liable to outward Violence, but they are
within themselves Sick and Diseased. And then we can be sensible enough that
they are in danger, and need not to be taught to seek out for means to recover
them. But this is also the case of the Soul; we reckon those parts of the body
diseased, that do not rightly perform their office, we account it a sick palate
that tastes not aright, a sick stomach that digests not. And thus it is with
the Soul, when its parts do not rightly perform their Offices.

11. The parts of the Soul are especially these three: The UNDERSTANDING, the
WILL, and the AFFECTIONS. And that these are disordered, there needs little
proof; let any man look seviously into his own Heart, and consider, how little
it is he knows of spiritual things, and then tell me whether his Understanding
be not dark: How much apter is he to Will evil then good, and then tell me
whether his Will be not Crooked? And how strong Desires he has after the
pleasures of sin, and what cold and faint ones toward God, and goodness, and
then tell me whether his Affections be not disordered, and rebellious even
against the voice of his own Reason within him? Now as in bodily diseases, the
first step to the cure is to know the Cause of the sickness, so likewise here
it is very necessary for us to know how the Soul first fell into this Diseased
condition, and that I shall now briefly tell you.

12. GOD created the first Man Adam without Sin, and endued his The first
Covenant.
Soul with the full knowledge of his Duty, and with such a strength, that he
might, if he would, perform all that was required of him. Having thus created
him, He makes a COVENANT or agreement with him to this purpose, that if he
continued in Obedience to God without committing Sin; then first, that Strength
of Soul, which he then had should still be continued to him; and secondly, That
he should never Die, but he taken up into Heaven, there to be Happy for ever.
But on the other side, if he committed Sin and Disobeyed God, then both He and
all his Children after him should lose that Knowledge and that perfect strength,
which enabled him to do all that God required of him: and Secondly, should be
subject to death, and not only so, but to Eternal damnation in Hell.

13. This was the Agreement made with Adam and all mankind in him (which we
usually call the FIRST COVENANT) upon which God gave Adam a particular
commandment, which was no more but this, That he should not eat of one only
tree of that garden wherein he had placed him. But he by the persuasion of the
Devil eats of that Tree, disobeys God, and so brings that curse upon himself,
and all his posterity. And so by that one Sin of his he lost both the full
Knowledge of his Duty, and the Power of performing it. And we being born after
his Image, did so likewise, and so are become both Ignorant in Discerning what
we ought to Do, and Weak and unable to the Doing of it, having a backwardness
to all good, and an aptness, and readiness to all evil; like a sick stomach,
which loathes all wholesome food, and longs after such trash, as may nourish the
disease.

14. And now you see where we got this Sickness of soul, and likewise that it
is like to prove a Deadly one, and therefore I presume I need say no more, to
assure you our Souls are in danger. It is more likely you will from this
description think them hopeless. But that you may not from that con^eit, excuse
your Neglect of them I shall hasten to show y^^ the contrary, by proceeding to
the fourth Motive of Care.

15. That Fourth Motive is the likelihood, that our CARE will not be That our
Care will not be in vain.
in VAIN, but that it will be a means to preserve the thing cared for; where
this is wanting, it disheartens our care. A Physician leaves his Patient when
he sees him past Hope, as knowing it is then in vain to give him any thing, but
on the contrary when he sees hopes of recovery, he plies him with Medicines.
Now in this very respect we have a great deal of reason to take care of our
souls, for they are not so far gone, but they may be recovered, nay it is
certain they will, if we do our parts toward it.

16. For though by that Sin of Adam all mankind were under the sentence of
eternal condemnation, yet it pleased God so far to pity our misery, as to give
us his Son, and in him to make a new Covenant with us after we had broken the
first.

17. This SECOND COVENANT was made with Adam, and us in him, The second
Covenant.
presently after his Fall, and is briefly contained in those wards, Genesis 3. 15.
Where God declares that THE SEED OF THE WOMAN SHALL BREAK THE SERPENTS HEAD;
and this was made up, as the first was, of some mercies to be afforded by God,
and some duties to be performed by us.

18. God therein promises to send his only Son, who is God equal with himself,
to earth, to become man like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, and he
to do for us these Several things.

19. Frst to make Known to us the whole Will of his Father, in the performance
whereof we shall be sure to be Accepted and rewarded by him. And this was one
great part of his business, which he performed in those many Sermons and
Precepts we find set down in the Gospel. And herein he is our PROPHET, it
being the work of a Prophet of old not only to foretell, but to Teach. Our Duty
in this particular is to hearken diligently to him, to be most ready, and
desirous to learn that will of God which he came from heaven to reveal to us.

The Second thing He was to do for us, was to Satisfy God for our Sins, not
only that one of Adam, but all the Sins of all Mankind that truly repent and
amend, and by this means to obtain for us Forgiveness of sins, the Favor of
God, and so to Redeem us from Hell and eternal damnation which was the
punishment due to our sin. All this he did for us by his death. He offered up
himself a Sacrifice for the Sins of all those who heartily bewail, and forsake
them. And in this He is our PRIEST, it being the Priests Office to Offer
Sacrifice for the sins of the people. Our Duty in this particular is first,
truly, and heartily to Repent us of and forsake our Sins, without which they
will never be forgiven us, though Christ have died. Secondly steadfastly to
Believe, that if we do that, we shall have the benefits of that Sacrifice of
his, all our sins, how many and great soever, shall be forgiven us, and we
saved from those eternal punishments which were due unto us for them. Another
part of the PRIESTS Office was Blessing and Praying for the people; and this
also Christ performs to us: It was his especial Commission from his Father to
Bless us, as St. Peter tells us Acts 3. 26. God sent his Son Jesus to Bless
you; and the following words show wherein that blessing consists, in turning
away every one of you from his iniquity, those means which he has used for the
turning us from our Sins, are to be reckoned of all other the greatest
blessings, and for the other part, that of Praying, that he not only performed
on earth, but continues still to do it in Heaven, He sits on the right hand of
God and makes Request for us, Romans 8. 34. Our Duty herein is not to resist
this unspeakable blessing of his, but to be willing to be thus Blessed in the
being turned from our sins, and not to make void, and fruitless all his Prayers
and Intercessions for us, which will never prevail for us, whilst we continue
in them.

21. The third thing, that Christ was to do for us, was to Enable us, or give
us Strength to do what God requires of us. This he does, first, by taking off
from the hardness of the Law given to Adam, which was never to commit the least
sin, upon pain of damnation, and requiring of us only an honest and hearty
endeavor to do what we are able, and where we fail, accepting of Sincere
Repentance. Secondly, By sending his Holy Spirit into our hearts, to govern,
and Rule us, to give us strength to overcome Temptations to Sin, and to Do all
that He now under the Gospel requires of us. And in this He is our KING, it
being the Office of a King to govern, and Rule and to subdue enemies. Our Duty
in this particular is to give up our selves obedient subjects of his, to be
governed, and Ruled by him, to obey all his Laws, not to take part with any
Rebel, that is, not to cherish any one sin, but diligently to Pray for his
Grace to enable us to subdue all, and then carefully to make use of it to that
purpose.

22. Lastly, He has purchased for all that faithfully obey him an Eternal
glorious inheritance, the Kingdom of Heaven, whither he is gone before to take
possession for us. Our duty herein is to be exceeding careful, that we forfeit
not our parts in it, which we shall certainly do, if we continue impenitent in
any sin. Secondly, not to fasten our Affections on this world, but to raise
them, according to the precept of the Apostle, Col. 3. 2. Set your affections
on things above and not on things on the earth; continually longing to come to
the possession of that blessed inheritance of ours, in comparison whereof all
things here below should seem vile and mean to us.

23. This is the Sum of that SECOND COVENANT we are now under, wherein you see
what Christ has done, how he Executes those Three Great Offices of KING, PRIEST
and PROPHET, as also what is Required of us, without our Faithful Performance,
all that he has done, shall never stand us in any stead; for he will never be
a Priest to Save any, who take him not as well for their Prophet to Teach, and
their King to Rule them; nay, if we neglect our part of this Covenant, our
condition will be yet worse, then if it had never bin made, for we shall then
be to Answer not for the breach of Law only, as in the first, but for the abuse
of mercy, which is of all sins the most provoking. On the other side, if we
faithfully Perform it, that is, set our selves heartily to the obeying of every
precept of Christ, not going on wilfully in any one sin, but bewailing and
forsaking whatever we have formerly been guilty of, it is then most certain,
that all the forementioned benefits of Christ belongs to us.

24. And now you see how little Reason you have to cast off the CARE of your
SOULS upon a conceit they are past cure, for that it is plain they are not;
Nay, certainly they are in that very condition, which of all others makes them
fittest for our care. If they had not been thus REDEEMED by CHRIST, they had
been then so hopeless, that care would have been in vain; on there other side,
if his Redemption had been such, that all men should be saved by it, though
they Live as they list, We should have thought it needless to take care for
them because they were safe without it. But it has pleased God so to order it,
that our care must be the means, by which they must Receive the good even of
all that Christ has done for them.

25. And now, if after all that God has done to Save these Souls of ours, we
will not bestow a little Care on them our selves, we very well deserve to
perish. If a Physician should undertake a patient that were in some desperate
disease, and by his skill bring him so far out of it, that he were sure to
recover, if he would but take care of himself and observe those rules the
Physician set him, would you not think that man weary of his life, that would
refuse to do that? So certainly that man is weary of his soul, wilfully casts
it away, that will not consent to those easy conditions, by which he may save
it.

26. You see how great kindness God has to these Souls of ours, the whole
TRINITY, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost have all done their parts for them. The
FATHER gave his only Son, the SON gave Himself, left his glory, and endured the
bitter death of the Cross, merely to keep our Souls from perishing. The HOLY
GHOST is become as it were our attendant, waits upon us with Continual offers
of his grace, to Enable us to do that which may preserve them; Nay he is so
desirous we should accept those Offers of his, that he is said to be grieved
when we refuse them, Ephesians. 4. 30. Now what greater disgrace and affront can we
put upon God then to despise what he thus values, that those Souls of ours,
which Christ thought worthy every drop of his blood, we should not think worth
any part of our Care? We use in things of the world, to rate them according to
the opinion of those who are best skilled in them, now certainly God who made
our Souls, best knows the worth of them, and since he prizes them so high, let
us (if it be but in reverence to him) be ashamed to neglect them. Especially
now that they are in so hopeful a condition, that nothing but our own
carelessness can possibly destroy them.

27. I have now briefly gone over those Four Motives of care I at first
proposed, which are each of them such, as never misses to stir it up toward
the things of this World; and I have also showed you how much more Reasonable,
nay Necessary it is they should do the like for the Soul. And now what can I
say more, but conclude in the words of Isaiah 46. 8. Remember this and show
your selves men. That is, deal with your Soul as your Reason teaches you to do
with all other things that concern you. And sure this common Justice binds you
to, for the Soul is that which furnishes you with that Reason, which you
exercise in all your worldly business; and shall the Soul it self receive no
Benefit from that Reason, which it affords you? This is as if the Master of a
Family, who provides food for his servants, should by them be kept from Eating
any himself, and so remain the only starved creature in his house.

28. And as Justice ties you to this, so Mercy does likewise; you know the poor
Soul will fall into Endless and unspeakable Miseries, if you continue to
neglect it, and then it will be too late to consider it. The Last Refuge you
can hope for is Gods mercy, but that you have despised and abused. And with
what face can you in your greatest need beg for his mercy to your Souls, when
you would not afford them your own? No not that common Charity of considering
them, of bestowing a few of those idle Hours you know not (scarce) how to pass
away, upon them.

29. Lay this to your hearts, and as ever you hope for Gods pity, when you most
want it, be sure in time to Pity your selves, by taking that due Care of your
precious Souls which belongs to them.

30. If what has been said, have persuaded you to this so necessary a Duty, my
next work will be to tell you how this Care must be employed, and that in a
word, is in the Doing of all those things which tend to the making the Soul
Happy; which is the end of our Care; and what those are I come now to show you.

PARTITION I. Of the DUTY of MAN by the Light of Nature, by the Light of
Scripture: Of FAITH, the Promises, of Hope, of Love, etc.
THE Benefits purchased for us by Christ, are such as will undoubtedly make the
Soul Happy, for Eternal Happiness it self is one of them; but because these
Benefits belong not to us till we perform the Condition required of us; whoever
desires the happiness of his Soul, must set himself to the performing of that
Condition; what that is, I have already mentioned in the General, That it is
the hearty, honest endeavor of obeying the whole Will of God. But then that
Will of God containing under it many particulars, it is necessary we should
also know what those are; that is, what are the several things, that God now
requires of us, our performance whereof will bring us to everlasting happiness,
and the neglect to endless misery.

2. Of these things there are some which Of the Light of NATURE.
God has so stamped upon our souls, that we Naturally knew them; that is, we
should have known them to be our Duty, though we had never been told so by the
Scripture. That this is so, we may see by those Heathens, who having never
heard of either Old or New Testament, do yet acknowledge themselves bound to
some General Duties, as to Worship God, to be Just, to Honor their Parents,
and the like. And as S. Paul says, Romans 2. 15. Their consciences do in those
things accuse or excuse them; That is, tell them, whether they have done what
they should, in those particulars, or no.

3. Now though Christ have brought greater Light into the world, yet he never
meant by it to put out any of that Natural light, which God has set up in our
Souls: Therefore let me here by the way, advise you not to walk contrary even
to this lesser light, I mean, not to venture on any of those Acts, which mere
Natural Conscience will tell you are Sins.

4. It is just matter of sadness to any Christian heart, to see some in these
days, who profess much of Religion, and yet live in such sins, as a mere
heathen would abhor; men that pretending to higher degrees of Light, and
holiness, then their brethren do, yet practice contrary to all Rules of common
honesty, and make it part of their Christian liberty so to do; of whose
Seducement it concerns all that love their Souls to beware: and for that
purpose let this be laid as a Foundation, That that Religion or Opinion cannot
be of God, which allows men in any wickedness.

5. But though we must not put out this light which God has thus put into our
Souls, yet this is not the only way whereby God has revealed his will, and
therefore we are not to rest here, but proceed to the knowledge of those other
things which God has by other means revealed.

6. The way for us to come to know them The light of SCRIPTURES.
is by the SCRIPTURES, wherein are set down those several commands of God which
he has given to be the Rule of our Duty.

7. Of those, some were given before Christ came into the world, such are those
precepts we find scattered throughout the Old Testament, but especially
contained in the Ten Commandments, and that excellent book of Deuteronomy;
others were given by Christ, who added much, both to the Law implanted in us by
Nature, and that of the Old Testament, and those you shall find in the New
Testament, in the several precepts given by him and his Apostles, but
especially in that Divine Sermon on the Mount, set down in the fifth, sixth and
seventh Chapters of S. Matthews Gospel.

8. All these should be severally spoke to, but because that would make the
discourse very long, and so less fit for the meaner sort of men, for whose use
alone it is intended, I choose to proceed in another manner: By summing all
these together, and so as plainly as I can, to lay down, what is now the duty
of every Christian.

9. This I find briefly contained in the words The Three great branches of MAN'S
DUTY.
of the Apostle, Tit. 2. 12. That we should live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present world; where the word Soberly contains our duty to our
selves; Righteously, our duty to our neghbour, and Godly, our duty to God.
These therefore shall be the Heads of my discourse, our DUTY to GOD, our SELVES,
and our NEIGHBOR. I begin with that to God, that being the best groundwork
whereon to build both the other.

10. There are many parts of our DUTY Duty to God
to GOD, The two chief are these: First to acknowledge him to be God; Secondly,
to have no other; under these are contained all those particulars, which make
up our whole duty to God, which shall be showed in their order.

11. To acknowledge him to be God, is to Acknowledging him to be God.
believe him to be an infinite glorious Spirit, that was from everlasting,
without beginning, and shall be to everlasting, without end. That he is our
Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one God, blessed
for ever. That he is subject to no alterations, but is Unchangeable; that he is
no bodily substance, such as our eyes may behold, but spiritual and invisible,
whom no man has seen, nor can see as the Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 3. 16. That
He is Infinitely Great and Excellent, beyond all that our wit or conceit can
imagine, that he has received his being from none, and gives being to all
things.

12. All this we are to believe of him in regard of his Essence and being: But
besides this, he is set forth to us in the Scripture by several Excellencies,
as that he is of Infinite Goodness, and Mercy, Truth, Justice, Wisdom, Power,
All Sufficiency, Majesty; That he disposes and governes all things by his
Providence; that he Knows all things and is Present in all places; these are
by Divines called the Attributes of God, and all these we must undoubtingly
acknowledge, that is, we must firmly believe all these Divine Excellencies to be
in God, and that in the greatest degree, and so that they can never cease to be
in him, he can never be other then insinitely Good, Merciful, True, etc.

13. But the acknowledging him for our God signifies yet more then this; it
means that we should perform to him all those several parts of Duty which
belong from a Creature to his God: What those are I am now to tell you.

14. The first is FAITH, or Belief, not only FAITH.
that forementioned of his Essence and Attributes, but of his word, the
believing most firmly, that all that he says is perfectly true. This cessarily
arises from that Attribute, his Truth it being natural for us to believe
whatsoever is said by one of whose Truth we are confident. Now the Holy
Scriptures being the Word of God we are therefore to conclude, that all that is
contained in them is most true.

15. The things contained in them are of these four sorts: First, Affirmations,
such are all Of his Affirmations.
the stories of the Bible, when it is said, Such and such things came so and so
to pass; Christ was born of a Virgin, was laid in a Manger, etc. And such also
are many points of Doctrine, as that there are three Persons in the Godhead,
that Christ is the Son of God, and the like. All things of this sort thus
delivered in Scripture we are to believe most true. And not only so, but
because they are all written for our instruction; we are to consider them for
that purpose, that is, by them to lay that Foundation of Christian knowledge on
which we may build a Christian life.

16. The Second sort of things contained in Commands
the Scripture, are the Commands, that is, the several things enjoined us by
God to perform; these we are to believe to come from him, and to be most just,
and fit for him to command: But then this Belief must bring forth Obedience,
that what we believe thus fit to be done, be indeed done by us; otherwise our
belief that they come from him serves but to make us more inexcusable.

17. Thirdly, The Scripture contains threatenings; Threatenings.
many Texts there are which threaten to them that go on in their sins, the
wrath of God, and under that are contained all the punishments and miseries of
this life, both spiritual and temporal, and everlasting destruction in the life
to come. Now we are most steadfastly to Believe, That these are Gods threats,
and that they will certainly be performed to every impenitent sinner. But then
the use we are to make of this belief, is to keep from those sins to which this
destruction is threatened, otherwise our belief adds to our guilt, that will
wilfully go on in spite of those threatenings.

18. Fourthly, The Scripture contains Promises, Promises.
and those both to our Bodies and our Souls; for our bodies there are many
promises that God will provide for them what he sees necessary; I will name
only one, Mat. 6. 33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness,
and all these things, that is, all outward necessaries, shall be added unto
you: But here it is to be observed, that we must first seek the kingdom of God
and his righteousness, that is, make it our first and greatest care to serve
and obey him before this promise even of temporal good things belongs to us. To
the soul there are many and high promises, as first, that of present ease and
refreshment which we find, Matthew. 11. 29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of
me, and ye shall find rest to your souls: But here it is apparent, that before
this rest belongs to us, we must have taken on us Christ's yoke, become his
servants and Disciples. Finally there are promises to the soul even of all the
benefits of Christ; but yet those only to such as perform the Condition
required; that is, Pardon of Sins to those that repent of them, Increase of
Grace to those that diligently make use of what they have already, and humbly
pray for more; and Eternal salvation to those that continue to their lives end
in hearty obedience to his Commands.

19. This Belief of the Promises must therefore stir us up to perform the
Condition, and till it do so, we can in no reason expect any good by them; and
for us to look for the benefit of them on other terms, is the same mad
presumption that it would be in a Servant to challenge his Master to give him a
reward for having done nothing of his work, to which alone the reward was
promised; you can easily resolve what answer were to be given to such a
servant, and the same are we to expect from God in this case: nay further, it
is sure God has given these Promises to no other end, but to invite us to
holiness of life; yea, he gave his Son, in whom all his Promises are as it were
sum'd up, for this end. We usually look so much at Christ's coming to satisfy
for us, that we forget this other part of his errand. But there is nothing
surer, then that the main purpose of his coming into the world was to plant
good life among men.

20. This is so often repeated in Scripture, that no man that considers and
believes what he reads can doubt of it. Christ himself tells us, Mat. 9. 13. He
came to call sinners to repentance. And S. Peter, Acts 3. 26. tells us, That
God sent his Son Jesus to bless us, in turning every one of us from his
iniquities; for it seems the turning us from our iniquities was the greatest
special Blessing which God intended us in Christ.

21. Nay, we are taught by S. Paul, that this was the end of his very death
also, Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for our sins, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
And again, Gal. 1. 4. Who gave himself for us, that he might deliver us from
this present evil world, that is, from the sins and ill customs of the world.
Diverse other Texts there are to this purpose, But these I suppose sufficient to
assure any man of this one great truth, That all that Christ has done for us
was directed to this end, the bringing us to live Christianly; or in the words
of Saint Paul, To teach us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world.

22. Now we know Christ is the foundation of all the Promises; in him all the
promises of God are yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. And therefore if God gave
Christ to this end, certainly the Promises are to the same also. And then how
great an abuse of them is it to make them serve for purposes quite contrary to
what they were intended, viz. To the encouraging us in sins, which they will
certainly do if we persuade our selves they belong to us how wickedly soever we
live. The Apostle teaches us another use of them, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore
these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. When we do thus we may justly
apply the promises to our selves, and with comfort expect our parts in them.
But till then though these promises be of certain truth, yet we can reap no
benefit from them, because we are not the persons to whom they are made, that
is, we perform not the condition required to give us right to them.

23. This is the Faith or Belief required of us toward the things God has
revealed to us in the Scripture, to wit, Such as may answer the End for which
they were so revealed, that is, the bringing us to good lives; the bare
believing the truth of them, without this, is no more then the Devils do, as S.
James tells us, Chap. 2. 19. Only they are not so unreasonable as some of us
are, for they will tremble, as knowing well this Faith will never do them any
good. But many of us go on confidently, and doubt not the sufficiency of our
Faith, though we have not the least fruit of obedience to approve it by; let
such hear S. James's judgment in the point, Chapter 2. 26. As the body without the
spirit is dead, so Faith if it have not works is dead also.

24. A second Duty to God is HOPE, that HOPE.
is, a comfortable expectation of these good things he has promised. But this,
as I told you before of Faith, must be such as agrees to the nature of the
promises, which being such as requires a condition on our part, we can hope no
further then we make that good; or if we do, we are so far from performing by
it this duty of Hope, that we commit the great sin of Presumption, which is
nothing else but hoping where God has given us no ground to hope: Presumption.
this every man does that hopes for pardon of sins and eternal life, without
that repentance and obedience to which alone they are promised; the true hope
is that which purifies us: S. John says, 1 Epist. 3. 5. Every man that has
this hope purifieth himself, even as he is pure; that is, it makes him leave
his sins and earnestly endeavor to be holy as Christ is, and that which does
not so, how confident soever it be, may well be concluded to be but that hope
of the Hypocrite which Job assures us shall perish.

25. But there is another way of transgressing Despair.
this Duty, besides that of Presumption, and that is by Desperation, by which I
mean not that which is ordinarily so called, viz. the Despairing of mercy, so
long as we continue in our sins, for that is but just for us to do: But I mean
such a desperation as makes us give over endeavor, that is, when a man that
sees he is not at the present such a one, as the promises belong to, concludes,
he can never become such, and therefore neglects all duty, and goes on in his
sins. This is indeed the sinful desparation, and that which if it be continued
in, must end in destruction.

26. Now the work of hope is to prevent this, by setting before us the
generality of the promises, that they belong to all that will but perform the
condition. And therefore though a man have not hitherto performed it, and so
has yet no right to them, yet hope will tell him, that that right may yet be
gained, if he will now set heartily about it. It is therefore strange folly for
any man, be he never so sinful, to give up himself for lost, when if he will
but change his course, he shall be as certain to partake of the promises of
mercy as if he had never gone on in those former sins.

27. This Christ shows us in the parable of the Prodigal, Luke 15. where we
see that Son, which had run away from his Father, and had consumed the portion
given him, in riotous living, was yet upon his return and repentance used with
as much kindness by the Father, as he that had never offended, nay with higher
and more passionate expressions of love. The intent of which Parable was only
to show us how graciously our heavenly Father will receive us, how great soever
our former sins have bin, if we shall return to him with true sorrow for what
is past, and sincere obedience for the time to come; nay so acceptable a thing
is it to God, to have any sinner return from the error of his ways, that there
is a kind of triumph in heaven for it, there is joy in the presence of the
Angels of God, over one sinner that repents: Luke 15. 10. And now who would
not rather choose by a timely repentance, to bring joy to heaven, to God and his
holy Angels, then by a sullen desperation to please Satan and his accursed
spirits; especially when by the former we shall gain endless happiness to our
selves, and by the latter as endless torments.

28. A Third Duty to God is LOVE; there Love its Motives.
are two common Motives of love among men. the one the goodness and excellency
of the person; the other his particular kindness, and love to us; and both
these are in the highest degree in God.

29. First he is of infinite goodness, and excellency Gods excellency.
in himself; this you were before taught to believe of him, and no man can
doubt it, that considers but this one thing, that there is nothing good in the
world, but what has received all its goodness from God: His goodness is as the
Sea, or Ocean; and the goodness of all creatures, but as foam small streams,
flowing from the Sea; now you would certainly think him a mad man, that should
say the Sea were not greater then some little brook; and certainly it is no
less folly to suppose that the goodness of God does not as much (nay infinitely
more) exceed that of all creatures. Besides the goodness of the creature is
imperfect and mixed with much evil; but his is pure and entire, without any such
mixture. He is perfectly Holy, and cannot be rainted with the least impurity,
neither can he be the Author of any to us, for though he be the cause of all
the goodness in us, he is the cause of none of our sins. This S. James expressly
tells us, Chap. 1. 13. Let no man say when he is tempted, He is tempted of God;
for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man.

30. But secondly, God is not only thus good His Kindness to us.
in himself, but he is also wonderful good; that is, kind and merciful to us;
we are made up of two parts, a Soul and a Body, and to each of these God has
expressed infinite mercy and tenderness. Do but consider what was before told you
of the SECOND COVENANT, and the mercies therein offered, even Christ himself
and all his benefits, and also that he offers them so sincerely and heartily
that no man can miss of enjoying them but by his own default. For he does most
really and affectionately desire we should embrace them and live; as appears by
that solemn Oath of his, Eze. 33. 11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his ways and
live: whereto he adds this passionate expression, turn ye, turn ye from your
evil ways for why will ye die? To the same purpose you may read Ezekiel. 18.
Consider this, I say, and then surely you cannot but say, He has great
kindness to our souls. Nay, let every man but remember with himself the many
calls he has had to repentance and amendment; sometimes outward, by the Word,
sometimes inward, by the secret whispers of Gods Spirit in his heart, which
were only to woe and entreat him to avoid Eternal misery, and to accept of
Eternal happiness; let him, I say, remember these, together with those many
other means God has used toward him for the same end, and he will have reason
to confess Gods kindness, not only to men's souls in general, but to his own in
particular.

31. Neither has he been wanting to our Bodies, all the good things they
enjoy, as health, strength, food, raiment, and what ever else concerns them,
are merely his gifts; so that indeed it is impossible we should be ignorant of
his mercies to them, all those outward comforts and refreshments we daily
enjoy, being continual effects and witnesses of it, and though some enjoy more
of these then others, yet there is no person but enjoyes so much in one kind
or other, as abundantly shows Gods mercy and kindness to him in respect of his
Body.

32. And now surely you will think it but reasonable we should Love him, who is
in all respects thus Lovely: Indeed this is a duty so generally acknowledged,
that if you should ask any man the question, whether he loved God or no, he
would think you did him great wrong to doubt of it; yet for all this, it is too
plain, that there are vey few, that do indeed love him, and this will soon be
proved to you by examining a little, what are the common effects of love, which
we bear to men like our selves, and then trying, whether we can show any such
fruits of our love to God.

33. Of that sort there are diverse, but for Fruit of Love. Desire of pleasing.
shortness I will name but two. The first is a Desire of pleasing, the second a
Desire of enjoying. These are constantly the Fruits of Love. For the first,
it is known by all, that he that loves any person, is very desirous to approve
himself to him, to do whatsoever he thinks will be pleasing to him; and
according to the degree of love, so is this desire more or less, where we love
earnestly, we are very earnest, and careful to please. Now if we have indeed
that love to God we pretend to, it will bring forth this fruit, we shall be
careful to please him in all things. Therefore as you judge of the tree by its
fruits, so may you judge of your love of God, by this fruit of it; nay indeed
this is the way of trial, which Christ himself has given us, Jo. 14. 15. If ye
love me keep my commandments; and S. John tell us, 1 Ep. 5. 3. That this is
the love of God, that we walk after his commandments, and where this one proof
is wanting, it will be impossible to testify our love to God.

34. But it must yet be farther considered, that this love of God must not be
in a low or weak degree, for besides that the Motives to it, his excellency and
his kindness are in the highest; the same Commandment which bids us love God,
bids us love him with all our heart, and with all our strength, that is, as
much as is possible for us, and above any thing else. And therefore to the
fulfilling of this Commandment, it is necessary we love him in that degree;
and if we do so, then certainly we shall have not only some slight and faint
endeavors of pleasing, but such as are most diligent and earnest, such as will
put us upon the most painful and costly duties, make us willing to forsake our
own ease, goods, friends, yea, life it self, when we cannot keep them without
disobeying God.

35. Now examine thy self by this; have thou this fruit of love to show? do
thou make it thy constant and greatest care to keep Gods Commandments? to obey
him in all things? earnestly laboring to please him to the utmost of thy
power, even to the forsakeing of what is dearest to thee in this world? if thou
do, thou may then truly say thou love God. But on the contrary, if thou
wilfully continuest in the breach of many, nay, but of any one command of his,
never deceive thy self, for the love of God abides not in thee. This will be
made plain to you, if you consider what the Scripture says of such, as that
they are enemies to God by their wicked works, Col. 1. 21. That the carnal
mind (and such is every one that continues wilfully in sin) is enmity with
'God, Romans 8. 7. That he that sins wilfuly tramples under foot the Son of God,
and does despite unto the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10. 29. and many the like. And
therefore unless you can think enmity, and trampling, and despite to be fruits
of love, you must not believe you love God, whilst you go on in any wilful
disobedience to him.

36. A Second fruit of Love, I told you, was desire of Enjoying. This is
constantly to be seen in our love to one another. If you Desire of Enjoying.
have a friend whom you entirely love, you desire his conversation, wish to be
always in his company: and thus will it also be in our love to God if that be
as great and hearty as this.

37. There is a two fold Enjoying of God, the one Imperfect in this life, the
other more Perfect and complete in the life to come; that in this life is that
conversation, as I may call it, which we have with God in his Ordinances, in
Praying, and Meditating, in Hearing his Word, in Receiving the Sacrament, which
are all intended for this purpose, to bring us into an intimacy and familiarity
with God by speaking to him, and hearing him speak to us.

38. Now if we do indeed love God, we shall certainly hugely value and desire
these ways of conversing with him, it being all that we can have in this life;
it will make us with David esteem one day in Gods Courts better then a
thousand, Psalm. 84. 10. We shall be glad to have these opportunities of
approaching to him as often as it is possible, and be careful to use them
diligently, to that end of uniting us still more to him; yea we shall come to
these Spiritual exercises with the same cheerfulness we would go to our dearest
friend. And if indeed we do thus it is a good proof of our Love.

39. But I fear there are not many have this to show for it, as appears by the
common backwardness and unwillingness of men to come to these; and their
negligence, and heartlesness when they are at them; and can we think that God
will ever own us for lovers of him, whilst we have such dislikes to his
company, that we will never come into it but when we are dragged by fear or
shame of men or some such worldly Motive? It is sure you would not think that
man loved you, whom you perceived to shun your company, and to be loath to come
in your sight. And therefore be not so unreasonable as to say, You love God,
when yet you desire to keep as far from him as you can.

40. But besides this, there is another Enjoyment of God, which is more perfect
and complete, and that is our perpetual enjoying of him in heaven, where we
shall be for ever united to him, and enjoy him not now and then only for short
spaces of time, as we do here, but continually without interruption, or
breaking off. And certainly if we have that degree of love to God we ought,
this cannot but be most earnestly desired by us so much, that we shall think no
labor too great to compass it. The seven years that Jacob served for Rachel.
Genesis 29. 20. seemed to him but a few days for the love that he had to her: and
surely if we have love to God we shall not think the service of our whole lives
too dear a price for this full Enjoyment of him, nor esteem all the Enjoyments
of the world worth the looking on in comparison thereof.

41. If we can truly tell our selves we do thus long for this enjoyment of God,
we may believe we love him. But I fear again there are but few that can thus
approve their love. For if we look into men's lives, we shall see they are not
generally so fond of this Enjoyment, as to be at any pains to purchase it. And
not only so, but it is to be doubted, there are many who if it were put to
their choice, whether they would live here always to enjoy the profit and
pleasure of the world, or go to heaven to enjoy God, would, like the children
of Gad and Reuben, set up their rest on this side Jordan, Number. 32. and never
desire that heavenly Canaan; so close do their affections cleave to things
below, which shows clearly they have not made God their treasure, for then
according to our Saviors Rule, Mat. 6. 21. their heart would be with him. Nay,
further yet; it is too plain that many of us set so little value on this
Enjoying of God, that we preser the vilest and basest sins before him, and
choose to Enjoy them, though by it we utterly lose our parts in Him, which is
the case of every man that continues wilfully in those sins.

42. And now I fear, according to these Rules of Trial, many that prefess to
love God, will be found not to do so. I conclude al with the words of S. John 1
Ep. 3. 18. Which though spoken of the love of our brethren, is very fitly
appliable to this love of God, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but
in deed and in truth.

43. A Fourth duty to God is FEAR; this arises FEAR.
from the consideration both of his Justice and his Power; his Justice is such
that he will not clear the wicked, and his Power such, that he is able to
inflict the sorest punishments upon them; and that this is a reasonable cause
of fear, Christ himself tells us, Mat. 10. 18. Fear him which is able to
destroy both body and soul in hell. Many other places of Scripture there are,
which commend to us this duty, as Ps. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with fear: Psalm.
34. 9. Fear the Lord ye that be his Saints. Pro. 9. 10. The fear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom, and diverse the like; and indeed all the threatenings of
wrath against sinners, which we meet with in the Scripture, are only to this
end, to work this fear in our hearts.

44. Now this fear is nothing else, but such an awful regard of God, as may
keep us from offending him. This the wise man tells us, Pro. 16. 17. The fear
of the Lord is to depart from evil: so that none can be said truly to fear God,
that is not thereby withheld from sin; and this is but answerable to that
common fear we have toward man; who ever we know may hurt us, we wilbeware of
provoking, and therefore if we be not as wary of displeasing God, it is plain
we fear men more then we do him.

45. How great a madness this is, thus to The folly of fearing Men more then
God.
fear men above God, will soon appear if we compare what man can do to us with
that which God can. And first, it is sure, it is not in the power of man (I
might say Devils too) to do us any hurt unless God permit and suffer them to do
it: so that if we do but keep him our friend, we may say with the Psalmist, The
Lord is on my side, I fear not what man can do unto me. For let their malice be
never so great, he can restrain and keep them from hurting us, nay, he can
change their minds toward us, according to that of the wise man, Prove. 16. 7.
When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace
with him. A notable example of this we have in Jacob, Genesis 32. who when his
brother Esau was coming against him as an enemy, God wonderfully turned his
heart, so that he met him with all the expressions of brotherly kindness, as
you may read in the next Chapter.

46. But secondly, suppose men were left at liberty to do thee what mischief
they could; alas, their power goes but a little way, they may perhaps rob thee
of thy goods, it may be they may take away thy liberty or thy credit, or
perchance thy life too, but that thou know is the utmost they can do. But
now God can do all this when he pleases, and that which is infinitely more, his
vengeance reaches even beyond death it self, to the eternal misery both of Body
and Soul in hell; in comparison of which, death is so inconsiderable, that we
are not to look upon it with any dread. Fear not them that kill the body, and
after that have no more that they can do, says Christ, Luke 12. 4. And then
immediately adds, But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear, fear him which
after he has killed has power to cast into hell, yea, I say unto you, Fear
him. In which words the comparison is set between that greatest ill we can
suffer from man, the loss of life, and those sadder evils God can inflict on
us; and the latter are found to be the only dreadful things, and therefore God
only to be feared.

47. But there is yet one thing farther considerable in this matter, which is
this, It is possible we may transgress against men and they not know it: I may
perhaps steal my neighbors goods, or defile his wife, and keep it so close
that he shall not suspect me, and so never bring me to punishment for it; but
this we cannot do with God, he knows all things, even the most secret thoughts
of our hearts; and therefore though we commit a sin never so closely, he is
sure to find us, and will as surely, if we do not timely repent, punish us
eternally for it.

48. And now surely it cannot but be confessed, that it is much safer displeasing
men, then God; yet alas our practice is as if we believed the direct contrary,
there being nothing more ordinary with us then for the avoiding of some present
danger we fear from men, to rush our selves upon the indignation of God. And
thus it is with us, when either to save our estates, or credits, or our very
lives, we commit any sin, for that is plainly the choosing to provoke God,
rather then man.

49. But God knows this case of fear of men is not the only one wherein we
venture to displease him, for we commit many sins, to which we have none of this
temptation, nor indeed any other, as for instance that of Common Swearing, to
which there is nothing either of pleasure, or profit to invite us. Nay, many
times, we, who so fear the mischiefs that other men may do to us that we are
ready to buy them off with the greatest sins, do our selves bring all those
very mischiefs upon us, by sins of our own choosing. Thus the careless Prodigal
robs himself of his estate, the Deceitful and Dishoneft man, or any that lives
in open notorious sin, deprives himself of his credit, and the Drunkard and
Glutton brings diseases on himself, to the shortning his life. And can we think
we do at all Fear God, when that fear has so little power over us, that though
it be backed with the many present mischiefs that attend upon sin, it is not
able to keep us from them? surely such men are far from fearing God, that they
rather seem to defy him, resolve to provoke him, whatsoever it cost them,
either in this world or the next. Yet so unreasonably partial are we to our
selves, that even such as these will pretend to this fear: you may examine
multitudes of the most gross scandalous sinners, before you shall meet with one
that will acknowledge he fears not God. It is strange it should be possible for
men thus to cheat themselves; but however, it is certain we cannot deceive God,
he will not be mocked, and therefore if we will not now so fear as to avoid sin,
we shall one day fear when it will be too late to avoid punishment.

50. A Fifth Duty to God, that of TRUSTING TRUST.
in him, that is, depending and resting on him: and that is First in all
dangers, Secondly in all wants. We are to rest on him in all our dangers both
Spiritual and Temporal. Of the first sort, are all those Temptations, by which
we are in danger to be drawn to sin. And in this respect In all spiritual
dangers.
he has promised, that if we resist the Devil he shall fly from us, Jam 4. 7.
Therefore our duty is first to pray earnestly for Gods grace to enable us to
overcome the temptation, and Secondly, to set our selves manfully to combat
with it, not yielding or giving consent to it in the least degree; and whilst
we do thus, we are confidently to rest upon God, that his grace will be
sufficient for us that he will either remove the temptation, or strengthen us
to withstand it.

51. Secondly, in all outward and Temporal Dangers, we are to rest upon him, as
knowing that In all Temporal.
he is able to deliver us, and that he will do so if he see it best for us, and
if we be such to whom he has promised his protection, that is, such as truly
fear him. To this purpose we have many promises in Scripture, Ps. 34. 7. The
Angel of the Lord tarrieth round about them that fear him, and delivers them:
and Ps. 34. 20. The Lord delivers the souls of his Saints, and all that put
their trust in him shall not be destitute; and diverse the like. And also we
have many examples, as that of the three children in the Furnace, Daniel 3.
That of Daniel in the Lions Den, Daniel 6. And many others; all which serve to
teach us this one lesson, that if we go on conscionably in performing our duty,
we need not he dismayed for any thing that can be fall us, for the God whom we
serve, is able to deliver us.

52. Therefore in all dangers, we are first humbly to pray for his aid, and
then to rest Not seek to deliver our selves by any Sin.
our selves cheerfully on him; and assuring our selves that he will give such
an issue as shall be most for our good. But above all things, we must be sure
to fix our dependence wholly on him, and not to rely on the creatures for
help, much less must we seek to deliver our selves by any unlawful means; that
is, by the committing of any sin; for that is like Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 7. to go
to the Witch, that is, to the Devil for help; such courses do commonly deceive
our hopes at the present, and in stead of delivering us out of our streights,
plunge us in greater, and those much more uncomfortable ones, because then we
want that which is the only support, Gods favor and aid which we certainly
forfeit when we thus seek to rescue our selves by any sinful means. But
supposing we could by such a way certainly free our selves from the present
danger, yet alas we are far from having gained safety by it, we have only
removed the danger from that which was less considerable, and brought it upon
the most precious part of us, our Souls; like an unskilful Physician, that to
remove a pain from the finger strikes it to the heart; we are therefore grossly
mistaken when we think we have played the good Husband in saving our Liberties
or Estates, or Lives themselves by a sin; we have not saved them but madly
overbought them, laid out our very Souls on them: And Christ tells us how
little we shall gain by such bargains, Mat. 17. 26. What is a man profited if
he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? Let us therefore resolve
never to value any thing we can possess in this world at so high a rate, as to
keep it at the price of the least sin, but when ever things are driven to such
an issue, that we must either part with some, perhaps all our worldly
possessions, nay life it self or else commit a sin, let us then remember, that
this is the season for us to perform that great and excellent duty of taking up
the Cross, which we can never so properly do in this case, for our bearing of
that which we have no possible way of avoiding, can at most be said to be but
the carrying of the Cross, but then only can we be said to take it up, when
having a means of escaping it by a sin, we rather choose to endure the Cross
then commit the Sin, for then it is not laid on us by any unavoidable
necessity, but we willingly choose it; and this is highly acceptable with God,
yea, withal so strictly required by him, that if we fail of performing it, when
we are put to the trial, we are not to be accounted followers of Christ, for so
himself has expressly told us, Mat. 16. 24. If any man come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me; and so again, Mark 8. 34. It
were therefore a good point of Spiritual Wisdom for us, sometimes by some lower
degrees of self-denial, to fit our selves for this greater, when we shall be
called to it; we know he that expects to run a Race will beforehand be often
breathing himself, that he may not be foiled when he comes to run for the
prize; in like manner 'twil be fit for us, sometimes to abridge our selves
somewhat of our lawful pleasure, or ease, or profit, so that we may get such a
mastery over our selves, as to be able to renounce all, when our obedience to
God requires it.

53. And as we are thus to Trust on God for In all wants spiritual.
deliverance from danger, so are we likewise for supply of our wants; and those
again are either Spiritual or Temporal: our Spiritual want is that of his Grace
to enable us to serve him, without which we can do nothing; and for this we are
to depend on him, provided, we neglect not the means, which are Prayer, and a
Careful using of what he has already bestowed on us: For then we have his
promise for it, he will give the holy Spirit to them that ask it, Luke 11. 15.
And unto him that has shall be given, Mat. 25. 29. that is, To him that has
made a good use of that grace, he has already, God will give more. We are not
therefore to affright our selves with the difficulty of those things God
requires of us, but remember he commands nothing which he will not enable us to
perform, if we be not wanting to our selves. And therefore let us sincerely do
our parts, and confidently assure our selves God will not fail of his.

54. But we have likewise Temporal and Bodily wants, and for the supply of them
we Temporal wants.
are likewise to rely on him. And for this also we want no Promises, supposing
us to be of the number of them to whom they are made, that is, Gods faithful
Servants: They that fear the Lord lack nothing, Psalm. 34. 9. and v. 10. They
that seek the Lord shall want no manner of thing that is good: Again, Psalm. 33.
18, 19. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that
hope in his mercy, to deliver their souls from death, and to feed them in time
of famine. Examples also we have of this, as we may see in the case of Eliah,
and the poor Widow, 1 Kings 17. And many others.

55. We are therefore to look up to him for the provision of all things
necessary for us, according to that of the Psalmist, The eyes of all wait upon
thee, O Lord, and thou give them meat in due season. And our Savior has
taught us to pray for our daily bread; thereby teaching us that we are to live
in continual dependence upon God for it. Yet I mean not by this, that we should
so expect it from God, as to give up our selves to idleness and expect to be
fed by Miracles. No, our honest industry and labor is the means by which God
ordinarily gives us the necessaries of this life; and therefore we must by no
means neglect that. He that will not labor, let him not eat, says the
Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. And we may believe God will pronounce the same
sentence, and suffer the slothful person to want even necessary food. But when
we have faithfully used our own endeavor, then we must also look up to God for
his blessing on it, without which it can never prosper to us. And having done
thus, we may comfortably rest our selves on his Providence for such a measure
of these outward things as he fees fittest for us.

56. But if our condition be such that we are not able to labor, and have no
other means of bringing in the necessaries of life to our selves, yet even then
we are cheerfully to rest upon God, believing that he who feeds the Ravens,
will by some means or other, though we know not what, provide for us so long as
he pleases we shall continue in this world, and never in any case torment our
selves with carking and distrustful thoughts; but as the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5. 7.
Cast all our care on him who cares for us.

57. This is earnestly pressed by our Savior, Matthew. 6. where he abundantly
shows the folly of this sin of distrust. The place is a most excellent one,
and therefore I shall set it down at large, Verse 25. Therefore, I say unto
you, take no thought for your life, what you shall eat, or what you shall
drink; neither for your body, what you shall put on; is not the life more then
meat, and the body then raiment? Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not,
neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds
them. Are ye not much better then they? Which of you by taking thought can add
one cubit to his stature? And why take ye thought for raiment? consider the
Lilies of the field how they grow, they toil not, neither do they spin, and yet
I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of
these. Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and
to morrow is cast into the Oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of
little faith? Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or what
shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed? (for after all these things
do the Gentiles seek) for your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all
these things. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and
then all these things shall be added unto you. Take therefore no thought for to
morrow, for the morrow shall take thought for the things of it self, sufficient
unto the day is the evil thereof. I might add many other texts to this
purpose, but this is so full and convincing that I suppose it needless.

58. All therefore that I shall say more concerning The benefit of trusting on
God.
this duty, is to put you in mind of the great benefits of it; as first, that
by his trusting upon God, you engage and bind him to provide for you. Men, you
know, think themselves highly concerned not to fail those that depend and trust
upon them; and certainly God does so much more. But then secondly, there is a
great deal of ease and quiet in the practice of this duty; it delivers us from
all those carkings and immoderate cares which disquiet our minds, break our
sleep, and gnaws even our very heart. I doubt not but those that have felt
them, need not be told they are uneasy. But then me thinks that uneasiness
should make us forward to embrace the means for the removing of them, and so we
see it too often does in unlawful ones; men will cheat, and steal, and lie, and
do any thing to deliver themselves from the fear of want. But alas, they
commonly prove but deceitful remedies; they bring Gods curse on us, and so are
more likely to betray us to want, then to keep us from it. But if you desire a
certain and unfailing cure for cares, take this of relying upon God.

59. For what should cause that man to fear want that knows he has one that
cares for him, who is All-sufficient, and will not suffer him to want what is
fit for him. If a poor man had but a faithful promise from a wealthy person
that he would never suffer him to want, it is sure he would be highly cheered
with it, and would not then think fit to be as carking as he was before, and
yet a man's promise may fail us, he may either grow poor and not be able, or he
may prove false and not be willing to make good his word. But we know God is
subject neither to impoverishing nor deceit. And therefore how vile an injury
do we offer to him if we dare not trust as much upon his promise as we would
that of a man? yea, and how great a mischief do we do our selves by loading our
minds with a multitude of vexatious and tormenting cares, when we may so
securely cast our burden upon God? I conclude this in the words of the Apostle,
Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God.

PARTITION II. Of HUMILITY, Of Submission to Gods Will, in respect of
Obedience, Of Patience in all sorts of sufferings, and of HONOR due to God in
several ways, in his House, Possessions, his Day, Word, Sacraments, etc.
. 1. A SIXTH Duty to God is HUMILITY, that is, such a sense of HUMILITY
our own meannesse and his excellency, as may work in us lowly and unfeigned
submission to him: This Submission is twofold; first, to his Will, secondly, to
his Wisdom.

2. The submission to his Will is also of two sorts, the submission either of
obedience or patience, Submission to Gods will in respects of obedience.
That of obedience is our ready yielding our selves up to do his Will, so that
when God has by his command made known to us what his pleasure is, cheerfully
and readily to set about it. To enable us to this, humility is exceeding
necessary; for a proud person is of all others the unaptest to obey, and we see
men never pay an obedience but where they acknowledge the person commanding to
be some way above them. And so it is here, if we be not thoroughly persuaded
that God is infinitely above us, that we are vileness and nothing in comparison
of him, we shall never pay our due obedience.

3. Therefore if ever you mean to obey entirely (as you must if ever you mean
to be saved) get your hearts possessed with the sense of that great unspeakable
distance that is between The great distance between God and us.
God and you Consider him as he is a God of infinite Majesty and glory, and we
poor worms of the earth; he infinite in power, able to do all things, and we
able to do nothing, not so much as to make one hair white or black; as our
Savior speaks, Mat. 5. 36. He of infinite purity and holiness, and we polluted
and defiled, wallowing in all kind of sins and uncleanness; he unchangeable
and constant, and we subject to change and alteration every minute of our
lives. He Eternal and Immortal, and we frail mortals, that when ever he takes
away our breath we die, and are turned again to our dust, Psalm. 104. 29.
Consider all this, I say, and you cannot but acknowledge a wide difference
between God and man, and therefore may well cry out with Job, after he had
approach't so near to Goa, as to discern somewhat of his excellency, Job 42.
56. Now mine eye sees thee, wherefore 1 abhor my self and repent in dust and
ashes.

4. And even when this Humility has The unworthiness of our best work.
brought us to obedience it is not then to be cast off, as if we had no further
use of it; for there is still great use, nay necessity of it, to keep us from
any high conceits of our performances, which if we once entertain, it will
blast the best of them, and make them utterly unacceptable to God like the
strictness of the Pharisee, which when once he came to boast of, the Publican
was preferred before him, Luke 18. The best of our works are so full of
infirmity and pollution, that if we compare them with that perfection, and
purity, which is in God, we may truly say with the Prophet, All our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isaiah 64. 6. And therefore to pride our
selves in them, is the same madness, that it would be in a beggar, to brag of
his appared when it is nothing but vile rags, and tatters. Our Saviors precept
in this matter must always be remembered, Luke 17. 10. When you have done all
those things which are commanded you, say, we are unprositable servants; if
when we have done all, we must give our selves no better a title, what are we
then to esteem our selves, that are so far from doing any considerable part, of
what we are commanded? Surely that worser name of sloathful and wicked servant,
Matthew. 25. 26. we have no reason to think too bad for us.

5. A Second sort of Submission to his will, is Submission in respect of
Patience.
that of Patience; this stands in suffering his will, as that of obedience did
in acting it, and is nothing else, but a willing and quiet yielding to whatever
afflictions it pleases God to lay upon us. This the forementioned humility will
make easy to us; for when our hearts are thoroughly possessed with that reverence
and esteem of God, it will be impossible for us to grudge or murmr at
whatever he does. We see an instance of it in Old Elie, 1 Samuel 3. Who after he
had heard the sad threatenings of God against him, of the destruction of his
family, the loss of the Priesthood, the cutting off both his sons in one day,
which were all of them afflictions of the heaviest kind, yet this one
consideration, that it was the Lord, enabled him calmly and quietly to yield to
them; saying, Let him do what seems him good, Verse 18. The same effect it
had on David, in his suffering, Psalm 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth
because thou did it: God doing it silenced all murmurings and grumblings in
him. And so must it do in us, in all our afflictions, if we will indeed approve
our humility to God.

6. For surely you will not think that child has due humility to his parent,
or that servant to his Master, that when they are corrected, shall fly in the
Father or Masters face. But thus do we when ever we grudg and repine at that
which God lays upon us. But besides the want of Humility in our so doing,
there is also a great want of justice in it; for God has, as we are his
creatures, a Right to do with us what he will, and therefore for us to resist
that right of his, is the highest injustice that can be; nay farther, it is
also the greatest folly in the world, for it is only our good that God aims at
in afdicting us; that heavenly Father is not like our earthly ones, who
sometime correct their children only to satisfy their own angry humor, not to
do them good. But this is subject to no such frailties, he does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of man, Lam. 3. 33. They are our sins, which
do not only give him just cause, but even force and necessitate him to punish
us He carries to us the bowels and affections of the tenderest Father: now when
a Father sees his child stubborn and rebellious, and running on in a course
that will certainly undo him, what greater act of Fatherly kindness can he do
then chasten and correct him, to see if by that means he may amend him; nay
indeed he could not be said to have true kindness to him if he should not. And
thus it is with God when he sees us run on in sin, either he must leave off to
love us, and so leave us to our selves to take our own course, and that is the
heaviest curse that can be fall any man; or else if he continue to love us, he
must correct and punish us to bring us to amendment. Therefore when ever he
strikes, we are in all reason, not only patiently to lie under his rod, but (as
I may say) kiss it also; that is, be very thankful to him, that Thankfulness
for Gods Corrections.
he is pleased not to give us over to our own hearts lusts, Psalm. 18. 12. but
still continue his care of us; sends afflictions, as so many messengers to call
us home to himself. You see then how gross a folly it is to murmr at those
stripes, which are meant so graciously; it is like that of a froward patient,
which reproaches and reviles the Physician that comes to cure him, and if such
a one be left to die of his disease, every one knows whom he is to thank for it.

7. But it is not only quietness, no nor thankfulness Fruitfulnes under them.
neither under afflictions, that is the full of our Duty in this matter; we
must have fruitfulness also, or all the rest will stand us in no stead. By
fruitfulness I mean the bringing forth that, which the afflictions were sent to
work in us; viz. the amendment of our lives. To which purpose in time of
affliction it is very necessary for us to call our selves to an account, to
examine our hearts and lives, and search diligently, what sins lie upon us,
which provoked God thus to smite us, and whatsoever we find our selves guilty
of, humbly to confess to God and immediately to forsake for the rest of our
time.

8. All I shall add concerning this duty of In all sorts of sufferings.
patience, is, that we are as much bound to it in one sort of sufferings, as
another, whether our suffering be so immediately from Gods hand, that no
creature has any thing to do in it, as sickness, or the like; or whether it
be such wherein men are the instruments of afflicting us. For it is most sure,
when any man does us hurt, he could not do it, without Gods permission, and
sufferance, and God may as well make them the instruments of punishing us, as
do it more directly by himself; and it is but a counterfeit patience, that
pretends to submit to God, and yet can bear nothing from men; we see holy Job,
who is set forth to us as a pattern of true patience, made no such difference
in his afflictions, he took the loss of his Cattle, which the Chaldeans and
Sabeans robbed him of, with the very same meekness, with which he did that,
which was consumed by fire from heaven. When therefore we suffer any thing from
men, be it never so unjustly in respect of them, we are yet to confess it is
most just in respect of God, and therefore in stead of looking upon them with
rage and revenge, as the common custom of the world is, we are to look up to
God, acknowledge his justice in the affliction, begging his pardon most
earnestly for those sins, which have provoked him to send it, and patiently and
thankfully bear it, till he shall see fit to remove it; still saying with Job,
blessed be the name of the Lord.

9. But I told you, Humility contained in Submission to Gods Wisdom.
it a submission not only to his Will, but also to his Wisdom; that is, to
acknowledge him infinitely Wise, and therefore that whatever he does is best
and fittest to be done. And this we are to confess both in his commands, and
in his disposing and ordering of things: First, whatsoever he commands In his
Commands.
us either to believe or do, we are to submit to his Wisdom in both, to
believe whatever he bids us believe, how impossible soever it seems to our
shallow understandings, and to do whatever he commands us to do, how contrary
soever it be to our fleshly Reason or humor, and in both to conclude, that his
Commands are most fit and Reasonable however they appear to us.

10. Secondly, We are to submit to his Wisd^me in respect of his Disposal and
Ordering In his Disposals.
of things; to acknowledge he disposes all things most Wisely, and that not
only in what concerns the world in general, but also in what concerns every
one of us in particular; so that what condition soever he put us in, we are to
assure our selves it is that which is best for us, since he chooses it for us
who cannot err. And therefore never to have impatient desires of any thing in
this world, but to leave it to God to fit us with such an estate and condition
as he sees best for us, and there let us quietly and contentedly rest; yea,
though it be such as of all others we should least have wished for our selves.
And this surely cannot but appear very reasonable to any that has humility;
for that having taught him, that God is infinitely wise, and he very foolish,
he can never doubt but that it is much more for his good that God should choose
for him, then he for himself; even as it is much more for the childs good to
have the parent choose for it, then to be left to those silly choices it would
make for its self. For how many times would it cut, and burn, and mischief it
self if it might have every thing it desires? And such children are we, we many
times eagerly desire those things which would undo us if we had them. Thus
many times we wish for Wealth, and Honor, and Beauty, and the like, when if
we had them they would only prove snares to us, we should be drawn into sin by
them. And this God, who knows all things, sees, though we do not, and
therefore often denies us those things which he sees will tend to our mischief,
and it is his abundant mercy that he does so. Let us therefore when ever we be
disappointed of any of our aims and wishes, not only patiently but joyfully
submit to it, as knowing that it is certainly best for us, it being chosen by
the unerring wisdom of our heavenly Father.

11. A seventh Duty to God is HONOR, that HONOR.
is, the paying him such a reverence and respect as belongs to so great a
Majesty. And this is either inward or outward. The inward is the exalting him
in our hearts having always the highest and most excellent esteem of him. The
outward is the manifesting and showing forth that inward; and that is the first
general in the whole course of our lives, the living like men that do indeed
carry that high esteem of God. Now you know if we bear any special Reverence
but to a Man, we will be careful not to do any foul or base thing in his
presence, and so if we do indeed honor God, we shall abhor to do any unworthy
thing in his sight. But God sees all things, and therefore there is no way to
shun the doing it in his sight if we do it at all; therefore if we do thus
reverence him, we must never at any time do any sinful thing.

12. But besides this general way of honoring Several ways of honoring God.
God, there are many particular acts by which we may honor him, and those acts
are diverse, according to the several particulars about which they are
exercised. For we are to pay his honor not only immediately to himself, but
also by a due estimation and account of all those things that nearly relate or
belong to him. Those are especially six; first, his House, secondly, his
Revenue or income (as I may say) thirdly, his Day, fourthly, his Word, fifthly,
his Sacraments, and sixthly, his Name; and every one of these is to have some
degree of our Reverence and Esteem.

13. First, his House, that is, the Church, In his House.
which being the place set apart for his public worship, we are to look on it,
though not as Holy in respect of it self, yet in respect of its use, and
therefore must not profane it by employing it to uses of our own. This Christ
has taught us by that act of his, Matthew. 21. 12. in driving the buyers and
sellers out of the Temple, saying, My house is called the house of prayer: And
again, John 2. 16. Make not my Fathers house a house of Merchandise. By which
it is clear, Churches are to be used only for the services of God, and we are
to make that the only end of our coming thither, and not to come to Church as
to a Market, to make bargains or dispatch businesses with our neighbors, as is
too common among many. But when ever thou entrest the Church, remember that it
is the House of God, a place where he is in an especial manner present, and
therefore take the counsel of the Wise man, Eccles. 5. 1. and keep thy foot
when thou go into the house of God; that is, behave thy self with that godly
awe and reverence which belongs to that great Majesty thou art before. Remember
that thy business there is to converse with God, and therefore shut out all
thoughts of the world, even of thy most lawful business, which though they be
allowable at another time, are here sinful. How fearful a guilt is it then to
entertain any such thoughts as are in themselves wicked? It is like the treason
of Judas, who pretended indeed to come to kiss his Master, but brought with
him a band of Soldiers to apprehend him, Mat. 26. We make show in our coming
to Church, of serving and worshipping God, but we bring with us a train of his
enemies to provoke and despite him. This is a wickedness that may outvie the
profaneness of these days, in turning Churches into Stables; for sinful and
polluted thoughts are much the worst sort of beasts.

14. The second thing to which respect belongs, His possessions.
is his Revenue or income; that is, whatsoever is his peculiar possessions, set
apart for the maintenance of those that attend his service; those were the
Priests in time of the Law, and Ministers of the Gospel now with us. And what
ever is thus set apart, we must look on with such respect as not to dare to
turn it to any other use. Of this sort some are the free-will-offerings of men,
who have sometimes of their own accord given some of their Goods or Lands to
this Holy use; and whatsoever is so given, can neither by the person that gave,
nor any other be taken away without that great sin of Sacrilege.

15. But besides these, there was among the Jews, and has always been in all
Christian Nations, something allotted by the Law of the Nation for the support
and maintenance of those that attend the service of God. And it is but just and
necessary it should be so, that those who by undertaking that Calling are taken
off from the ways of gaining a livelihood in the world, should be provided for
by them whose souls they watch over. And therefore it is most reasonable, which
the Apostle urges in this matter, 1 Cor. 9. 11. If we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? That
is, it is most unreasonable for men to grudge the bestowing a few carnal
things, the outward necessaries of this temporal life, on them from whom they
receive spiritual things, even instruction and assistance toward the obtaining
of an eternal life.

16. Now whatsoever is thus appointed for The great sin of Sacrilege.
this use, may by no means be employed to any other. And therefore those Tithes
which are here by Law allotted for the maintenance of the Ministry, must by no
means be kept back, nor any tricks or shifts used to avoid the payment either
in whole or in part. For first, it is certain, that it is as truly theft as any
other robbery can be, Ministers having right to their tithes by the same Law
which gives any other man right to his estate. But then secondly, it is another
manner of robbery then we think of, it is a robbing of God, whose Service they
were given to maintain, and that you may not doubt the truth of this, it is no
more then God himself has said of it, Mal. 3. 8. Will a man rob God? yet ye
have robbed me; yet ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? in tithes and
offerings. Here it is most plain that in Gods account the with holding tithes
is a robbing of him. And if you please you may in the next verse see what the
gains of this robbery amounts to, Ye are cursed with a curse: A curse is all is
gotten by it; and common experience shows us that GODS vengeance does in a
remarkable manner pursue this sin of Sacrilege, whether it be that of with
holding tithes, or the other The punishment.
of seizing on those possessions, which have been voluntarily consecrated to
God. Men think to enrich themselves by it, but it usually proves directly
contrary; this unlawful gain becomes such a Canker in the estate, as often eats
out even that we had a just title to. And therefore if you love (I will not say
your souls, but) your estates, preserve them from that danger by a strict care
never to meddle with any thing set a part for God.

17. A Third thing, wherein we are to express our Reverence to God; is the
hallowing of the times, set apart for his service. He who has given all our
time, requires some The times for his service.
part of it to be paid back again, as a rent or tribute of the whole. Thus the
Jews kept holy the seventh day: and we Christians the Sunday, or Lords day; the
Jews were in their Sabbath especially to remember the Creation of Lords day.
the World, and we in ours, the Resurrection of Christ by which a way is made
for us into that better world we expect hereafter. Now this Day thus set apart,
is to be employed in the Worship and Service of God, and that first more
solemnly and publicly in the Congregation, from which no man must then absent
himself without a just cause: and Secondly, privately at home, in praying with,
and instructing our families, or else in the yet more private duties of the
closet, a man's own private prayers, Reading, Meditating, and the like.

And that we may be at leisure for these, a Rest from all worldly business is
commanded; therefore let no man th^nk that a bare rest from labor is all that
is required of him on the Lords day, but the time which he saves from the works
of his calling, he is to lay out on those spiritual duties. For the Lords Day
was never ordained to give us a pretense for idleness, but only to change our
unployment from worldly to heavenly, much less was it meant that by our rest
from our callings we should have more time-free to bestow upon our sins, as too
many do, who are more constant on that day at the Alehouse then the Church. But
this Rest was commanded, first, to shadow out to us that Rest from sin which we
are bound to all the days of our lives. And secondly, to take us off from our
worldly business, and to give us time to attend the service of God and the need
of our souls.

18. And surely if we rightly consider it, it is a very great benefit to us
that there is such a set time thus weekly returning for that purpose. We are
very intent and busy upon the world, and if there were not some such time
appointed to our hands, it is to be doubted we should hardly allot any our
selves: And then what a starved condition must these poor souls of ours be in,
that shall never be afforded a meal? whereas now there is a constant diet
provided for them every Sunday, if we will conscionably employ it, may be a
festival day to them, may bring them in such spiritual food, as may nourish
them to eternal life. We are not to look on this day with grudging, like those
in Amos 8. 5. Who ask, When will the Sabbath be gone, that we may set forth
wheat? As if that time were utterly lost, which were taken from our worldly
business. But we are to consider it, as the gainfullest, as the joyfullest day
of the week, a day of harvest, wherein we are to lay up in store for the whole
week, nay for our whole lives.

19. But besides this of the weekly Lords day, there are other times, which the
Church The Feasts of the Church.
has set apart for the remembrance of some special mercies of God, such as the
Birth and Resurrection of Christ, the Descent of the Holy Ghost, and the like;
and these days we are to keep in that manner which the Church has ordered, to
wit in the solemn worship of God, and in particular thanks giving for that
special blessing we then remember. And surely whoever is truly thankful for
those rich mercies, cannot think it too much to set apart some few days in a
year for that purpose.

But then we are to look that our Feasts be truly spiritual, by employing the
day thus holily, and not make it an occasion of intemperance and disorder as
too many, who consider nothing in Christmas and other good times, but the good
cheers and jollity of them. For that is doing despite, in stead of honor to
Christ, who came to bring all purity and soberness into the world, and
therefore must not have that coming of his remembered in any other manner.

20. Other days there are also set a part in memory of the Apostles, and other
Saints, wherein we are to give hearty thanks to God, for his graces in them;
particularly, that they were made instruments of revealing to us Christ Jesus,
and the way of salvation, as you know the Apostles were by their Preaching
throughout the World. And then farther, we are to meditate on those Examples of
holy life, they have given us, and stir up our selves to the imitation thereof.
And whoever does uprightly set himself to make these uses of these several Holy
days, will have cause, by the benefit he shall find from them, to thank and
not to blame the Church for ordering them.

21. Another sort of days there are, which The Fasts.
we are likewise to observe, and those are days of fasting and humiliation;
and whatever of this kind the Church injoynes, whether constantly at set times
of the year, or upon any special and more sudden occasion, we are to observe in
such manner as she directs; that is, not only a bare abstaining from meat,
which is only the bodies punishment; but in afflicting our souls, humbling them
deeply before God, in a hearty confessing, and bewailing of our own, and the
nations sins, and earnest prayers for Gods pardon, and forgiveness, and for
the turning away of those judgments, which those sins have called for: But
above all, in turning our selves from our sins, loosing the bands of
wickedness, as Isaiah speaks, Chap. 58. 6. and exercising our selves in works
of mercy, dealing our bread to the hungry, and the like, as it there follows.

22. Fourthly, we are to express our reverence Gods Word.
to God, by honoring his Word; and this we must certainly do, if we do indeed
honor him; there being no surer sign of our despising any person, then the
setting light, by what he says to us; as on the contrary, if we value One,
every word he speaks will be of weight with us. Now this Word of God is
expressly contained in the holy Scriptures, the Old and New Testament, where he
speaks to us, to show us his Will and our duty. And therefore The holy
Scriptures.
to this Word of his, we are to bear a wonderful respect, to look upon it, as
the rules by which we must frame all the actions of our life; and to that end
to study it much, to read in it as often as we can, if it may be, never to let
a day pass us without reading or hearing some part of it read.

23. But then that is not all: We must not only read, but we must mark what we
read, we must diligently observe, what duties there are which God commands us
to perform, what faults they are, which God there charges us not to commit,
together with the rewards promised to the one, and the punishment threatened to
the other. When we have thus marked, we must lay them up in our memory, not so
loosely and carelessly that they shall presently drop out again; but we must so
fasten them there by often thinking and meditating on them, that we may have
them ready for our use. Now that use is the directing of our lives; and
therefore when ever we are tempted to the committing of any evil, we are then
to call to mind this is the thing which in such a Scripture is forbidden by
God, and all his vengeances threatened against it; and so in like manner when
any opportunity is offered us of doing good, to remember, this is the duty
which I was exhorted to in such a Scripture, and such glorious rewards promised
to the doing of it; and by these considerations strengthen our selves for
resisting of the evil and performance of the good.

24. But besides this of the written Word, it has pleased God to provide yet
further for our instruction by his Ministers, whose Office it is to teach us
Gods Will, not by saying any thing contrary to the written Word (for whatsoever
is so, can never be Gods Will) but by Explaining it, and making it easier to
our understandings, and then applying it to our particular occasions, and
exhorting and stirring us up to the practice of it; all which is the end at
which first their Catechizing and then their Preaching aims. And to this we
are to bear also a due respect by giving diligent heed thereto, not only being
present at Gatechizings and Sermons, and either sleep out the time, or think of
somewhat else, but carefully marking what is said to us. And surely if we did
but rightly consider, how much it concerns us, we should conclude it very
reasonable for us to do so.

25. For First as to that of Catechizing, Catechizing.
it is the laying the foundation upon which all Christian practice must be
built, for that is the teaching us our duty, without which it is impossible for
us to perform it. And though it is true, that the Scriptures are the Fountains,
from whence this knowledge of duty must be fetched, yet there are many who are
not able to draw it from this Fountain themselves, and therefore it is
absolutely necessary it should be thus brought to them by others.

26. This Catechizing is generally looked on as a thing belonging only to the
youth, and so indeed it ought, not because the oldest are not to learn, if they
be ignorant, but because all children should be so instructed, that it should
be impossible for them, to be ignorant when they come to years. And it nearly
concerns every Parent, as they will free themselves from the guilt of their
childrens eternal undoing, that they be careful to see them instructed in all
necessary things; to which purpose it will be fit early to teach them some
short Catechism, of which sort none so fit as the Church Catechism; yet are
they not to rest on these endeavors of their own; but also to call in the
Ministers help, that he may build them up farther in Christian knowledge.

27. But alas! it is too sure that parents have very much neglected this Duty,
and by that means it is that such multitudes of men and women that are called
(bristians, know no more of Christ or any thing that concerns their own Souls,
then the meerest Heathen.

28. But although it were their Parents fault that they were not Instructed
when they were young, yet it is now their own if they remain still ignorant;
and it is sure it will be their own ruin and misery if they wilfully continue
so. Therefore whoever it be, of what age or condition soever, that is in this
ignorant estate, or in any such degree of it, that he wants any part of
necessary saving knowledge, let him as he loves his soul, as ever he would
escape eternal damnation, seek out for instruction, and let no fear of shame
keep any from it: For first, it is certain the shame belongs only to the wilful
continuing in ignorance, to which the desire of learning is directly contrary,
and is so far from a shameful, that it is a most commendable thing, and will be
sure to be so accounted by all wise and good men. But secondly, suppose some
profane, senseless people should deride it, yet sure that shame were in all
reason to be undergone joyfully rather then venture on that confusion of face
which will at the day of judgment befall those, who to avoid a little false
shame amongst men, have gone on in a wilful ignorance of their duty, which
ignorance will be so far from excusing any sins they shall commit, that it adds
one great and heavy sin to all the rest, even the despising that knowledge
which is offered to them. How ha^nous a sin that is, you may learn in the first
Chapter of the Proverbs, where hating knowledge v. 29. is said to be the thing
that draws down those sad vengeances forementioned, even Gods forsaking men,
laughing at their calamity in stead of helping them: Which is of all other
conditions in the world the most miserable, and surely they are madly desperate
that will run themselves into it.

29. As for those who have already this foundation laid by the knowledge of the
grounds of Christian Religion, there is yet for them a farther help provided by
Preaching. And it is no more then needs, for God knows those Preaching.
that understand their duty well enough are too apt to forget it; nay,
sometimes by the violence of their own lusts to transgress it even when they do
remember it, and therefore it is very useful we should be put in mind of it to
prevent our forgetting, and also often exhorted and assisted to withstand those
lusts which draw us to those transgressions. And to these purposes preaching is
intended, first, to warn us to be upon our guard against our spiritual enemy,
and then to furnish us with weapons for the fight; that is, such means and
helps as may best enable us to beat off temptations and get the victory over
them.

30. Since therefore this is the end of Preaching, we must not think we have
done our duty when we have heard a Sermon, though never so attentively, but we
must lay it up in our hearts those instructions and advices we there meet with,
and use them faithfully to that end of overcoming our sins. Therefore when ever
thou come to the Physician of thy Soul, do as thou would with the Physician
of thy Body; thou come to him not only to hear him talk and tell thee what
will cure thee, but also to do according to his directions; and if thou do
not so here, thou art as vain as he that expects a bare receipt from his Doctor
shall cure him though he never make use of it. Nay, thou art much more vain and
ridiculous, for that though it do him no good will do him no harm, he shall
never be the worse for having been taught a medicine though he use it not: but
in these Spiritual Receipts it is otherwise, if we use them not to our good
they will do us a great deal of harm, they will rise up in judgment against
us, and make our condemnation so much the heavier. Beware therefore not to
bring that danger upon thy self, but when thou have heard a Sermon, consider
with thy self what directions there were in it for enabling thee to eschew
evil, or to do good. And if there were any thing especially concerned thine own
bosom sin, lay that close to thy heart, and all the week after make it matter
of meditation, think of it even whilst thou art at thy work, if thou want
other time; and not only think of it, but set to the practice of it, do what
thou were advised to, for the subduing sins and quickening grace in thee.
Finally, look carefully to practice the counsel of the Apostle, Jam. 1. 22. Be
ye doers of the Word, not hearers only, deceiving your own souls. To hope for
good from the Word without doing of it, is, it seems, nothing but a deceiving
our selves: Let us never therefore measure our godliness by the number of
Sermons which we hear, as if the hearing many were the certain mark of a good
Christian; but by the store of fruit we bring forth by them, without which all
our hearing will serve but to bring us into that heavier portion of stripes,
which belongs to him that knows his Masters will and does it not, Luke 12. 47.
But this reverence which is due to Preaching we must not pay to all that is now
a days called so, for God knows there are many false Prophets gone out into
the world, as the Apostle speaks, 1 John 41. And now, if ever, is that advice
of his necessary, To try the spirits whether they be of God. But what I have
said, I mean only of the Preaching of those who first have a lawful calling to
the Office, and secondly frame their doctrine according to the right rule, the
written Word of God. But if any man say, He is not able to judge whether the
Doctrine be according to the Word or no, let him at least try it by the common
known rules of duty which he does understand, and if he find it a Doctrine
giving men liberty to commit those things which are by all acknowledged sins,
such as rebellion, injustice, unmercifulness, uncleanness, or the like, he may
conclude, it is utterly contrary to God and his Word, and then abhorrence, and
not reverence belongs to it.

31. Fifthly, we are to express our honoring The Sacraments.
of God by Reverencing his Sacraments: those are two; Baptism, and the Supper
of the Lord. And this we are to do; First, by our high esteem of them;
Secondly, by our reverent usage of them: we are first to prize them at a high
rate, looking on them, as the instruments of bringing to us the greatest
blessings we can receive. The first of them, Baptism, that enters us into
covenant with God, makes us members of Christ, and so gives us right to all
those precious benefits, that flow from him, to wit, pardon of sins,
sanctifying grace, and heaven it self, on condition we perform our parts of the
Covenant. And as for the Lords Supper, that is not only a sign and remembrance
of Christ and his death; but it is actually the giving Christ, and all the
fruits of his death to every worthy receiver; and therefore there is a most
high estimation, and value due to each of them.

32. And not only so; but in the second place we must show our reverence in our
usage of them; Of Baptism.
and that, First, before, Secondly, at, and Thirdly, after the time of
receiving them. It is true that the Sacrament of Baptism being now administered
to us, when we are Infants, it is not to be expected of us, that we should in
our own persons do any thing, either before or at the time of receiving it,
those performances were strictly required of all persons, who were baptized
when they were of years. But for us, it suffices to give us this right to
Baptism, that we are born within the pale of the Church, that is, of Christian
parents; and all that is required at that time is what we can only perform by
others, they in our stead promising that when we come to years we will perform
our parts of the Covenant. But by how much the less we are then able to do so
much, the greater bond lies on us to perform those after-duties required of us,
by which we are to supply the want of the former.

33. Now if you would know what those The vow of Baptism.
duties are, look over those promises which your Godfathers and Godmothers then
made in your name, and you may then learn them. I cannot give you them in a
better form then that of our Churches Catechism, which tells, That our
Godfathers and Godmothers did promise and vow three things in our names; first,
that we should forsake the Devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities of
this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. Where, by the Devil
is meant, first, the worshipping of all false gods, which is indeed but
worshipping the Devil: A sin which at the time of Christ's coming into the world
was very common, most part of mankind then living in that vile Idolatry. And
therefore when Baptism was first ordained, it was but needful to make the
forsaking of those false gods a principal part of the vow. And though those
false worships are now much rarer, yet there was one special part of them,
which may be feared to be yet too common among us, and that is all sorts of
uncleanness, which though we do not make Ceremonies of our Religion as the
Heathens did of theirs, yet the committing thereof is a most high provocation
in Gods eyes, such as drew him to destroy whole Cities with fire and brimstone,
as you may read, Genesis 19. Nay, the whole World with water, Genesis 6. and will not
fail to bring down judgments, and strange ones, on any that continue therein;
and therefore the forsaking them well deserves to be looked on as an especial
part of this promise. Besides this, all dealing with the Devil is here vowed
against, whether it be by practicing witchcraft our selves, or consulting with
those that do upon any occasion whatever, as the recovery of our health, our
goods, or whatever else; for this is a degree of the former sin, it is the
forsaking of the Lord, and setting up the Devil for our God, whilst we go to
him in our needs for help.

34. But we also renounce all the works of the Devil, and those are either in
general all those which the Devil tempts us to, or else those particular kinds
of sin which have most of his image on them; that is, those which he himself
most practices, such are pride (which brought him from being an Angel of light
to the accursed condition he is now in) and lying; he is, as our Savior says,
John 8. 44. A liar, and the Father of it; and such also are malice and envy,
especially killing and destroying of others, for he was a murderer from the
beginning, John 8. 48. But above all there is nothing wherein we become so like
him, as in tempting and drawing others to sin, which is his whole trade and
business, and if we make it any part of ours, we become like that roaring Lion,
that goes about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8.

35. The second thing we vow to forsake, is the pomps and vanities of this
wicked world. By the pomps and vanities there are several things meant; some of
them such as were used by the Heathens in some Unlawful sports of theirs,
wherein we are not now so much concerned, there being none of them remaining
among us: but besides that, there is meant all excess, either in diet, or
sports, or apparel, when we keep not those due measures, which either by the
general rules of sobriety, or the particular circumstances of our qualities and
callings we are bound to. Next, by the wicked world, we may understand, first,
the wealth and greatness of the world, which though we do not so totally
renounce, that it is unlawful for a Christian to be either rich or great, yet
we thus far promise to forsake them, that we will not set our hearts upon them,
nor either get or keep them by the least unlawful means. Secondly, by the
wicked world, we may understand the companies and customs of the world, which
so far as they are wicked we here renounce; that is, we promise never to be
drawn by company to the commission of a sin, but rather to forsake the most
delightful company then be ensnared by it; nor yet by custom, but rather
venture the shame of being thought singular, ridiculous persons, walk as it
were in a path by our selves, then put our selves into that broad way that
leads to destruction, by giving our selves over to any sinful custom how
common soever it be grown. If this part of our vo^ were but thoroughly
considered, it would arm us against most of the temptations the world offers
us, company and custom being the two special instruments by which it works on
us

36. A third thing we renounce, is all the sinful lusts of the flesh; where the
flesh is to he understood in that sense wherein the Scripture often uses it,
for the fountain of all disordered affections. For though those unclean desires
which we ordinarily call the lusts of the flesh are here meant, yet they are
not the only things here contained, there being diverse other things which the
Scripture calls the works of the flesh; I cannot better inform you of them then
by setting down that list S. Paul gives of them, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Now the
works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness,
revellings, and such like. This, with those other descriptions, you will find
scattered in several places of Scripture, will show you there are many things
contained under this part of your vow, the forsaking all the sinful lusts of
the flesh.

37. The second thing our Godfathers and Godmothers promised for us, was, that
we should believe all the Articles of the Christian faith. These we have summed
up together in that which we call the Apostles Creed, which since we promise to
believe, we are supposed also to promise to learn them, and that not only the
words, but likewise the plain sense of them, for who can believe what he either
never heard, of, or knows not any thing of the meaning of it? Now by this
believing is meant not only the consenting to the truth of them, but also the
living like them that do believe. As for Example, our believing that God
created us, should make us live in that subjection and obedience to him which
becomes Creatures to their Creator; the believing that Christ Redeemed us,
should make us yield up our selves to him as his purchase, to be disposed
wholly by him, and employed only in his service. The believing a judgment to
come, should give us care so to walk that we may not be condemned in it. And
our believing the life everlasting, should make us diligent so to employ our
short moment of time here, that our everlasting life may be a life of joy, not
of misery to us. In this manner from all the Articles of the Creed, we are to
draw Motives to confirm us in all Christian Practice, to which end it is that
our learning and believing of them tends, and therefore without it we are very
far from making good this part of our vow, the believing all the Articles of
the Christian faith.

38. The last part of our vow is, that we should keep Gods holy will and
Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of our lives. Where by our
keeping of Gods holy will and commandments, is meant our doing of all those
things, which he has made known to us to be his will we should perform;
wherein he has given us his holy Word to instruct us, and teach us, what it is
that he requires of us, and now he expects that we should faithfully do it
without favoring our selves in the breach of any one of his commands. And then
in this entire obedience, we must walk all the days of our lives: That is, we
must go on in a constant course of obeying God; not only fetch some few steps
in his ways, but walk in them, and that not for some part of our time, but all
the days of our lives, never turn out of them, but go on constantly in them,
as long as we live in this world.

39. Having now thus briefly explained to you this vow made at your Baptism,
all I The strict obligation of this vow of Baptism.
shall add concerning it, is only to remember you how nearly you are concerned
in the keeping it: and that first in respect of justice, secondly, in respect
of advantage and benefit. That you are in justice bound to it, I need say no
more but that it is a promise, and you know justice requires of every man the
keeping of his promise. But then this is of all other promises the most solemn
and binding, for it is a vow; that is, a promise made to God; and therefore we
are not only unjust, but forsworn, when ever we break any part of it.

40. But secondly we are also highly concerned to keep it, in respect of our
own benefit. I told you before, That Baptism entered us into Covenant with God;
now a Covenant is made up of two parts, that is, something promised by the one
party, and something by the other of the parties that make the Covenant. And if
one of them break his part of the Covenant, that is, perform not what he has
agreed to, he can in no reason look that the other should make good his. And so
it is here, God does indeed promise those benefits before mentioned, and that
is his part of the Covenant. But then we also undertake to perform the several
things contained in this vow of Baptism, and that is our part of it, and unless
we do indeed perform them, God is not tied to make good his, and so we forfeit
all those precious benefits and advantages, we are left in that natural and
miserable estate of ours, children of wrath, enemies to God, and heirs of
eternal damnation. And now what can be the pleasure that any or all sins can
afford us that can make us the least degree of recompense for such a loss, the
loss of Gods favor and grace here, and the loss of our own souls hereafter?
for as our Savior says, Mark 8. 36. What shall it profit a man if he shall
gain the whole world and lose his own soul? yet this mad bargain we make when
ever we break any part of this our vow of Baptism. It therefore most nearly
concerns us to consider sadly of it, to remember that every sin we commit is a
direct breach of this vow, and therefore when thou art tempted to any sin, seem
it never so light, say not of it as Lot did of Zoar, Genesis 6. 20. Is it not a
little one? but consider that what ever it is, thou have in thy Baptism vowed
against it, and then be it never so little it draws a great one at the heels of
it, no less then that of being forsworn, which whoever commits, God has in
the third Commandment pronounced, He will not hold him guiltless. And that we
may the better keep this vow, it will be very useful often to repeat to our
selves the several branches of it, that so we may still have it ready in our
minds to set against all temptations; and surely it is so excellent a weapon,
that if we do not either cast it aside, or use it very negligently, it will
enable us, by Gods help, to put to flight our spiritual adversary. And this is
that reverence we are to pay to this first Sacrament, that of Baptism.

PARTITION III. Of the LORDS SUPPER, of Preparation before, of Duties to be
done at the Receiving and afterward, etc.
. 1. NOW follows the Reverence due The Lords Supper.
to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and in this I must follow my first
division, and set down first, what is to be done before; secondly, at, and
thirdly, after the time of receiving; for in this Sacrament we cannot be
excused from any one of these, though in the former we are.

2. And first, for that which is to be done before, Things to be done before
receiving.
S. Paul tells us it is examination, 1 Cor. 11. 28. But let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup. But before I
proceed to the particulars of this Examination, I must in the general tell you,
Examination.
that the special business we have to do in this Sacrament, is to repeat and
renew that Covenant we make with God in our Baptism, which we having many ways
grievously broken, it pleases God in his great mercy to suffer us to come to
the renewing of it in this Sacrament, which if we do in sincerity of heart, he
has promised to accept us, and to give us all those benefits in this, which he
was ready to bestow in the other Sacrament, if we had not by our own fault
forfeited them. Since then the renewing of our Covenant is our business of this
time, it follows that these three things are necessary toward it: First, that
we understand what that Covenant is; Secondly, that we consider, what our
breaches of it have been; and Thirdly, that we resolve upon a strict observance
of it, for the rest of our life. And the trying our selves in every one of
these particulars is that Examination which is required of us before we come to
this Sacrament.

3. And first, we are to examine whether we understand what this Covenant is;
this is exceeding necessary, as being the foundation of both the other, for it
is neither possible to discover our past sins, nor to settle purposes against
them for the future without it. Let this therefore be your first business, Try
whether you rightly understand what that Covenant is which you entered into at
your Baptism, what be the Mercies promised on Gods part, and the duties on
yours. And because the Covenant made with each of us in Baptism is only the
applying to our particulars, the Covenant made by God in Christ with all
mankind in general, you are to consider whether you understand that; if you do
not, you must immediately seek for instruction in it. And till you have means
of gaining better, look over what is briefly said in the entrance to this
Treatise, concerning the SECOND COVENANT, which is the foundation of that
Covenant which God makes with us in our Baptism. And because you will there
find, that obedience to all Gods Commands is the condition required of us, and
is also that which we expressly Vow in our Baptism, it is necessary you should
likewise know what those Commands of God are. Therefore if you find you are
ignorant of them, never be at rest till you have got your self instructed in
them, and have gained such a measure of knowledge as may direct you to do that
Whole Duty of Man which God requires. And the giving thee this instruction is
the only aim of This Book, which the more ignorant thou art, the more earnestly
I shall entreat thee diligently to read. And if thou have heretofore approacht
to this Holy Sacrament in utter ignorance of these necessary things, bewail thy
sin in so doing, but presume not to come again till thou have by gaining this
necessary knowledge fitted thy self for it, which thou must hasten to do. For
though no man must come to the Sacrament in such ignorance, yet if he wilfully
continue in it, that will be no excuse to him for keeping from this holy Table.

4. The second part of our Examination is, concerning our breaches of this
Covenant; and here thou will find the use of that knowledge I spoke of. For
there is no way of discovering what our sins have been, but by trying Sins.
our actions by that which should be the rule of them, the Law of God. When
therefore Several sorts.
thou set to this part of Examination, remember what are the several
branches of thy duty, and then ask thy own heart in every particular, how thou
have performed it. And content not thy self with knowing in general, that thou
have broken Gods Law, but do thy utmost to discover in what particulars thou
have done so. Recall, as well as thou can, all the passages of thy life, and
in each of them consider what part of that duty has been transgrest by it. And
that not only in the grosser act, but in word also, nay, even in thy most
secret thoughts: For though man's Law reaches not to them, yet Gods does; so
that whatever he forbids in the act he forbids likewise in the thoughts and
desires, and sees them as clearly as our most public acts. This particular
search is exceeding necessary; for there is no promise of forgiveness of any
sin but only to him that confesses and forsakes it. Now to both these it is
necessary that we have a direct and particular knowledge of our sins. For how
can he either confess his Sin, that knows not his guilt of it? or how can he
resolve to forsake it, that discerns not himself to have formerly cleaved to
it? Therefore we may surely conclude, that this Examination is not only useful
but necessary toward a full and complete repentance; for he that does not take
this particular view of his sins, will be likely to repent but by (...) which
will never avail him toward his pardon; nothing but an entire forsaking of
every evil way, being sufficient for that. But surely of all other times it
concerns us, that when we come to the Sacrament our repentance be full and
complete; and therefore this strict search of our own hearts is then especially
necessary. For although it be true, that it is not possible by all our
diligence to discover or remember every sin of our whole lives: and though it
be also true, that what is so unavoidably hid from us, may be forgiven without
any more particular confession then that of David's, Psalm. 19. 12. Cleanse thou
me from my secret faults; Yet this will be no plea for us if they come to be
secret only because we are negligent in searching. Therefore take heed of
deceiving thy self in this weighty business, but search thy soul to the bottom,
without which it is impossible that the wounds thereof should ever be thoroughly
cured.

5. And as you are to enquire thus narrowly concerning the several sorts of
sins, so also must you concerning the degrees of them, for there are diverse
circumstances which increase and heighten the sin. Of this sort there are many,
as first, when we sin against knowledge, that is, when we certainly know such a
thing to be a sin, yet for the present pleasure or profit (or whatever other
motive) adventure of it. This is by Christ himself adjudged to be a great
heightning of the sin. He that knows his Masters will and does it not, shall be
beaten with many stripes, Luke 12. 47. Secondly, when we sin with deliberation,
that is, when we do not fall into it of a sudden ere we are aware, but have
time to consider of it, this is another degree of the sin. But thirdly, a yet
higher is, when we do it against the resistances and checks of our own
conscience, when that at the time tells us, This thing thou ought not to do:
Nay, lays before us the danger as well as the sin of it, yet in spite of
these admonitions of conscience we go on and commit the sin; this is a huge
increase of it, such as will raise the least sin into a most high provocation.
For it is plain, a sin thus committed must be a wilful one, and then be the
matter of it never so light it is most heinous in Gods eyes. Nay, this is a
circumstance of such force, that it may make an indifferent action, that is in
it self no sin, become one. For though my conscience should err in telling me
such a thing were unlawful, yet so long as I were so persuaded, it were sin for
me to do that thing; for in that case my Will consents to the doing a thing
which I believe to be displeasing to God, and God (who judges us by our wills,
not understandings) imputes it to me as a sin as well as if the thing were in
it self unlawsul, and therefore surely we may conclude, that any thing which is
in it self sinful, is made much more so by being committed against the checks
of conscience. A fourth aggravation of a sin, is, when it has been often
repeated, for then there is not only the guilt of so many more acts, but every
Act grows also so much worse, and more inexcusable. We always judge thus in
faults committed against our selves, we can forgive a single injury more easily
then the same when it has been repeated, and the oftener it has been so
repeated, the more heinous we account it. And so surely it is in faults against
God also. Fifthly, the sins which have been committed after vows and
Resolutions of amendment are yet more grievous; for that contains also the
breaking of those promises. Somewhat of this there is in every wilsul sin,
because every such is a breach of that vow we make at Baprism. But besides
that, we have since bound our selves by new vows, if at no other time, yet
surely at our coming to the Lords Supper, that being (as was formerly said)
purposely to repeat our vow of Baptism. And the more of these vows we have
made, so much the greater is our guilt, if we fall back to any sin we then
renounced. This is a thing very well worth weighing, and therefore examine thy
self particularly at thy approach to the Sacrament concerning thy breaches of
former vows made at the Holy Table. And if upon any other occasion, as
sickness, trouble of mind, or the like, thou have at any time made any other,
call thy self to a strict account how thou have performed them also, and
remember that every sin committed against such vows, is besides its own natural
guilt a Perjury likewise. Sixthly, a yet higher step is, when a sin has been
so often committed that we are come to a custom and habit of it: and that is
indeed a high degree.

6. Yet even of Habits some are worse then others, as first, if it be so
confirmed that we are come to a hardness of heart, have no sense at all of the
sin: Or, secondly, if we go on in it against any extraordinary means used by
God to reform us, such as sickness, or any other afflictiction which seems to
be sent on purpose for our reclaiming. Or thirdly, if all Reproofs and
Exh^rtations either of Ministers or private friends work not on us, but either
make us angry at our reprovers, or sets us on defending the sin. Or lastly, if
this sinful habit be so strong in us as to give us a love to the sin, not only
in our selves but in others, if, as the Apostle says, Romans 1. 31. We do not
only do the things, but take pleasure in them that do them, and therefore
entice and draw as many as we can into the same sins with us: Then it is risen
to the highest step of wickedness, and is to be looked on as the utmost degree
both of sin and danger. Thus you see how you are to examine your selves
concerning your sins, in each of which you are to consider how many of these
heightning circumstances there have been, that so you may aright measure the
hainousness of them.

7. Now the end of this Examination is, Humiliation
to bring you to such a sight of your sins, as may truly humble you, make you
sensible of your own danger, that have provoked so great a Majesty, who is able
so sadly to revenge himself upon you. And that will surely even to the most
carnal heart appear a reasonable ground of sorrow. But that is not all, it must
likewise bring you to a sense and abhorrence of your baseness, and
ingratitude, that have thus offended so good and graecious a God, that have
made such unworthy and unkind returns to those tender and rich mercies of his.
And this consideration especially must melt your hearts into a deep sorrow and
contrition, the degree whereof must be in some measure answerable to the degree
of your sins. And the greater it is, provided it be not such as shuts up the
hope of Gods Mercy, the more acceptable it is to God, who has promised not to
despise a broken and contri^e heart, Psalm 51. 17. And the more likely it will
be also to bring us to amendment: For if we have once felt what the smart of a
wounded Spirit is, we shall have the less mind to venture upon sin again.

8. For when we are tempted with any of the short pleasures of sin, we may
then out of our own experience set against them the sharp pains and terrors of
an accusing conscience, which will to any that has felt them be able
infinitely to outweigh them. Endeavor therefore to bring your souls to this
melting temper, to this deep unfeigned sorrow, and that not only for the danger
you have brought upon your self; for though that be a consideration which may
and ought to work sadness in us, yet where that alone is the motive of our
sorrow, it is not that sorrow which will avail us for pardon; and the reason of
it is clear, for that sorrow proceeds only from the love of our selves, we are
sorry because we are like to smart. But the sorrow of Contrition.
a true penitent must be joined also with the love of God, and that will make
us grieve for having offended him, though there were no punishment to fall upon
our selves. The way then to stir up this sorrow in us, is first, to stir up our
love of God, by repeating to our selves the many gracious acts of his mercy
toward us, particularly, that of his sparing us, and not cutting us off in our
sins. Consider with thy self how many and how great provocations thou have
offered him, perhaps in a continued course of many years wilful disobedience,
for which thou might with perfect justice have been ere this sent quick into
hell: Nay, possibly thou have before thee many examples of less sinners then
thou art, who have been suddenly snatched away in the midst of their sins. And
what cause can thou give, why thou have thus long escaped, but only because
his eye has spared thee? And what cause of that sparing, but his tender
compassions toward thee, his unwillingness that thou should perish? This
consideration if it be pressed home upon thy soul, cannot choose (if thy heart be
not as hard as the nether Millstone) but awake somewhat of love in thee toward
this gracious, this long suffering God, and that love will certainly make it
appear to thee, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken
the Lord, Jer. 2. 19. That thou have made such wretched requitals of so great
mercy; it will make thee both ashamed and angry at thy self that thou have been
such an unthankful creature. But if the consideration of this one sort of mercy
Gods forbearance only, be such an engagement and help to this godly sorrow,
what will then be the multitude of those other mercies which every man is able
to reckon up to himself? and therefore let every man be as particular in it as
he can, call to mind as many of them as he is able, that so he may attain to
the greater degree of true contrition.

9. And to all these endeavors must be added earnest prayers to God, that he
by his holy Spirit would show you your sins, and soften your hearts, that you
may thoroughly bewail and lament them.

10. To this must be joined an humble consession of sins to God, and that not
only in general, Confession.
but also in particular, as far as your memory of them will reach, and that
with all those heightning circumstances of them, which you have by the
forementioned examination discovered. Yea, even secret and forgotten sins must
in general be acknowledged, for it is certain there are multitudes of such; so
that it is necessary for every one of us to say with David, Psalm. 19. 12. Who
can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from my secret faul^s. When you have
thus confessed your sins with this hearty sorrow, and sincere hatred of them, you
may then (and not before) be concluded to feel so much of your disease, that it
will be seasonable to apply the remedy.

11. In the next place therefore you are to Faith.
look on him whom God has set forth to be the propitiation of our sins, Romans
3. 25. Even Jesus Christ, that Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the
world, John 1. 29. And earnestly beg of God, that by his most precious blood
your sins may be washed away; and that God would for his sake be reconciled to
you, And this you are to believe will surely be done, if you do for the rest of
your time forsake your sins, and give your selves up sincerely to obey God in
all his commands. But without that, it is vain to hope any benefit from Christ,
or his sufferings. And therefore the next part of your preparation must be the
setting those resolutions of obedience which I told you was the third thing
Resolutions of Obedience
you were to examine your selves of before your approach to the holy Sacrament.

12. Concerning the particulars of this resolution, I need say no more, but
that it must answer every part, and branch of our duty, that is, we must not
only in general resolve that we will observe Gods Commandments, but we must
resolve it for every Commandment by itself; and especially where we have found
our selves most to have failed heretofore, there especially to renew our
resolutions. And herein it nearly concerns us to look that these resolutions be
sincere, and unfeigned, and not only such slight ones as people use out of
custom to put on at their coming to the Sacrament, which they never think of
keeping afterward. For this is a certain truth, that whosoever comes to this
holy Table without an entire hatred of every sin, comes unworthily; and it is
as sure, that he that does entirely hate all sin, will resolve to forsake it;
for you know forsaking naturally follows hatred, no man willingly abides with a
thing or person he hates. And therefore he that does not so resolve, as that
God the searcher of hearts may approve it as sincere, cannot be supposed to
hate sin, and so cannot be a worthy receiver of that holy Sacrament. Therefore
try your resolutions thoroughly, that you deceive not your selves in them, it is
your own great danger, if you do; for it is certain you cannot deceive God, nor
gain acceptance from him by any thing which is not perfectly hearty and
unfeigned.

13. Now as you are to resolve on this new Of the means.
obedience, so you are likewise to resolve on the means, which may assist you
in the performance of it. And therefore consider in every duty, what are the
means that may help you in it, and resolve to make use of them, how uneasy
soever they be to your flesh; so on the other side consider what things they
are, that are likely to lead you to sin, and resolve to shun and avoid them:
this you are to do in respect of all sias whatever, but especially in those,
whereof you have formerly been guilty. For there it will not be hard for you to
find, by what steps and degrees you were drawn into it, what company, what
occasion it was that ensnared you, as also to what sort of temptations you are
aptest to yield. And therefore you must particularly fence your self against
the sin, by avoiding those occasions of it.

14. But it is not enough that you resolve you will do all this hereafter, but
you must instantly set to it, and begin the course by doing at the present
whatsoever you have opportunity of doing. And there are several things, which
you may, nay, must do at the present, before you come to the Sacrament.

15. As first you must cast off every sin, not Present renouncing of sin.
bring any one unmortified lust with you to that Table, for it is not enough to
purpose to cast them off afterward, but you must then actually do it by
withdrawing all degrees of love and affection from them; you must then give a
bill of divorce to all your old beloved sins, or else you are no fit way to be
married to Christ. The reason of this is clear; For this Sacrament is our
spiritual nourishment; now before we can receive spiritual nourishment we must
have spiritual life (for no man gives food to a dead person) But whosoever
continues not only in the act, but in the love of any one known sin, has no
spiritual life, but is in Gods account no better then a dead carcass, and
therefore cannot receive that spiritual food. It is true, he may eat the bread,
and drink the wine, but he receives not Christ, but in stead of him, that which
is most dreadful; the Apostle will tell you what, 1 Cor. 11. 29. He eats and
drinks his own damnation. Therefore you see how great a necessity lies on you
thus actually to put off every sin, before you come to this Table.

16. And the same necessity lies on you for Embracing virtue.
a second thing to be done at this time, and that is the putting your soul into
a heavenly and Christian temper; by possessing it with all those graces which
may render it acceptable in the eyes of God. For when you have turned out Satan
and his accursed train, you must not let your soul lie empty; if you do, Christ
tells you, Luke 11. 26. He will quickly return again, and your last estate
shall be worse then your first. But you must by earnest prayer invite into it
the holy Spirit, with his graces, or if they be in some degree there already,
you must pray that he will yet more fully possess it, and you must quicken and
stir them up.

17. As for example, you must quicken your Quickening of graces.
humility, by considering your many and great sins; your Faith, by meditating
on Gods promises to all penitent sinners; your love to God by considering his
mercies, especially those remembered in the Sacrament, his giving Christ to die
for us: and your love to your neighbor, nay, to your enemies, by considering
that great example of his suffering for us that were enemies to him. And it is
most particularly required of us when we come to this Table that we copy out
this pattern of his in a perfect forgiveness of all that have offended us; and
not only forgiveness, but such a kindness also as will express it self in all
offices of love and friendship to them.

18. And if you have formerly so quite forgot Charity.
that blessed example of his, as to do the direct contrary, if you have done
any unkindnesse or injury to any person, then you are to seek forgiveness from
him; and to that end, first, acknowledge your fault, and secondly Restore to
him, to the utmost of your power, whatsoever you have deprived him of, either
in goods or credit. This Reconciliation with our brethren is absolutely
necessary toward the making any of our services acceptable with God, as
appears by that precept of Christ, Matthew. 5. 23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to
the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave
there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Where you see, that though the gift
be already at the Altar, it must rather be left there unoffered then be offered
by a man that is not at perfect peace with his neighbor. And if this charity
be so necessary in all our services, much more in this where by a joint
partaking in the same holy mysteries, we signify our being united and knit not
only to Christ our head, but also to each other, as fellow members. And
therefore if we come with any malice in our hearts, we commit an act of the
highest Hypocrisy by making a solemn profession in the Sacrament of that
charity and brotherly love, whereof our hearts are quite void.

19. Another most necessary grace at this Devotion.
time is that of devotion, for the raising whereof we must allow our selves
some time to withdraw from our worldly affairs, and wholly to set our selves to
this business of preparation, one very special part of which preparation lies
in raising up our souls to a devout and heavenly temper. And to that it is most
necessary that we cast off all thoughts of the world, for they will be sure as
so many clogs to hinder our souls in their mounting toward heaven. A special
exercise of this devotion is Prayer, wherein we must be very frequent and
earnest at our coming to the Sacrament, this being one great instrument wherein
we must obtain all those other graces required in our preparation. Therefore be
sure this be not omitted; for if you use never so much endeavor besides, and
leave out this, it is the going to work in your own streng^h without looking to
God for his help, and then it is impossible you should prosper in it: For we
are not able of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Therefore be instant with him so to assist
you with his grace, that you may come so fitted to this holy Table, that you
may be partakers of the benefits there reached out to all worthy receivers.

20. These and all other spiritual Graces our Necessity of these graces.
Souls must be clothed with when we come to this Feast, for this is that
Wedding garment, without which, whosoever comes is like to have the entertainment
mentioned in the parable of him who came to the marriage without a wedding
garment, Mat. 22. 13. who was cast into utter darkness, where is weeping and
gnashing of teeth; for though it is possible he may sit it out at the present
and not be snatched from the Table, yet S. Paul assures him, he drinks damnation
to himself, and how soon it may fall on him is uncertain: But it is sure, it
will, if repentance prevent it not, and as sure that whenever it does come it
will be intolerable, for who among us can dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa.
33. 14.

21. I shall add but one thing more concerning The usefulness of a spiritual
guide.
the things which are to be done before the Sacrament, and that is an advice,
That if any person upon a serious view of himself cannot satisfy his own Soul
of his sincerity, and so doubts whether he may come to the Sacrament, he do not
rest wholly on his own judgment in the case: for if he be a truly humbled
Soul, it is likely he may judge too hardly of himself; if he be not, it is
odds, but if he be left to the satisfying of his own doubts, he will quickly
bring himself to pass too favorable a sentence. Or whether he be the one or
the other, if he come to the Sacrament in that doubt, he certainly plunges
himself into farther doubts and scruples, if not into sin: On the other side,
if he forbear because of it, if that fear be a causeless one, then he
groundlesly absents himself from that Holy Ordinance, and so deprives his Soul
of the benefits of it. Therefore in the midst of so many dangers which attend
the mistake of himself, I would, as I said before, exhort him not to trust to
his own judgment, but to make known his case to some discreet and godly
Minister, and rather be guided by his, who will probably (if the case be duly
and without any disguise discovered to him) be better able to judge of him then
he of himself. This is the counsel the Church gives in the exhortation before
the Communion, where it is advised, That if any by other means there
forementioned, cannot quiet his own conscience, but require farther counsel and
comfort, then let him go to some discreet and learned Minister of Gods Word and
open his grief, that he may receive such ghostly counsel, advice and comfort
that his conscience may be relieved, etc. This is surely such advice as should
not be neglected neither at the time of coming to the Sacrament, nor any other
when we are under any fear or reasons of doubt concerning the state of our
Souls. And for want of this, many have run into very great mischief, having let
the doubt fester so long that it has either plunged them into deep distresses
of conscience, or which is worse, they have to still that disquiet within them,
betaken themselves to all sinful pleasures, and so quite cast off all care of
their souls.

22. But to all this it will perhaps be said, That this cannot be done without
discovering Not to be ashamed to discover our selves to one
the nakedness and blemishes of the soul, and there is shame in that, and
therefore men are unwilling to do it. But to that I answer, That it is very
unreasonable that should be a hindrance. For, first, I suppose you are to choose
only such a person as will faithfully keep any secret you shall commit to him,
and so it can be no public shame you can fear. And if it be in respect of that
single person, you need not fear that neither; for, supposing him a godly man,
he will not think the worse of you, but the better, that you are so desirous to
set all right between God and your Soul. But if indeed there were shame in it,
yet as long as it may be a means to cure both your trouble and your sin too (as
certainly godly and faithful counsel may tend much to both) that shame ought to
be despised, and it is sure it would if we loved our Souls as well as our
Bodies; for in bodily diseases, be they never so foul or shameful, we count him
a fool who will rather miss the cure then discover it, and then it must here be
so much a greater folly by how much the Soul is more precious then the Body.

23. But God knows, it is not only doubting persons, to whom this advice might
be useful, there are others of another sort, whose confidence As necessary to
the confident as to the doubtful
is their disease, who presume very groundlesly of the goodness of their
estates: And for those it were most happy, if they could be brought to hear
some more equal judgments, then their own in this so weighty a business. The
truth is, we are generally so apt to favor our selves, that it might be very
useful for the most, especially the more ignorant sort, sometimes to advise
with a spiritual guide, to enable them to pass right judgments on themselves;
and not only so, but to receive directions, how to subdue and mortisie those
sins they are most inclined to, which is a matter of so much difficulty, that
we have no reason to despise any means that may help us in it.

24. I have now gone through those several parts of duty we are to perform
before our receiving. In the next place, I am to tell you, At the time of
receiving
what is to be done at the time of receiving. When thou art at the Holy Table;
first, humble thy self in an unfeigned acknowledegment Meditation of thy
unworthiness.
of thy great unworthiness to be admitted there; and to that purpose remember
again between God and thine own Soul, some of thy greatest, and foulest sins,
thy breaches of former vows made at that Table, especially since thy last
receiving. Then meditate on those bitter sufferings of Christ, which are set
The sufferings of Christ.
out to us in the Sacrament, when thou see the bread broken, remember how his
blessed body was torn with nails upon the Cross; when thou see the Wine
poured out, remember how his precious blood was spilt there; and then consider,
it was thy sins that caused both. And here think, how unworthy a wretch thou
art to have done that which occasioned such torments to him? How much worse
then his very crucifiers? They crucified him once, but thou have, as much as in
thee lay, crucified him daily. They crucified him because they knew him not,
but thou have known both what he is in himself, The Lord of Glory, and what he
is to thee, a most tender and merciful Savior, and yet thou have still
continued thus to crucify him afresh. Consider this, and let it work in thee,
first, a great sorrow for thy sins past, and then a great hatred and a firm
resolution against them for the time to come.

25. When thou have a while thus thought on these sufferings of Christ for the
increasing The a^onement wrought by them.
thy humility and contrition; then in the second place think of them again, to
stir up thy Faith, look on him as the sacrifice offered up for thy sins, for
the appeasing of Gods wrath, and procuring his favor and mercies toward thee.
And therefore believingly, yet humbly beg of God to accept of that satisfaction
made by his innocent and beloved Son, and for the merits thereof to pardon thee
whatever is past, and to be fully reconciled to thee. The thankfulness owing
for them.


26. In the third place consider them again to raise thy thankfulness. Think
how much both of shame and pain he there endured, but especially those great
agonies of his Soul, which drew from him that bitter cry, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me, Matt. 27. 45. Now all this he suffered only to keep thee
from perishing. And therefore consider what unexpressible thanks thou owe
him; and endeavor to raise thy Soul to the most zealous and hearty
thanksgiving: For this is a principal part of duty at this time, the praising
and magnifying that mercy which has redeemed us by so dear a price. Therefore
it will here well become thee to say with David, I will take the Cup of
Salvation and will call upon the Name of the Lord.

27. Fourthly, look on these sufferings of The great love of Christ in them.
Christ to stir up this love; and surely there cannot be a more effectual means
of doing it, for here the love of Christ to thee is most manifest, according to
that of the Apostle, 1 John 3. 16. Hereby perceive we the love of God toward
us, because he laid down his life for us. And that even the highest degree of
love, for as himself tells us, John 15. 13. Greater love then this has no man,
then that a man lay down his life for his friend. Yet even greater love then
this had he, for he not only died, but died the most painful and most
reproachful death, and that not for his friends, but his utter enemies. And
therefore if after all this love on his part there be no return of love on
ours, we are worse then the vilest sort of men, for even the Publicans, Matthew.
5. 46. Love those that love them. Here therefore chide and reproach thy self
that thy love to him is so faint and cool, when his to thee was so zealous and
affectionate. And endeavor to enkindle this holy flame in thy Soul, to love
him in such a degree that thou may be ready to copy out his example, to part
with all things, yea, even life it self whenever he calls for it, that is,
whenever thy obedience to any command of his shall lay thee open to those
sufferings. But in the mean time to resolve never again to make any league with
his enemies, to entertain or harbor any sin in thy breast. But if there have
any such hitherto remained with thee, make this the season to kill and crucify
it; offer it up at this instant a sacrifice to him who was sacrificed for thee,
and particularly for that very end that he might redeem thee from all iniquity.
Therefore here make thy solemn resolutions to forsake every sin, particularly,
those into which thou have most frequently fallen. And that thou may indeed
perform those resolutions, earnestly beg of this crucified Savior that he
will, by the power of his death, mortify and kill all thy corruptions.

28. When thou art about to receive the Consecrated Bread and Wine, remember
that God now offers to Seal to thee that New Covenant The benefits of the New
Covenant sealed in the Sacrament-
made with mankind in his Son. For since he gives that his Son in the
Sacrament, he gives with him all the benefits of that Covenant, to wit, pardon
of sins, sanctifying grace and a title to an eternal inheritance. And here be
astonished at the infinite goodness of God, who reaches out to thee so precious
a treasure. But then remember that this is all but on condition that thou
perform thy part of the Covenant. And therefore settle in thy soul the most
serious purpose of obedience, and then with all possible devotion join with the
Minister in that short, but excellent prayer, used at the instant of giving the
Sacrament, The Body of our Lord, etc.

29. So soon as thou have received, offer up thy devoutest praises for that
great mercy, together Upon receiving give thanks.
with thy most earnest prayers for such assistance of Gods Spirit as may enable
thee to perform the vow thou have now made. Then Pray.
remembering that Christ is a propitiation not for our sins only, but also for
the sins of the wh^le world; let thy charity reach as far as his has done, and
pray for all mankind that every one may receive the benefit of that sacrifice
of his; commend also to God the estate of the Church, that particularly whereof
thou art a Member. And forget not to pray for all to whom thou owe obedience,
both in Church and State; and so go on to pray for such particular persons as
either thy relations or their wants shall present to thee. If there be any
Collection for the poor (as there always ought to be at this time) give freely
according to thy ability; or if by the default of others, there be no such
Collection, yet do thou privately design something toward the relief of thy
poor brethren, and be sure to give it the next fitting opportunity that offers
it self. All this thou must contrive to do in the time that others are
receiving, that so when the public prayers, after the administration begin,
thou may be ready to ioyn in them, which thou must likewise take care to do
with all devotion: thus much for thy behavior at the time of receiving.

30. Now follows the third and last thing; After the acrament.
That is, what thou art to do after thy receiving. That which is immediately to
be done, is as soon as thou art retir^d from the Congregation, to offer up
again to God thy Sacrafice of praise for all those precious mercies conveyed to
thee, in that holy Sacrament, as also Private Prayer and ^hanksgiv^^g.
humbly to entreat the continued assistance of his grace to enable thee to make
good all those purposes of obedience thou have now made. And in whatsoever thou
know thy self most in danger, either in respect of any former habit, or
natural inclination, there especially desire and earnestly beg his aid.

31. When thou have done thus, do not ^t pre^ntly to fall wordly fairs.
presently let thy self loose to thy worldly cares and business. But spend all
that day, either in meditating, praying, reading, good conferences, or the
like; so as may best keep up that holy flame that is enkindled in thy heart.
Afterward, when thy calling requires thee to fall to thy usual affairs, do it,
but yet still remember that thou have a greater business then that upon thy
hands; that is, the performing of all those promises, thou so lately made to
God, and therefore whatever thy outward employments To keep thy resolutions
still in memory.
are, let thy heart be set on that, keep all the particulars of thy resolution
in memory, and whenever thou art tempted to any of thy old sins, then consider,
this is the thing thou so solemnly vowedst against, and The danger of breaking
them.
withal remember what a horrible guilt it will be, if thou should now
wilfully do any thing contrary to that vow; Yea, and what a horrible mischief
also it will be to thy self. For at thy receiving, God and thou entredst into
Covenant, into a league of friendship and kindness. And as long as thou keep
in that friendship with God, thou art safe, all the malice of men or devils can
do thee no harm: For as the Apostle says, Romans 8. 31. If God be for us who can
be against us? But if thou breakest this league (as thou certainly do, if
thou yield to any wilful sin) then God and Making God thy enemy.
thou are enemies, and if all the world then were for thee, it could not avail
thee.

32. Nay, thou will get an enemy with in Thy own conscience.
thine own bosom, thy conscience accusing and upbraiding thee; and when God
and thine own conscience are thus against thee, thou can not but be extremely
miserable even in this life, besides that fearful expectation of wr^^h which
awaits thee in the next. Remember all this when thou art set upon by any
temptation, and then sure thou can not but look upon that temptation as a
cheat, that comes to rob thee of thy Peace, thy God, thy very Soul. And then
surely it will appear as unfit to entertain it, as thou would think it to
harbor one in thy house who thou know came to rob thee of what is dearest
to thee.

33. And let not any experience of Gods mercy in pardoning thee heretofore
encourage thee Gods former pardons no encouragement to sin.
again to provoke him; for besides that it is the highest degree of wickedness
and unthankfulness to make that goodness of his which should lead thee to
repentance an encouragement in thy sin: Besides this, I say, the oftener thou
have been pardon^d, the less reason thou have to expect it again, because thy
sin is so much the greater for having been committed against so much mercy. If
a King have several times pardoned an offender, yet if he still return to
commission of the same fault, the King will at last be forced, if he have any
love to Justice, to give him up to it. Now so it is here, God is as well just
as merciful, and his Justice will at last surely and heavily avenge the abuse
of his Mercy; and there cannot be a greater abuse of his mercy then to sin in
hope of it: so that it will prove a mi^serable deceiving of thy self thus to
presume upon it.

34. Now this care of making good thy vow The obligation of this vow perpetual.
must not abide with thee some few days only and then be cast aside, but it
must continue with thee all thy days. For if thou break thy vow, it matters not
whether sooner or later. Nay, perhaps the guilt may in some respects be more,
if it be late, for if thou have for a good while gone on in the observance of
it, that shows the thing is possible to thee; and so thy after breaches are not
of insirmity, because thou can not avoid them, but of perverseness, because
thou will not: Besides the use of Christian-Walking must needs make it more
easy to thee. For indeed all the difficulty of it is but from the custom of
the contrary: And therefore if after some acquaintance with it, when thou have
overcome somewhat of the hardness, thou shall then give it over, it will be
most inexcusable. Therefore be careful all the days of thy life to keep such a
Watch over thy self, and so to avoid all occasions of temptations, as may
preserve thee from all Wilful breaches of this vow.

35. But though the obligation of every such Yet often to be renewed.
single vow reach to the utmost day of our lives, yet are we often to renew it,
that is, we are often to receive the holy Saecrament, for that being the means
of conveighing to us so great and unvaluable benefits; and it being also a
command of Christ, That we should do this in remembrance of him, we are in
respect both of reason and duty to omit no fit opportunity of partaking of that
holy Table. I have now showed you what that reverence is which we are to pay to
God in his Sacrament.

PARTITION IV. HONOR due to Gods Name; Of Sinning against it; Blasphemy;
Swearing; Assertory Oaths, Promissory Oaths; Unlawful Oaths: Of Perjury; Of
vain Oaths, and the Sin of them, etc.
. 1. THe last thing wherein we are to express Honor due to Gods Name.
our Reverence to him, is, the Honoring his Name. Now what this Honoring of
his Name is, we shall best understand by considering what are the things by
which it is dishonored, the avoiding of which will be our way of honoring it.

The first is, all Blasphemies, or speaking any evil thing of God, the highest
degree whereof Sins against it.
is cursing him, or if we do not speak it with our mouths, yet if we do it in
our hearts by Blasphemy.
thinking any unwor^hy thing of Him; it is looked on by God, who sees the heart,
as the vilest dishonor. But there is also a blasphemy of the actions, that is,
when men who profess to be the servants of God, live so wickedly that they
bring up an evil report on him whom they own as their Master and Lord. This
Blasphemy the Apostle takes notice of, Romans 2. 24. Where he tells those who
profess to be observers of the Law, That by their wicked actions, the Name of
God was blasphemed among the Gentiles. Those Gentiles were moved to think ill
of God, as the favourer of sin, when they saw those, who called themselves his
servants, commit it.

A second way of Dishonouring Gods Name is, by swearing, and that is of two
sorts, either Swearing.
by false Oaths, or else by rash and light ones. A false Oath may also be of
two kinds, as first, that by which I affirm somewhat, or secondly, that by
which I promise. The first is when I say such or such a thing was done so or
so, and Assertory Oaths.
confirm this saying of mine with an Oath; if then I know there be not perfect
truth in what I say, this is a flat perjury, a downright being forsworn: Nay,
if I swear to the truth of that whereof I am only doubtful, though the thing
should happen to be true, yet it brings upon me the guilt of Perjury; for I
swear at a venture, and the thing might for ought I knew be as well false as
true, whereas I ought never to swear to any thing, the truth of which I do not
certainly know.

2. But besides this sort of Oaths, by which Promissory.
I affirm any thing, there is the other sort, that by which I promise somewhat.
And that promise may be either to God or Man, when it is to God, we call it a
vow of which I have already spoken, under the head of the Sacraments, I shall
now only speak of that to man; and this may become a false oath, either at, or
after the time of taking it. At the time of taking, it is false if either I
have then no real purpose of making it good, or else take it in a sense
different from that which I know, he to whom I make the promise understands it;
for the use of oaths being to assure the persons to whom they are made, they
must be taken in their sense. But if I were never so sincere at the taking the
Oath, if afterward I do not perform it I am certainly Perjured.

3. The nature of an Oath being then thus Unlawful Oaths.
binding, it merely concerns us to look that the Matter of our Oaths be lawful,
for else we run our selves into a woeful snare. For Example, suppose I swear to
kill a man, if I perform my Oath I am guilty of Murder, if I break it, of
Perjury. And so I am under a necessity of sinning one way or other: But there
is nothing puts us under a greater degree of this unhappy necessity, then when
we swear two Oaths, whereof the one is directly cross and contradictory to the
other. For if I swear to give a man my whole estate, and afterward swear to
give all or part of that estate to another, it is certain I must break my Oath
to one of them, because it is impossible to perform it to both, and so I must
be under a necessity of being forsworn. And into this unhappy straight every
man brings himself that takes any Oath which crosses some other which he has
formerly taken; which should make all that love either God or their own souls,
resolve never thus miserably to entangle themselves by taking one Oath cross
and thwarting to another. But it may perhaps here be asked, What a person that
has already brought himself into such a condition shall do? I answer, he must
first heartily repent the great sin of taking the unlawful oath, and then stick
only to the lawful, which is all that is in his power toward the repairing his
fault, and qualifying him for Gods pardon for it.

4. Having said this concerning the kinds of God greatly dishonored by Perjury.
this sin of Perjury, I shall only add a few words to show you how greatly
Gods Name is dishonored by it. In all Oaths you know, God is solemnly called
to witness the truth of that which is spoken; now if the thing be false, it is
the basest affront and dishonor that can possibly be done to God. For it is in
reason to signify one of these two things, either that we believe he knows not
whether we say true or no; (and that is to make him no God, to suppose him to
be as deceivable, and easy to be deluded as one of our ignorant neighbors) or
else that he is willing to countenance our Lies; the former robs him of that
great attribute of his, his knowing all things, and is surely a great
dishonouring of him, it being even amongst men accounted one of the greatest
disgraces to account a man fit to have cheats put upon him; yet even so to deal
with God if we venture to forswear upon a hope that God discernes it not. But
the other is yet worse, for the supposing him willing to countenance our lies,
is the making him a party in them; and is not only the making him no God (it
being impossible that God should either lie himself or approve it in another)
but it is the making him like the very Devil. For he it is that is a liar, and
the Father of it, John 8. 44. And sure I need not say more to prove that this
is the highest degree of dishonouring Gods Name.

5. But if any yet doubt the hainousness of this sin, let him but consider what
God himself The punishments of it.
says of it in the Third Commandment, where he solemnly professes, He will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain; and sure the adding that
to this Commandment, and none of the rest, is the marking this out for a most
heinous guilt. And if you look into Zac. 5. you will there find the punishment
is answerable, even to the utter destruction not only of the man, but his house
also. Therefore it concerns all men as they love either their temporal or
eternal welfare to keep them most strictly from this sin.

But besides this of forswearing, I told you Vain Oaths.
there was another sort of Oaths by which Gods Name is dishonored, those are
the vain and light Oaths, such as are so usual in our common discourse, and are
expressly forbidden by Christ, Mat. 5. 34. But I say unto you, swear not at all,
neither by Heaven, for it is Gods throne, nor by the Earth, for it is his
footstool: where you see we are not allowed to swear even by mere creatures,
because of the relation they have to God. How great a wickedness is it then to
profane his holy Name by rash and vain Oaths, this is a sin that is (by I know
not what charm of Satan's) grown into a fashion among us; and now its being so,
draws daily more men into it. But it is to be remembered that when we shall
appear before Gods Judgment seat to answer for those profanations of his Name,
it will be no excuse to say, It was the fashion to do so: it will rather be an
increase of our guilt, that we have by our own practice helped to confirm that
wicked custom which we ought to have beat down and discountenanced.

6. And sure whatever this profane Age thinks of it, this is a sin of very high
nature. The sin of them.
For besides that it is a direct breach of the Precept of Christ, it shows
first, a very mean and low esteem of God: Every Oath we swear is the appealing
to God to judge the truth of what we speak, and therefore being of such
greatness and Majesty, requires that the matter concerning which we thus
appeal to him should be of great weight and moment, somewhat wherein either his
own glory, or some considerable good of man is concerned. But when we swear in
common discourse it is far otherwise, any the triflingest or lightest thing
serves for the matter of an Oath, nay, often men swear to such vain and foolish
things, as a considering person would be ashamed barely to speak. And is it not
a great despising of God to call him solemnly to judge in such childish, such
wretched matters? God is the great King of the world; now though a King be to
be resorted unto in weighty cases, yet sure he would think himself much
despised if he should be called to judge between Boys at their childish games:
And God knows many things whereto we frequently swear, are not of greater
weight, and therefore are a sign that we do not rightly esteem of God.

7. Secondly, This common swearing is a sin They lead to Perjury.
which leads directly to the former of forswearing, for he that by the use of
swearing has made Oaths so familiar to him, will be likely to take the
dreadfullest Oath without much consideration. For how shall he that swears
hourly, look upon an Oath with any reverence? and he that does not, it is his
chance, not his care, that is to be thanked, if he keep from Perjury. Nay,
further; he that swears commonly, is not only prepared to forswear, when a
solemn Oath is rendered him, but in all probability does actually forswear
himself often in these suddener Oaths: for supposing them to come from a man
ere he is aware (which is the best can be said of them) what assurance can any
man have who swears ere he is aware, that he shall not lie so too? And if he
does both together, he must necessarily be forsworn. But he that observes your
common swearers will be put past doubt that they are often forsworn. For they
usuaily swear indifferently to things true or false, doubtful or certain. And I
doubt not but if men who are guilty of this sin would but impartially examine
their own practice, their hearts would second me in this observation.

8. Thirdly, This is a sin to which there is no temptation, there is nothing
either of pleasure or profit got by it: Most other sins offer us No temptation
to them.
somewhat either of the one or the other, but this is utterly empty of both. So
that in this sin the Devil does not play the Merchant for our Souls, as in
others he does; he does not so much as cheapen them, but we give them freely
into his hands without any thing in exchange. There seems to be but one thing
possible for men to hope to gain by it, and that is to be believed in what they
say when they thus bind it by an Oath. But this also they constantly fail of,
for there are none so little believed as the common swearers. And good reason,
for he that makes no conscience thus to profane Gods Name, why shall any man
believe he makes any of lying? Nay, their forwardness to confirm every the
slightest thing by an Oath, rather gives jealousy that they have some inward
guilt of falseness, for which that Oath must be the cloak. And thus you see in
how little stead it stands them, even to this only purpose for which they can
pretend it useful: and to any other advantage it makes not the least claim, and
therefore is a sin without temptation, and consequently without excuse; for it
shows the greatest contempt, nay, unkindness to God, when we will provoke him
thus, without any thing, to tempt us to it. And therefore though the commonness
of this sin have made it pass but for a small one, yet is very far from being
so, either in it self, or in Gods account.

9. Let all therefore who are not yet fallen into the custom of this sin, be
most careful never to yield to the least beginnings of it, and Necessity of
abstaining from them.
for those who are so miserable, as to be already ensnared in it, let them
immediately, as they tender their Souls, get out of it. And let no man plead the
hardness of leaving an old custom, as an excuse for his continuing in it, but
rather the longer he has been in it, so much the more haste let him make out
of it, as thinking it too too much, that he has so long gone on in so great a
sin. And if the length of the custom have increased the difficulty of leaving
it, that is in all reason to make him set immediately to the casting it off,
lest that difficulty at last grow to an impossibility; and the harder he finds
it at the present, so much the more diligent and watchful he must be in the use
of all those means, which may Means for it.
tend to the overcoming that sinful habit: some f^w of those means it will not
be amiss here to mention.

10. First let him possess his mind fully of the Sense of the guilt and danger.
hainousn^ss of the sin, and not to measure it only according to the common
rate of the world. And when he is fully persuaded of the guilt, then let him
add to that, the consideratin of the danger, as that it puts him out of Gods
favor at the present, and will, if he continue in it, cast him into Hell for
ever. And sure if this were but thoroughly laid to heart, it would restrain this
sin: For I would ask a man, that pretends impossibility of leaving the custom,
whether if he were sure he should be hanged the next oath he swore, the fear of
it would not keep him from swearing? I can scarce believe any man in his wits
so little Master of himself, but it would. And then surely damning is so much
worse then hanging, that in all reason the fear of that ought to be a much
greater restraint. The doubt is, men do either not heartily believe that this
sin will damn them, or if they do, they look on it, as a thing a great way off
and so are not much moved with it; but both these are very unreasonable. For
the first, it is certain, that every one that continues wilfully in any sin is
so long in a state of damnation, and therefore this being so continued in, must
certainly put a man in that condition, For the second, it is very possible, he
may be deceived in thinking it so far off, for how knows any man that he shall
not be struck dead with an oath in his mouth? Or if he were sure not to be so,
yet eternal damnation is surely to be dreaded above all things, be it at what
distance soever.

11. A second means is to be exactly true in all thou speak; that all men
may believe thee Truth in speaking.
on thy bare word, and then thou will never have occasion to confirm it by an
oath, to make it more credible, which is the only color or reason can at any
time be pretended for swearing.

12. Thirdly, Observe what it is that most betrays thee to this sin, whether
drink, or Forsaking the occasion
anger or the company and example of others, or what ever else, and then if
ever thou mean to forsake the sin, forsake those occasions of it.

13. Fourthly, Endeavor to possess thy heart Reverence of God.
with a continual Reverence of God, and if that once grow into a custom with
thee, it will quickly turn out that contrary one of profaining. Use and
accustom thy self therefore to this reverence of God, and particularly to such
a respect to his name, as if it be possible, never to mention it without some
lifting up of thy heart to him. Even in thy ordinary discourse, when ever thou
take his Name in to thy mouth, let it be an occasion of raising up thy
thoughts to him. But by no means permit thy self to use it in idle bywords, or
the like. If thou do accustom thy self to pay this reverence to the bare
mention of his name, it will be an excellent fence against the profaning it in
oaths.

14. A fifth means is a diligent and constant watch over thy self, that thou
thus offend not ^atchful^^ss.
with thy tongue, without which all the former will come to nothing. And the
last means is prayer, which must be added to all thy endeavors, Prayer.
therefore pray earnestly, that God will enable thee to overcome this wicked
custom; say with the Psalmist, Set a watch O Lord over my mouth, and keep the
door of my lips; and if thou do sincerely set thy self to the use of means
for it, thou may be assured, God will not be wanting in his assistance. I
have been the longer on this because it is so reigning a sin. God in his mercy
give all that are guilty of it a true sight of the hainousness of it.

15. By these several ways of dishonouring Gods Name you may understand what is
the What it is to hon^r Gods Name.
duty of honoring it, viz. A strict abstaining from every one of these, and
that abstinence founded on an awful respect and reverence to that sacred Name
which is Great, Wonderful and Holy, Psa. 99. 3. I have now past through the
several branches of that great duty of Honoring of God.

PARTITION V. Of WORSHIP due to Gods Name. Of PRAYER, and its several parts. Of
public Prayers in the CHURCH, in the FAMILY. Of PRIVATE PRAYER. Of REPENTANCE,
etc. Of FASTING.
. 1. THe Eighth Duty we owe to God is WORSHIP; This is that great duty by which
especially we acknowledge his Godhead, WORSHIP.
Worship, being proper only to God, and therefore it is to be looked on as a
most weighty duty. This is to be performed, first, by our Souls, secondly, by
our Bodies: The Souls part is Praying. Now Prayer, its parts.
prayer is a speaking to God, and there are diverse parts of it, according to
the different things about which we speak.

2. As first, There is Confession, that is, the acknowledging our sins to God.
And this Confession.
may be either general or particular; the general is when we only confess in
gross, that we are sinful; the particular, when we mention the several sorts
and acts of our sins. The former is necessary to be always a part of our solemn
prayers, whether public or private. The latter is proper for private prayer,
and there the oftener it is used the better; yea, even in our daily private
prayer it will be fit constantly to remember some of our greatest and foulest
sins, though never so long since past. For such we should never think
sufficiently confessed and bewailed. And this bewailing must always go along with
Confession; we must be heartily sorry for the sins we confess, and from our
souls acknowledge our own great unworthiness in having committed them. For our
confession is not intended to instruct God, who knows our sins much better then
our selves do, but it is to humble our selves, and therefore we must not think
we have confessed aright till that be done.

3. The second part of prayer is Petition; that is, the begging of God
whatsoever we Petitions.
want either for our Souls or Bodies. For our Souls we must first beg pardon of
sins, and For our Souls.
that for the sake of Jesus Christ, who shed his blood to obtain it. Then we
must also beg the grace and assistance of Gods Spirit to enable us to forsake
our sins, and to walk in obedience to him. And herein it will be needful
particularly to beg all the several virtues, as Faith, Love, Zeal, Purity,
Repentance, and the like, but especially those which thou most want: And
therefore observe what thy wants are, and if thou be proud, be most instant
in praying for humility; if lustful, for chastity, and so for all other Graces,
according as thou find thy needs. And in all these things that concern thy
Soul, be very earnest and importunate, take no denial from God, nor give over,
though thou do not presently obtain what thou suest for. But if thou have never
so long prayed for a grace, and yet find it not, do not grow weary of
praying, but rather search what the cause may be which makes thy prayer so
ineffectual; see if thou do not thy self hinder them; perhaps thou prayest to
God to enable thee to conquer some sin, and yet never go about to fight
against it, never make any resistance, but yieldest to it as often as it
comes, nay, put thy self in its way, in the road of all temptations. If it
be thus, no wonder though thy prayers avail not, for thou will not let them.
Therefore amend this, and set to the doing of thy part sincerely, and then thou
need not fear but God will do his.

4. Secondly, We are to petition also for Bodies.
our bodies; that is, we are to ask of God such necessaries of life as are
needful to us, while we live here. But these only in such a degree, and
measure, as his wisdom sees best for us, we must not presume to be our own
carvers, and pray for all that wealth, or greatness, which our own vain hearts
may perhaps desire, but only for such a condition, in respect of outward
things, as he sees may most tend to those great ends of our living here, the
gloryfying him, and the saving of our own Souls.

5. A third part of Prayer is Deprecation, that is, when we pray to God to turn
away Deprecation
some evil from us. Now this evil may be either the evil of sin or the evil of
punishment: The evil of sin is that we are especially to pray against, most
earnestly begging of God, That he will by the power of his grace, preserve us
from falling into sin. And whatever sins Of Sin.
they are to which thou know thy self most inclined, there be particularly
earnest with God to preserve thee from them. This is to be done daily, but then
more especially, when we are under any present temptation, and in danger of
falling into any sin; in which case we have reason to cry out as S. Peter did
when he found himself sinking, Save Lord, or I perish; humbly beseeching him
either to withdraw the temptation, or strengthen us to withstand it, neither of
which we can do for our selves.

6. Secondly, We are likewise to Pray against the evil of Punishment, but
principally Of Punishment.
against Spiritual punishments, as the anger of God, the withdrawing of his
grace, and eternal damnation. Against these we can never pray with too much
earnestness: But we may also pray against temporal punishments, that is, any
outward affliction, but this with submission to Gods will, according to the
example of Christ, Mat. 26. 39. Not as I will, but as thou will.

7. A Fourth part of Prayer is Intercession, Intercession.
that is, praying for others: This in general we are to do for all mankind, as
well strangers as acquaintance, but more particularly, those to whom we have
any especial Relation, either public, as our Governors, both in Church and
State, or private, as Parents, Husband, Wife, Children, Friends, etc. We are
also to pray for all that are in affliction, and such particular persons as we
discern especially to be so: Yea, we are to pray for those that have done us
injury, those that despightfully use us and persecute us, for it is expressly
the command of Christ, Mat. 5 44. And that whereof he has likewise given us
the highest example in praying even for his very crucifiers, Luke 23. 34.
Father forgive them. For all these sorts of persons we are to pray, and that
for the very same good things we beg of God for our selves, that God would give
them in their several places and callings, all spiritual and temporal blessings
which he sees wanting to them, and turn away from them all evil whether of sin
or punishment.

8. The fifth part of Prayer is Thanksgiving; Thanksgiving.
that is, the Praising and Blessing God for all his mercies, whether to our own
persons, and those that immediately relate to us, or to the Church and Nation
whereof we are members, or yet more general to all mankind; and this for all
his mercies both spiritual and temporal. In the Spiritual, first, for those
wherein we are all in common concerned, as the giving of his Son, the sending
of his Spirit, and all those means he has used to bring sinful men unto
himself. Then secondly, for those mercies we have in our own particulars
received, such are, the having been born within the pale of the Church, and so
brought up in Christian Religion, by which we have been partakers of those
precious advantages of the Word and Sacraments, and so have had, without any
care or pains of ours, the means of eternal life put into our hands. But
besides these, there is none of us but have received other spiritual mercies
from God.

9. As first, Gods patience and long-suffering, Spiritual Mercies.
waiting for our Repentance, and not cutting us off in our sins. Secondly, his
calls and invitations of us to that repentance, not only outward, in the
ministry of the Word, but also inward, by the motions of his Spirit. But then
if thou be one that has by the help of Gods grace been wrought upon by these
calls, and brought from a profane or worldly, to a Christian course of life,
thou art surely in the highest degree tied to magnify and praise his goodness,
as having received from him the greatest of mercies.

10. We are likewise to give thanks for Temporal blessings, whether such as
concern the public, as the prosperity of the Church Temporal.
or Nation, and all remarkable deliverances afforded to either; or else such as
concern our particulars; such are all the good things of this life which we
enjoy, as Health, Friends, Food, Raiment, and the like; also for those minutely
preservations, whereby we are by Gods gracious providence kept from danger, and
the especial deliverances which God has given us in time of greatest perils.
It will be impossible to set down the several mercies which every man receives
from God, because they differ in kind and degree between one man and another.
But it is sure that he which receives least has yet enough to employ his whole
life in praises to God. And it will be very fit for every man to consider the
several passages of this life, and the mercies he has in each received, and so
to gather a kind of List or Catalogue of them, at least the principal of them,
which he may always have in his memory, and often with a thankful heart repeat
before God.

11. These are the several parts of Prayer, Public prayer in the Church.
and all of them to be used both publicly and privately. The public use of
them is first, that in the Church, where all meet to join in those prayers
wherein they are in common concerned. And this (where the prayers are such as
they ought to be) we should be very constant at, there being an especial
blessing promised to the joint requests of the faithful, and he that without a
necessary cause absents himself from such public prayers, cuts himself off
from the Church, which has always been thought so unhappy a thing, that it is
the greatest punishment the Governors of the Church can lay upon the worst
offender; and therefore it is a strange madness for men to inflict it upon
themselves.

12. A second sort of Public Prayer is that In the Family.
in a Family, where all that are members of it join in their common
supplications; and this also ought to be very carefully attended to, first, by
the Master of the Family, who is to look that there be such prayers, it being
as much his part thus to provide for the Souls of his Children and Servants, as
to provide food for their Bodies. Therefore there is none, even the meanest
householder, but ought to take this care. If either himself or any of his Family
can read, he may use some prayers out of some good book, if it be the Service
Book of the Church, he makes a good choice; if they cannot read, it will then
be necessary they should be taught without Book some form of prayer which they
may use in the Family, for which purpose again some of the Prayers of the
Church will be very fit, as being most easy for their memories by reason of
their shortness, and yet containing a great deal of matter. But what choice
soever they make of prayers, let them be sure to have some, and let no man that
professes himself a Christian, keep so heat henish a Family, as not to see God
be daily worshipped in it. But when the Master of a Family has done his duty
in this providing, it is the duty of every member of it to make use of that
provision, by being constant and diligent at those Family-Prayers.

13. Private or secret Prayer is that which Private Prayer.
is used by a man alone apart from all others, wherein we are to be more
particular, according to our particular needs, then in public it is fit to be.
And this of private Prayer is a duty which will not be excused by the
performance of the other of public. They are both required, and one must not
be taken in exchange for the other. And whoever is diligent in public prayers,
and yet negligent in private, it is much to be feared he rather seeks to
approve himself to men then to God, contrary to the command of our Savior,
Mat. 6. who enjoynes this private prayer, this praying to our Father in secret,
from whom alone we are to expect our reward, and not from the vain praises of
men.

14. Now this duty of Prayer is to be often Frequency in Prayer.
performed, by none seldomer then Evening and Morning, it being most necessary
that we should thus begin and end all our works with God, and that not only in
respect of the duty we owe him, but also in respect of our selves, who can
never be either prosperous or safe, but by committing our selves to him; and
therefore should tremble to venture on the perils either of day or night
without his safeguard. How much oftener this duty is to be performed, must be
judged according to the business or leisure men have; where, by business, I
mean not such business as men unprofitably make to themselves, but the
necessary business of a man's Calling, which with some will not afford them
much time for set and solemn Prayer. But even these men may often in a day lift
up their hearts to God in some short Prayers, even whilst they are at their
work. As for those that have more leisure, they are in all reason to bestow
more time upon this duty. And let no man that can find time to bestow upon his
vanities, nay, perhaps his sins, say he wants leisure for prayer, but let him
now endeavor to redeem what he has misspent, by employing more of that
leisure in this duty for the future. And surely if we did but rightly weigh how
much it is our own advantage The advantages of Prayer.
to perform this duty, we should think it wisdom to be as frequent as we are
ordinarily seldom in it.

15. For first, it is a great Honor for us poor Honor.
worms of the earth to be allowed to speak so freely to the Majesty of heaven.
If a King should but vouchsafe to let one of his meanest Subjects talk
familiarly and freely with him, it would be looked on as a huge honor; that
man how despiseable soever he were before, would then be the envy of all his
neighbors; and there is little question, he would be willing to take all
opportunities of receiving so great a grace. But alas! this is nothing to the
honor is offered us, who are allowed, nay, invited to speak to, and converse
with the King of Kings, and therefore how forward should we in all reason be to
it?

16. Secondly, It is a great Benefit, even the Benefit.
greatest that can be imagned; for Prayer is the instrument of fetching down
all good things to us, whether spiritual or temporal; no prayer, that is
qualified as it ought to be, but is sure to bring down a blessing, according to
that of the wise man, Eccles. 35. 17. The Prayer of the humble pierces the
clouds, and will not turn away till the highest regard it. You would think him
a happy man that had one certain means of helping him to whatever he wanted,
though it were to cost him much pains and labor; now this happy man thou
may be if thou will. Prayer is the never-failing means of bringing thee, if
not all that thou think thou want, yet all that indeed thou do, that
is, all that God sees fit for thee. And therefore be there never so much
weariness to thy flesh in the duty, yet considering in what continual want thou
stand of something or other from God, it is madness to let that uneasiness
dishearten thee, and keep thee from this so sure means of supplying thy wants.

17. But in the third place, this duty is in it Pleasantness
self so far from being uneasy, that it is very pleasant. God is the fountain
of happiness, and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm 16. 11.
And therefore the nearer we draw to him the happier we must needs be, the very
joys of heaven arising from our neerness to God. Now in this life we have no
way of drawing so near to him, as by this of Prayer, and therefore surely it is
that, which in it self is apt to afford abundance of delight and pleasure, if
it seem otherwise to us, it is from some distemper of our own hearts, which
like a sick palate cannot relish the most pleasant meat. Prayer is a pleasant
duty, but it is withal a spiritual one; and therefore if thy heart be carnal,
if that be set either on the contrary Carnality one reason of its seeming
otherwise.
pleasures of the flesh, or dross of the world, no marvail then, if thou taste
no pleasantness in it, if like the Israelites thou despise Mann^ whilst thou
longest after the flesh pots of Egypt. Therefore if thou find a weariness in
this duty, suspect thy self, purge, and refine thy heart from the love of all
sin, and endeavor to put it into a heavenly and spiritual frame, and then thou will find this no unpleasant exercise, but full of delight and satisfaction. In
the mean time complain not of the hardness of the duty, but of the unto
wardness of thy own heart.

18. But there may also be another reason Want of use another.
of its seeming unpleasant to us, and that is want of Use. You know there are
many things, which seem uneasy at the first trial, which yet after we are
accustomed to them, seem very delightful, and if this be thy case, then thou
know a ready cure, viz. to use it oftener, and so this consideration
naturally inforces the exhortation of being frequent in this duty.

19. But we are not only to consider how To ask nothing unlawful.
often, but how well we perform it. Now to do it well, we are to respect, first
the matter of our Prayers, to look that we ask nothing that is unlawful, as
revenge upon our ene^ies, or the like; secondly the manner; and that must be
first in faith, we must believe, that if we ask as we ought, God will either
give us To ask in Faith.
the thing we ask for, or else something which he sees better for us. And then
secondly in humility; we must acknowledge our selves utterly In humility.
unworthy of any of those good things we beg for, and therefore sue for them
only for Christ's sake; thirdly with attention, we must With attention.
mind what we are about, and not suffer our selves to be carried away to the
thought of other things. I told you at the first, that Prayer was the business
of the soul, but if our minds be wandering, it is the work only of the tongue
and lips, which make it in Gods account no better then vain babbling, and so
will never bring a blessing on us. Nay as Jacob said to his mother, Genesis 27.
12. It will be more likely to bring a curse on us then a blessing, for it is a
profaning one of the most solemn parts of Gods service, it is a piece of
Hypocrisy, the drawing near to him with our lip, when our hearts are far from
him, and a great slighting and despising that dreadful Majesty we come before:
And as to our selves it is a most ridiculous folly, that we who come to God
upon such weighty errands, as are all the concernments of our souls and bodies,
should in the midst forget our business, and pursue every the lightest thing
that either our own vain fancies or the Devil, whose business it is here to
hinder us, can offer to us. It is just as if a Mal^factor, that comes to sue
for his life to the King, should in the midst of his supplication happen to
epsy a Butter fly, and then should leave his suit, and run a chase after that
Butterfly: Would you not think it pity, a pardon should be cast away upon so
wretchless a creature? And sure it will be as unreasonable to expect that God
should attend and grant those suits of ours, which we do not at all consider
our selves.

20. This wandering in Prayer is a thing we are Helps against wandering.
much concerned to arm our selves against, it being that to which we are
naturally wonderful prone. To that end it will be necessary first to possess
our hearts at our coming to Prayers with the greatness of that Majesty we are
to Consideration of Gods Majesty.
approach, that so we may dread to be vain and trifling in his presence.
Secondly, We are to consider the great concernment of the things we are Our
needs.
to ask, some whereof are such that if we should not be heard, we were of all
creatures the most miserable, and yet this wandering is the way to keep us from
being heard. Thirdly, We are to beg Gods aid in this particular: And therefore
Prayer for Gods aid.
when thou set to Prayer, let thy first petition be for this grace of
attention.

21. Lastly, Be as watchful as is possible over Watchfulness.
thy heart in time of prayer to keep out all wandering thoughts, or if any have
gotten in let them not find entertainment, but as soon as ever thou discernest
them, suffer them not to abide one moment, but cast them out with indignation,
and beg Gods pardon for them. And if th ou do thus sincerely and diligently
strive against them, either God will enable thee in some measure to overcome,
or he will in his mercy pardon thee what thou can not prevent: But if it be
through thy own negligence thou art to expect neither, so long as that
negligence continues.

22. In the fourth place, we must look our With Zeal.
Prayers be with Zeal and Earnestness, it is not enough that we so far attend
them as barely to know what it is we say, but we must put forth all the
affection and devotion of our souls, and that according to the several parts of
prayer before mentioned. It is not the cold, faint request that will ever
obtain from God. We see it will not from our selves; for if a beggar should ask
relief from us, and do it in such a scornful manner that he seemed indifferent
whether he had it or no, we should think he had either little want or great
pride; and so have no heart to give him. Now surely the things we ask from God
are so much above the rate of an ordinary Alms, that we can never expect they
should be given to slight and heartless petitions. No more in like manner will
our Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving ever be accepted by him, if it be not
offered from a heart truly affected with the sense of his mercies; it is but a
kind of formal complementing, which will never be approved by him who requires
the heart, and not the lips only. And the like may be said of all the other
parts of Prayer. Therefore be careful when thou drawest nigh to God in Prayer,
to raise up thy soul to the highest pitch of zeal and earnestness thou art
able. And because of thy self alone thou art not able to do any thing, beseech
God that he will inflame thy heart with this heavenly fire of Devotion, and
when thou have obtained it, beware that thou neither quench it by any wilful
sin, nor let it go out again for want of stirring it up and employing it.

23. Fifthly, We must Pray with Purity, I mean, we must purge our hearts from
all affections With purity.
to sin. This is surely the meaning of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 8. when he
commands men to lift up holy hands in Prayer, and he there instances in one
special sort of sin, wrath and doubting; where, by doubting, is meant those
unkind disputes and contentions which are so common amongst men. And surely he
that cherishes that or any other sin in his heart, can never lift up those holy
hands which are required in this duty. And then sure his prayers be they never
so many or earnest, will little avail him: The Psalmist will tell him, he shall
not be heard, Psalm. 66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not
hear me. Nay, Solomon will tell him yet worse, that his prayers are not only
vain, but abominable, Prove. 15. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord. And thus to have our prayers turned into sin, is one
of the heaviest things can befall any man; we see it is set down in that sad
Catalogue of curses, Psalm. 109. 7. Therefore let us not be so cruel to our
selves as to pull it upon our own heads, which we certainly do if we offer up
prayers from an impure heart.

24. In the last place we must direct our To right ends.
prayers to right ends; And that either in respect of the prayer it self, or
the things we pray for; First, we must pray not to gain the praise of devotion
amongst men, like those hypocrites, Mat. 6. 5. Nor yet only for company or
fashion sake to do as others do: But we must do it, first, as an act of worship
to God; secondly, as an acknowledgment, that he is that great spring, from
whence alone we expect all good things. And thirdly, to gain a supply of our
own or others needs. Then in respect of the Things prayed for; we must be sure
to have no ill aims upon them; we must not ask that we may consume it upon our
lusts, Jam. 4. 3. as those do who pray for wealth, that they may live in riot
and excess, and for power, that they may be able to mischief their enemies, and
the like. But our end in all must be Gods glory first, and next that, our own
and others Salvation, and all other things must be taken in only as they tend
to those, which they can never do if we abuse them to sin. I have now done with
that first part of worship, that of the Soul.

25. The other is that of the Body, and that is nothing else but such humble
and reverent Bodily Worship.
gestures in our approaches to God, as may both express the inward reverence of
our Souls, and may also pay him some tribute from our very Bodies, with which
the Apostle commands us to glorisie God, as well as with our souls; and good
reason, since he has created and redeemed the one as well as the other:
whenever therefore thou offerest thy prayers unto God, let it be with all
lowliness as well of body as of mind, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
95. 6. O come let us worship, let us fall down and kneel before the Lord our
maker.

26. The Ninth DUTY to God is REPENTANCE: That this is a duty to God we are
REPENTANCE.
taught by the Apostle, Act. 20. 21. where speaking of repentance, he styles it
repentance toward God. And there is good reason this should be a duty to him,
since there is no sin we commit but is either mediately or immediately against
him. For though there be sins both against our selves and our neighbors, yet
they being forbidden by God, they are also breaches of his Commandments, and so
sins against him.

This repentance is, in short, nothing but a turning from sin to God, the
casting off all A turning from sin to God.
our former evils, and in stead thereof constantly practicing all those
Christian duties which God requires of us. And this is so necessary a duty,
that without it we certainly perish, we have Christ's word for it, Luke 13. 5.
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

27. The directions for performing the several parts of this duty have been
already given in the preparation to the Lords Suppor, Times for this Duty.
and thither I refer the Reader. Only I shall here mind him, that it is not to
be looked upon as a duty to be practiced only at the time of receiving the
Sacrament. For this being the only remedy against the poison of sin, we must
renew it as often as we repeat our sins, that is daily. I mean we must every
day repent of Daily.
the sins of that day, for what Christ says of other evils, is true also of
this, sufficient to the day is the evil thereof; we have sins enough of each
day to exercise a daily repentance, and therefore every man must thus daily
call himself to account.

28. But as it is in accounts, they who constantly At set times.
set down their daily expenses, have yet some set time of casting up the whole
sum, as at the end of the week or month; so should it also be here, we should
set aside some time to humble our selves solemnly before God for the sins, not
of that day only, but of our whole lives. And the frequenter these times are,
the better. For the oftener we thus cast up our accounts with God, and see what
vast debts we are run in to him, the more humbly shall we think of our selves,
and the more shall thirst after his mercy, which two are the special things
that must qualify us for his pardon. He therefore that can assign himself one
day in the week for this purpose, will take a thriving course for his soul. Or
if any man's state of life be so busy as not to afford him to do it so often,
let him yet come as near to that frequency as is possible for him, remembering
always, that none of his worldly employments can bring him in near so gainful
a return as this spiritual one will do, and therefore it is very ill husbandry
to pursue them to the neglect of this.

29. Besides these constant times, there are In the time of affliction.
likewise occasional times for the performance of this duty, such especially
are the times of calamity and affliction, for when any such befalls us, we are
to look on it as a message sent from heaven to call us to this duty, and
therefore must never neglect it when we are thus summoned to it, lest we be of
the number of them who despise the chastisements of the Lord, Heb. 12. 5.

30. There is yet another time of repentance, At death.
which in the practice of men has gotten away the custom from all those, and
that is the time of death, which, it is true, is a time very fit to renew our
repentance, but sure not proper to begin it; and it is a most desperate madness
for men to defer it till then. For to say the mildest of it, it is the
venturing our Souls upon such miserable uncertainties as no wise man would
trust with any thing of the least value.

For first, I would ask any man that means to repent at his death, how he knows
he shall have an hours time for it? do we not daily The danger of deferring it
till then.
see men snatched away in a moment? and who can tell that it shall not be his
own case? But secondly, suppose he have a more leisurely death, that some
disease give him warning of its approach, yet perhaps he will not understand
that warning, but will still flatter himself, as very often sick people do,
with hopes of life to the last: and so his death may be sudden to him though it
comes by never so slow degrees. But again, thirdly, if he do discern his
danger, yet how is he sure he shall then be able to repent? Repentance is a
grace of God, not at our command; and it is just and usual with God, when men
have a long time refused and rejected that grace, resisted all his calls and
invitations to conversion and amendment, to give them over at last to the
hardness of their own hearts, and not to afford them any more of that grace
they have so despised. Yet suppose in the fourth place, that God in his
infinite patience should still continue the offer of that grace to thee, yet
thou that have resisted, it may be thirty, or forty, or fifty years together,
how know thou that thou shall put off that habit of resistance upon a
sudden, and make use of the The disadvantages of a death bed repentance.
grace afforded? It is sure thou have many more advantages toward the doing it
now then thou will have then.

31. For first, The longer sin has kept The custom of sin.
possession of the heart the harder it will be to drive it out. It is true, if
Repentance were nothing but a present ceasing from the acts of sin, the death
bed were fittest for it, for then we are disabled from committing most sins;
but I have formerly showed you repentance contains much more then so, there
must be in it a sincere hatred of sin, and love of God. Now how unlikely is it
that he which has all his life loved sin, cherisht it in his bosom, and on
the contrary abhorred God and goodness, should in an instant quite change his
affections, hate that sin he loved and love God and goodness, which before he
utterly hated?

32. And secondly, The bodily pains that attend a death bed will distract thee
and make Bodily pains
thee unable to attend the work of repentance, which is a business of such
weight and difficulty, as will employ all our powers even when they are at the
freshest.

33. Consider those disadvantages thou Danger of unsincerity.
must then struggle with, and then tell me what hope there is thou shall then
do that, which now upon much easier terms thou will not. But in the third place
there is a danger behind beyond all these, and that is, that the repentance
which death drives a man to, will not be a true repentance, for in such a case
it is plain, it is only the fear of hell puts him on it, which though it may be
a good beginning, where there is time after to perfect it, yet where it goes
alone it can never avail for Salvation. Now that death bed repentances are
often only of this sort, is too likely when it is observed, that many men who
have seemed to repent, when they have thought Death approaching, have yet,
after it has pleased God to restore them to health, been as wicked (perhaps
worse) as ever they were before; which shows plainly that there was no real
change in them, and then surely had such a man died in that seeming repentance,
God, who tries the heart, would not have accepted it, which he saw was
unsincere. When all these dangers are laid together, it will surely appear a
most desperate adventure for any man to trust to a Deathbed repentance. Nor is
it ever the less for that example of the penitent Thief, Luke 23. 43. which is
by many so much depended on. For it is sure, his case and ours differ widely,
he had never heard of Christ before and so more could not be expected of him
then to embrace him as soon as he was tendered to him: But we have had him
offered, nay pressed upon us from our Cradles and yet have rejected. But if there
were not this difference, it is but a faint hope can be raised only from a
single example, and another we find not in the whole Bible. The Israeli^es we
read we^e fed with Manna from Heaven, but would you not think him stark mad
that should out of expectation of the like, neglect to provide himself any
food? Yet it is full as reasonable to depend upon this example as the other. I
conclude all in the words of the Wise man, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember thy Creator
in the days of thy youth before the evil days come.

34. To this duty of repentance, Fasting is very proper to be annexed. The
Scripture Fasting.
usually joins them together; among the Jews the great day of atonement was to
be kept with Fasting, as you may see by comparing Levit. 16. 31. with Isay 58.
5. and this by Gods especial appointment. And in the Prophets when the people
are called on to repent and humble themselves, they are also called on to Fast.
Thus it is Joel 2. 12. Therefore now thus says the Lord, Turn ye unto me with
all your hearts, with fasting, and with weeping, etc. Yea, so proper has
Fasting been accounted to Humiliation, that we see even wicked Ahab would not
omit it in his 2 Kings 21. 27. Nor the Heathen Ninivites in theirs, Jonah 3. 5.
Nor is it less fit or less acceptable since Christ, then it was before him. For
we see he supposes it as a duty sometimes to be performed, when he gives
directions to avoid vainglory in it, Matthew. 6. 6. And also assures us that if
it be performed, as it ought, not to please men, but God, it will surely be
rewarded by him. And accordingly we find it practiced by the Saints: Anna,
Luke 2, 37. Served God with fasting and prayer: where it is observable, that it
is reckoned as a service of God, fit to be joined with prayers. And the
Christians of the first times were generally very frequent in the practice of
it. Now though fasting be especially proper to a time of humiliation, yet is it
not so restrained to it but it may be seasonable, whenever we have any
extraordinary thing to request from God. Thus when Esther was to endeavor the
deliverance of her people from destruction, she and all the Jews kept a solemn
Fast, Esther 416. And thus when Paul and Barnabas were to be Ordained Apostles,
there was fasting joined to prayer, Acts 13. 3. And so it will be very fit for
us, whenever we have need of any extraordinary directions, or assistance from
God, whether concerning our temporal or spiritual concernments, thus to quicken
our prayers by Fasting. But above all occasions, this of Humiliation seems most
to require it, for besides the advantages of kindling our zeal, which is never
more necessary then when we beg for pardon of sins, Fasting carries in it
somewhat of revenge, which is reckoned as a special part of repentance, 2 Cor.
7. 11. For by denying Fasting a revenge upon ourselvs.
our bodies the refreshment of our ordinary food, we do inflict somewhat of
punishment upon our selves for our former excesses, or whatever other sins we
at that time accuse our selves of; which is a proper effect of that indignation
which every sinner ought to have against himself. And truly he that is so
tender of himself that he can never find in his heart so much as to miss a
meal, by way of punishment for his faults, shows he is not much fallen out
with himself, for committing them, and so wants that indignation which the
Apostle in the forenamed text mentions as a part of true repentance.

35. There is no doubt, but such Holy revenges upon our selves for sins are
very acceptable to God; yet we must not think that either Such revenges
acceptable with God.
those, or any thing else we can do, can make satisfaction for our offenses,
for that nothing but the blood of Christ can do. And therefore on that, and not
on any of our performances Yet no satisfaction for sins.
we must depend for pardon. Yet since that blood shall never be applied to any
but penitent sinners, we are as much concerned to bring forth all the fruits of
repentance, as if our hopes depended on them only.

36. How often this duty of fasting is to be performed, we have no direction in
Scripture. Times of fasting.
That must be allotted by men's own piety, according as their health, or other
considerations will allow. But as it is in humiliation, the frequenter returns
we have of set times for it, the better; so is it likewise in fasting, the
oftener, the better, so it be not hurtful either to our healths, or to some
other duty required of us. Nay perhaps fasting may help some men to more of
those times for humiliation, then they would otherwise gain. For perhaps there
are some, who cannot, without a manifest hinderance to their calling, allow a
whole day to that work, yet such a one may at least afford that time, he would
otherwise spend in eating: And so fasting will be doubly useful toward such a
man's humiliation, both by helping him in the duty, and gaining him time f^^^^.

37. I have now gone through the first branch of our Duty to God, to wit, the
Acknowledging him for our God. The Second is the having no other. Of which I
need say little, Second Branch of our Duty to God.
as it is a forbidding of that grosser sort of Heathenish Idolatry, the
worshipping of Idols, which though it were once common in the world, yet is now
so rare, that it is not likely any that shall read this will be concerned in
it. Only I must say, That to pay Divine Worship to any creature, be it Saint or
Angel, yea, or the Image of Christ himself, is a transgression against this
second branch of our duty to God, it being the imparting that to a creature
which is due only to God, and therefore is strictly to be abstained from.

38. But there is another sort of Idolatry of Inward Idolatry.
which we are generally guilty, and that is, when we pay those affections of
Love, Fear, Trust, and the like, to any creature in a higher degree then we do
to God: for that is the setting up that thing, whatsoever it is, for our God.
And this inward kind of Idolatry is that which provokes God to jealousy as
well as the outward of worshipping an Idol. I might enlarge much upon this, but
because some severals of it have been touched on in the former discourse, I
suppose it needless. And therefore shall now proceed to the second head of
DUTY, that to our SELVES.

PARTITION VI. Of DUTIES to our SELVES; Of Sobriety; Of Humility; the great Sin
of PRIDE; the Danger, the Folly of this; Of VAINGLORY, the Danger, Folly; the
Means to Prevent it: Of MEEKNES; the Means to obtain it, etc.
. 1. THIS DUTY to our SELVES is by Duty to our SELVES.
S. Paul in the forementioned Text, Titus 2. 12. summed up in this one word,
Soberly. Now by Soberly, is meant our keeping within those due bounds which God
has set us. My business will therefore be to tell you what are the particulars
of this Sobriety: And that first, in respect of the soul; secondly, in respect
of the body: The sobriety of the soul stands in right governing its passions
and affections; and to that are many Virtues required. I shall give you the
particulars of them.

2. The first of them is Humility, which may well have the prime place, not
only in respect Humility.
of the excellency of the virtue, but also of its usefulness toward the
obtaining of all the rest. This being the foundation on which all others must
be built. And he that hopes to gain them without this, will prove but like that
foolish builder Christ speaks of, Luke. 6. 49. who built his house on the sand.
Of the Humility toward God I have already spoken, and showed the necessity of
it, I am now to speak of Humility, as it concerns our selves, which will be
found no lessnecessary then the former.

3. This Humility is of two sorts, the first is, the having a mean and low
opinion of our selves, the second is the being content that others should have
so of us. The first of these is contrary to pride, the other to vainglory. And
that both these are absolutely necessary to Christians, I am now to show you;
which will, I conceive, best be done by laying before you first, the sin,
secondly, the danger, thirdly, the contrary vices.

4. And first, for Pride; the sin of it is so The great sin of Pride.
great, that it cast the Angels out of heaven, and therefore if we may judge of
sin by the punishment, it was not only the first, but the greatest sin that
ever the Devil himself has been guilty of: But we need no better proof of the
hainousness of it, then the extreme hatefulness of it to God; which besides
that instance of his punishing the Devil, we may frequently find in the
Scriptures, Prove. 16. 5. Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to
the Lord. And again, Chap. 6. 16. where there is mention of several things the
Lord hates, a proud look is set as the first of them: So Jam. 4. 7. God
resists the proud; and diverse other texts there are to the same purpose,
which show the great hatred God bears to this sin of Pride. Now since it is
certain, God who is all goodness hates nothing, but as it is evil, it must
needs follow, that where God hates in so great a degree, there must be a great
degree of evil.

5. But secondly, PRIDE is not only very The danger.
sinful but very dangerous; and that first, in respect of drawing us to other
sins; secondly, Drawing into other sins.
of betraying us to punishments. First, Pride draws us to other sins, wherein
it shows it self indeed to be the direct contrary to humility; for as that is
the root of all Virtue, so is this of all Vice. For he that is proud sets
himself up as his own God, and so can never submit himself to any other rules
or Laws then what he makes to himself. The ungodly, says the Psalmist, is so
proud that he cares not for God, Psalm. 10. 4. Where you see it is his pride
that makes him despise God. And when a man is once come to that, he is prepared
for the commission of all sins. I might instance in a multitude of particular
sins that naturally flow from this of pride; as first, Anger, which the wise
man sets as the effect of pride, Pro. 21. 24. calling it proud wrath; secondly,
strife and contention; which he again notes to be the off spring of pride,
Prove. 13. 10. Only by pride comes contention. And both these are indeed most
natural effects of pride. For he that thinks very highly of himself expects
much submission and observance from others, and therefore cannot but rage and
quarrel whenever he thinks it not sufficiently paid. It would be infinite to
mention all the fruits of this bitter root: I shall name but one more, and that
is, that pride not only betrays us to many sins, but also makes them
incurable in us, for it hinders the working of all remedies.

6. Those remedies must either come from Frustrating of remedies.
God or man; if from God, they must be either in the way of meekness and
gentleness, or else of sharpness and punishment. Now if God by his goodness
essay to lead a proud man to repentance, he quite mistakes Gods meaning, and
thinks all the mercies he receives are but the reward of his own desert, and so
long it is sure he will never think he needs repentance. But if on the other
side God use him more sharply, and lay afflictions and punishments upon him,
those in a proud heart work nothing but murmurings and hatings of God, as if he
did him injury in those punishments. As for the remedies that can be used by
man, they again must be either by way of correction, or exhortation;
corrections from man will sure never work more on a proud heart, then those
from God; for he that can think God unjust in them, will much rather believe it
of man. And exhortations will do as little. For let a proud man be admonished
though never so mildly and lovingly he looks on it as a disgrace. And therefore
in stead of confessing or amending the fault, he falls to reproaching his
reprover as an over-busie or censorious person, and for that greatest and most
precious act of kindness, looks on him as his enemy. And now one that thus
stubbornly resists all means of cure must be concluded in a most dangerous
estate.

7. But besides this danger of sin, I told you there was another, that of
punishment; and of Betraying to punishment.
this there will need little proof when it is considered, that God is the proud
man's professed enemy, that he hates and resists him, as appeared in the Texts
forecited: And then there can be little doubt, that he which has so mighty an
adversary shall be sure to smart for it. Yet besides this general ground of
conclusion, it may not be amiss to mention some of those texts which
particularly threaten this sin, as Prove. 16. 18. Pride goes before
destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall: Again, Prove. 16 5. Every one
that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord, though hand join in hand,
yet they shall not be unpunished. The decr^e it seems is unalterable, and
whatever endeavors are used to preserve the proud man they are but vain, for
he shall not go unpunished. And this is very remarkable in the story of
Nebuchadnezzor, Dan. 4. who though a King, the greatest in the world, yet for
his pride was driven from among men to dwell and feed with beasts. And it is
most frequently seen, that this sin meets with very extraordinary judgments
even in this life. But if it should not, let not the proud man think that he
has escaped Gods vengeance, for it is sure there will be a most sad reckoning
in the next; for if God spared not the Angels for this sin, but cast them into
hell, let no man hope to speed better.

8. In the third place I am to show you the great Folly of this sin; and to do
that, it will be necessary to consider the several The Folly.
things whereof men use to be proud; they are of three sorts, either those
which we call the goods of Nature, or the goods of Fortune, or the goods of
Grace.

9. By the Goods of Nature, I mean Beauty, In respect of the goods of Nature.
Strength, Wit, and the like, and the being proud of any of these is a huge
folly: For first, we are very apt to mistake and think our selves Handsome or
Witty when we are not, and then there cannot be a more Ridiculous Folly then to
be proud of what we have not, and such every one esteems it in another man,
though he never supposes it his own case, and so never discerns it in himself.
And therefore there is nothing more despiseable amongst all men, then a Proud
Fool, yet no man that entertains high opinions of his own wit but is in danger
to be thus deceived, a man's own judgment of himself being of all others the
least to be trusted. But secondly, suppose we be not out in judging, yet what
is there in any of these natural endowments which is worth the being Proud?
There being scarce any of them which some creature or other has not in a
greater degree then man. How much does the whiteness of the Lilly, and the
redness of the Rose exceed the white and red of the fairest face? What a
multitude of creatures is there, that far surpass man in strength and
swiftness? And diverse others there are which as far as concerns any useful end
of theirs, act much more wisely then most of us; and are therefore oftentimes
in Scripture proposed to us by way of Example. It is therefore surely great
unreasonableness for us to think highly of our selves for such things as are
common to us with beasts and plants. But thirdly, if they were as excellent as
we fancy them, yet they are not at all durable, they are impaired and lost by
sundry means; a frenzy will destroy the rarest wit, a sickness decay the
freshest beauty, the greatest strength, or however old age will be sure to do
all. And therefore to be proud of them is again a folly in this respect. But
lastly, whatever they are, we gave them not to our selves. No man can think he
did any thing toward the procuring his natural beauty or wit, and so can with
no reason value himself for them.

10. In the second place, the folly is as great The goods ^^ Fortune.
to be proud of the goods of Fortune; by them I mean wealth and honor, and the
like; for it is sure, they add nothing of true worth to the man, somewhat of
outward pomp and bravery they may help him to, but that makes no change in the
person. You may load an Ass with money, or deck him with rich Trappings, yet
still you will not make him a whit the nobler kind of beast by either of them.
Then secondly, these are things we have no hold of, they vanish many times, ere
we are aware, he that is rich to day, may be poor to morrow, and then will be
the less pitied by all in his poverty, the prouder he was when he was rich.
Thirdly, We have them all, but as Stewards, to lay out for our Masters use, and
therefore should rather think how to make our accounts, then pride our selves
in our receipts. Lastly, Whatever of these we have, they, as well as the
former, are not owing to our selves. But if they be lawfully gotten, we owe
them only to God, whose blessing it is, that makes rich, Prove. 10. 22. If
unlawfully, we have them upon such terms that we have very little reason to
brag of them. And thus you see in these several respects, the folly of this
second sort of pride.

11. The third is that of the goods of grace; The goods of grace.
that is any virtue a man has. And here I can not say, but the things are very
valuable, they being infinitely more precious, then all the world, yet
nevertheless this is of all the rest the highest folly. And that not only in
the foregoing respect, that we help not our selves to it, grace being above all
things most immediately Gods Work in us; but especially in this that the being
proud of grace, is the fine way to lose it. God, who gives grace to the humble,
will take it from the proud. For if, as we see in the parable, Mat. 25. 28. the
talent was taken from him who had only put it to no use at all, how shall he
hope to have it continued to him that has put it to so ill, that in stead of
trading with it for God, has trafficked with it for Satan? And as he will
loose the Grace for the future, so he will loose all Reward of it for the time
past. For let a man have done never so many good acts, yet if he be proud of
them, that pride shall be charged on him to his destruction, but the good shall
never be remembered to his reward. And this proves it to be a most wretched
folly to be proud of grace. It is like that of children, that pull those things
in pieces they are most fond of, but yet much worse then that of thei^s, for we
not only loose the thing (and that the most precious that can be imagined) but
we must also be eternally punished for doing so, there being nothing that shall
be so sadly reckoned for in the next world as the abuse of Grace, and certainly
there can be no greater abuse of it, then to make it serve for an end so
directly contrary to that for which it was given, it being given to make us
humble, not proud; to magnify God, not our selves.

12. Having showed you thus much of this Means of Humility.
sin, I suppose it will appear very necessary to be eschewed; to which purpose
it will first be useful to consider what has been already said concerning it,
and that so seriously, as may work in thee not some slight dislike, but a deep
and irreconcilable hatred of the sin: secondly, to be very watchful over thine
own heart that it cherish not any beginnings of it; never suffer it to feed on
the fancy of thy own worth, but when ever any such thought ari^es, beat it down
immediately with the remembrance of some of thy follies or sins, and so make
this very motion of pride an occasion of humility. Thirdly, Never to compare
thy self with those thou think more foolish or wicked then thy self, that so
thou may like the Pharis^e, Luke 16. 11. extol thy self for being better;
but if thou will compare, do it with the Wise, and Godly, and then thou will
find thou come so far short as may help to pull down thy high esteem of thy
self. Lastly, To be very earnest in Prayer, that God would root out all degrees
of this sin in thee, and make thee one of those poor in Spirit, Mat. 5. 3. to
whom the blessing, even of Heaven it self, is promised.

13. The second contrary to humility I told Vain glory.
you was vain glory. That is, a great thirst after the praise of men. And
first, that this The sin.
is a sin, I need prove no otherwise, then by the words of our Savior, John 5.
44. How can ye believe, that receive honor one of another? Where it appears,
that it is not only a sin but such a one, as hinders the receiving of Christ
into the heart, for so believing there signifies. This then in the second place
shows you likewise the great dangerousness of this The danger.
sin, for if it be that, which keeps Christ out of the heart, it is sure it
brings infinite danger, since all our safety, all our hope of escaping the
wrath to come, stands in receiving him. But besides the authority of this text,
common experience shows, that where ever this sin has possession it endangers
men to fall into any other. For he that so considers the praise of men, that he
must at no hand part with it when ever the greatest sins come to be in fashion
and credit (as God knows many are now adays) he will be sure to commit them
rather then run the disgrace of being too single and precise; I doubt there are
many consciences can witness the truth of this, so that I need say no more to
prove the danger of this sin.

14. The third thing I am to show, is the The Folly.
folly of it; and that will appear first, by considering what it is we thus
hunt after, nothing but a little air, a blast, the breath of men, it brings us
in nothing of real advantage: for I am made never the wiser nor the better for
a man's saying I am wise and good. Besides, if I am commended, it must be either
before my face or behind my back; if the former, it is very often flattery, and
so the greatest abuse that can be offered, and then I must be very much a fool
to be pleased with it. But if it be behind my back, I have not then so much as
the pleasure of knowing it; and therefore it is a strange folly thus to pursue
what is so utterly gainless. But secondly,. it is not only gainless, but
painful and uneasy also, He that eagerly seeks praise is not at all master of
himself, but must suit all his actions to that end, and in stead of doing what
his own reason and conscience (nay perhaps his worldly convenience) directs him
to, he must take care to do what will bring him in commendations, and so
enslaves himself to every one that has but a tongue to commend him. Nay, there
is yet a further uneasiness in it, and that is, when such a man fails of his
aim, when he misses the praise, and perhaps meets with the contrary reproach,
(which is no man's lot more often then the vainglorious, nothing making a man
more despised) then what disturbances and disquiets, and even tortures of mind
he is under? A lively instance of this you have in Achitophel, 2 Samuel 17. 23.
who had so much of this upon Absaloms despising his counsel, that he chose to
rid himself of it, by hanging himself. And sure this painfulness that thus
attends this sin, is sufficient proof of the folly of it. Yet this is not all,
it is yet further very hurtful. For if this vain glory be concerning any good,
or Christian action, it destroys all the fruit of it; he that prays or gives
alms to be seen of men, Matthew. 6. 2. must take that as his reward, Verily I say
unto you, they have their reward; they must expect none from God, but the
portion of those Hypocrites that love the praise of men more then the praise of
God. And this is a miserable folly to make such an exchange. It is like the Dog
in the Fable, who seeing in the water the shadow of that meat he held in his
mouth, caught at the shadow, and so let go his meat. Such dogs, such
unreasonable creatures are we when we thus let go the eternal rewards of Heaven
to catch at a few good words of men. And yet we do not only lose those eternal
joys, but procure to our selves the contrary eternal miseries, which is sure
the highest pitch of folly and madness. But if the vain glory be not concerning
any virtuous action, but only some indifferent thing, yet even there also it is
very hurtful; for vain glory is a sin that wheresoever it is placed endangers
our eternal estate, which is the greatest of all mischiefs. And even for the
present it is observable, that of all other sins it stands the most in its own
light, hinders it self of that very thing it pursues. For there are very few
that thus hunt after praise, but they are discerned to do so, and that is sure
to eclipse whatever praiseworthy thing they do, and brings scorn upon them in
stead of reputation. And then certainly we may justly condemn this sin of folly
which is so ill a manager even of its own design.

15. You have seen how wretched a thing Helps against vainglory.
this vain glory is in these several respects, the serious consideration
whereof may be one good means to subdue it, to which it will be necessary to
add, first, a great watchfulness over thy self; observe narrowly whether in
any Christian duty thou at all considerest the praise of men, or even in the
most indifferent action, look whether thou have not too eager a desire of it,
and if thou find thy self inclined that way, have a very strict eye upon it,
and where ever thou find it stirring check and resist it, suffer it not to
be the end of thy actions: But in all matters of Religion let thy Duty be the
Motive; in all indifferent things of common life let Reason direct thee; and
though thou may so far consider in those things the opinion of men, as to
observe the rules of common decency, yet never think any praise that comes in
to thee from any thing of that kind, worth the contriving for: Secondly, set
up to thy self another aim, viz. that of pleasing God; let that be thy enquiry
when thou go about any thing, whether it be approved by him? and then thou will not be at leisure to consider what praise it will bring thee from men. And
surely he that weighs of how much more moment it is to please God, who is able
eternally to reward us, then men, whose applause can never do us any good, will
surely think it reasonable to make the former his only care. Thirdly, if at any
time thou art praised, do not be much overjoyed with it, nor think a jot the
better of thy self; but if it be Virtue thou art praised for, remember it was
God that wrought it in thee, and give him the glory, never thinking any part of
it belongs to thee: If it be some indifferent action, then remember that it
cannot deserve praise, as having no goodness in it: But if it be a bad one (as
amongst men such are sometimes likeliest to be commended) then it ought to set
thee a trembling in stead of rejoicing, for then that woe of our Saviors
belongs to thee, Luke 6. 26. Woe unto you when men speak well of you, for so
did their Fathers to the false Prophets, and there is not a greater sign of a
hardened heart, then when men can make their sins the matter of their glory. In
the last place let thy prayers assist in the fight with this corruption.

16. A second VIRTUE is MEEKNES, MEEKNES.
That is a calmness and quietness of spirit, contrary to the Rages and
impatiencies of Anger. This Virtue may be exercised either in respect of God,
or our neighbor. That toward God I have already spoken of, under the head of
Humility, and that toward our neighbor I shall hereafter. All I have here to
say of it is, how it becomes a duty to our selves; that it does, in respect of
the great advantage we reap by it; which, in mere kindness to our Advantages
fit.
selves, we are to look after. And to prove that brings us this great
advantage; I need say no more, but that this meekness is that to which Christ
has pronounced a blessing, Mat. 5. 5. Blessed are the meek, and not only in
the next world, but even in this too, they shall inherit the earth. Indeed none
but the meek person has the true enjoyment of any thing in the world, for the
angry, and impatient are like sick people, who we use to say, cannot enjoy the
greatest prosperities: For let things be never so fair without, they will raise
storms within their own breasts. And surely whoever has either in himself, or
others observed the great uneasiness of this passion of anger, cannot choose but
think meekness a most pleasant thing.

17. Besides, it is also a most honorable thing, for it is that whereby we
resemble Christ, Learn of me, says he, for I am meek and lowly in heart, Matthew
11. 28. It is also that whereby we conquer our selves, overcome our own unrulie
passions, which of all victories is the greatest and most noble. Lastly, it is
that which makes us behave our selves like men, whereas anger gives us the
fierceness and wildness of Savage Beasts. And accordingly the one is by all
esteemed and loved, whereas the other is hated and abhorred, every man shunning
a man in rage as they would a furious beast.

18. Farther, yet meekness is the sobriety of the mind, whereas anger is the
direct madness, it puts a man wholly out of his own power, and makes him do
such things as himself in his sober temper abhors; how many men have done those
things in their rage, which they have repented all their lives after? and
therefore surely as much as a man is more honorable then a beast, a sober man
then a mad man, so much has this virtue of Meekness the advantage of Honor
above the contrary vice of Anger.

19. Again, meekness makes any condition tolerable and easy to be endured. He
that meekly bears any suffering takes off the edge of it that it cannot wound
him, whereas he that frets and rages at it; whets it and makes it much sharper
then it would be; nay, in some cases makes that so, which would not else be so
at all, as particularly in the case of reproachful words, which in themselves
can do us no harm, they neither hurt our bodies nor lessen our estates, the
only mischief they can do us is to make us angry, and then our anger may do us
many more; whereas he that meekly passes them by is never the worse for them,
nay, the better; for he shall be rewarded by God for that patience. Much more
might be said to recommend this virtue to us, in respect of our own present
advantage, but I suppose this may suffice to persuade men to esteem of it. The
harder matter will be to gain them to the practice of it, wherein men pretend I
know not what difficulties of natural constitutions, and the like; yet sure
there is no man of so Choleric a temper, but if he did heartily set about it,
would find it were not impossible in some good measure to subdue it: But then
he must be diligent in using means to that end. Diverse of these Means there
are, I shall mention some few.

20. As first, The imprinting deep in our Means of obtaining it.
minds the loveliness and benefits of meekness, together with the ugliness and
mischiefs of anger. Secondly, To set before us the examples of Christ, who
endured all reproaches, yea, torments with perfect patience, that was led as a
sheep to the slaughter, I say 53. 7. That when he was reviled, reviled not
again; when he suffered, threatened not, 1 Peter 2. 23. And if he, the Lord of
glory suffered thus meekly and unjustly from his own creatures, with what face
can we ever complain of any injury done to us? Thirdly, To be very watchful to
prevent the very first beginnings of anger, and to that purpose to mortify all
inward peevishness and frowardness of mind, which is a sin in it self, though
it proceed no farther, but will also be sure, if it be cherished, to break out
into open effects of anger. Therefore when ever thou find the least rising
of it within thee, make as much haste to check it as thou would to quench a
fire in thy house, but be sure thou bring no fuel to it, by entertaining any
thoughts that may increase it. And at such a time especially keep a most strict
watch over thy tongue, that it break not out into any angry speeches, for that
breath will fan the fire, not only in thine adversary, but thy self too;
therefore though thy heart be hot within, stifle the flame, and let it not
break out; and the greater the temptation is, the more earnestly lift up thy
heart to God to assist thee to overcome it. Fourthly, Often remember how great
punishments thy sins have deserved, and then whether thy sufferings be from God
or man, thou will acknowledge them to be far short of what is due to thee, and
therefore wilt be ashamed to be impatient at them.

21. The third Virtue is CONSIDERATION, CONSIDERATION.
and this in a most special manner we owe to our Souls. For without it we
shall, as rash unadvised people use to do, rush them into infinite perils. Now
this Consideration is either of our State, or of our Actions. By Of our State.
our State, I mean what our condition is to God ward, whether it be such that
we may reasonably conclude our selves in his favor. This it much concerns us
to consider and examine, and that not by those easy rules men are apt to frame
to themselves, as whether they believe that Christ died for their sins, that
they are of the number of the Elect, and shall certainly be saved; if these and
the like were all that were required to put us into Gods favor, none but some
melancholy person could ever be out of it; for we are apt enough generally to
believe comfortably of our selves. But the Rules God has given us in his Word
are those by which we must be tried at the last day, and therefore are
certainly the only safe ones by which to try our selves now. And the sum of
those are, That whosoever continues The Rule by which to try our State.
in any one wilful sin is not in his favor, nor can if he so die hope for any
mercy at his hand.

22. Now it is highly necessary we should consider what our condition is in
this respect: for since our life is nothing but a puff of breath in our
nostrils, which may for ought we know be taken from us the next minute, it
nearly concerns us to know how we are provided for another world, that so in
case we want at present that oil in our Lamps wherewith we are to meet the
Bridegroom, Mat. 25. 8. we may timely get it, and not for want of it be ever
shut out like the foolish Virgins from his presence. The neglect of this
consideration The danger of Inconsideration.
has undone many souls; some by too easy a belief that they were in a good
condition, without considering and trying themselves by the foregoing Rule, but
presuming either upon some slight outward performances, or upon such a false
faith as I even now described; others by the wretched careless going on,
without so much as asking themselves what their condition is, but hope they
shall do as well as their neighbors, and so never enquiring farther; which
wretched carelessness will as certainly undo the spiritual, as the like would
do the temporal estate; yet in that every man is wise enough to foresee, that a
man that never takes any accounts of his estate to see whether he be worth
something or nothing, will be sure to be a beggar in the end. But in this far
weightier matter we can generally be thus improvident.

23. The second thing we are to consider, is Our Actions.
our Actions, and those either before or after the doing of them. In the first
place, we are to consider before we act, and not to do any Before we do them.
thing rashly or headily; but first, to advise with our consciences, whether
this be lawful to be done, for he that follows his own inclination, and does
every thing which that moves him to, shall be sure to fall into a multitude of
sins. Therefore consider soberly and be assured of the lawfulness of the thing
before thou venture to do it. This advisedness is in all worldly things
accounted so necessary a part of wisdom, that no man is accounted wise without
it; a rash man we look upon as the next degree to a fool: And yet it is sure
there is not so much need of looking about us in any thing as in what concerns
our souls, and that not only in respect of the great value of them above all
things else, but also in regard of the great danger they are in, as has been
showed more at large in the beginning of the Treatise.

24. Secondly, We are to consider the actions when they are past also, that is,
we are to examine After they are done.
whether they have been such as are allowable by the Laws of Christ. This is
very necessary whether they be good or bad; if they be good, the recalling them
helps us to the comfort of a good conscience, and that comfort again
encourages us to go on in the like; and besides, it stirs us up to
thankfulness to God, by whose grace alone we were enabled to do them. But if
they be bad, then it is especially necessary that we thus examine them, for
without this it is impossible we should ever come to amendment; for unless we
observe them to have been amiss, we can never think it needful to amend, but
shall still run on from one wickedness to another, which is the greatest curse
any man can lie under.

25. The oftener therefore we use this consideration ^requency of ^onsidera^^^n.
the better, for the less likely it is that any of our sins shall escape our
knowledge. It is much to be wished that every man should thus every night try
the actions of the day, that so if he have done any thing amiss he may soon
check himself for it, and settle his resolutions against it, and not let it
grow on to a habit and course. And that he may also early beg Gods pardon,
which will the easier be had the sooner it is asked, every delay of that being
a great increase of the sin. And surely whoever means to take an account of
himself at all, will find this the easier course, it being much easier to do it
so a little at a time, and while passages are fresh in his memory, then to take
the account of a long time together. Now if it be considered, that every wilful
sin must have a particular repentance before it can be pardoned, Danger of
omitting it.
me thinks men should tremble to sleep without that repentance; for what
assurance has any man that lies down in his bed that he shall ever rise again?
and then how dangerous is the condition of that man that sleeps in an
unrepented sin? The weighing of these several Motives may be a means, by Gods
blessing, to bring us to the practice of this duty of Consideration in all the
parts of it.

PARTITION VII. Of CONTENTEDNES and the Contraries to it; Murmuring, Ambition,
Covetousness, Envy; Helps to Contentedness; Of DUTIES which concern our BODIES;
Of CHASTITY, etc. Helps to it; Of TEMPERANCE. Rule of Temperance in in EATING.
. 1. THe Fourth VIRTUE is CONTENTEDNES, CONTENTEDNES.
and this surely is a duty we must owe to our selves, it being that without which
it is impossible to be happy. This Contentedness is a well-pleasednes with that
condition, whatever it is, that God has placed us in, not murmuring and
repining at our lot, but cheerfully welcoming whatsoever God sends. How great,
and withal how pleasant a virtue this is may appear by the contrariety it has
to several great and painful vices; so that where this is rooted in the heart,
it subdues not only some such single sin, but a cluster of them together.

2. And first it is contrary to all murmuring ^ontrary to ^^rmuring
in general, which is a sin most hateful to God, as may appear by his sharp
punishments of it on the Israelites in the wilderness, as you may read in
several places of the book of Exodus and Numbers. And surely it is also very
painful and uneasy to a man's self, for if, as the Psalmist says, it be a
joyful pleasant thing to be thankful, we may by the Rule of contraries
conclude, It is a sad and unpleasant thing to be murmuring; and I doubt not
every man's own experience will confirm the truth of it.

3. Secondly, It is contrary to Ambition; the ambitious man is always disliking
his present To Ambition.
condition, and that makes him so greedily to seek a higher, whereas he that is
content with his own lies quiet out of the road of this temptation. Now
ambition is not only a great sin in it self, but it puts men upon many other:
There is nothing so horrid, which a man that eagerly seeks greatness will stick
at; lying, perjury, murder, or any thing will down with him, if they seem to
tend to his advancement: And the uneasiness of it is answerable to the sin.
This none can doubt of that considers what a multitude of fears and jealousies,
cares and distractions there are that attend ambition in its progress, besides
the great and public ruins that usually befall it in the end. And therefore
sure Contentedness is in this respect as well a Happiness as a Virtue.

4. Thirdly, It is contrary to Covetousness; this the Apostle witnesses, Heb.
13. 5. Let To Covetousness.
your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things as
ye have; where you see contentedness is set as the direct contrary to
covetousness. But of this there needs no other proof then common experience;
for we see the covetous man never thinks he has enough, and therefore can
never be content; for no man can be said to be so that thirsts after any thing
he has not. Now that you may see how excellent and necessary a virtue this is
that secures us against covetousness, it will not be amiss a little to consider
the nature of that sin.

5. That it is a very great crime, is most Covetousness contrary to our duty to
God.
certain, for it is contrary to the very foundation of all good life; I mean
those three great Duties, to God, to our Selves, to our Neighbor. First, It is
so contrary to our Duty to God, that Christ himself tells us, Luke 16. 13. We
cannot serve God and Mammon: he that sets his heart upon wealth, must
necessarily take it off from God. And this we daily see in the covetous man's
practice, he is so eager in the gaining of riches, that he has no time or care
to perform duty to God; let but a good bargain, or opportunity of gain come in
his way, Prayer, and all duties of Religion, must be neglected to attend it.
Nay, when the committing the greatest sin against God may be likely either to
get or save him ought, his love of wealth quickly persuades him to commit it.

6. Secondly, It is contrary to the Duty we To our Selves.
owe our Selves, and that both in respect of our Souls and Bodies. The covetous
man despises his Soul, sells that to eternal destruction for a little pelf: for
so every man does that by any unlawful means seeks to enrich himself, Nay,
though he do it not by unlawful means, yet if he have once set his heart upon
wealth, he is that covetous person upon whom the Apostle has pronounced, That
he shall not enter into the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 10. Nor does he only
offend against his Soul but his Body too. For he often denies that those
necessary refreshments it wants, and for which his wealth (as far as it
concerns himself) was given him. This is so constantly the custom of rich
Misers that I need not prove it to you.

7. In the third place, Covetousness is contrary To our neighbors.
to the duty we owe to our neighbors. And that in both the parts of it,
Justice and Charity: he that loves money immoderately, will not care whom he
cheats and defrauds so he may bring in gain to himself; and from hence spring
those many tricks of deceit and cousenage, so common in the world. As for
Charity, that is never to be hoped for from a covetous man who dreads the
lessening of his own heaps more then the starving of his poor brother. You see
how great a sin this is, that we may well say of it as the Apostle does, 1 Timothy
6. 10. The love of money is the root of all evil. And it is not much less
uneasy then wicked, for between the care of getting and the fear of losing,
the covetous man enjoyes no quiet hour. Therefore every man is deeply
concerned, as he tenders his happiness either in this world or the next, to
guard himself against this sin, which he can no way do, but by possessing his
heart with this virtue of contentedness.

8. In the fourth place, it is contrary to envy, Contentedness contrary to envy.
for he that is content with his own condition, has no temptation to envy
another: How unchristian a sin this of envy is, shall hereafter be showed: At
the present, I need say no more, but that it is also a very uneasy one, it
frets and gnaws the very heart of him that harbors it. But the worse this sin
is, the more excellent still is this grace of contentedness, which frees us
from it. I suppose I have said enough to make you think this a very lovely, and
desirable Virtue. And sure it were not impossible to be gained by any, that
would but observe these few directions.

9. First, To consider, that whatever our estate and condition in any respect
be, it is Helps to con^edness.
that which is allotted us by God, and therefore is certainly the best for us,
he being much better able to judge for us, then we for our selves; and
therefore to be displeased at it, is in effect to say, we are wiser then he.
Secondly, Consider thoroughly the vanity of all worldly things, how very little
there is in them, while we have them, and how uncertain we are to keep them;
but above all, in how little stead they will stand us at the day of death or
judgment, and then thou can not think any of them much worth the desiring,
and so wilt not be discontented for want of them. Thirdly, Suffer not thy fancy
to run on things thou have not: many have put themselves out of love with what
they have, only by thinking what they want. He that sees his neighbor possess
somewhat, which himself has not, is apt to think how happy he should be, if he
were in that man's condition, and in the mean time never thinks of enjoying his
own, which yet perhaps in many respects may be much happier, then that of his
neighbors which he so much admires. For we look but upon the outside of other
men's conditions, and many a man that is envied by his neighbors, as a
wonderful happy person, has yet some secret trouble, which makes him think
much otherwise of himself. Therefore never compare thy condition in any thing
with those thou countest more prosperous then thy self, but rather do it with
those thou know more unhappy, and then thou will find cause to rejoice in
thine own portion. Fourthly, Consider how far thou art from deserving any good
thing from God, and then thou can not but with Jacob, Gen 32. 10. confess,
that thou art not worthy of the least of those mercies thou enjoyest; and in
stead of murmuring that they are no more, wilt see reason to admire, and praise
the bounty of God, that they are so many. Fifthly, be often thinking of the
joys laid up for thee in Heaven; look upon that as thy home, on this world,
only as an Inn, where thou art fain to take up in thy passage; and then as a
Traveller expects not the same conveniences at an Inn, that he has at home,
so thou have reason to be content with what ever entertainment thou findst here
knowing thou art upon thy journey to a place of infinite happiness, which will
make an abundant amends for all the uneasiness, and hardship thou can suffer
in the way. Lastly, Pray to God, from whom all good things do come, that he
will to all his other blessings, add this of a contented mind, without which
thou can have no taste or relish of any other.

10. A fifth Duty is DILIGENCE: This is made up of two parts, watchfulness, and
industry, DILIGENCE.
and both these we owe to our Souls.

11. First, Watchfulness, in observing all Watchfulness against sin.
the dangers that threaten them. Now since nothing can endanger our Souls, but
sin, this watchfulness is principally to be employed against that: And as in a
besieged City, where there is any weak part, there it is necessary to keep the
strongest guard; so it is here, wherever thou find thy inclinations such,
as are most likely to betray thee to sin, there it concerns thee to be
especially watchful: Observe therefore carefully to what sins either thy
natural temper, thy company, or thy course of life do particularly incline
thee, and watch thy self very narrowly in those; Yet do not so lay out all thy
care on those, as to leave thy self open to any other, for that may give Satan
as much advantage on the other side; but let thy watch be general, against all
sin, though in a special manner against those, which are like oftenest to
assault thee.

12. The second part of diligence, is industry, or labor, and this also we owe
to our Souls, for without it they will as little prosper Industry in improving
gifts.
as that vineyard of the sluggard, which Solomon describes, Prove. 24. 30. For
there is a husbandry of the Soul, as well as of the estate, and the end of the
one, as of the other, is the increasing, and improving of its riches. Now the
riches of the Soul are either Natural, or Divine. By the natural I mean its
faculties of reason, wit, memory, and the like; by the Divine I mean the graces
of God, which are not the Souls natural portion, but are given immediately by
God, and both these we are to take care to improve, they being both talents
entrusted to us for that purpose.

13. The way of improving the natural is Of Nature.
by employing them so, as may bring in most honor to God: we must not let them
lie idle by us, through sloth, neither must we overwhelm them with
intemperance, and brutish pleasures, which is the case of too many, but we
must employ them, and set them on work. But then we must be sure it be not in
the Devils service, like many, who set their wit only to the profaning of God,
or cheating their neighbors, and stuff their memories with such filthiness, as
should never once enter their thoughts; our use of them must be such, as may
bring in most glory to God, most benefit to our neighbors, and may best fit us
to make our accounts, when God shall come to reckon with us for them.

14. But the other part of the Souls riches, is yet more precious, that is
grace, and of this we must be especially careful, to husband, and Of Grace.
improve it. This is a duty expressly commanded us by the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3. 18.
Grow in grace. And again, in the first Chapter of that Epistle, verse 5. Give
all diligence to add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, etc. Now
the especial means of improving grace is by employing it, that is, by doing
those things for the enabling of us whereunto it was given us: This is a sure
means, not only in respect of that easiness, which a custom of any thing
brings in the doing of it, but principally, as it has the promise of God, who
has promised, Matthew. 25. 29. That to him that has (that is, has made use of
what he has) shall be given, and he shall have abundance. He that diligently
and faithfully employs the first beginnings of grace, shall yet have more, and
he that in like manner husbands that more, shall yet have a greater degree; so
that what Solomon says of temporal riches, is also true of spiritual, The hand
of the diligent makes rich.

15. Therefore whenever thou find any To improve good motions
good motion in thy heart, remember that is a season for this spiritual
husbandry: If thou have but a check of conscience against any sin, thou live
in, drive that on till it come to a hatred, and then that hatred, till it come
to resolution, then from that resolution, proceed to some endeavors against
it. Do this faithfully, and sincerely, and thou shall certainly find the grace
of God assisting thee, not only in every of these steps, but also enabling thee
to advance still higher, till thou come to some victory over it. Yet to this
industry thou must not fail to add thy prayers also, there being a promise,
that God will give the holy Spirit to them that ask it, Matthew. 7. 11. And
therefore they that ask it not, have no reason to expect it. But it must be
asked with such an earnestness, as is some way answerable to the value of the
thing, which being infinitely more precious then all the world, both in respect
of his own worth, and its usefulness to us, we must beg it with much more zeal
and earnestness, then all temporal blessings, or else we show our selves
despisers of it.

16. Having directed you to the means of improving grace, I shall to quicken
you to it, mention the great danger of the contrary; The danger of the contrary.
And that is not as in other things, the losing only those further degrees,
which our industry might have helped us to, but it is the losing even of what
we already have; For from him that has not (that is again has not made use of
what he has) shall be taken away even that which he has, Matthew. 25. 29. God
will withdraw the grace, which he sees so neglected, as we see in that Parable,
the Talent was taken from him that had only hid it in a Napkin, and had
brought in no gain to his Lord. And this is a most sad punishment, the
greatest that can befall any man, before he comes to Hell, indeed it is some
kind of foretaste of it, it is the delivering him up to the power of the Devil,
and it is the banishing him from the face of God, which are not the least parts
of the misery of the damned. And it is also the binding a man over to that
fuller portion of wretchedness in another world; For that is the last doom of
the unprofitable servant, Matthew. 25. 30. Cast ye the unprofitable servant into
outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. You see there are
no light dangers that attend this neglect of grace, and therefore if we have
any love, nay any common pity to our Souls, we must set our selves to this
industry. I have now done with those VERIUES, which respect our SOULS. I come
now to those which concern our BODIES.

17. The first of which is Chastity, or Purity, CHASTITY.
which may well be set in the front of the duties we owe to our bodies, since
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 18. sets the contrary as the especial sin against them,
He that commits fornication, sins against his own body.

18. Now this virtue of chastity consists in a perfect abstaining from all
kinds of uncleanness; not only that of adultery, and fornication, but all other
more unnatural sorts of it, committed either upon our selves, or with any
other. In a word, all acts of that kind are utterly against Chastity, save
only in lawful marriage. And even there men are not to think themselves let
loose to please their brutish appetites, but are to keep themselves within
such rules of moderation, as agree to the end of marriage, which being these
two, the begetting of Children, and the avoiding of fornication, nothing must
be done which may hinder the first of these ends; and the second aiming only
at the subduing of lust, the keeping men from any sinful effects of it, is very
contrary to that end to make marriage an occasion of heightning, and enflaming
it.

19. But this virtue of chastity reaches not only to the restraining of the
grosser act, but Uncleanness forbidden in the very lowest degrees.
to all lower degrees; it sets a guard upon our eyes, according to that of our
Savior, Mat. 5. 28. He that looks on a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her already in his heart; and upon our hand as appears
by what Christ adds in that place, If thy hand offend thee, cut it off: so also
upon our tongues, that they speak no immodest or filthy words, Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, Ephesians. 4. 29. Nay upon our very
thoughts, and fancies, we must not entertain any foul or filthy desires, nor so
much as the imagination of any such thing. Therefore he that forbears the
grosser act, and yet allows himself in any of these, it is to be suspected that
it is rather some outward restraint, that keeps him from it, then the
conscience of the sin. For if it were that, it would keep him from these too,
these being sins also, and very great ones in Gods sight. Besides, he that lets
himself loose to these, puts himself in very great danger of the other, it
being much more easier to abstain from all, then to secure against the one,
when the other is allowed. But above all, it is to be considered that even
these lower degrees are such as make men very odious in Gods eyes who sees the
heart, and loves none that are not pure there.

20. The loveliness of this Virtue of Chastity The mischiefs of it.
needs no other way of describing then by considering the loathsomeness and
mischiefs of the contrary sin, which is, first, very brutish; those desires
are but the same that the beasts have; and then how far are they sunk below the
nature of men, that can boast of their sins of that kind as of their special
excellency? when if that be the measure, a Goat is the more excellent creature.
But indeed they that eagerly pursue this part of Beastiality do often leave To
the Soul.
themselves little, besides their humane shape, to difference them from beasts:
This sin so clouds the understanding, and defaceth the reasonable Soul.
Therefore Solomon very well describes the young man that was going to the
harlots house, Prove. 7. 22. He goes after her as an Ox goes to the slaughter.

21. Nor secondly, are the effects of it better to the body then to the mind.
The many foul To the Body.
and filthy, besides painful diseases, which often follow this sin, are
sufficient witnesses how mischievous it is to the body. And alas, how many are
there that have thus made themselves the Devils Martyrs? Suffered such torments
in the pursuit of this sin, as would exceed the invention of the greatest
tyrant? Surely they that pay thus dear for damnation, very well deserve to
enjoy the purchase.

22. But thirdly, Besides the natural fruits of this sin, it is attended with
very great and The Judgments of God a against it.
heavy Judgments from God; the most extra ordinary and miraculous Judgment
that ever befell any place, Fire and Brimstone from Heaven upon Sodom and
Gomorrah, was for this sin of uncleanness. And many examples likewise of Gods
vengeance may be observed on particular persons, for this sin. The incest of
Amnon cost him his life, as you may read, 2 Samuel 13. Zimrie and Cozbi were
slain in the very act, Numb. 25. 8. And no person that commits the like, has
any assurance it shall not be his own case. For how secretly soever it be
committed, it cannot be hid from God, who is the sure avenger of all such
wickedness. Nay, God has very particularly threatened this sin, 1 Cor. 3. 17.
If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. This sin of
uncleanness is a kind of sacrilege, a polluting those bodies, which God has
chosen for his Temples, and therefore no wonder, if it be thus heavily punished.

23. Lastly, This sin shuts us out from the It shuts out from Heav^
Kingdom of Heaven, wherein no impure thing can enter. And we never find any
list of those sins, which bar men thence, but this of uncleanness has a
special place in it. Thus it is Gal. 5. 19 and so again, 1 Cor. 6 9. If we will
thus pollute our selves we are fit company only for those black spirits, the
Devil and his Angels; and therefore with them we must expect our portion, where
our flames of lust shall end in flames of fire.

24. All this laid together, may surely recommend Helps to Chastity.
the virtue of Chastity to us, for the preserving of which we must be very
careful, first, to check the beginnings of the temptation, to cast away the
very first fancy of lust with indignation, for if you once fall to parley and
talk with it, it gains still more upon you, and then it will be harder to
resist; therefore your way in this temptation is to fly rather then fight with
it. This is very necessary, not only that we may avoid the danger of proceeding
to act the sin, but also in respect of the present fault of entertaining such
fancies, which of it self, though it should never proceed further, is, as has
been showed, a great abomination before God. Secondly, have a special care to
fly Idleness, which is the proper soil for these filthy weeds to grow in; and
keep thy self always busied in some innocent or virtuous employment, for then
these fancies will be less apt to offer themselves. Thirdly, never suffer thy
self to recall any unclean passages of thy former life with delight, for that is
to act over the sin again, and will be so reckoned by God; nay, perhaps thus
deliberately to think of it may be a greater guilt then a rash acting of it.
For this both shows thy heart to be set upon filthiness, and is also a
preparation to more acts of it. Fourthly, forbear the company of such light and
wanton persons as either by the filthiness of their discourse, or any other
means, may be a snare to thee. Fifthly, pray earnestly that God would give thee
the Spirit of Purity, especially at the time of any present temptation. Bring
the unclean Devil to Christ to be cast out, as did the man in the Gospel; and
if it will not be cast out with Prayer alone, add Fasting to it; but be sure
thou do not keep up the flame by any high or immoderate feeding. The last
remedy, when the former prove vain, is Marriage, which becomes a duty to him
that cannot live innocently without it. But even here there must be care taken
lest this which should be for his good, become not to him an occasion of
falling for want of sobriety in the use of marriage. But this I have touched on
already, and therefore need add no more but an earnest entreaty, That men
would consider seriously of the foulness and danger of this sin of uncleanness,
and not let the commonness of it lessen their hatred of it, but rather make
them abhor that shameless impudence of the world that can make light of this
sin against which God has pronounced such heavy curses, Whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 4. and so he will certainly do all sorts of
unclean persons whatsoever.

25. The second VIRTUE that concerns our bodies is TEMPERANCE: And the
exercises of that are diverse, as first, temperance in Eating, TEMPERANCE.
secondly, In Drinking, thirdly, in Sleep, fourthly in Recreation, fifthly, in
apparel. I shall speak of them severally; and first of temperance in eating.
This temperance is observed In Eating.
when our eating is agreeable to those ends to which eating is by God and
Nature designed; Ends of eating.
those are first, the being, secondly, the wellbeing of our bodies.

26. Man is of such a frame that Eating Preserving of life.
becomes necessary to him for the preserving his life, hunger being a natural
disease which will prove deadly if not prevented, and the only Physic for it
is Eating, which is therefore become a necessary means of keeping us alive. And
that is the first end of eating; and as men use not to take Physic for
pleasure, but remedy, so neither should they eat.

27. But secondly, God has been so bountiful as to provide not only for the
being, Of Health.
but the well being of our bodies, and therefore we are not tied to such
strictness, that we may eat no more then will just keep us from starving, but
we may also eat whatsoever either for kind or quantity most tends to the health
and welfare of them: Now that eating which is agreeable to these ends, is
within the bounds of temperance, as on the contrary whatsoever is contrary to
them, is a transgression against it; he therefore that sets up to himself other
ends of eating, as either the pleasing of his taste, (what is yet worse) the
pampering of his body that he may the better serve his lust, he directly
thwarts and crosses these ends of Gods; for he that has those aims does that
which is very contrary to health, yea, to life it self, as appears by the many
diseases and untimely deaths which surfeiting and uncleanness daily bring on
men.

28. He therefore that will practice this Virtue of Temperance, must neither
eat so much, Rules of Temperance in Eating.
nor of any such sorts of meat (provided he can have other) as may be hurtful
to his health: what the sorts or quantities shall be is impossible to set down,
for that differs according to the several constitutions of men; some men may
with temperance eat a great deal, because their stomachs require it, when
another may be guilty of intemperance in eating but half so much, because it is
more then is useful to him. And so also for the sort of meat, it may be
niceness and luxury for some to be curious in them, when yet some degree of it
may be necessary to the infirmities of a weak stomach, which not out of
wantonness but disease cannot eat the courser meats. But I think it may in
general be said, That to healthful bodies the plainest meats are generally the
most wholesome, but every man must in this be left to judge for himself; and
that he may do it aright, he must be careful that he never suffer himself to be
enslaved to his palate, for that will be sure to satisfy it self, whatever
becomes of health or life.

29. To secure him the better let him consider, Means of it.
First, How unreasonable a thing it is that the whole body should be subjected
to this one Sense of Tasting, that it must run all hazards only to please that.
But it is yet much more so that the diviner part, the Soul, should also be thus
enslaved; and yet thus it is in an intemperate person, his very soul must be
sacrificed to this Brutish appetite; for the sin of intemperance, though it be
acted by the Body, yet the Soul must share in the eternal punishment of it.
Secondly, Consider how extreme short and vanishing this pleasure is, it is gone
in a moment, but the pains that attend the excess of it are much more durable,
and then surely it agrees not with that common reason, wherewith, as men, we
are endued to set our hearts upon it. But then in the third place, it agrees
yet worse with the temper of a Christian, who should have his heart so purisied
and refined with the expectation of those higher and spiritual joys he looks
for in another world, that he should very much despise these gross and brutish
pleasures which beasts are as capable of as we, and to them we may well be
counted to leave them, it being the highest their natures can reach to; but for
us who have so much more excellent hopes, it is an intolerable shame that we
should account them as any part of our happiness. Lastly, The sin of Gluttony
is so great and dangerous, that Christ thought fit to give an especial warning
against it, take heed to your selves that your hearts be not overcharged with
surfeiting, etc. Luke 21. 34. And you know what was the end of the rich
glutton, Luke 16. He that had fared deliciously every day, at last wants a drop
of water to cool his tongue. So much for that first sort of Temperance, that of
Eating.

PARTITION VIII. Of Temperance in DRINKING, False Ends of Drinking, viz. Good
Fellowship, putting away Cares, etc.
. 1. THe second is Temperance in Drinking, Temperance in Drinking.
and the ends of eating and drinking being much the same, I can give no other
direct rules in this, then what were given in the former, to wit, that we drink
neither of such sorts of liquor, nor in such quantities as may not agree with
the right ends of drinking, the preserving of our lives and healths: Only in
this there will be need of putting in one Caution, for our understandings being
in more danger to be hurt by drinking then meat, we must rather care to keep
that safe, and rather not drink what we might safely in respect of our healths,
if it be in danger to distemper our reason. This I say because it is possible
some men's brains may be so weak that their heads cannot bear that ordinary
quantity of drink which would do their bodies no harm. And whoever is of this
temper must strictly abstain from that degree of drink, or that sort of it
which he finds has that effect, yea, though it do in other respects appear not
only safe but useful to his health For though we are to preserve our healths,
yet we are not to do it by a sin, as drunkenness most certainly is.

2. But alas! of those multitudes of drunkards False ends of drinking.
we have in the world, this is the case but of very few, most of them going far
beyond what their health requires, yea, or can bear, even to the utter
destruction thereof. And therefore it is plain men have set up to themselves
some other ends of drinking then those allowable ones forementioned; it may not
be amiss a little to explain what they are, and withal to show the
unreasonableness of them.

3. The first, and most owned, is that which Good Fellowship.
they call Good fellowship; one man drinks to keep another company at it. But I
would ask such a one, Whether if that man were drinking rank poison he would
pledge him for company? If he say he would not, I must tell him, that by the
very same, nay, far greater reason, he is not to do this. For immoderate
drinking is that very poison; perhaps it does not always work death immediately
(yet there want not many instances of its having done even that, very many
having died in their drunken fit) but that the custom of it does usually bring
men to their ends, is past doubt, and therefore though the poison work slowly,
yet it is still poison. But however it does at the present work that which a
wise man would more abhor then death; it works madness, and frenzy turns the
man into a beast, by drowning that reason which should difference him from one.
Certainly the effects of drink are such, that had being drunk been first
enjoined as a punishment, we should have thought him a more then ordinary
Tyrant that had invented it.

4. A second end of drinking is said to be the maintaining of friendship and
kindness amongst Preserving of kindness.
men. But this is strangely unreasonable, that men should do that toward the
maintaining of friendship, which is really the greatest mischief that can be
done to any man. Did ever any think to befriend a man by helping to destroy his
estate, his credit, his life? Yet he that thus drinks with a man does this and
much more, he ruins his reason, yea, his soul, and yet this must be called the
way of preserving of friendship; this is so ridiculous that one would think
none could own it but when he were actually drunk. But besides, alas,
experience shows us, that this is fitter to beget quarrels then preserve
kindness, as the many drunken brawls we every day see, with the wounds, and
sometimes murders that accompany them, do witness.

5. A third end is said to be the chearing of Chearing the spirits.
their spirits, making them merry and jolly. But sure if the mirth be such that
reason must be turned out of doors before it begin, it will be very little
worth; one may say with Solomon, Eccl. 2. 2. The laughter of such fools is
madness. And sure they that will be drunk to put themselves in this temper,
must by the same reason be glad of a Frenzy, if they could but be sure it
would be of the merry sort. But little do these merry folks think what sadness
they are all this while heaping up to themselves, often in this world, when by
some mad pranks, they play in their jollity, they bring mischief upon
themselves, but however certainly in another, where this mirth will be sadly
reckoned for.

6. A fourth end is said to be the putting away Putting away cares.
of cares; but I shall ask what those cares are? be they such as should be put
away? perhaps they are some checks and remorses of conscience, which must be
thus charmed. And I doubt this has proved too effectual with many to the
laying them asleep: But this is the wickedst folly in the world; for if thou
think not these checks to have something considerable in them, why do they
trouble thee. But if thou do, it is impossible thou can hope this can long
secure thee from them. Thou may thus stop their mouths for a while, but they
will one day cry the louder for it. Suppose a Thief or a Murderer knew he were
pursued to be brought to justice, would he think you to put away the fear of
being hanged, fall to drinking, and in the mean time take no care for his
escape; or would you not think him desperately mad if he did? Yet this is the
very case here, thy conscience tells thee of thy danger, that thou must ere
long be brought before Gods Judgment Seat; and is it not madness for thee
instead of endeavoring to get thy pardon, to drink away the thought of thy
danger. But in the second place, suppose these cares be some worldly ones, and
such as are fit to be put away; then for shame do not so disgrace thy Reason,
thy Christianity, as not to let them be as forcible to that end as a little
drink. Thy Reason will tell thee it is in vain to care, where care will bring
no advantage: and thy Christianity will direct thee to one on whom thou may
safely cast all thy cares, for he cares for thee, 1 Pet. 5. 7. And therefore
unless thou meanest to renounce being both a man and a Christian, never betake
thee to this pitiful shift to rid thee of thy cares. But besides, this will not
do the deed neither; for though it may at the present, whilst thou art in the
height of the drunken fit, keep thee from the sense of thy cares, yet when that
is over, they will return again with greater violence; and if thou have any
conscience, bring a new care with them, even that which arises from the guilt
of so foul a sin.

7. A fifth end is said to be the passing away of time. This though it be as
unreasonable as any of the former, yet by the way it serves to reproach
idleness, which is, it seems, so burdensome a thing, that even this vilest
employment is preferred before it. But this is in many a very false plea. For
they often spend time at the pot not only when they have nothing else to do,
but even to the neglect of their most necessary business. However it is in all
a most unreasonable one, for there is no man but he may find somewhat or other
to employ himself in. If he have little worldly business of his own, he may yet
do somewhat to the benefit of others; but however there is no man but has a
Soul, and if he will look carefully to that he need not complain for want of
business, where there are so many corruptions to mortify, so many inclinations
to watch over, so many temptations (whereof this of drunkenness is not the
least) to resist; The Graces of God to improve and stir up, and former neglects
of all these to lament, sure there can never want sufficient employment; for
all these require time, and so men at their deaths find; for then those that
have all their lives made it their business to drive away their time, would
then give all the world to redeem it. And sure where there is much leisure from
wordly affairs, God expects to have the more time thus employed in Spiritual
exercises. But it is not likely those meaner sort of persons, to whom this book
is intended, will be of the number of those that have much leisure, and
therefore I shall no farther insist on it, only I shall say this, that what
degrees of leisure they at any time have, it concerns them to employ to the
benefit of their souls, and not to bestow it to the ruin of them, as they do,
who spend it in drinking.

8. A sixth end is said to be the preventing of that reproach which is by the
world cast Preventing reproach.
on those that will in this be stricter then their neighbors; but in answer to
this, I shall first ask, What is the harm of such reproach? sure it cannot
equal the least of those mischiefs drunkenness betrays us to. Nay, if we will
take our Saviors words it is a happiness, Blessed, says he, are ye when men
shall revile you, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake, Mat. 5.
11. And S. Peter tells us, 1 Peter 4. 14. If ye be reproached for the Name of
Christ happy are ye: and sure to be reproached for obedience to any command of
Christ's, is to be reproached for his Name. Secondly, Let it be remembered that
at our Baptism we solemnly renounced the world; and shall we now so far
consider it, as for a sew scoffs of it to run our selves on all the temporal
evils before mentioned; and which is much worse, the wrath of God and eternal
destruction? But Thirdly, If you fear reproach, why do ye do that which will
bring reproach upon you from all wise and good men, whose opinion alone is to
be regarded? And it is certain drinking is the way to bring it on you from all
such. And to comfort thy self against that, by thinking thou art still
applauded by the foolish and worst sort of men, is as if all the mad men in the
world should agree to count themselves the only sober persons, and all others
mad, which yet sure will never make them the less mad, nor others the less
sober. Lastly, consider the heavy doom Christ has pronounced on those that
are ashamed of him, and so are all those that for fear of reproach shall shrink
from their obedience to him, Mat. 8. 38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and
of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall the Son of
man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of the Father with the holy Angels.
There is none but will at that day desire to be owned by Christ: But whoever
will not here own him; that is, cleave fast to his commands, notwithstanding
all the scorns, nay, persecutions of the world, shall then certainly be cast
off by him. And he that will adventure thus to maintain his credit among a
company of Fools and Madmen, deserves well to have it befall him: But after all
this, it is not sure that even these will despise thee for thy sobriety, it is
possible they may seem to do so to fright thee out of it; but if their hearts
were searched, it would be found they do even against their wills, bear a
secret reverence to sober persons, and none fall more often under their scorn
and despising then those that run with them to the same excess of riot; for
even he that sticks not to be drunk himself, will yet laugh at another that he
sees so.

9. There is a seventh end, which though every man think too base to own, yet
it is Pleasure of the drink.
too plain it prevails with many. And that is the bare pleasure of the drink;
but to these I confess it will not be fit to say much, for he that is come to
this lamentable degree of sottishness, is not like to receive benefit by any
thing can be said: Yet let me tell even this man, that he of all others has
the most means of discerning his fault, for this being such a ground of
drinking as no body will own, he is condemned of himself; yea, and all his
fellow drunkards too, for their denying it, is a plain sign they acknowledge it
a most abominable thing. And if Esau were called a profane person, Heb. 12. 6.
for selling but his birth right for a mess of pottage, and that too when he had
the necessity of hunger upon him, what name of reproach can be bad enough for
him who sells his health, his reason, his God, his soul, for a cup of drink,
and that when he is so far from needing it, that perhaps he has already more
then he can keep? I shall say no more to this sort of persons, but let me warn
all those that go on in the sin on any of the former grounds, that a little
time will bring them even to this which they profess to loathe; it being daily
seen that those which first were drawn into the sin for the love of the
company, at last continue in it for love of the drink.

10. I can think but of one end more, that Bargaining.
is, that of Bargaining. Men say it is necessary for them to drink in this one
respect of trading with their neighbors, bargains being most conveniently to
be struck up at such meetings. But this is yet a worse end then all the rest,
for the bottom of it is an aim of cheating and defrauding others; We think when
men are in drink we shall the better be able to overreach them; and so this
adds the sin of cousenage and defrauding to that of drunkenness. Now that this
is indeed the intent, is manifest, for if it were only the dispatch of bargains
were aimed at, we should choose to take men with their wits about them,
therefore the taking them when drink has distempered them can be for nothing
but to make advantage of them. Yet this often proves a great folly as well as a
sin; for he that drinks with another in hope to overreach him, does many times
prove the weaker brained, and becomes drunk first, and then he gives the other
that opportunity of cheating him which he designed for the cheating of the
other. Now this end of drinking is so far from becoming an excuse, that it is a
huge heightning of the sin; for if we may not drink intemperately upon any
occasion, much less upon so wicked a one as is the cousening and defrauding of
our brethren.

11. I suppose I have now showed you the Degrees of this sin.
unreasonableness of those Motives, which are ordinarily brought in excuse of
this sin. I am yet further to tell you, that it is not only that huge degree of
drunkeness which makes men able neither to go nor speak, which is to be looked
on as a sin, but all lower degrees, which do at all work upon the
understanding, whether by dulling it and making it less fit for any employment,
or by making it too light and airy, apt to apish and ridiculous mirth, or what
is worse, by inflaming men into rage and fury. These, or whatever else make any
change in the man, are to be reckoned into this sin of drunkenness: Nay,
further, the drinking beyond the natural ends of drinking, that is, beyond
moderate refreshment is a sin, though by the strength of a man's brain it makes
not the least change in him, and therefore those that are not actually drunk,
yet can spend whole days, or any considerable part of them in drinking, are so
far from being innocent, that that greater woe belongs to them, which is
pronounced, Isa. 5. 22. against those that are mighty to drink. For though such
a man may make a shift to preserve his wits, yet that wit serves him to very
little purpose when his employment is still but the same with him that is the
most sottishly drunk, that is, to pour down drink.

12. Nay, this man is guilty of the greater waste; First, of the good creatures
of God: The great guilt of the strong drinkers.
That drink which is by Gods providence intended for the refreshing and
relieving of us, is abused and misspent when it is drunk beyond that measure
which those ends require, and sure there is not the meanest of these creatures
we enjoy, but the abuse of them shall one day be accounted for, and he that
drinks longest has the most of that guilt. But in the second place, this is a
wast of that which is much more precious, our time, which is allowed us by God
to work out our Salvation in, and must be strictly reckoned for, and therefore
ought every minute of it to be most thriftily husbanded to that end in actions
of good life; but when it is thus laid out it tends to the direct contrary,
even the working out our damnation. Besides, he that thus drinks, though he
escape being drunk himself, he is yet guilty of all the drunkenness that any of
his company fall under, for he gives them encouragement to drink on by his
Example, especially if he be one of any authority, but if he be one whose
company the rest are fond of, his company is then a certain ensnaring of them,
for then they will drink too, rather then lose him. There is yet a greater
fault that many of these stronger brained drinkers are guilty of, that is, the
setting themselves purposely to make others drunk, playing, as it were, a prize
at it, and counting it matter of triumph and victory to see others fall before
them: This is a most horrible wickedness, it is the making our selves the
Devils Factors, endeavoring all we can to draw our poor brethren into eternal
misery, by betraying them to so grievous a sin; and therefore it may well be
reckoned as the highest step of this vice of drinking, as having in it the sin
of mischieving others added to the excess in our selves. And though it be looked
upon in the world as a matter only of jest and merriment to make others drunk,
that we may sport our selves with their ridiculous behavior, yet that mirth
will have a sad conclusion, there being a woe expressly threatened by God to this
very sin, Hab. 2. 15. W^ unto him that gives his neighbor drink, that put
thy bottle to him and make him drunk that thou may look on their
nakedness: And sure he buys his idle pastime very dear, that takes it with
such a Woe attending it.

13. I have now gone through the several The great mischiefs of this sin.
motives to, and degrees of this sin of drunkenness, wherein I have been the
more particular because it is a sin so strangely reigning amongst us, no
Condition, no Age, or scarce Sex free from it, to the great dishonor of God,
reproach of Christianity, and ruin not only of our own Souls hereafter, but
even of all our present advantages and happiness in this life; there being no
sin which betrays each single committer to more mischiefs in his
understanding, his health, his credit, his estate, then this one does. And we
have reason to believe this sin is one of those common crying guilts which have
long layen heavy upon this Nation, and pulled down those many sad judgments we
have groaned under.

14. Therefore, Christian Reader, let me Exhortation to forsake it.
now entreat, nay conjure thee by all that tenderness and love thou ought to
have to the honor of God, the credit of thy Christian profession, eternal
welfare of thine own Soul, the prosperity of the Church and Nation, whereof
thou art a member; Nay, by that love which certainly thou have to thy own
temporal welfare, to think sadly of what has been spoken; And then judge,
whether there be any pleasure in this sin, which can be any tolerable
recompense for all those mischiefs, it brings with it; I am confident no man in
his wits can think there is, and if there be not, then be ashamed to be any
longer that fool, which shall make so wretched a bargain, but begin at this
instant a firm and a faithful resolution, never once more to be guilty of this
swinish sin, how often soever thou have heretofore fallen into it, and in the
fear of God betake thee to a strict temperance, which when thou have done, thou will find thou have made not only a gainful but a pleasant exchange; for there
is no man that has tried both courses but his own heart will tell him there is
infinitely more pleasant comfort and pleasure in sobriety and temperance then
ever all his drunken revellings afforded him.

15. The main difficulty is the first breaking The difficulties of doing ^o
considered
off the custom, and that arises partly from our selves, partly from others.
That from our selves may be of two sorts; the first is, when by the habit of
drinking, we have brought such false thirsts upon our selves, that our bodies
seem to require it, and this wants Seeming ^^^essity of drink.
nothing but a little patience to overcome. Do but refrain some few days and it
will afterward grow easy; for the hardness arising only from custom, the
breaking of that does the business. If thou say, it is very uneasy to do so,
consider, whether if thou had some disease which would certainly kill thee if
thou did not for some little time refrain immoderate drinking, thou would
not rather forbear then die? if thou would not, thou art so brutish a sot,
that it is in vain to persuade thee; but if thou had, then consider how
unreasonable it is for thee not to do it in this case also; the habit of
drinking may well pass for a mortal disease, it proves so very often to the
body, but will most certainly to the Soul; and therefore it is madness to stick
at that uneasiness in the cure of this which thou would submit to in a less
danger. Set therefore but a resolute purpose to endure that little trouble for
a small time, and this first difficulty is conquered, for after thou have a
while refrained, it will be perfectly easy to do so still.

16. The second difficulty is that of spending the time, which those that have
made Want of employment.
drinking their trade and business, know scarce how to dispose of. But the very
naming of this difficulty directs to the cure, get thee some business, somewhat
to employ thy self in, which, as I have already showed, will be easily found by
all sorts of persons, but those meaner to whom I now write, can sure never want
it ready at hand, they being generally such as are to be maintained by their
labor, and therefore to them I need only give this advice, to be diligent in
that business they have, to follow that close as they ought; and they will have
little occasion to seek out this way of spending their time.

17. There is another sort of difficulty, Persuasions and reproaches of men.
which I told you arises from others, and that is either from their
persuasions, or reproaches. It is very likely if thy old companions see thee
begin to fall off, they will set hard to thee, to bring thee back to thy old
course, they will urge to thee the unkindness of forsaking the company of thy
friends, the sadness of renouncing all that mirth and jollity, which good
fellows (as they call them) enjoy, and if thou can not thus be won, they will
affright thee with the reproach of the world, and so try if they can mock thee
out of thy sobriety.

18. The way to overcome this difficulty The means of resisting them.
is to foresee it, therefore when thou first enterest on thy course of
temperance, thou art to make account thou shall meet with these (perhaps many
other) temptations, and that thou may make a right judgment, whether they be
worthy to prevail with thee, take them before hand, and weigh them, consider
whether that false kindness, that is maintained among men by drinking, be
worthy to be compared with that real and everlasting kindness of God, which is
lost by it; Whether that foolish, Weigh the advantages with the hurt.
vain mirth bear any weight with the present joys of a good conscience here,
or with those greater of Heaven hereafter. Lastly, whether the unjust reproach
of wicked men, the shame of the world be so terrible, as the just reproof of
thine own conscience at the present, and that eternal confusion of face that
shall befall all those, that go on in this sin, at the last day; Weigh all
these, I say, I need not say, in the balance of the Sanctuary, but even in the
scales of common reason, and sure thou will be forced to pronounce, that the
motives to temperance infinitely out weigh those against it; When thou have thus
advisedly judged, then fix thy resolution accordingly, and when ever any of
these temptations come to stagger thee, remember thou have formerly weighed
them, know the just value of them, and that they are a most unworthy price
for those precious advantages thou must give in exchange for them. And
therefore hold fast thy resolution, and with indignation reject all motions to
the contrary.

19. But be sure thou thus reject them at Reject the temptation at the very
beginning.
their very first tender, and do not yield in the least degree; For if once
thou give ground, thou art lost, the sin will by little and little prevail
upon thee. Thus we see many, who have professed to be resolved upon great
temperance, yet for want of this care, have adventured into the company of good
fellows, when they have been there, they have at the first been over entreated
to take a cup, after that another, till at last they have taken their rounds as
freely as any of them, and in that flood of drink drowned all their sober
resolutions. Therefore whoever thou art, that do really desire to forsake the
sin, take care to avoid the occasions and beginnings of it; to which end it
will be good openly to declare and own thy purposes of sobriety, that so thou
may discourage men from assaulting thee. But if either thou art ashamed to
own it, or seem to be so, they will quickly make use of that shame to bring
thee to break it.

20. If thou be thus wary to keep thee from The security of doing so.
the first beginnings, thou art then sure never to be overtaken with this sin:
For it is like the keeping the outworks of a besieged City, which so long as
they are stoutly defended there is no danger, but if they be either surprised
or yielded, the City cannot long hold out. The advice therefore of the wise man
is very agreeable to this matter, Eccles. 19. 1. He that despises small things
shall perish by little and little. But because as the Psalmist says, Psalm.
127. 1. Except the Lord keep the City the watchman waketh but in vain:
therefore to this guard of thy self add thy most earnest prayers to God that
he will also watch over thee, and by the strength of his grace enable thee to
resist all temptations to this sin.

21. If thou do in the sincerity of thy heart The esficacy of these means, if
not hindered by love of the sin.
use these means, there is no doubt but thou will be able to overcome this
vice, how long soever thou have been accustomed to it, therefore if thou do
still remain under the power of it, never excuse thy self by the impossibility
of the task, but rather accuse the falseness of thy own heart, that has still
such a love to this sin, that thou will not set roundly to the means of
subduing it.

22. Perhaps the great commonness of the sin That love makes men loath to
believe it dangerous.
and thy particular custom of it may have made it so much thy familiar, thy
bosom acquaintance, that thou art loath to entertain hard thoughts of it, very
unwilling thou art to think that it means thee any hurt, and therefore art apt
to speak peace to thy self, to hope that either this is no sin, or at most but
a frailty, such as will not bar thee out of heaven: But deceive not thy self,
for thou may as well say there is no heaven, as that drunkenness shall not
keep thee thence; I am sure the same word of God which tells us there is such a
place of happiness, tells us also that drunkards are of the number of those
that shall not inherit it, 1 Cor. 6. 10. And again, Gal. 5. 21. Drunkenness is
reckoned among those works of the flesh, which they that do shall not inherit
the kingdom of God. And indeed had not these plain texts, yet meet reason would
tell us the same, That is a place of infinite purity, such as flesh and blood,
till it be refined and purified, is not capable of, as the Apostle tells us, 1
Cor. 15. 53. and if as we are mere men, we are too gross and impure for it, we
must sure be more so when we have changed our selves into Swine, the soulest of
beasts, we are then prepared for the Devils to enter into, as they did into the
herd, Mark 5. 13. and that not only some one or two, but a Legion, a troop and
multitude of them. And of this we daily see examples, for where this sin of
drunkenness has taken possession, it usually comes as an harbinger to
abundance of others; each act of drunkenness prepares a man not only for
another of the same sin, but of others; lust and rage, and all brutish
appetites are then let loose, and so a man brings himself under that curse
which was the saddest David knew how to foretell to any, Psalm. 69. 28 The
falling from one wickedness to another. If all this be not enough to affright
thee out of this drunken fit, thou must still wallow in thy vomit, continue in
this sottish, senseless condition, till the flames of Hell rowse thee, and then
thou will by sad experience find what now thou will not believe, that the end
of those things, as the Apostle says, Romans 6. 21. is death. God in his
infinite mercy timely awake the hearts of all that are in this sin, that by a
timely forsaking it they may fly from that wrath to come. I have now done with
this second part of Temperance, concerning Drinking.

PARTITION IX. Temperance in SLEEP; the rule of it, etc. Of RECREATION; Of
APPAREL.
. 1. THE Third part of TEMPERANCE concerns SLEEP: Sleep.
And Temperance in that also must be measured by the end for which sleep was
ordained by God, which was only the refreshing and supporting of our frail
bodies, which being of such a temper that continual labor and toil tires and
wearies them out, Sleep comes as a Medicine to that weariness, as a repairer of
that decay, that so we may be enabled to such labors as the duties of Religion
or works of our Calling require of us. Sleep was intended to make us more
profitable, not more idle; as we give rest to our beasts; not that we are
pleased with their doing nothing, but that they may do us the better service.

2. By this therefore you may judge what is The rule of Temperance therein.
temperate sleeping; to wit, that which tends to the refreshing and making us
more lively and fit for action; and to that end a moderate degree serves best.
It will be impossible to set down just how many hours is that moderate degree,
because as in eating so in sleep, some constitutions require more then others.
Every man's own experience must in this judge for him, but then let him judge
uprightly and not consult with his sloth in the case, for that will still, with
Solomon's sluggard, cry, A little more sleep, a little more slumber, a little
more folding of the hands to sleep, Prove. 24. 33. But take only so much as he
really finds to tend to the end forementioned.

3. He that does not thus limit himself falls into several sins under this
general one of sloth, The many Sins that follow the transgression of it.
as first, he wastes his time, that precious talent which was committed to him
by God to improve, which he that sleeps away, does like him in the Gospel,
Matthew. 25. 18. Hides it in the earth when he should be trading with it; and you
know what was the doom of that unprofitable servant, verse 30. Cast ye him into
outer darkness: he that gives himself to darkness of sleep here, shall there
have darkness without sleep, but with weeping and gnashing of teeth. Secondly,
he injures his body, immoderate sleep sils that full of diseases, makes it a
very sink of humors, as daily experience shows us. Thirdly, he injures his
Soul also, and that not only in robbing it of the service of the body, but in
dulling its proper faculties, making them useless and unfit for those
employments to which God has designed them; of all which ill husbandry the
poor Soul must one day give account. Nay, lastly, he affronts and despises God
himself in it, by crossing the very end of his creation, which was to serve God
in an active obedience, but he that sleeps away his life, directly thwarts and
contradicts that, and when God says, Man is born to labor, his practice says
the direct contrary, that man was born to rest. Take heed therefore of giving
thy self to immoderate sleep, which is the committing of so many sins in one.

4. But besides the sin of it, it is also very Other mischiefs of sloth.
hurtful in other respects, it is the sure bane of thy outward estate, wherein
the sluggish person shall never thrive; according to that observation of the
Wise man, Pro. 23. 21. Drowsiness shall cover a man with rags; that is, the
slothful man shall want convenient clothing; nay, indeed it can scarce be said,
that the sluggard lives: Sleep you know is a kind of death, and he that gives
himself up to it, what does he but die before his time? Therefore if untimely
death be to be looked upon as a curse, it must needs be a strange folly to choose
that from our own sloth which we dread so much from Gods hand.

5. The fourth part of Temperance concerns Recreations, which are sometimes
necessary Temperance in Recreation.
both to the body and the mind of a man, neither of them being able to endure
a constant toil without somewhat of refreshment between; and therefore there is
a very lawful use of them; but to make it so, it will be necessary to observe
these Cautions.

6. First, We must take care that the kind of Cautions to be observed in them.
them be lawful, that they be such as have nothing of sin in them; we must not
to recreate our selves do any thing which is dishonorable to God, or injurious
to our neighbor, as they do who make profane or filthy backbiting discourse
their recreation. Secondly, we must take care that we use it with moderation:
and to do so, we must first be sure not to spend too much time upon it, but
remember that the end of recreation is to fit us for business, not to be it
self a business to us: Secondly, we must not be too vehement and earnest in it,
not set our hearts too much upon it, for that will both ensnare us to the using
too much of it, and it will divert and take off our minds from our more
necessary employments: Like Schoolboyes, who after a play time, know not how to
set themselves to their books again. Lastly, we must not set up to our selves
any other end of recreations but that lawful one, of giving us moderate
refreshment.

7. As first, we are not to use sports only to pass away our time, which we
ought to study Unlue End of Sports.
how to redeem, not fling away; and when it is remembered how great a work we
have here to do, the making our calling and election sure, the securing our
title to heaven hereafter, and how uncertain we are what time shall be allowed
us for that purpose; it will appear our time is that which of all other things
we ought most industriously to improve. And therefore sure we have little need
to contrive ways of driving that away which flies so fast of it self, and is
so impossible to recover. Let them that can spend whole days and nights at
Cards and Dice, and idle pastimes, to consider this, and withal, whether they
ever bestowed a quarter of that time toward that great business of their lives
for which all their time was given them, and then think what a woeful reckoning
they are like to make when they come at last to account for that precious
treasure of their time. Secondly, we must not let our covetousness have any
thing to do in our recreations; if we play at any Game, let the end of our
doing it be merely to recreate our selves, not to win money; and to that
purpose be sure never to play for any considerable matter, for if thou do, thou will bring thy self into two dangers, the one of covetousness, and a greedy
desire of winning, the other of rage and anger at thy ill fortune, if thou
happen to lose; both which will be apt to draw thee into other sins besides
themselves: Covetousness will tempt thee to cheat and cousen in gaming, and
anger to swearing and cursing, as common experience shows us too often. If thou
find thy self apt to fall into either of these in thy gaming, thou must either
take some course to secure thy self against them, or thou must not permit thy
self to play at all: for though moderate play be in it self not unlawful, yet
if it be the occasion of sin, it is so to thee, and therefore must not be
ventured on. For if Christ commands us so strictly to avoid temptations, that
if our very eyes or hands offend us (that is, prove snares to us) we must
rather part with them then to be drawn to sin by them: How much rather must we
part with any of these unnecessary sports, then run the hazard of offending God
by them? He that so plays, lays his soul to stake, which is too great a prize
to be played away. Besides, he loses all the recreation and sport he pretends
to aim at, and in stead of that sets himself to a greater toil then any of
those labors are he was to ease by it. For sure the desires and fears of the
covetous, the impatience and rage of the angry man are more real pains then any
the most laborious work can be.

8. The last part of Temperance is that of Temperance in Apparel.
APPAREL, which we are again to measure by the agreeableness to the ends for
which clothing should be used. Those are especially these three: first, the
hiding of nakedness. This was the first occasion of apparel, as you may read,
Genesis 3. 21. and was the effect of the first sin; and Apparel designed for
covering of shame.
therefore when we remember the original of clothes, we have so little reason
to be proud of them, that on the contrary we have cause to be humbled and
ashamed, as having lost that innocence which was a much greater ornament then
any the most glorious apparel can be. From this end of clothing we are likewise
engaged to have our apparel modest, such as may answer this end of covering our
shame: And therefore all immodest fashions of apparel, which may either argue
the wantonness of the wearer, or provoke that of the beholder, are to be
avoided.

9. A second end of Apparel, is the fencing the body from cold, thereby to
preserve the health thereof, and this end we must likewise Fencing from cold.
observe in our clothing; we must wear such kind of habits, as may keep us in
that convenient warmth, which is necessary to our healths. And this is
transgrest, when out of the vanity of being in every fantastic fashion, we
put our selves in such clothing, as either will not defend us from cold, or is
some other way so uneasy, that it is rather a hurt then a benefit to our
bodies to be so clad. This is a most ridiculous folly, and yet that which
people that take a pride in their clothes are usually guilty of.

10. A third end of Apparel is the distinguishing Distinction of persons.
or differencing of persons, and that first in respect of Sex; Secondly, in
respect of qualities. First, clothes are to make difference of Sex; this has
been observed by all Nations, the habits of men and women have always been
diverse. And God himself expressly provided for it among the Jews, by commanding
that the man should not wear the apparel of the woman, nor the woman of the
man. But then secondly, there is also a distinction of qualities to be observed
in apparel; God has placed some in a higher condition then others, and in
proportion to their condition, it befits their clothing to be; Gorgeous
apparel, our Savior tells us, is for Kings Courts, Luke 7. 25. Now this end of
apparel should also be observed. Men and women should content themselves with
that sort of clothing, which agrees to their Sex and condition, not striving to
exceed, and equal that of a higher rank, nor yet making it matter of envy,
among those of their own estate, vying who shall be finest, but let every man
cloth himself in such sober attire, as befits his place and calling, and not
think himself disparaged, if another of his neighbors have better then he.

11. And let all remember that clothes are things, which add no true worth to
any, and therefore it is an intolerable vanity to spend any considerable part
either of their thoughts, time or wealth upon them, or to value themselves ever
the more for them, or despise their poor brethren that want them. But if they
desire to adorn themselves, let it be as S. Peter advises the women of his
time, 1 Pet. 3. 4. In the hidden man of the heart, even the ornament of a meek
and quiet spirit. Let them cloth themselves as richly as is possible with all
Christian virtues, and that is the raiment that will set them out lovely in
Gods eyes, yea, and in men's too, who, unless they be fools and Idiots will more
value thee for being good, then fine, and sure one plain Coat thou put upon
a poor man's back will better become thee, then twenty rich ones thou shall put
upon thine own. Too much sparing a ^ault as well as excess.


12. I have now gone through the several parts of temperance; I shall now in
conclusion, add this general caution, that though in all these particulars I
have taken notice only of the one fault of excess, yet it is possible there may
be one on the other hand; men may deny their bodies that which they necessarily
require to their support, and well being. This is, I believe, a fault not so
common, as the other, yet we sometimes see some very niggardly persons, that
are guilty of it, that cannot find in their hearts to borrow so much from their
chests, as may feed their bellies, or cloth their backs, and that are so intent
upon the world, so moiling, and drudging in it, that they cannot afford
themselves that competent time of sleep, or recreation, that is necessary. If
any that has read the former part of this Discourse be of this temper, let him
not comfort himself, that he is not guilty of those excesses there complained
of, and therefore conclude himself a good Christian, because he is not
intemperate, for whoever is this covetous creature, his abstaining shall not be
counted to him as the virtue of temperance, for it is not the love of
temperance, but wealth, that makes him refrain; And that is so far from being
praiseworthy, that it is that great sin which the Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 6.
10. is the root of all evil; such a man's body will one day rise in judgment
against him, for defrauding it of its due portion, those moderate refreshments,
and comforts which God has allowed it. This is an Idolatry beyond that of
offering the children to Moloch, Lev. 20. 3. they offered but their children,
but this covetous wretch sacrifices himself to his god Mammon, whilst he often
destroys his health, his life, yea, finally his Soul too, to save his purse. I
have now done with the second head of duty, that to our selves, contained by
the Apostle under the word soberly.

PARTITION X. Of DUTIES to our NEIGHBORS. Of JUSTICE, Negative, Positive. Of
the sin of MURDER, Of the Hainousness of it, the Punishments of it, and the
strange Discoveries thereof. Of Maiming, wounds and stripes.
. 1. I Come now to the third part of Duties, DUTY to our NEIGHBOR.
those to our Neighbor, which is by the Apostle summed up in gross in the word
[righteousness,] by which is meant not only bare justice, but all kind of
charity also, for that is now by the law of Christ become a debt, to our
neighbor, and it is a piece of unrighteousness to defraud him out of it. I
shall therefore build all the particular duties we ow to our neighbor, on those
two general ones, Justice and Charity.

2. I begin with JUSTICE, whereof there are two parts, the one Negative, the
other Positive: JUSTICE.
the negative justice is to do no wrong, or injury to any. The positive justice
is to do right to all; that is, to yield them whatsoever appertains or is due
unto them. I shall first speak of the negative justice, the not injuring
Negative.
or wronging any. Now because a man is capable of receiving wrong in several
respects; this first part of justice extends it self into several branches,
answerable to those capacities of injury. A man may be injured either in his
Soul, his body, his possessions, or credit; and therefore this duty of negative
justice lays a restraint on us in every of these. That we do no wrong to any
man in respect either of his Soul, his body, his possessions, or credit.

3. First, This JUSTICE ties us to do no To the Soul
hurt to his Soul; and here my first work must be to examine what harm it is
that the soul can receive; it is we know an invisible substance which we cannot
reach with our eye, much less with our swords and weapons, yet for all that it
is capable of being hurt and wounded; and that even to death.

4. Now the Soul may be considered either In the natural sense.
in a natural or spiritual sense; in the natural it signifies that which we
usually call the mind of a man, and this we all know may be wounded with gries
or sadness, as Solomon says, Prove. 15. 13. By sorrow of heart the spirit is
broken. Therefore whoever does causlesly afflict or grieve his neighbor; he
transgresses this part of justice, and hurts, and wrongs his soul. This sort of
injury malicious and spiteful men are very often guilty of, they will do
things* by which themselves reap no good, nay, often much harm, only that they
may vex and grieve another; This is a most savage, inhumane humor, thus to
take pleasure in the sadness, and afflictions of others; and whoever harbors
it in his heart, may truly be said to be possessed with a Devil, for it is the
nature only of those accursed spirits to delight in the miseries of men; and
till that be cast out, they are fit only to dwell as the possessed person did,
Mar 5. 2. Among graves and tombs, where there are none capable of receiving
affliction by them.

5. But the Soul may be considered also in the In the spiritual.
spiritual sense, and so it signifies that immortal part of us which must live
eternally, either in bliss or woe in another world. And the Soul thus
understood is capable of two sorts of harm: First, That of sin; Secondly, That
of Punishment; the latter whereof is certainly the consequent of the former;
and therefore though God be the inflicter of punishment yet since it is but the
effect of sin, we may justly reckon, that he that draws a man to sin, is
likewise the betrayer of him to punishment, as he that gives a man a mortal
wound, is the cause of his death; therefore under the evil of sin both are
contained, so that I need speak only of that.

6. And sure there cannot be a higher sort Drawing to in the greatest injury.
of wrong, then the bringing this great evil upon the Soul; sin is the disease
and wound of the Soul, as being the direct contray to Grace; which is the
health and soundness of it: Now this wound we give to every Soul whom we do by
any means whatsoever draw into sin.

7. The ways of doing that are diverse, I Direct means of it.
shall mention some of them, whereof though some are more direct then others,
yet all tend to the same end. Of the more direct ones there is, first, the
commanding of sin, that is, when a person that has power over another shall
require him to do something which is unlawful; an example of this we have in
Nebuchadnezzars commanding the worship of the golden Image, Dan. 3. 4. and his
copy is imitated by any parent or master who shall require of his child or
servant to do any unlawful act. Secondly, there is counselling of sin, when men
advise and persuade others to any wickedness: Thus Jobs wife counseled her
husband to curse God, Job 27. And Achitophel advised Absalom to go into his
Fathers concubines, 2 Samuel 16. 21. Thirdly, there is enticing and alluring to
sin, by setting before men the pleasures or profits they shall reap by it. Of
this sort of enticement Solomon gives warning, Prove. 1. 10. My son, if sinners
entice thee, consent thou not; if they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for
blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without a cause, etc. and verse the
13. you may see what is the bait, by which they seek to allure them: we shall
find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil, cast in thy
lot among us, let us all have one purse. Fourthly, there is assistance in sin;
that is, when men aid and help others either in contriving or acting a sin.
Thus Jonadab helped Amnon in plotting the Ravishing of his sister, 2 Samuel 13.
all these are direct means of bringing this great evil of sin upon our brethren.

8. There are also others, which though they seem more indirect, may yet be as
effectual Indirect.
toward that ill end: As first, example in sin; he that sets others an ill
pattern does his part to make them imitate it, and too often it has that
effect; there being generally nothing more forcible to bring men into any
sinful practice, then the seeing it used by others, as might be instanced in
many sins, to which there is no other temptation, but their being in fashion.
Secondly, there is encouragement in sin, when either by approving, or else at
least by not showing a dislike, we give others confidence to go on in their
wickedness. A third means is by justifying and defending any sinful act of
another, for by that we do not only confirm him in his evil, but endanger the
drawing others to the like, who may be the more inclinable to it, when they
shall hear it so pleaded for. Lastly, the bringing up any reproach upon strict
and Christian living, as those do who have the ways of God in derision; this is
a means to affright men from the practice of duty, when they see it will bring
them to be scorned and despised; this is worse then all the former, not only in
respect of the man who is guilty of it (as it is an evidence of the great
profaneness of his own heart) but also in regard of others, it having a more
general ill effect then any of the former can have, it being the betraying men
not only to some single acts of disobedience to Christ, but even to the casting
off all subjection to him: By all these means we may draw on our selves this
great guilt of injuring and wounding the souls of our brethren.

9. It would be too long for me to instance Men sadly to consider whom they
have thus injured.
in all the several sins, in which it is usual for men to ensnare others; as
drunkenness, uncleannness, rebellion, and a multitude more. But it will concern
every man for his own particular, to consider sadly what mischiefs of this
kind he has done to any, by all, or any of these means, and to weigh well the
greatness of the injury. Men are apt to boast of their innocence toward their
neighbors, that they have done wrong to no man; but God knows many that thus
brag, are of all others the most injurious persons: perhaps they have not
maimed his body, nor stolen his goods: but alas! the body is but the case and
cover of the man, and the goods some appurtenances to that, it is the soul is
the man, and that they can wound and pierce without remorse, and yet with the
adulteress, Prove. 30. 20. say, They have done no wickedness; but glory of their
friendly behavior to those whom they thus betray to eternal ruin, for
whomsoever thou have drawn to any sin, thou have done thy part to ascertain to
those endless flames. And then think with thy self how base a treachery this
is, thou would call him a treacherous villain, that should while he pretends
to embrace a man, secretly stab him; but this of thine is as far beyond that,
as the soul is of more value then the body, and hell worse then death. And
remember yet farther, that besides the cruelty of it to thy poor brother, it is
also most dangerous to thy self, it being that against which Christ has
pronounced a woe, Matthew. 18. 7. and ver. 6. he tells us that whoever shall
offend (that is, draw into sin) any of those little ones, it were better for
him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the Sea. Thou may plunge thy poor brother into perdition, but as it
is with wrestlers, he that gives another a fall, commonly falls with him, so
thou art like to bear him company to that place of torment.

10. Let therefore thy own and his danger beget Heartily to bewail it.
in thee a sense of the greatness of this sin, this horrid piece of injustice
to the precious soul of thy neighbor. Bethink thy self seriously to whom thou
have bin thus cruel, whom thou have enticed to drinking, advised to rebellion,
allured to lust, stirred up to rage, whom thou have assisted or encouraged in
any ill course, or discouraged, and disheartened by thy profane scoffings at
piety in general, or at any conscionable strict walking of his in particular;
and then draw up a bill of indictment accuse and condemn thy self, as a Cain, a
murderer of thy brother, heartily and deeply bewail all thy guilts of this
kind, and resolve never once more to be a stumbling block, as S. Paul calls
it, Romans 14. in thy brothers way.

11. But this is not all, there must be some Endeavor to repair it.
fruits of this repentance brought forth; now in all sins of injustice,
restitution is a necessary fruit of repentance, and so it is here, thou have
committed an act (perhaps many) of high injustice to the soul of thy brother,
thou have robbed it of its innocence, of its title to heaven, thou must now
endeavor to restore all this to it again, by being more earnest and
industrious to win him to repentance, then ever thou were to draw him to sin,
use now as much art to convince him of the danger, as ever thou did to
flatter him with the pleasures of his vice, in a word, countermine thy self by
using all those methods, and means to recover him, that thou did to destroy
him, and be more diligent and zealous in it for it is necessary thou should
both in regard of him and thy self: First, in respect of him, because there is
in man's nature so much a greater promptness and readiness to evil, then to
good, that there will need much more pains and diligence to instill the one into
him, then the other: besides, the man is supposed to be already accustomed to
the contrary, which will add much to the difficulty of the work. Then in
respect of thy self; if thou be a true penitent, thou will think thy self
obliged, as S. Paul did, to labor more abundantly, and wilt be ashamed, that
when thou art trading for God, bringing back a soul to him, thou should not
pursue it with more earnestness, then while thou art an agent of Satan's,
besides the remembrance, that thou art a means of bringing this poor soul into
this snare, must necessarily quicken thy diligence to get him out of it: So
much for the first part of negative justice, in respect of the souls of our
brethren.

12. The second concerns the bodies, and to those also this justice binds thee
to do no Negative justice to the body.
wrong nor violence. Now of wrongs to the body there may be several degrees,
the In respect of the life.
highest of them is killing, taking away the life; this is forbid in the very
letter of the sixth Commandment. Thou shall do no murder.

13. Murder may be committed either by Several ways of being guilty of murder.
open violence; when a man either by sword, or any other instrument takes away
another life, immediately, and directly, or it may be done secretly and
treacherously, as David murdered Uriah, not with his own sword but with the
sword of the Children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 11. 17. And Jozabel Naboth by a false
accusation, 1 Kings 21. 13. And so diverse have committed this sin of murder by
poison, false-witness, or some such concealed ways. The former is commonly the
effect of a sudden rage, the latter has several originals, sometimes it
proceeds from some old malice fixed in the heart toward the person, sometimes
from some covetous or ambitious desires; such a one stands in a man's way to his
profit or preferment, and therefore he must be removed; and sometimes again it
is to cover shame, as in the case of Strumpets, that murder their Infants that
they may not betray their filthiness. But besides these more direct ways of
killing, there is another, and that is, when by our persuasions and enticements
we draw a man to do that which tends to the shortning of his life, and is
apparent to do so; he that makes his neighbor drunk, if by that drunkenness
the man come to any mortal hurt which he would have escaped if he had been
sober, he that made him drunk is not clear of his death; or if he die not by
any such sudden accident, yet if drinking cast him into a disease, and that
disease kill him, I know not how he that drew him to that excess can acquit
himself of his murder in the eyes of God, though humane Laws touch him not. I
wish those who make it their business to draw in customers to that trade of
debauchery would consider it. There is yet another way of bringing this guilt
upon our selves, and that is by inciting and stirring up others to it, or to
that degree of anger and revenge which produces it; as he that sets two persons
at variance, or seeing them already so, blows the coals, if murder ensue, he
certainly has this share in the guilt, which is a consideration that ought to
aflright all from having any thing to do in the kindling, or increasing of
contention.

14. Now for the hainousness of this sin of The hainousness of the sin.
murder, I suppose none can be ignorant, that it is of the deepest dye, a most
loud crying sin; This we may see in the first act of this kind, that ever was
committed, Abels blood cried from the earth, as God tells Cain, Genesis 4. 10.
Yea, the guilt of this sin is such, that it leaves a stain even upon the land
where it is committed, such as is not to be washed out, but by the blood of the
murderer, as appears Deuteronomy. 19. 12, 13. The land cannot be purged of blood, but
by the blood of him that shed it; and therefore though in other cases the
flying to the Altar secured a man, yet in this of wilful murder no such refuge
was allowed but such a one was to be taken even thence, and delivered up to
justice, Exodus 21. 14. Thou shall take him from my Altar, that he may dye. And
it is yet farther observable, that the only two precepts which the Scripture
mentions, as given to Noah after the flood, were both in relation to this sin,
that of not eating blood, Genesis 9. 4. being a ceremony to beget in men a greater
horror of this sin of murder, and so intended for the preventing of it. The
other was for the punishment of it, Genesis 9. 6. He that sheddeth man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed; and the reason of this strictuess is added in the
next words, For in the Image of God made he man; where you see that this sin is
not only an injury to our brother, but even the highest contempt, and despite
toward God himself, for it is the defacing of his image, which he has stamped
upon man. Nay yet further, it is the usurping of Gods proper right, and
authority. For it is God alone, that has right to dispose of the life of man;
'twas he alone that gave it, and it is he alone that has power to take it
away; but he that murders a man does, as it were, wrest this power out of Gods
hand, which is the highest pitch of rebellious presumption.

15. And as the sin is great, so likewise is the The great punishments
attending it.
punishment; we see it frequently very great, and remarkable, even in this
world, (besides those most fearful effects of it in the next) blood not only
cries, but it cries for vengeance, and the great God of recompenses as he
styles himself, will not fail to hear it: very many examples the Scripture
gives us of this: Ahab and Jezabel, that murdered innocent Naboth, for
greediness of his vineyard, were themselves slain, and the Dogs licked their
blood in the place, where they had shed his, as you may read in that Story; so
Absalom, that slew his brother Amnon, after he had committed that sin, fell
into another, that of rebellion against his King and Father, and in it
miserably perished. Rechab and Baanah, that slew Ishbosheth, were themselves
put to death, and that by the very person they thought to endear by it; many
more instances might be given of this out of the Sacred Story, and many also
out of Humane, there having been no age but has yielded multitudes of examples
of this kind, so that every man may furnish himself out of the observations of
his own time.

16. And it is worth our notice, what The strange discoveries of it.
strange and even miraculous means it has often pleased God to use for the
discovery of this sin; the very bruit creatures have often been made
instruments of it; nay, often the extreme horror of a man's own conscience has
made him betray himself, so that it is not any closeness a man uses in the
acting of this sin, that can secure him from the vengeance of it, for he can
never shut out his own conscience, that will in spite of him be privy to the
fact, and that very often proves the means of discovering it to the world, or
if it should not do that, yet it will sure act revenge on him, it will be such
a Hell within him as will be worse then death: This we have seen in many, who
after the commission of this sin have never been able to enjoy a minutes rest,
but have had that intolerable anguish of mind that they have chosen to be
their own murderers rather then live in it. These are the usual effects of this
sin even in this world, but those in another are yet more dreadful, where
surely the highest degrees of torment belong to this high pitch of wickedness,
for if as our Savior tells us, Mat. 5. 22. Hell fire be the portion of him
that shall but call his brother fool, what degree of those burnings can we
think proportionable, to this so much greater an injury?

17. The consideration of all this ought to We must watch diligently against
all approaches of this sin.
possess us with the greatest horror, and abomination of this sin, and to make
us extremely watchful of our selves, that we never fall into it, and to that
end to prevent all those occasions which may insensibly draw us into this pit.
I mentioned at first several things which are wont to be originals of it, and
at those we must begin, if we will surely guard our selves. If therefore thou will be sure never to kill a man in thy rage, be sure never to be in that rage,
for if thou permittest thy self to that, thou can have no security against
the other, anger being a madness that suffers us not to consider, or know what
we do, when it has once possessed us. Therefore when thou find thy self begin
to be inflamed, think betimes, whither this may lead thee, if thou let
loose to it, and immediately put the bridle upon this head strong passion; so
again, if thou will be sure thy malice shall not draw thee to it, be sure never
to harbor one malscious thought in thy heart, for if it once settle there it
will gather such strength, that within a while thou will be perfectly under the
power of it, so that it may lead thee even to this horrible sin at its
pleasure; be therefore careful at the very first approach of this treacherous
guest, to shut the doors against it, never to let it enter thy mind; so also if
thou will be sure thy covetousness, thy ambition, thy lust, or any other sinful
desire shall not betray thee to it, be sure thou never permit any of them to
bear any sway with thee, for if they get the dominion, as they will soon do, if
they be once entertained in the heart, they will be past thy control, and
hurry thee to thi^ or any other sin, that may serve their ends. In like manner
if thou would not be guilty of any of the mortal effects of thy neighbors
drunkenness, be sure not to entice him to it nor accompany him at it, and to
that purpose do not allow thy self in the same practice, for if thou do, thou will be laboring to get company at it. Lastly, if thou will not be guilty of
the murder committed by another, take heed thou never give any encouragement to
it, or contribute any thing to that hatred, or contention, that may be the
cause of it. For when thou have either kindled or blowed the fire, what know
thou whom it may consume? bring always as much water as thou can to quench,
but never bring one drop of oil to increase the flame. The like may be said of
all other occasions of this sin not here mentioned; and this careful preserving
our selves from these, is the only sure way to keep us from this sin; therefore
as ever thou would keep thy self innocent from the great offense, guard thee
warily from all such inlets, those steps and approaches toward it.

18. But although murder be the greatest, yet it is not the only injury that
may be done to the body of our neighbor, there are others which are also of a
very high nature, the next Maiming a great injury.
in degree to this is Maiming him, depriving him of any member, or at least of
the use of it, and this is a very great wrong and mischief to him, as we may
discern by the Judgment of God himself, in the case of the bond-servant, who
should by his Masters means loose a member, Exodus 21. 26. the freedom of his
whole life was thought but a reasonable recompense for it, He shall let him go
free, says the text, for his eye; Nay though it were a less considerable part,
if it were but a tooth, which of all other may be lost with the least damage,
yet the same amends was to be made him, ver. 27.

19. But we need no other way of measuring That which every man dreads for
himself.
this injury, then the judgment of every man in his own case; how much does
every man dread the loss of a limb, so that if he be by any accident or
disease, in danger of it, he thinks no pains or cost too much to preserve it.
And then how great an injustice, how contrary to that great rule of doing as we
would be done to, is it, for a man to do that to another, which he so
unwillingly suffers himself.

But if the person be poor, one that must Yet worse if the man be poor.
labor for his living, the injury is yet greater, it is such as may in effect
amount to the former sin of murder, for as the wise man says, Ecclus. 24. 21.
The poor man's bread is his life, and he that deprives them thereof is a
bloodshedder. And therefore he that deprives him of the means of getting his
bread by disabling him from labor, is surely no less guilty. In the Law it was
permitted to every man that had sustained such a damage by his neighbor to
require the Magistrate to inflict the like on him, eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, as it is Exodus 21. 24

20. And though unprofitable revenge be Necessity of making what satisfaction
we can.
not now allowed to us Christians, yet sure it is the part of every one who
has done this injury, to make what satisfaction lies in his power; it is true,
he cannot restore a limb again (which by the way should make men wary how they
do those mischiefs which it is so impossible for them to repair) but yet he may
satisfy for some of the ill effects of that loss: If that have brought the man
to want and penury, he may, nay, he must, if he have but the least ability,
relieve and support him, yea, though it be by his own extraordinary labor: for
if it be a duty of us all to be eyes to the blind and feet to the lame, as Job
speaks, much more must we be so to them whom our selves have made blind and
lame. Therefore whoever has done this injury to any of his poor brethren, let
him know, he is bound to do all that is possible toward the repairing of it,
if he do not, every new suffering that the poor man's wants bring upon him,
becomes a new charge and accusation against him, at the tribunal of the just
Judge.

21. There are yet other degrees of injury Wounds and stripes injuries also.
to the body of our neighbor, I shall mention only two more, Wounds, and
stripes; A man may Wound another, which though it finally cause loss neither of
life nor limb, is yet an endangering of both; and the like may be said of
stripes; both of which however are very painful at the present, nay perhaps
very long after, and pain of all temporal evils, is to be accounted the
greatest, for it is not only an evil in it self, but it is such a one, that
permits us not, whilst we are under it, to enjoy any other good; A man in pain
having no taste of any the greatest delights: If any man despise these, as
light injuries, let him again ask himself, how he would like it, to have his
own body slasht or bruised, and put to pass under those painful means of cure,
which are many times necessary in such cases? I presume there is no man would
willingly undergo this from another, and why then should thou offer it to him?

22. The truth is, this strange cruelty to This cruelty to others the effect of
pride.
others is the effect of a great pride, and haughtiness of heart, we look upon
others with such contempt, that we think it no matter how they are used; we
think they must bear blows from us, when in the mean time we are so tender of
our selves, that we cannot hear the least word of disparagement, but we are all
on a flame. The provocations to these injuries are commonly so slight, that did
not this inward pride dispose us to such an angriness of humor, that we take
fire at every thing, it were impossible we should be moved by them. Nay some
are advanced to such a wantonness of cruelty, that without any provocation at
all in cool blood, as they say, they can thus wrong their poor brethren, and
make it part of their pastime and recreation to cause pain to others. Thus some
tyrannous humors take such a pleasure in tormenting those under their power,
that they are glad when they can but find a pretense to punish them, and then
do it without all moderation, and others will set men together by the ears,
only that they may have the sport of seeing the scuffle; like the old Romans,
that made it one of their public sports to see men kill one another, and sure
we have as little Christianity as they, if we can take delight in such
spectacles.

23. This savageness and cruelty of mind is so unbecoming the nature of a man,
that he is not allowed to use it even to his beast; how intolerable is it then
toward those, that are of the same nature, and which is more, are heirs of the
same eternal hopes with us? They that shall thus transgress against their
neighbors in any of the foregoing particulars, or what ever else is hurtful to
the body, are unjust persons, want even this lowest sort of justice, the
negative, to their neighbors, in respect of their bodies.

24. Neither can any man excuse himself by saying what he has done was only in
return of some injury offered him by the other, for suppose it be so, that he
have indeed received some considerable wrong, yet cannot he be his own revenger
without injury to that man, who is not, by being thine enemy, become thy
vassal, or slave, to do with him what thou list; thou have never the more right
of dominion over him, because he has done thee wrong, and therefore if thou
had no power over his body before, it is certain thou have none now, and
therefore thou art not only uncharitable (which yet were sin enough to damn
thee) but unjust in every act of violence thou do to him. Nay, this
injustice ascends higher, even to God himself, who has reserved vengeance as
his own peculiar right, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord, Romans
12. 19. and then he that will act revenge for himself, what does he, but
incroach upon this special right and prerogative of God, snatch the sword, as
it were, out of his hand, as if he knew better how to weild it! which is at
once a robbery, and contempt of the Divine Majesty.

PARTITION XI. Of JUSTICE, about the Possessions of our Neighbor, against
Injuring him, as concerning his WIFE, his GOODS. Of Malice, Covetousness,
Oppression, Theft. Of Paying of Debts, etc.
. 1. THe third part of Negative Justice His Possession.
concerns the possessions of our Neighbors; what I mean by Possessions, I
cannot better explain then by referring you to the Tenth Commandment, the end
of which is to bridle all covetous appetites and desires toward the
possessions of our neighbor. There we find reckoned up, not only his house,
servants, and cattle, which may all pass under the one general name of his
goods or riches, but particularly his wife, as a principal part of his
possessions, and therefore when we consider this duty of negative justice, in
respect of the possessions of our Neighbor, we must apply it to both his wife
as well as his goods.

2. The especial and peculiar right that His Wife.
every man has in his wife is so well known that it were vain to say any thing
in proof of it, the great impatience that every husband has to have this right
of his invaded, shows that it is sufficiently understood in the world, and
therefore none that does this injury to another, can be ignorant of the
greatness of it. The corrupting of a man's wife, enticing her to a strange bed,
is by all acknowledged to be the worst sort of theft, infinitely beyond that of
the goods.

3. Indeed there is in this one, a heap of the The enticing a man's wife the
greatest injustice.
greatest injustices together; some toward the woman, and some toward the
man: Toward the Woman there are the greatest imaginable; it is that injustice
to her soul, which was before mentioned as the highest of all others, it is the
robbing her of her innocence To the woman.
and setting her in a course of the horridst wickedness (no less then lust and
perjury together) from which it is probable she may never return, and then it
proves the damning of her eternally. Next it is in respect of this world, the
robbing her of her credit, making her abhorred and despised, and her very name
a reproach among all men; and besides it is the depriving her of all that
happiness of life, which arises from the mutual kindness and affection that is
between man and wife, instead whereof this brings in a loathing, and abhorring
of each other; from whence flow multitudes of mischiefs, too many to rehearse,
in all which the man has his share also.

4. But besides those, there are to him many, To the man.
and high injustices; for it is first the robbing him of that, which of all
other things he accounts most precious, the love and faithfulness of his wife,
and that also wherein he has such an incommunicable right, that himself
cannot, if he would, make it over to any oother; and therefore sure it cannot
without the utmost injustice be torn from him by any: Nor is this all, but it
is farther the ingulfing him (if ever he come to discern it) in that most
tormenting passion of jealousy, which is of all others the most painful, and
which often puts men upon the most desperate attempts, it being as Solomon says,
Prove. 6. 34. The rage of a man. It is yet farther, the bringing upon him all
that scorn, and contempt, which by the unjust measures of the world falls on
them, which are so abused, and which is by many esteemed the most insufferable
part of the wrong; and though it be true that it is very unjust he should fall
under reproach, only because he is injured, yet unless the world could be new
molded, it will certainly be his lot, and therefore it adds much to the
injury: Again, this may indeed be a robbery in the usual sense of the word, for
perhaps it may be the thrusting in the child of the adulterer into his family,
to share both in the maintenance and portions of his own children; and this is
an arrand theft: first, in respect of the man, who surely intends not the
providing for another man's child; and then in respect of the children, who are
by that means defrauded of so much as that goes away with. And therefore
whosoever has this circumstance of the sin to repent of, cannot do it
effectually, without restoring to the family, as much as he has by this means
robbed it of.

5. All this put together will sure make this The most irreparable.
the greatest and most provoking injury that can be done to a man, and (which
heightens it yet more) it is that, for which a man can never make reparations;
for unless it be in the circumstance before mentioned, there is no part of this
sin, wherein that can be done; to this purpose it is observable in the Jewish
Law, that the Thief was appointed to restore fourfold, and that freed him; but
the adulterer having no possibility of making any restitution, any
satisfaction, he must pay his life for his offense, Lev. 20. 10. And though now
a days adulterers speed better, live many days to renew their guilt, and
perhaps to laugh at those, whom they have thus injured, yet let them be
assured, there must one day be a sad reckoning, and that whether they repent or
not: If by Gods grace they do come to repentance, they will then find this to
be no cheap sin, many anguishes of soul, terrors, and perplexities of
conscience, groans, and tears it must cost them; and indeed were a man's whole
life spent in these penitential exercises, 'twere little enough to wipe off the
guilt of any one single act of this kind; what overwhelming sorrows then are
requisite for such a trade of this sin, as too many drive? Certainly it is so
great a task, that it is highly necessary for all that are so concerned, to set
to it immediately, lest they want time to go through with it; for let no man
flatter himself, that the guilt of a course and habit of such a sin can be
washed away with a single act of repentance; no, he must proportion the
repentance to the fault, and as one has been a habit and course, so must the
other also. And then how strange a madness is it for men to run into this sin
(and that with such painful pursuits, as many do) which he knows must at the
best hand, that is, supposing he do repent of it, cost him thus dear; but then
if he do not repent, infinitely dearer; it loses him all his title to heaven,
that place of purity, and gives him his portion in the lake of fire, where the
burnings of his lust shall end in those everlasting burnings: For how closely
soever he have acted this sin, be it so that he may have said with the
adulterer in Job 25. 15. No eye sees me, yet it is sure he could not in the
greatest obscurity shelter himself from Gods sight, with whom the darkness is
no darkness, Psalm 139. 12. And he it is, who has expressly threatened to judge
this sort of offenders, Heb. 13. 4. Adulterers God will judge. God grant that
all that live in this foul guilt, may so seasonably, and so thoroughly judge
them selves, that they may prevent that severe and dreadful judgment of his.

6. The second thing, to which this Negative Justice to our Neighbors
possessions His goods.
reaches, is his Goods, under which general word is contained all those
several sorts of things, as House, Land, Cattle, Money, and the like, in which
he has a right and property; these we are by the rule of this justice to
suffer him to enjoy without seeking either to work him damage in any of them,
or to get any of them to our selves: I make a difference between these two,
because there may be two several grounds or motives of this injustice; the one
malice, the other covetousness.

7. The malicious man desires to work his Malicious injustice.
neighbor mischief, though he get nothing by it himself; it is frequently seen,
that men will make havoc, and spoil of the goods of one, to whom they bear a
grudge, though they never design to get any thing to themselves by it, but
only the pleasure of doing a spite to the other: This is a most hellish
humor, directly answerable to that of the Devil, who bestows all his pains
and industry, not to bring in any good to himself, but only to ruin and undo
others: and how contrary it is to all rules of justice, you may see by the
Precept given by God to the Jews concerning the goods of an enemy, where they
were so sar from being allowed a liberty of spoil and destruction, that they
are expressly bound to prevent it, Exodus 23 45. If thou meet thine enemies Ox,
or his Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again: If thou
see the Ass of him that hates thee lying under his burden, and would
forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with him: Where you see it is a
debt we owe to our very enemies, to prevent that loss and damage, which by any
accident he is in danger of: and that even with some labor, and pains to our
selves. How horrible an injustice is it then, purposely to bring that loss, and
damage on him? Who ever is guilty of this let him never excuse himself by
saying, he has not inricht himself by the spoil of his neighbor, that he has
nothing of it cleaves to his finger, for sure this malicious injustice is no
less a fault then the covetous one; nay, I suppose in respect of the principle
and cause, from which it flows, it may be greater, this hatred of another
being worse then the immoderate love of our selves; whoever has thus mischieft
his neighbor, he is as much bound to repair the injury, to make satisfaction
for the loss, as if he had enriched himself by it.

8. But on the other side, let not the covetous Covetous injustice.
defrauder therefore judge his sin light because there is another, that in some
one respect outweighs it; for perhaps in others his may cast the scales;
certainly it does in this one, that he that is unjust for greediness of gain is
like to multiply more acts of this sin, then he that is so out of malice; for
it is impossible any man should have so many objects of his malice, as he may
have of his covetousness; there is no man at so general a defiance with all
mankind that he hates every body; but the covetous man has as many objects of
his vice, as there be things in the world he counts valuable: But I shall not
longer stand upon this comparison, it is sure they are both great and crying
sins, and that is ground enough of abhorring each: let us descend now to the
several branches of this sort of covetous injustice; it is true they may all
bear the name of robbery, or theft, for in effect they are all so, yet for
methods sake it will not be amiss to distinguish them into these three,
Oppression, Theft, and Deceit.

9. By Oppression I mean that open and barefaced Oppression.
robbery, of seizing upon the possessions of others, and owning, and avowing
the doing so. For the doing of this there are several instruments; as first
that of power, by which many Nations and Princes have been turned out of their
rights, and many private men out of their estates: Sometimes again, Law is made
the instrument of it; he that covets his neighbors lands or goods, pretends a
claim to them, and then by corrupting of Justice by Bribes and gifts, or else
overruling it by greatness and authority gets judgment on his side: This is a
high oppression, and of the worst sort, thus to make the Law, which was
intended for the protection, and defense of men's Rights, to be the means of
overthrowing them; and it is a very heavy guilt, that lies both on him that
procures, and on him that pronounces such a sentence, yea, and on the Lawyer
too, that pleads such a cause, for by so doing he assists in the oppression;
sometimes again, the very necessities of the oppressed are the means of his
oppression; thus it is in the case of Extortion, and griping Usury: a man is in
extreme want of money, and this gives opportunity to the executioner to wrest
unconscionably from him, to which the poor man is forced to yield to supply his
present wants. And thus also it is often with exacting Landlords, who when
their poor tenants know not how to provide themselves elsewhere, rack and skrew
them beyond the worth of the thing. All these and many the like are but several
ways of acting this one sin of Oppression which becomes yet the more heinous,
by how much the more helpless the person is, that is thus oppressed, therefore
the oppression of the widow, and fatherless, is in Scripture mentioned as the
height of this sin.

10. It is indeed a most crying guilt, and Gods vengeance against it.
that against which God has threatened his heavy vengeance, as we read in
diverse texts of Scriptures: Thus it is, Ezekiel. 18. 12. He that has oppressed
the poor, and has spoiled by violence, he shall surely die, his blood shall be
upon him; and the same sentence is repeated against him, ver. 18. Indeed God
has so peculiarly taken upon him the protection of the poor, and oppressed,
that he is engaged as it were in honor to be their avenger, and accordingly,
Psalm. 12. We see God solemnly declare his resolution of appearing for them,
ver. 5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will
I arise, says the Lord, I will set him in safety from him; the advice
therefore of Solomon is excellent, Prove. 22. 22. Rob not the poor, because he
is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the gate, for the Lord will plead
their cause and will spoil the soul of those that spoiled them; they are like
in the end to have little joy of the booty it brings them in, when it thus
engages God against them.

11. The second sort of this injustice is Theft, Theft.
and of that also there are two kinds, the one the withholding what we should
pay, and the other taking from our neighbor what is already in his possession.

12. Of the first sort is the not paying of Not paying what we borrow.
debts, whether such as we have borrowed, or such as by our own voluntary
promise are become our debts, for they are equally due to him, that can lay
either of these claims to them; and therefore the withholding of either of them
is a theft, a keeping from my neighbor that which is his; yet the former of
them is rather the more injurious, for by that I take from him that which he
once actually had (be it money, or whatsoever else) and so make him worse then
I found him: This is a very great, and very common injustice; men can now a
days with as great confidence deny him that asks a debt, as they do him that
asks an alms, nay many times it is made matter of quarrel for a man to demand
his own, besides the many attendances the creditor is put to in pursuit of it,
are a yet farther injury to him, by wasting his time, and taking him off from
other business, and so he is made a looser that way too. This is so great
injustice, that I see not how a man can look upon any thing he possesses as his
own right, whilst he thus denies another his. It is the duty of every man in
debt, rather to strip himself of all, and cast himself again naked upon Gods
providence, then thus to feather his nest with the spoils of his neighbors.
And surely it would prove the more thriving course, not only in respect of the
blessing, which may be expected upon justice, compared with the curse, that
attends the contrary, but even in worldly prudence also; for he that defers
paying of debts, will at last be forced to it by Law, and that upon much worse
terms, then he might have done it voluntarily, with a greater charge, and with
such a loss of his credit, that afterward in his greatest necessities he will
not know where to borrow. But the sure way for a man to secure himself from the
guilt of this injustice, is never to borrow more then he knows he has means to
repay, unless it be of one, who knowing his disability, is willing to run the
hazard. Otherwise he commits this sin at the very time of borrowing; for he
takes that from his neighbor upon promise of paying, which he knows he is
never likely to restore to him, which is a flat robbery.

The same justice which ties men to pay their What we are bound for.
own debts, ties also every surety to pay those debts of others, for which he
stands bound, in case the principal either cannot or will not: for by being
bound, he has made it his own debt, and must in all justice answer it to the
creditor, who its presumed, was drawn to send on confidence of his security,
and therefore is directly cheated and betrayed by him, if he see him not
satisfied. If it be thought hard, that a man should pay for that which he never
received benefit by, I shall yield it, so far as to be just matter of wariness
to every man how he enter into such engagements, but it can never be made an
excuse for the breaking them.

As for the other sort of debt, that which is What we have promised.
brought upon a man by his own voluntary promise, that also cannot without
great injustice be withho^den; for it is now the man's right, and then it is no
matter, by what means it came to be so. Therefore we see David makes it part of
the description of a just man, Psa. 15. 4. that he keeps his promise yea,
though they were made to his own disadvantage; and surely he is utterly unfit
to ascend to that Holy Hill, there spoken of, either as that signifies the
Church here, or Heaven hereafter that does not punctually observe this part of
justice. To this sort of debt may be reduced the wages of the servant, the hire
of the labourer, and the withholding of these is a great sin, and the
complaints of those that are thus injured, ascend up to God. Behold (says S.
James) the hire of the laborers which have reap^d down your fields, which is,
of you kept back by fraud, cries, and the cries of them that have reaped, are
entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath: and Deuteronomy. 24. 14. 15. we find a
strict command in this matter. Thou shall not oppress an hired servant that is
poor and needy, at his day thou shall give him his hire, neither shall the Sun
go down upon it, for he is poor, and sets his heart upon it, lest he cry
against thee to the Lord, and it be sin unto thee. This is one of those loud
clamourous sins, which will not cease crying, till it bring down Gods
vengeance, and therefore though thou have no justice to thy poor brother, yet
have at least so much mercy to thy self, as not to pull down judgments on thee
by thus wronging him.

PARTITION XII. Of Theft; Stealing. Of Deceit in Trust, in Traffic. Of
Restitution, etc.
. 1. THE second part of Theft is the taking from our neighbor Stealing the
goods of our neighbor.
that which is already in his possession; and this may be done either more
violently, and openly, or else more closely, and sliely; the first is the
manner of those that rob on the way, or plunder houses, where by force they
take the goods of their neighbor; The other is the way of the pilfering thief,
that takes away a man's goods unknown to him; I shall not dispute, which of
these is the worst, it is enough that they are both such acts of injustice, as
make men odious to God, unfit for humane society, and betray the actors to the
greatest mischiefs even in this world, death it self being by Law appointed the
reward of it; and there are few that follow this Trade long, but at last meet
with that fruit of it. I am sure it is madness for any to believe he shall
always steal securely, for he is to contend with the industry of all those whom
he shall thus injure, whose losses will quicken their wits for the finding him
out, and which is infinitely more, he is to struggle with the justice of God,
which does usually pursue such men to destruction, even in this world; witness
the many strange discoveries, that have been made of the craftiest thieves. But
however, if he were secure from the vengeance here, I am sure nothing but
repentance and reformation can secure him from the vengeance of it hereafter.
And now when these dangers are weighed, 'twill surely appear, that the thief
makes a pitiful bargain, he steals his neighbors money, or cattle, and in
exchange for it he must pay his life, or his soul, perhaps both, and if the
whole world be too mean a price for a Soul, as he tells us, Mark 18. 36. who
best knew the value of them, having himself bought them, what a strange madness
is it, to barter them away for every petty trifle, as many do, who have got
such a habit of stealing, that not the meanest worthless thing can escape their
fingers? Under this head of theft may be ranked the receivers of stolen goods,
whether those that take them, as partners in the theft, or those that buy them,
when they know or believe they are stolen. This many (that pretend much to abhor
theft) are guilty of, when they can by it, buy the thing a little cheaper then
the common rate. And here also comes in the concealing of any goods a man finds
of his neighbors, which whosoever restores not, if he know, or can learn out
the owner, is no better then a thief, for he withholds from his neighbor that
which properly belongs to him: and sure 'twill not be uncharitable to say, that
he that will do this, would likewise commit the grosser theft, were he by that
no more in danger of Law then in this he is.

The third part of injustice is Deceit, and in that there may be as many acts
as there are Deceit.
occasions of intercourse and dealing between man and man.

2. It will be impossible to name the mall but I think they will be contained
under these two general deceits, in matters of Trust, and in matter of
Traffic, or bargaining; unless it be that of Gaming, which therefore here by
the way, I must tell you, is as much a fraud and deceit as any of the rest.

3. He that deceives a man in any Trust that is committed to him, is guilty of
a great In Trust.
in ustice, and that the most treacherous sort of one, it is the joining of two
great sins in one, defrauding; and promise-breaking; for in all trusts there is
a promise employed, if not expressed, for the very accepting of the trust contains
under it a promise of fidelity; these trusts are broken sometimes to the
living, sometimes to the dead; to the living there are many ways of doing it,
according to the several kinds of the trust; sometimes a trust is more general,
like that of Potiphar to Joseph, Genesis 39. 4. a man commits to another all that
he has, and thus Guardians of children, and sometimes stewards are entrusted;
sometimes again it is more limited, and restrained to some one special thing: A
man intrusts another to bargain, or deal for him in such a particular, or he
puts some one thing into his hands, to manage, and dispose: Thus among servants
it is usual for one to be entrusted with one part of the Masters goods, and
another with another part of them. Now in all these, and the like cases,
whosoever acts not for him that intrusts him, with the same faithfulness, that
he would for himself, but shall either carelessly loose, or prodigally imbezel
the things committed to him, or else convert them to his own use, he is guilty
of this great sin of betraying a trust to the living. In like manner he that
being entrusted with the execution of a dead man's Testament, acts not according
to the known intention of the dead man, but enriches himself by what is
assigned to others, he is guilty of this sin, in respect of the dead; which is
so much the greater, by how much the dead has no means of remedy, and redress,
as the living may have. It is a kind of robbing of graves which is a theft of
which men naturally have such a horror, that he must be a very hardened thief,
that can attempt it. But either of these frauds are made yet more heinous, when
either God, or the poor are immediately concerned in it; that is, when any
thing is committed to a man. for the uses either of piety; or charity; this
adds s^criledge to both the fraud, and the treachery, and so gives him title
to all those curses, that attend those several sins, which are so heavy, that
he that for the present gain will adventure on them, makes as ill, nay, a much
worse bargain, then Gehazi, 1 Kings 5. 27 who by getting the raiment of Naaman
got his leprosy too.

4. The second sort of fraud is in matters of traffic and bargain, wherein
there may be In Traffic.
deceit both in the seller, and buyer; that of the seller is commonly either in
concealing the faults of the commodity, or else in overrating it.

5. The ways of concealing its faults are ordinary these, either first by
denying that it The sellers concealing the faults of his ware.
has any such fault, nay, perhaps commending it for the direct contrary
quality, and this is down right lying, and so adds that sin to the other, and
if that lie be confirmed by an oath, as it is too usually, then the yet greater
guilt of perjury comes in also; and then what a heap of sins is here gathered
together? abundantly enough to sink any poor soul to destruction, and all this
only to skrew a little more money out of his neighbors pocket, and that
sometimes so very little, that it is a miracle that any man that thinks he has a
Soul, can set it at so miserable a contemptible price. A second means of
concealing is by using some Art to the thing, to make it look fair, and to hide
the faults of it, and this is acting a lie, though it be not speaking one,
which amounts to the same thing, and has surely in this case as much of the
intention of cheating, and defrauding, as the most impudent forswearing can
have. A Third means, is the picking out ignorant Chapmen; This is, I believe,
an Art too well known among Tradesmen, who will not bring out their faulty
wares to men of skill, but keep them to put off to such, whose unskilfulness may
make them passable with them: and this is still the same deceit with the
former; for it all tends to the same end, the cozening and defrauding of the
Chapmen, and then it is not much odds, whether I make use of my own Art, or his
weakness for the purpose. This is certain, he that will do justly, must let his
Chapmen know what he buys; and if his own skill enable him not to judge, (nay,
if he do not actually find out the fault) thou art bound to tell it him,
otherwise thou make him pay for somewhat, which is not there, he presuming
there is that good quality in it, which thou know is not, and therefore thou
may as honestly take his money for some goods of another man's, which thou
know thou can never put into his possession, which I suppose no man will
deny to be an arrant cheat. To this head of concealment may be referred, that
deceit of false weights and measures, for that is the concealing from the buyer
a defect in the quantity, as the other was in the quality of the commodity, and
is again the making him pay for what he has not. This sort of fraud is pointed
at particularly by Solomon, Prove. 11. 1. with this note upon it, that it is an
abomination to the Lord.

6. The second part of fraud in the seller, His overrating it.
lies in over-rating the commodity; though he have not disguised, or concealed
the faults of it, and so have dealt fairly in that respect; yet if he set an
unreasonable price upon it, he defrauds the buyer: I call that an unreasonable
price, which exceeds the true worth of the thing, considered with those
moderate gains, which all Tradesmen are presumed to be allowled in the Sale:
Whatever is beyond this must in all likelihood be fetched in by some of these
ways: As first, by taking advantage of the buyers ignorance in the value of
the thing, which is the same with doing it in the goodness, which has already
been showed to be a deceit: Or secondly, by taking advantage of his necessity;
thou find a man has present and urgent need of such a thing, and therefore
take this opportunity to set the Dice upon him; but this is that very sin of
Extortion, and oppression spoken of before; for it is sure, nothing can justly
raise the price of any thing, but either its becoming dearer to thee, or its
being some way better in its self; but the necessity of thy brother causes
neither of these; his nakedness does not make the clothes thou sellest him
stand thee in ever the more, neither does it make them any way better; and
therefore to rate them ever the higher, is to change thy way of trading, and
sell even the wants and necessities of thy neighbor, which sure is a very
unlawful vocation. Or thirdly, it may be by taking advantage of the
indiscretion of the Chapman: A man perhaps earnestly fancies such a thing, and
then suffers that fancy so to over rule his reason, that he resolves to have it
upon any terms; If thou find this in him, and thereupon raisest thy rate,
this is to make him buy his folly, which is of all others the dearest purchase;
it is sure his fancy adds nothing to the real value, no more then his necessity
did in the former case, and therefore should not add to the price. He
therefore that will deal justly in the business of selling, must not catch at
all advantages, which the temper of his Chapman may give, but consider soberly,
what the thing is worth, and what he would afford it for to another, of whom he
had no such advantage, and accordingly rate it to him at no higher a price.

7. On the Buyers part there are not ordinarily Fraud in the Buyer.
so many opportunities of fraud; yet it is possible a man may sometimes happen
to sell somewhat, the worth whereof he is not acquainted with, and then it will
be as unjust for the buyer to make gain by his ignorance, as in the other case
it was for the seller: but that which oftener falls out, is the case of
necessity, which may as probably fall on the sellers side, as the buyers: A
man's wants compel him to sell, and permit him not to stay to make the best
bargain, but forces him to take the first offer; and here for the buyer to
grate upon him, because he sees him in that strait is the same fault which I
before showed it to be in the seller.

8. In this whole business of traffic there are so many opportunities of
deceit that a man Many temptations to deceit in Traffic.
had need fence himself with a very firm resolution, nay, love of justice, or
he will be in danger to fall under temptation; for as the Wise man speaks,
Eccles. 27. 2. As a Nail sticks fast between the joynings of the Stones, so
does sin stick close between buying and selling; it is so interwoven with all
Trades, so mixed with the very first principles, and grounds of them, that it is
taught together with them, and so becomes part of the Art; so that he is now a
days scarce thought fit to manage a Trade, that wants it, while he that has
most of this black Art of defrauding, applauds and huggs himself, nay, perhaps
boasts to others, how he has over-reacht his neighbor.

What an intolerable shame is this, that we Christians, who are by the precepts
of our The commonness of injustice a reproach to Christianity
Master set to those higher duties of Charity, should in stead of practicing
them, quite unlearn those common rules of justice, which mere Nature teaches?
For, I think, I may say, there are none of those several branches of injustice
toward the possessions of our neighbor, which would not be adjudged to be so
by any sober Heathen; so that, as Saint Paul tells those of the Circumcision,
that the Name of God was blasphemed among the Gentiles, by that unagreeableness
that was betwixt their practice, and their Law, Romans 2. 24. So now may it be
said of us, that the Name of Christ is blasphemed among the Turks and Heathens,
by the vile and scandalous lives of us, who call our selves Christians, and
particularly in this sin of injustice; For shame let us at last endeavor to
wipe of this reproach from our profession, by leaving these practices, to which
me thinks this one single consideration should be enough to persuade us.

9. Yet beside this, there want not other; It is not the way to enrich a man.
Among which, one there is of such a nature, as may prevail with the arrantest
worldling, and that is, that this course does not really tend to the enriching
of him; there is a secret curse goes along with it, which like a Canker eats
out all the benefit was expected from it. This no man can doubt that believes
the Scripture, where there are multitudes of Texts to this purpose: thus Prove.
22. 16. He that oppresses the poor to increase his riches, shall surely come
to want. So Habbak. 2. 6. Woe to him that increases that which is not his, how
long? And he that ladeth himself with thick Clay: shall they not rise up
suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee? and thou shall be
for booties to them. This is commonly the fortune of those that spoil and
deceive others, they at last meet with some that do the like to them. But the
place in Zachary is most full to this purpose, Chap. 5. where under the sign of
a flying roll is signified the curse that goes forth against this sin, Verse 4.
I will bring it forth, says the Lord of Hosts, and it shall enter into the
house of the Thief, and into the house of him that swears falsely by my Name,
and it shall consume it with the timber thereof, and with the stones thereof.
Where you see, theft and perjury are the two sins, against which this curse is
aimed (and they too often go together in the matter of defranding) and the
nature of this curse is, to consume the house, to make an utter destruction of
all that belongs to him that is guilty of either of these sins Thus whilst
thou art ravening after thy neighbors goods, or house, thou art but gathering
f^el to burn thine own And the effect of these threatenings of God we daily see
in the strange improsperou ness of ill gotten estates, which every man is apt
enough to observe in other men's cases: he that sees his neighbor decline in
his estate, can presently call to mind, this was gotten by oppression or
deceit; yet so sottish are we, so be witcht with the love of gain, that he that
makes this observation, can seldom turn it to his own use, is never the less
greedy, or unjust himself for that vengeance he discerns upon others.

10. But alas, if thou could be sure that thy unjust possessions, should not
be torn from thee, It ruins the Soul eternally.
yet when thou remembrest, how deer thou must pay for them in another world,
thou have little reason to brag of thy prize. Thou think thou have been very
cunning, when thou have over reached thy brother; but God knows all the while,
there is another overreaching thee, and cheating thee of what is infinitely
more precious, even thy Soul: the Devil herein deals with thee as Fishers use
to do; those that will catch a great fish, will bait the hook with a less, and
so the great one coming with greediness to devour that, is himself taken: So
thou that art gaping to swallow up thy poor brother, art thy self made a prey
to that great devourer. And alas! what will it ease thee in Hell, that thou
have left wealth behind thee upon earth, when thou shall there want that, which
the meanest beggar here injoyes, even drop of water to cool thy tongue.
Consider this, and from henceforth resolve to employ all that pains and
diligence thou have used to deceive others, in rescuing thy self from the
frauds of the grand deceiver.

11. To this purpose it is absolutely necessary, that thou make Restitution to
all whom The necessity of Restitution.
thou have wronged: For as long as thou keep any thing of the unjust gain,
it is as it were an earnest penny from the Devil, which gives him full right to
thy Soul. But perhaps it may be said, it will not in all cases be possible to
make restitution to the wronged party, peradventure he may be dead; in that
case then make it to his Heirs, to whom his right descends. But it may further
be objected, That he that has long gone on in a course of fraud, may have
injured many, that he cannot now remember, and many that he has no means of
finding out: In this case all I can advise is this: First, to be as diligent as
is possible, both in recalling to mind who they were, and endeavoring to
find them out; and when, after all thy care, that proves impossible, let thy
Restitutions be made to the poor, and that they may not be made by halves, be
as careful as thou can to reckon every the least mite of unjust gain, but
when that cannot exactly be done, as it is sure it cannot by those who have
multiplied the acts of fraud, yet even there let them make some general
measures, whereby to proportion their restitution: as for example, a Tradesman
that cannot remember how much he has cheated in every single parcel, yet may
possibly guess in the gross whether he have usually over-reacht to the value of
a third, or a fourth part of the wares, and then what proportion soever he
think he has so defrauded, the same proportion let him now give out of that
estate he has raised by his trade: but herein it concerns every man to deal
uprightly, as in the presence of God, and not to make advantage of his own
forgetfulness, to the cutting short of the Restitution, but rather go on the
other hand, and be sure rather to give too much, then too little. If he do
happen to give somewhat over, he need not grudge the charge of such a sin
offering, and it is sure he will not if he do heartily desire an atonement. Many
other difficulties there may be in this business of restitution, which will not
be foreseen, and so cannot now be particularly spoke to; but the more of those
there are, the greater horror ought men to have of running into the sin of
injustice, which it will be so difficult, if not impossible for them to repair,
and the more careful ought they to be to mortify that which is the root of all
injustice, to wit Covetousness.

PARTITION XIII. Of False Reports, False Witness, Slanders, Whisperings. Of
despising and Scoffing for Infirmities, Calamities, Sins, etc. Of Positive
Justice, Speaking the Truth, Of Lying. Of Humility and Pride. Of Envy and
Detraction. Of Gratitude, etc.
. 1. THe Fourth Branch of Negative Justice concerns the Credit of our
neighbors, His credit.
which we are not to lessen, or impair by any means, particularly not by false
Reports: Of false reports there may be two sorts, the one is when a man says
something of his neighbor, which he directly knows to be false, the other when
possibly he has some slight surmize, or jealousy of the thing; but that upon
such weak grounds, that it is as likely to be false as true. In either of these
cases, there is a great guilt lies upon the reporter. That there does so in the
first of them, no body will doubt, every one acknowledging that it is the
greatest baseness to invent a lie of another; but there is as little reason to
question the other, for he that reports a thing as a truth, which is but
uncertain, is a liar also, or if he do not report it as a certainty, but only
as a probability, yet then though he be not guilty of the lie, yet he is of the
injustice of robbing his neighbor of his credit; for there is such an aptness
in men to believe ill of others, that any the lightest jealousy will, if once
it be spread abroad, serve for that purpose; and sure it is a most horrible
injustice upon every slight surmize, and fancy, to hazard the bringing so great
an evil upon another; especially when it is considered, that those surmizes
commonly spring rather from some censoriousness, peevishness, or malice in the
surmizer, then from any real fault in the person so suspected.

2. The manner of spreading these false reports of both kinds, is not always
the same; False witness
sometimes it is more open and avowed, sometimes more close and private: the
open is many times by false witness before the Court of Justice; and this not
only hurts a man in his credit, but in other respects also; it is the delivering
him up to the punishment of the Law, and according to the nature of the crime
pretended, does him more or less mischief; but if it be of the highest kind, it
may concern his life, as we see it did in Naboths case, 1 King 21. How great
and crying a sin it is in this respect, as also in that of the perjury, you may
learn from what has been said of both those sins. I am now to consider it
only, as it touches the credit; and to that it is a most grievous wound, thus
to have a crime publicly witnessed against one, and such as is scarce curable
by any thing that can afterward be done to clear him, and therefore whoever is
guilty of this, does a most outrageous injustice to his neighbor; this is that
which is expressly forbidden in the ninth Commandment, and was by God appointed
to be punished by the inflicting of the very same suffering upon him, which his
false testimony aimed to bring upon the other. Deuteronomy. 19. 16.

3. The second open way of spreading these Public slanders.
reports, is by a public and common declaring of them; though not before the
Magistrate, as in the other case, yet in all companies, and before such as are
likely to carry it farther, and this is usually done with bitter railings, and
reproaches, it being an ordinary Art of slanderers, to revile those whom they
slander, that so by the sharpness of the accusation, they may have the greater
impression in the minds of the hearers; this both in respect of the slander,
and the railing, is a high injury, and both of them such, as debar the
committers from Heaven; thus Psalm. 15. where the upright man is described, that
shall have his part there, this is one special thing, verse. 3. That he
slandereth not his neighbor. And for railing the Apostle in several places
reckons it amongst those works of the flesh, which are to shut men out both
from the Church here by excommunication, as you may see 1 Cor. 15. 11. and from
the Kingdom of God hereafter, as it is, 1 Cor. 6. 10.

4. The other more close and private way Whispering.
os spreading such reports is that of the Whisperer, he that goes about from
one to another, and privately vents his slanders, not out of an intent by that
means to make them less public, but rather more; this trick of delivering them
by way of secret, being the way to make them both more believed, and more
spoken of too; for he that receives such a tale, as a secret from one, thinks
to please some body else, by delivering it as a secret to him also; and so it
passes from one hand to another, till at last it spread over a whole Town: This
sort of slanderer is of all others the most dangerous, for he works in the
dark, ties all he speaks to, not to own him as the author, so that whereas in
the more public accusations, the party may have some means of clearing himself
and detecting his accuser, here he shall have no possibility of that, the
slander, like a secret poison, works incureable effects, before ever the man
discern it. This sin of whispering is by Saint Paul mentioned among those great
crimes, which are the effects of a reprobate mind, Romans 1. 29. It is indeed one
of the most incurable wounds of this sword of the tongue; the very bane and
pest of humane society; and that which not only robs single persons of their
good names, but oftentimes whole families, nay, public societies of men of
their peace, what ruins: what confusions has this one sin wrought in the
world? It Is Solomon's observation, Prove. 18. 28. That a whisperer separateth
chief friends, and sure one may truly say of tongues thus employed, that they
are set on fire of Hell, as Saint James says, Chap. 3. 6.

5. This is such a guilt that we are to beware Several steps toward this sin.
of all the degrees of approach to it, of which there are several steps; the
first is the giving ear to, and cherishing of those that come with slanders,
for they that entertain and receive them, encourage them in the practice; for
as our common proverb says, if there were no Receivers, there would be no
thief; so if there were none that would give an ear to tales, there would be no
talebearers. A second step is, the giving too easy credit to them, for this
helps them to attain part of their end, they desire to beget a general ill
opinion of such a man, but the way of doing it must be by causing it, first, in
particular men: and if thou suffer them to do it in thee, they have so far
prospered in their aim. And for thy own part thou do a great injustice to thy
neighbor to believe ill of him without a just ground, which the accusation of
such a person certainly is not. A third step is the reporting to others, what
is thus told thee; by which thou make thy self directly a party in the
slander, and after thou have unjustly withdrawn from thy neighbor thy own good
opinion, endeavourest to rob him also of that of others. This is very little
below the guilt of the first whisperer, and tends as much to the ruin of our
neighbors credit. And these several degrees have so close a dependence one
upon another, that it will be very hard for him that allows himself the first,
to escape the other; and indeed he that can take delight to hear his neighbor
defamed, may well he presumed of so malicious a humor, that it is not likely he
should stick at spreading the slander. He therefore that will preserve his
innocence in this matter, must never in the least degree cherish or countenance
any that brings these false reports. And it is not less necessary to his peace,
then to his innocence; for he that once entertains them, must never expect
quiet, but shall be continually incited, and stirred up even against his
nearest, and dearest relations; so that this whisperer, and slanderer is to be
looked on by all, as a common enemy, he being so as well to those to whom, as
of whom he speaks.

6. But besides this grosser way of slandering, there is another, whereby we
may impair, and lessen the credit of our neighbor, and that is by contempt,
and despising; one Despising and scoffing.
common effect whereof is scoffing, and deriding him. This is very injurious to
a man's reputation, for the generality of men do rather take up opinions upon
trust, then judgment; and therefore if they see a man despised, and scorned,
they will be apt to do the like. But besides this effect of it, there is a
present injustice in the very act of despising, and scorning others. There are
ordinarily but three things, which are made the occasions of it, (unless it be
with such, with whom virtue and godliness are made the most reproachful things,
and such despising is not only an injury to our neighbor, but even to God
himself for whose sake it is, that he is so despised) those three are first the
infirmities, secondly the calamities, thirdly the sins of a man, and each of
these are very far from being ground of our triumphing over him.

7. First, for infirmities, be they either of For infirmities.
body or mind, the deformity and unhandsomness of the one, or the weakness, and
folly of the other, they are things out of his power to help, they are not his
faults, but the wise dispensations of the great Creator, who bestows the
excellency of body and mind, as he pleases, and therefore to scorn a man,
because he has them not, is in effect to reproach God who gave them not to him.

8. So also for the calamities, and miseries, For calamities.
that befall a man, be it want, or sickness, or whatever else, these also come
by the providence of God, who raises up, and pulls down, as seems good to
him, and it belongs not to us to judge, what are the motives to him to do so,
as many do, who upon any affliction that befalls another, are presently
concluding, that sure it is some extraordinary guilt, which pulls this upon
him, though they have no particular to lay to his charge. This rash judgment
our Savior reproves in the Jews, Luke 13. where on occasion of the
extraordinary sufferings of the Galileans, he asks them, verse. 2. Suppose ye
that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they
suffered such things? I tell you nay, but except you repent, ye shall all
likewise perish: when we see Gods hand heavy upon others, it is no part of our
business to judge them, but our selves, and by repentance to prevent, what our
own sins have deserved. But to reproach, and revile any that are in affliction,
is that barbarous cruelty, taken notice of by the Psalmist, as the height of
wickedness, Psalm. 69. 26. They persecute him whom thou have smitten, and they
talk to the grief of them whom thou have wounded: In all the miseries of
others, compassion becomes a debt to them; how unjust are they then, that in
stead of paying them that debt, afflict them with scorn and reproach?

9. Nay the very sins of men, though as For sins.
they have more of their wills in them, they may seem more to deserve reproach,
yet certainly they also oblige us to the former duty of compassion, and that in
the highest degree, as being the things, which of all others make a man the
most miserable; in all these cases, if we consider how subject we are to the
like our selves; and that it is only Gods mercy to us, by which we are
preserved from the worst that any man else is under, it will surely better
become us to look up to him with thankfulness, then down on them with contempt
and despising. Thus you see the direct injustice of scorning and contemning our
brethren, to which when that other is added, which naturally follows, as a
consequent of this; to wit, the begetting the like contempt in others, there
can sure be no doubt of its being a great and horrible injustice to our
neighbor in respect of his credit.

10. Now how great the injury of destroying Destroying the credit a great
injury.
a man's credit is, may be measured by these two things; first, the value of the
thing he is robbed of, and secondly the difficulty of making reparations. For
the first, it is commonly known, that a man's good name is a thing he holds most
precious, oftentimes dearer then his life, as we see by the hazards men
sometimes run to preserve even a mistaken reputation; but it is sure it is that,
which has even by sober men been esteemed one of the greatest happinesses of
life: And to some sort of men, such especially as subsist by dealings in the
world, it is so necessary, that it may well be reconed as the means of their
livelihood, and then sure, it is no slight matter to rob a man of what is thus
valuable to him.

11. Secondly, the difficulty of making reparations increases the injury, and
that is such in this case of defamation, that I may And irrepairable.
rather call it an impossibility then a difficulty: For when men are possessed of
an ill opinion of a person, it is no easy matter to work it out; so that the
slanderer is herein like a young Conjurer, that raises a Devil he knows not how
to lay again. Nay, suppose men were generally as willing to lay down ill
conceits of their neighbors, as they are to take them up, yet how is it
possible for him that makes even the most public recantation of his slander,
to be sure that every man that has come to the hearing of the one, shall do so
of the other also? And if there be but one person, that does not, (as probably
there will be many) then is the reparation still short of the injury.

12. This consideration is very fit to make Yet every guilty person must do all
he can to repair the injury.
men afraid of doing this wrong to their neighbor; but let it not be made use
of to excuse those that have already done the wrong, from endeavoring to make
the best reparations they can; for though it is odds, it will not equal the
injury, yet let them however do what they are able toward it: And this is so
necessary toward the obtaining pardon of the sin, that none must expect the
one, that do not perform the other. Whosoever therefore sets himself to repent
of his faults of this kind, must by all prudent means endeavor to restore his
neighbor to that degree of credit he has deprived him of; and if that be not
to be done without bringing the shame upon himself, of confessing publicly the
slander, he must rather submit to that, then be wanting to this necessary part
of justice, which he owes to the wronged party.

13. Thus I have gone through these four branches of Negative Justice to our
Neighbor; wherein we must yet further observe, that this justice binds us not
only in respect of our words, and actions, but of our very thoughts, and
affections also; we are not only forbid to hurt, but to hate, not only
restrained Justice in the thoughts.
from bringing any of these evils forementioned upon him, but we must not so
much as wish them before, not delight in them after they are befallen him: we
must take no pleasure either in the sin of his Soul, or hurt of his body; we
must not envy him any good thing he enjoyes, nor so much as wish to possess
our selves of it: Neither will it suffice us, that we so bridle our tongue,
that we neither slander, nor revile, if we have that malice in our hearts,
which makes us wish his discredit; or rejoice, when we find it procured,
though we have no hand in the procuring it. This is the peculiar property of
Gods Laws, that they reach to the heart; whereas men's can extend only to the
words, and actions; and the reason is clear, because he is the only Lawgiver,
that can see what is in the heart, therefore if there were the perfectest
innocence in our tongue, and hands, yet if there be not this purity of heart,
it will never serve to acquit us before him. The counsel therefore of Solomon
is excellent, Prove 4. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are
the issues of life. Let us strictly guard that, so that no malicious unjust
thought enter there; and that not only, as it may be the means of betraying us
to the grosser act, but also as it is in it self such a pollution in Gods
sight, as will unfit us for the blessed vision of God, whom none but the pure
in heart have promise of seeing, Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for
they shall see God.

14. I come now to speak of the Positive Positive Justice.
part of Justice, which is the yielding to every man that which by any kind of
right he may challenge from us. Of these dues there are some that are general
to all mankind, others that are restrained within some certain conditions and
qualities of men, and become due only by virtue of those qualifications.

15. Of the first sort, that is those, that Speaking Truth a due to all men.
are due to all men, we may reckon first the speaking Truth, which is a common
debt we owe to all mankind; speech is given us as the instrument of
intercourse and society, one with another, the means of discovering the mind
which otherwise lies hid, and concealed, so that were it not for this, our
conversations would be but the same as of beasts: Now this being intended for
the good and advantage of mankind, it is a due to it, that it be used to that
purpose; but he that Lies, is so far from paying that debt, that on the
contrary he makes his speech the means of injuring and deceiving him he speaks
to.

16. There might much be said to show the Lying expressly forbidden in Scripture.
several sorts of Obligations we lie under, to speak truth to all men; but
supposing I write to Christians, I need not insist on any other, then the
Commands we have of it in Scripture, thus Ephesians. 4 25. the Apostle commands that
putting away lying, they speak every man truth with his neighbor: And again,
Col. 3. 9. Lie not one to another: and Prove. 6. 17. a lying tongue is mentioned
as one of those things that are abominations to the Lord. Yea so much does he
hate a lie, that it is not the most pious and religious end, that can reconcile
him to it, the man that lies, though in a zeal to Gods glory, shall yet be
judged as a sinner, Romans 3. 7. what shall then become of those multitudes of
men that lie on quite other ends? some out of malice, to mischief others, some
out of covetousness to defraud their neighbors, some out of pride, to set
themselves out, and some out of fear, to avoid a danger or hide a fault. But of
a yet stranger sort, then all these, are those, that do it without any
discernable temptation, that will tell lies by way of story, take pleasure in
telling incredible things, from which themselves reap nothing, but the
reputation of impertinent liars.

17. Among these diverse kinds of falsehoods, Truth is become such a rarity among
us, that it is a most difficult matter, to find such a The great commonness
and folly of this sin.
man as David describes, Psalm 15. 2. That speaks the truth from his heart.
Men have so glibbed their tongues to lying, that they do it familiarly upon any
or no occasion, never thinking that they are observed either by God or man. But
they are extremely deceived in both; for there is scarce any sin (that is at
all endeavored to be hid) which is more discernable even to men: they that
have a custom of lying, seldom fail, be their memory never so good) at some
time or other to betray themselves; and when they do, there is no sort of sin,
meets with greater scorn, and reproach; a Liar being by all accounted a title
of the greatest infamy, and shame. But as for God, it is madness to hope that
all their Arts can disguise them from him, who needs none of those casual ways
of discovery, which men do, but sees the heart, and so knows at the very
instant of speaking, the falsehood of what is said: and then by his Title of The
God of Truth, is tied not only to hate, but punish it, and accordingly you see,
Rev 20. that the Liars are in the number of those that are shut out of the new
Jerusalem; and not only so, but also have their part in the Lake that burns
with Fire and Brimstone. If therefore thou be not of the humor of that unjust
Judge Christ speaks of, Luke 18. 2. Who neither feared God, nor regarded man,
thou must resolve on this part of Justice, the putting away lying, which is
abhorred by both.

18. A second thing we owe to all is Humanity Courteous behavior a due to all
men.
and Courtesy of behavior, contrary to that sullen churlishness we find
spoken of in Nabal, who was of such a temper, that a man could not speak to
him, 1 Samuel 25. 17. There is sure so much of respect due to the very nature of
mankind, that no accidental advantage of health or honor, which one man has
above another, can acquit him from that debt to it, even in the person of the
meanest; and therefore that crabbed and harsh behavior to any that bears but
the form of a man, is an injustice to that nature he partakes of. And when we
consider how much that nature is dignified by the Son of God his taking it upon
him, the obligation to reverence it is yet greater, and consequently the sin of
thus contemning it.

19. This is the common guilt of all proud and haughty persons, who are so
busy in admiring Not paid by the proud man.
themselves, that they over look all that is valuable in others, and so think
they owe not so much as common civility to other men, whilst they set up
themselves as Nebuchadnezzar did his Image to be worshipped of all. This is
sure very contrary to what the Apostle exhorts, Rom 12. 10. In honor prefer
one another: And again, Phil. 2. 4. Look not every man on his own things, but
every man also on the things of others; and let such remember the sentence of
our blessed Savior, Luke 14. 11. He that exalts himself shall be abased, and
he that humbles himself shall be exalted, which we often find made good to
us, in the strange down falls of proud men. And it is no wonder, for this sin
makes both God and men our enemies; God, as the Scripture every where
testifies, abhorres it, and all that are guilty of it, and men are by means of
it used so contemptuously and unkindly by us, that they are by nothing more
provoked against us, and then whom God and man thus resist, who shall secure
and uphold?

20. A third thing we owe to all is Meekness; Meekness a due to all men.
that is, such a patience, and gentleness toward all, as may bridle that mad
passion of anger, which is not only very uneasy to our selves, as has already
been showed, but also very mischievous to our neighbors, as the many outrages,
that are often committed in it, do abundantly testify. That this duty of
meekness is to be extended to all men, there is no doubt; for the Apostle in
express words commands it, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. Be patient toward all men, and that
it should seem in spite of all provocation to the contrary, for the very next
words are, See that none render evil for evil, or railing for railing: and
Timothy is commanded to exercise this meekness even toward them who oppose
themselves against the Doctrine of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 2. 2^. which was a case,
wherein some heat would probably have been allowed, if it might have been in
any.

21. This virtue of meekness is so necessary to the preserving the peace of the
world, that it is no wonder, that Christ, who came to plant peace among men,
should enjoin meekness Brauling very insufferable.
to all. I am sure the contrary effects of rage and anger are every where
discernable, it breeds disquiet in Kingdoms, in Neighbourhoods, in Families,
and even between the nearest relations; it is such a humor, that Solomon warns
us never to enter a friendship with a man that is of it, Prove. 22. 24. Make no
friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shall not go. It
makes a man unfit to be either friend or companion, and indeed makes one
insufferable to all that have to do with one, as we are again taught by
Solomon, Prove. 21. 19 where he prefers the dwelling in a wilderness, rather
then with a contentious and angry woman, and yet a woman has ordinarily only
that one weapon of the tongue to offend with. Indeed to any that have not the
same unquietness of humor, there can scarce be a greater uneasiness, then to
converse with those, that have it, though it never proceed farther, then words.
How great this sin is, we may judge by what our Savior says of it, Matt. 5.
where there are several degrees of punishment allotted to several degrees of
it; but alas! we daily outgo that, which he there sets as the highest step of
this sin; the calling thou fool, is a modest sort of reviling, compared with
those multitudes of bitter reproaches we use in our rages.

22. Nay, we often go yet higher; reproaches serve not our turn, but we must
curse too; How common is it to hear men use the horredst execrations, and
cursings upon It leads to that great sin of cursing.
every the slightest cause of displeasure? nay, perhaps without any cause at
all; so utterly have we forgot the rule of the Apostle, Romans 12. 14. Bless and
curse not; Yea, the precept of our blessed Savior himself, Matthew. 5. 44. Pray
for those that despi^efully use you. Christ bids us pray for those, who do us
all injury, and we are often cursing those, who do us none. This is a kind of
saying our prayers backward indeed, which is said to be part of the ceremony
the Devil uses, at the making of a Witch, and we have in this case also reason
to look on it, as a means of bringing us into acquaintance, and league with
that accursed spirit here, and to a perpetual abideing with him hereafter. It Is
the language of Hell, which can never fit us to be Citizens of the New
Jerusalem, but marks us out for inhabitants of that land of darkness. I
conclude this with the advice of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4, 31. Let all bitterness,
and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you with
all malice.

23. Having spoken thus far of those common Particular dues.
dues, wherein all men are concerned, and have a right, I am now to proceed to
those other sorts of dues, which belong to particular persons, by virtue of
some special qualification. These qualifications may be of three kinds, that of
excellency, that of Want, and that of Relation.

24. By that of excellency, I mean any extraordinary A respect due to men of
extraordinary gifts.
gifts, or endowments of a person; such as wisdom, learning, and the like, but
especially grace: these being the singular gifts of God, have a great value and
respect due to them, wheresoever they are to be found; and this we must readily
pay by a willing, and glad acknowledgement of those his gifts in any he has
bestowed them on, and bearing them a reverence, and respect, answerable
thereunto, and not out of an overweening of our own excellencies, despise and
undervalue those of others, as they do, who will yield nothing to be reason,
but what themselves speak, nor any thing piety, but what agrees with their own
practice.

25. Also we must not envy, or grudge that they have those gifts, for that is
not only We are not to envy them.
an injustice to them, but injurious also to God who gave them as it is at
large set forth in the parable of the laborers, Mat. 20. where he asks them,
who grumbled at the masters bounty to others, Is it not lawful for me to do
what I will with my own, is thine eye evil because mine is good? This envying
at Gods goodness to others, is in effect a murmuring against God, who thus
disposes it, neither can there be a greater, and more direct opposition against
him, then for me to hate and wish ill to a man, for no other reason, but
because God has loved and done well to him. and then in respect of the man,
it is the most unreasonable thing in the world, to love him the less, merely
because he has those good qualities, for which I ought to love him more.

26. Neither must we detract from the excellencies Nor detract from them.
of others, we must not seek to eclipse or darken them by denying either the
kinds, or degrees of them; by that means to take off that esteem, which is due
to them. This sin of detraction is generally the effect of the former, of envy,
he that envies a man's worth, will be apt to do all he can to lessen it in the
opinions of others, and to that purpose will either speak slightly of his
excellencies; or if they be so apparent, that he knows not how to cloud them,
he will try if he can by reporting some either real, or feigned infirmity of
his, take off from the value of the other, and so by casting in some dead
flies, as the wise man speaks, Eccles. 10. 1. Strive to corrupt the savor of
the ointment: this is a great injustice, and directly contrary to that duty we
owe, of acknowledging, and reverencing the gifts of God in our brethren.

27. And both those sins of envy, and detraction The folly of both those sins.
do usually prove as great follies, as wickedness; the envy constantly brings
pain, and torment to a man's self, whereas if he could but cheerfully, and
gladly look on those good things of another, he could never fail to be the
better for them himself; the very pleasure of seeing them would be some
advantage to him but besides that those gifts of his brother may be many ways
helpful to him, his wisdom and learning may give him instruction; his piety,
and virtue, example, etc. but all this the envious man loses, and has nothing
in exchange for it, but a continual fretting, and gnawing of heart.

28. And then for detraction, that can hardly be so managed, but it will be
found out; he that is still putting in Caveats against men's good thoug^ts of
others, will quickly discover himself to do it out of envy, and then that will
be sure to lessen their esteem of himself, but not of those he envies, it being
a sort of bearing testimony to those excellencies, that he thinks them worth
the envying.

29. What has been said of the value, and A respect due to men in regard of
their ranks and qualities.
respect due to those excellencies of the mind, may in a lower degree be
applied to the outward advantages of honor, greatness, and the like. These
though they are not of equal value with the former (and such for which no man
is to prize himself) yet in regard, that these degrees, and distinctions of men
are by Gods wise providence disposed, for the better ordering of the world,
there is such a civil respect due to those, to whom God has dispensed them, as
may best preserve that order, for which they were intended. Therefore all
inferiors are to behave themselves to their superiors with modesty, and
respect, and not by a rude boldness confound that order which it has pleased
God to set in the world, but according as our Church-Catechism teaches, order
themselves lowly and reverently to all their betters. And here the former
caution against envy comes in most seasonably; these outward advantages being
things, of which generally men have more taste, then of the other, and
therefore will be more apt to envy, and repine to see others exceed them
therein, to this therefore all the former considerations against envy will be
very proper, and the more necessary to be made use of, by how much the
temptation is in this case to most minds the greater.

30. The second qualification is that of want; whoever is in distress for any
thing, wherewith Dues to those that are in any sort of want.
I can supply him, that distress of his makes it a duty in me so to supply him,
and this in all kinds of wants. Now the ground of its being a duty is, that God
has given men abilities not only for their own use, but for the advantage and
benefit of others, and therefore what is thus given for their use, becomes a
debt to them, whenever their need requires it. Thus he that is ignorant and
wants knowledge is to be instructed by him, that has it, and this is one
special end, why that knowledge is given him: The tongue of the learned is
given to speak a word in season. Esaias 50. 4. He that is in sadness, and
affliction, is to be comforted by him that is himself in cheerfulness. This we
see Saint Paul makes it the end of Gods comforting him, that he might be able
to comfort them that are in any trouble, 2 Cor. 1. 4. He that is in any course
of sin, and wants reprehension and counsel, must have that want supplied to him
by those who have such abilities, and opportunities, as may make it likely to
do good. That this is a justice we owe to our neighbor, appears plainly by
that text, Levit. 19. 17 Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou
shall in any wise reprove him, and not suffer sin upon him; where we are under
the same obligation to reprove him, that we are not to hate him. He that lies
under any slander, or unjust defamation, is to be defended, and cleared by him,
that knows his innocence, or else he makes himself guilty of the slander,
because he neglects to do that which may remove it; and how great an injustice,
that of slandering our neighbor is, I have already showed.

31. Lastly, he that is in poverty and need, To the poor.
must be relieved by him that is in plenty; and he is bound to it, not only in
charity, but even in justice. Solomon calls it a due, Prove. 3. 27. Withhold not
good from him to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do
it: and what that good is, he explains in the very next verse: Say not to thy
neighbor, go and come again, and to morrow I will give, when thou have it by
thee: It seems it is the withholding a due, so much as to defer giving to our
poor neighbor. And we find God did among the Jews separate a certain portion
of every man's increase to the use of the poor, a tenth every third year (which
is all one with a thirtieth part every year, Deuteronomy. 14. 28. 29. And this was to
be paid not as a charity, or liberality, but as a debt, they were unjust, if
they withheld it. And surely we have no reason to think, that Christian justice
is sunk so much below the Jewish, that either nothing at all, or a less
proportion is now required of us. I wish our practice were but at all
answerable to our obligation in this point, and then surely we should not see
so many Lazarus's lie unrelieved at our doors, they having a better right to
our superfluities, then we our selves have, and then what is it, but arrant
robbery to bestow that upon our vanities, nay our sins, which should be their
portion.

32. In all the foregoing cases, he that has God withdraws those abilities
which are not thus employed.
ability is to look upon himself, as Gods steward, who has put it into his
hands to distribute to them, that want, and therefore not to do it, is the same
injustice and fraud, that it would be in any steward to purse up that money for
his private benefit, which was entrusted to him, for the maintenance of the
family, and he that shall do thus, has just reason to expect the doom of the
unjust steward, Luke 16. to be put out of the stewardship, to have those
abilities taken from him, which he has so unfaithfully employed. And as for
all the rest, so particularly for that of wealth, it is very commonly to be
observed, that it is withdrawn from those that thus defraud the poor of their
parts, the griping miser coming often by strange undiscernable ways to
poverty; and no wonder, he having no title to Gods blessing on his heap, who
does not consecrate a part to him in his poor members. And therefore we see the
Israelites before they could make that challenge of Gods promise to bless them,
Deuteronomy. 26. 15. Look down from thy holy habitation and bless thy people Israel,
etc. they were first to pay the poor man's tithes, ver. 12. without which they
could lay no claim to it. This withholding more then is meet, as Solomon says,
Prove. 11. 24. tends to poverty; and therefore as thou would play the good
husband for thy self, be careful to perform this justice according to thy
ability to all that are in want.

33. The third qualification is that of Relation, Duties inspect of relation.
and of that there may be diverse sorts, arising from diverse grounds, and
duties, answerable to each of them. There is first a relation of a Debtor to a
Creditor; and he that stands in that relation to any, whether by virtue of
bargain, loan, or promise, it is his duty to pay justly what he owes, if he be
able (as on the otherside if he be not; it is the Creditors, to deal charitably
and Christianly with him, and not to exact of him beyond his ability.) But I
need not insist on this, having already by showing you the sin of withholding
debts, informed you of this duty.

34. There is also a relation of an obliged Gratitude to Benefactors.
person to his Benefactor, that is one that has done him good, of what kind
soever, whether spiritual, or corporal; and the duty of that person is, first
thankfulness, that is a ready and hearty acknowledgement of the courtesy
received: secondly, prayer for Gods blessings, and rewards upon him; and
thirdly, an endeavor, as opportunity and ability serves, to make returns of
kindness, by doing good turns back again. This duty of gratitude to Benefactors
is so generally acknowledged by all, even the most barbarous and savagest of
men, that he must have put off much of his humane nature, that refuses to
perform it. The very Publicans and sinners, as our Savior says, do good to
those ^^a do good to them.

35. Yet how many of us fail even in this, The contrary too common.
how frequent is it to see men, not only neglect to repay courtesies, but return
injuries in stead of them? it is too observable in many particulars, but in
none more, then in the case of advice, and admonition, which is of all others,
the most precious part of kindness, the reallest good turn that can be done
from one man to another. And therefore those that do this to us, should be
looked on, as our prime and Greatest Benefactors. But alas! how few are there
that can find gratitude, shall I say? nay patience for such a courtesy? Go
about to admonish a man of a fault, or tell him of an Error, he presently
looks on you, as his enemy, you are, as S. Paul tells the Galatians, Chap. 4.
16. become his enemy because you tell him the truth; such a pride there is in
men's hearts, that they must not be told of any thing amiss, though it be with
no other intent, but that they may amend it. A strange madness this is, the
same that it would be in a sick man, to fly in the face of him that comes to
cure him, on a fancy that he disparaged him in supposing him sick; so that we
may well say with the Wise man, Prove. 12. 1. He that hates reproof is
brutish. There cannot be in the world a more unhappy temper, for it fortifies
a man in his sins, raises such Mounts, and Bulwarks about them, that no man can
come to assault them; and if we may believe Solomon, destruction will not fail
to attend it, Prove. 29. 1. He that being often reproved hardens his neck,
shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. But then again in respect
of the admonisher, it is the greatest injustice, I may say, cruelty that can be,
he comes in tenderness, and compassion to rescue thee from danger, and to that
purpose puts himself upon a very uneasy task; for such the general impatience
men have to admonition, has now made it; and what a defeat, what a grief is it
to him to find, that in stead of reforming the first fault, thou art run into a
second; to wit, that of causless displeasure against him? This is one of the
worst, and yet I doubt, the commonest sort of unthankfulness to Benefactors,
and so a great failing in that duty we owe to that sort of relation. But
perhaps these will be looked on as remote relations (yet it is sure they are
such as challenge all that duty I have assigned to them) I shall in the next
place proceed to those relations, which are by all acknowledged to be of the
greatest neerness.

PARTITION XIV. Of Duty to Parents; Magistrates, Pastors. Of the Duty of
Parents to Children, etc.
1. THE first of those nearer sorts Duty to Parents.
of relations, is that of a Parent; And here it will be necessary to consider
the several sorts of Parents, according to which the duty of them is to be
measured. Those are these three, the Civil, the Spiritual, the Natural.

2. The Civil Parent is he, whom God has established the Supreme Magistrate,
who Duties to the Supreme Magistrate.
by a just right possesses the Throne in a Nation. This is the common Father of
all those that are under his authority. The duty we owe to this Parent is,
first, Honor and Reverence, Honor.
looking on him, as upon one, on whom god has stamped much of his own power
and authority, and therefore paying him all honor and esteem, never daring,
upon any pretense whatsoever, to speak evil of the Ruler of our people, Acts
23. 5.

3. Secondly, Paying Tribute; This is expressly Tribute.
commanded by the Apostle, Romans 13. 6. Pay ye Tribute also, for they are Gods
Ministers attending continually upon this very thing. God has set them apart as
Ministers for the common good of the people, and therefore it is all justice,
they should be maintained and supported by them. And indeed when it is
considered, what are the cares and troubles of that high calling, how many
thorns are platted in every Crown, we have very little reason to envy them
these dues; and it may truly be said, there is none of their poor laboring
subjects that earns their living so hardly.

4. Thirdly, We are to pray for them: this Prayers for them.
is also expressly commanded by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 2. to be done for Kings,
and for all that are in authority. The businesses of that calling are so
weighty, the dangers and hazards of it so great, that they of all others need
prayers for Gods direction, assistance, and blessing, and the prayers that are
thus poured out for them, will return into our own bosoms, for the blessings
they receive from God tend to the good of the people, to their living a quiet
and peaceable life, as it is in the close of the verse forementioned.

5. Fourthly, We are to pay them Obedience. Obedience.
This is likewise strictly charged by the Apostle, 1 Peter 2. 13. Submit your
selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King
as Supreme, or unto Governors as those that are sent by him: We owe such an
obedience to the supreme power, that whoever is authorized by him, we are ^o
submit to; and S. Paul likewise is most full to this purpose, Romans 13. 1. Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers: And again, Ver. 2. Wh^soever
resists the powers, resists the Ordinance of God. And it is observable that
these precepts were given at a time, when those powers were Heathens, and cruel
persecutors of Christianity; to show us, that no pretense of the wickedness of
our Rulers can free us of this duty. An obedience we must pay either Active or
Passive: the Active in the case of all lawful commands; That is, when ever the
Magistrate commands something, which is not contrary to some command of God, we
are then bound to act according to that command of the Magistrate, to do the
things he requires. But when he enjoins any thing contrary to what God has
commanded, we are not then to pay him this active obedience; we may, nay we
must refuse thus to act, (yet here we must be very well assured that the thing
is so contrary, and not pretend conscience for a cloak of stubbornness) we are
in that case to obey God rather then man. But even this is a season for the
Passive obedience, we must patiently suffer, what he inflicts on us, for such
refusal, and not, to secure our selves, rise up against him. For who can
stretch his hand against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? says David to
Abishai, 1 Samuel 26. 9. and that at a time when David was under a great
persecution from Saul, nay, had also the assurance of the Kingdom after him,
and St. Paul's sentence in this case is most heavy, Romans 13. 2. They that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Here is very small encouragement
to any to rise up against the lawful Magistrate, for though they should so far
prosper here, as to secure themselves from him by this means, yet there is a
King of Kings from whom no power can shelter them, and this damnation in the
close will prove a sad prize of their victories. What is on the other side the
duty of the Magistrate to the people will be vain to mention here, none of that
rank being like to read this Treatise, and it being very useless for the people
to inquire, what is the duty of their Supreme, wherein the most are already
much better read, then in their own, it may suffice them to know that
whatsoever his duty is, or however performed, he is accountable to none but
God, and no failing of his part can warrant them to fail of theirs.

6. The second sort of Parents are the spiritual; That is, the Ministers of the
Word, Duties to our Pastors.
whether such, as be Governors in the Church, or others under them, who are to
perform the same offices to our Souls, that our natural parents do to our
bodies. Thus S. Paul tells the Co^inthians, that in Christ Jesus he had
begotten them through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 15. and the Galatians, Chap. 4. 19.
that he travels in birth of them, till Christ be formed in them: And again, 1
Cor. 3. 2. He had fed them with Milk; that is, such Doctrines as were agreeable
to that infant state of Christianity they were then in; but he had stronger
meat for them of full age, Heb. 5. 14. All these are the Offices of a Parent,
and therefore they that perform them to us, may well be accounted as such.

7. Our duty to these is first to love them, Love.
to bear them that kindness, which belongs to those who do us the greatest
benefits. This is required by S. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. I beseech you, brethren,
mark them which labor among you, and are over you, in the Lord, and admonish
you, and esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. The work is such
as ought in all reason to procure them love, it being of the highest advantage
to us.

8. Secondly, It Is our duty to value and Esteem.
esteem them, as we see in the text now mentioned, and surely this is most
reasonable, if we consider either the nature of their work, or who it is that
imployes them. The nature of their work is of all others the most excellent; we
use to value other professions proportionably to the dignity and worth of the
things they deal in. Now surely there is no Merchandise of equal worth with a
Soul, and this is their Traffic, rescuing precious Souls from perdition. And
if we consider further, who it is that imployes them, it yet adds to the
reverence due to them. They are Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 20. and
Ambassadors are by the Laws of all Nations to be used with a respect,
answerable to the quality of those that send them. Therefore Christ tells his
disciples, when he sends them out to preach, He that despises you despises
me, and he that despises me despises him that sent me. Luke 10. 16. It seems
there is more depends on the despising of Ministers, then men ordinarily
consider, it is the despising of God and Christ both. Let those think of this,
who make it their pastime, and sport to affront, and deride this calling. And
let those also, who dare presume to exercise the Offices of it, without being
lawfully called to it, which is a most high presumption; It Is as if a man on
his own head should go, as an Ambassador from his Prince; the Apostle says of
the Priests of the Law, which yet are inferior to those of the Gospel, That no
man takes this honor to himself, but he which was called of God. Heb. 5. 4.
How shall then any man dare to assume this greater honor to himself, that is
not called to it; Neither will it suffice to say, they have the inward call of
the spirit; for since God has established an order in the Church, for the
admitting men to this Office, they that shall take it upon them without that
authority, resist that ordinance, and are but of the number of those thieves
and robbers, as our Savior speaks, John 10. which come not in by the door.
Besides the sad experience of these times show, that many who pretend most to
this inward call of the spirit, are called by some other spirit, then that of
God, the doctrines they vent, being usually directly contrary to that word of
his, on which all true Doctrines must be founded. Such are to be looked on as
those seducers, those false prophets, whereof we are so often warned in the
Epistles of the Apostles. And whosoever countenances them, or follows them,
partakes with them in their guilt. It is recorded of Jeroboam, as a crying sin,
that he made of the m^anest of the people priests; that is, such as had by Gods
institution no right to it, and whoever hearkens to these uncalled preachers
runs into that very sin, for without the encouragement of being followed, they
would not long continue in the course, and therefore they that give them that
encouragement, have much to answer for and are certainly guilty of the sin of
despising their true Pastors, when they shall thus set up these false apostles
against them. This is a guilt this age is too much concerned in, God in his
mercy so timely convince us of it, as may put a stop to that confusion and
impiety, which breaks in so fast upon us by it.

9. Thirdly, We owe to them maintenance: Maintenance.
but of this I have spoken already in the first part of this Book, and shall
not here repeat. Fourthly, We owe them obedience, Obey them, Obedience.
says the Apostle, that have the rule over you and submit your selves, for
they watch for your Souls, Heb. 13. 17. This obedience is to be paid them in
spiritual things; that is, whatsoever they out of Gods word shall declare to
us, to be Gods Commands, these we are diligently to obey, remembering that it is
not they, but God requires it, according to that of Christ, he that hears
you, hears me, Luke 10. 16. And this whether it be delivered by the way of
public preaching, or private exhortation, for in both, so long as they keep
them to the rule, which is Gods Word, they are the Messengers of the Lord of
Hosts. Mal. 2. 7. This obedience the Apostle inforceth from a double motive,
one taken from their Ministry, another from themselves. They watch, says he,
for your Souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief; The people are by their obedience to enable their
Pastors to give a comfortable account of their Souls, and it is a most unkind
return of all their care and labors; to be put to grieve for the ill success
of them. But then in the second place, it is their own concernment also; they
may put their Ministers to the discomfort of seeing all their pains cast away,
but themselves are like to get little by it, that (says the Apostle, Heb. 13.
17.) will be unprofitable for you; it is your selves, that will finally prove
the losers by it, you lose all those glorious rewards, which are offered, as
the crown of this obedience, you get nothing but an addition to your sin and
punishment, for as our Savior tells the Pharisees, If he had not come and
spoken to them they had not had sin, John 15. 24. that is, in comparison with
what they then had; so certainly they that never had the Gospel preached to
them, are much more innocent then they that have heard and resisted it. And for
the punishment, what Christ told those to whom he had preached, That it should
be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, which were Heathen Cities, then for them,
the same undoubtedly we may conclude of our selves.

10. Lastly, We are to pray for them; This Prayers for them.
S. Paul every where requires of his Spiritual children; thus Ephesians. 6. 7, 8.
having commanded prayer for all Saints, he adds, And for me, that utterance may
be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of
the Gospel; and so again, Col. 4. 3. And this remains still a duty to these
Spiritual Fathers, to pray for such assistances of Gods Spirit to them, as may
enable them rightly to discharge that Holy Calling. I shall omit to set down
here, what is the duty of Ministers to the people, upon the same consideration,
on which I forbear to mention the duty of Magistrates.

11. The third sort of parent is the natural, Duties to our natural Parents.
the fathers of our flesh, as the Apostle calls them, Heb. 12. 9. And to these
we owe several duties, as first we owe them reverence, and Reverence.
respect; we must behave our selves toward them with all humility, and
observance, and must not upon any pretense of infirmity in them, despise or
contemn them, either in outward behavior, or so much as inwardly in our
hearts. If indeed they have infirmities, it must be our business to cover, and
conceal them; like Shem and Japhet, who while cursed Cham published and
disclosed the nakedness of their father, covered it, Genesis 9. 23. and that in
such a manner too, as even themselves might not behold it. We are as much as
may be to keep our selves from looking on those nakednesses of our parents,
which may tempt us to think irreverently of them. This is very contrary to the
practice of too many children, who do not only publish and deride the
infirmities of their Parents, but pretend they have those infirmities they have
not; there is ordinarily such a pride, and headiness in youth, that they cannot
abide to submit to the counsels, and directions of their Elders, and therefore
to shake them off, are willing to have them pass for the effects of dotage,
when they are indeed the fruits of sobriety, and experience. To such the
exhortation of Solomon is very necessary, Prove. 23. 22. Hearken to thy father
that begat thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old. A multitude of
texts more there are in that book to this purpose, which shows that the wisest
of men thought it necessary for children to attend to the counsel of their
parents. But the youth of our Age set up for wisdom, the quite contrary way,
and think they then become wits, when they are advanced to the despising the
counsel, yea mocking the persons of their parents. Let such if they will not
practice the exhortations, yet remember the threatening of the wise man, Pro.
30. 17. The eye that mocketh his father and despises to obey his mother, the
ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it.

A second duty to them is love; we are to bear them a real kindness, such as
may make Love.
us heartily desirous of all manner of good to them, and abhor to do any thing
that may grieve or disquiet them. This will appear but common gratitude; when
it is remembered, what our parents have done for us, how they were not only the
instruments of first bringing us into the world, but also of susteining and
supporting us after; and certainly they that rightly weigh the cares and fears,
that go to the bringing up of a child, will judge the love of that child to be
but a moderate return for them. This love is to be expressed several ways, first,
in all kindness of behavior, carrying our selves not only with an awe, and
respect, but with kindness and affection, and therefore most gladly and readily
doing those things, which may bring joy and comfort to them, and carefully
avoiding whatever may grieve, and afflict them. Secondly, this love is to be
expressed in praying for them. The debt a child owes to a parent is so great,
that he can never hope himself to discharge it, he is therefore to call in Gods
aid, to beg of him, that he will reward all the good, his parents have done for
him, by multiplying his blessings upon them; what shall we then say to those
children, that in stead of calling to heaven for blessings on their parents,
ransack hell for curses on them, and power out the blackest execrations against
them? This is a thing so horrid, that one would think there needed no
persuasion against it, because none could be so vile, as to fall into it, but
we see God himself, who best knows men's hearts, saw it possible; and therefore
laid the heaviest punishment upon it: He that curses father or mother, let him
die the death, Exodus 21. 17 And alas! our d^yly experience tells us, it is not
only possible, but common even this of uttering curses But it is to be f^ared,
there is another, yet more common, that is the wishing cu^ses, th^ugh fear or
shame keep them from speaking out. How many children are there, that either
through impatience of the Government, or greediness of the possessions of the
Parents, have wished their deaths? But whoever does so let him remember, that
how sl^ly and fairly soever he carry it before men, there is one that sees
those secretest wishes of his heart, and in his sight he assuredly passes for
this heinous offender, a curser of his Parents. And then let it be considered,
that God has as well the power of punishing, as of seeing, and therefore since
he has pronounced death to be the reward of that sin it is not unreasonable to
expect he may himself inflict it; that they who watch for the death of their
Parents, may untimely meet with their own. The fifth Commandment promises long
life as the reward of honoring the Parent, to which it is very agreeable that
untimely death be the punishment of the contrary, and sure there is nothing
more highly contrary to that duty, then this we are now speaking of, the
cursing our Parents.

14. The third duty we owe to them is Obedience; This is not only contained in
the Obedience.
fifth Commandment, but expressly enjoined in other places of Scripture. Ephesians.
6. 1. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right; and again,
Col. 3. 20. Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing
to the Lord. We owe them an obedience in all things, unless where their
commands are contrary to the commands of God, for in that case our duty to God
must be preferred, and therefore if any Parent shall be so wicked, as to
require his child to steal, to lie, or to do any unlawful thing, the child
then offends not against his duty, though he disobey that command, nay, he must
disobey, or else he offends against a higher duty, even that he owes to God,
his Heavenly Father. Yet when it is thus necessary to refuse obedience, he
should take care to do it in such a modest, and respectful manner that it may
appear it is conscience only, and not stubbornness moves him to it. But in case
of all lawful commands; that is, when the thing commanded is either good, or
not evil, when it has nothing in it contrary to our duty to God, there the
child is bound to obey, be the command in a weightier or lighter matter; How
little this duty is regarded is too manifest every where in the world, where
Parents generally have their children no longer under command, then they are
under the rod; when they are once grown up, they think themselves free from all
obedience to them; or if some do continue to pay it, yet let the motive of it
be examined, and 'twill in too many be found only Worldly Prudence; They fear
to displease their Parents, least they should shorten their hand toward them,
and so they shall lose somewhat by it; but how few are there that obey purely
upon conscience of duty? This Sin of Disobedience to Parents was by the Law of
Moses punishable with death, as you may read Deuteronomy. 21. 18. but if Parents now a
days should proceed so with their children, many might soon make themselves
childless.

15. But of all the acts of disobedience, that of Especially in their Marriage.
marrying against the consent of the Parent, is one of the highest. Children
are so much the goods, the Possessions of the Parent, that they cannot without
a kind of theft, give away themselves without the allowance of those, that have
the right in them; and therefore we see under the Law, the Maid that had made
any vow, was not suffered to perform it, without the Consent of the Parent.
Numb. 30. 5. the right of the Parent was thought of force enough to cancel, and
make void the Obligation, even of a vow, and therefore surely it ought to be so
much considered by us as to keep us from making any such, whereby that right is
infringed.

16. A fourth duty to the Parent is to assist, Ministering to their wants.
and minister to them in all their wants of what kind soever, whether weakness,
and sickness of body, decayedness of understanding, or poverty, and lowness in
estate; in all these the child is bound according to his ability, to relieve
and assist them: for the two former, weakness of body, and infirmity of mind,
none can doubt of the duty, when they remember how every child did in his
infancy receive the very same benefit from the Parent, the child had then no
strength to support, no understanding to guide it self; the care of the Parents
was fain to supply both these to it, and therefore in common gratitude,
whenever either of these becomes the Parents case, as sometimes by great age,
or some accident both do, the child is to perform the same offices back again
to them. As for that of Relieving their poverty, there is the very same
Obligation to that with the former, it being but just to sustain thy Parent who
has formerly sustained thee: but besides this, Christ himself teaches us, that
this is contained within the precept of honoring their Parents; for when Mar.
7. 13. he accuses the Pharisees of rejecting the Commandment of God, to cleave
to their own traditions, he instances in this particular, concerning the
relieving of Parents, whereby it is manifest that this is a part of that duty
which is enjoined in the fifth Commandment, as you may see at large in the
Text, and such a duty it is that no pretense can absolve, or acquit us of it.
How then shall those answer it, that deny relief to their poor Parents, that
cannot part with their own excesses, and superfluities, which are indeed their
sins, to satisfy the necessities of those to whom they owe their being? Na,
some there are yet worse, who out of pride scorn to own their parents in their
poverty: Thus it often happens, when the Child is advanced to dignity or
wealth, they think it a disparagement to them to look on their Parents that
remain in a low condition, it being the betraying, as they think, to the world
the meanness of their birth, and so the poor Parent fares the worse for the
prosperity of his child. This is such a pride and unnaturalness together, as
will surely find a sharp vengeance from God; for if Solomon observe of Pride
alone, that it is the forerunner of destruction, Prove. 16. 18. we may much
rather conclude so of it, when it is thus accompanied.

17. To this that has been said of the duty Duty to be paid even to the worst
of Parents.
of Children to their Parents, I shall add only this; That no unkindness, no
fault of the Parent, can acquit the child of this duty; but as S. Peter tells
servants, 1 Peter 2. 18. that they must be subject not only to the good and
gentle Masters, but also to the froward; so certainly it belongs to children to
perform duty not only to the kind and virtuous, but even to the harshest, and
wicked'st Parent. For though the gratitude due to a kind Parent, be a very
forcible motive to make the child pay his duty, yet that is not the only nor
chiefest ground of it; That is laid in the Command of God, who requires us thus
to honor our Parents, and therefore though we should suppose a Parent so
unnatural, as never to have done any thing to oblige the child, (which can
hardly be imagined) yet still the Command of God continues in force, and we are
in conscience of that, to perform that duty to our Parents, thou^h none of the
other tie of gratitude, should lie on us.

But as this is due from the child to the Parents, Duty of Parents to Children.
so on the other side there are other things also due from the Parents to the
Child, and that throughout the several states and Ages of it.

18. First, There is the care of nourishing and sustaining it, which begins
from the very To nourish them.
birth, and continues a duty from the Parent, till the child be able to perform
it to himself; This is a duty, which nature teaches, even the savage beasts,
have a great care and tenderness in nourishing their young, and therefore may
serve to reproach and condemn all Parents, who shall be so unnatural as to
neglect this. I shall not here enter into the question, Whether the Mother be
obliged to give the Child its first nourishment, by giving it Suck her self,
because 'twill not be possible to affirm universally in the Case, there being
many circumstances, which may alter it, and make it not only lawful, but best
not to do it; all I shall say, is, that where no impediment of sickness,
weakness, or the like does happen, it is surely best for the Mother her self to
perform this office, there being many advantages to the child by it, which a
good Mother ought so far to consider, as not to sell them to her own sloth, or
niceness, or any such unworthy motive; for where such only are the grounds of
^o^bearing it, they will never be able to justify the omission, they being
themselves unjustifiable.

But besides this first care, which belongs to Bring them to Baptism.
the body of the child, there is another, which should begin near as early,
which belongs to their Souls, and that is the bringing them to the Sacrament of
Baptism, thereby to procure them an early right to all those precious
advantages, which that Sacrament conveyes to them. This is a duty the Parents
ought not to delay, it being most reasonable, that they who have been
instruments to convey the stain and pollution of sin to the poor Infant, should
be very earnest and industrious to have it washed off, as soon as may be:
Besides the life of so tender a creature is but a blast, and many times gone in
a moment; and though we are not to despair of Gods mercy to those poor
children, who dye without Baptism, yet surely those Parents commit a great
fault, by whose neglect it is, that they want it.

19. Secondly, The Parents must provide Educate them.
for the education of the child; they must, as Solomon speaks, Proverbs 22. 6.
Train up the child in the way he should go. As soon therefore as children come
to the use of reason, they are to be instructed, and that first in those
things, which concern their eternal wellbeing they are by little and little to
be taught all those things which God has commanded them, as their duty to
perform; as also what glorious rewards he has provided for them, if they do
it, and what grievous and eternal punishments, if they do it not. These things
ought as early, as is possible, to be instilled into the minds of children,
which (like new vessels) do usually keep the favor of that which is first put
into them; and therefore it nearly concerns all Parents to look they be at
first thus seasoned with Virtue and Religion. It Is sure if this be neglected,
there is one ready at hand to fill them with the contrary, the Devil will be
diligent enough to instill into them all wickedness and vice, even from their
cradles, and there being also in all our natures so much the greater aptness to
evil, then to good, there is need of great care and watchfulness, to prevent
those endeavors of that enemy of Souls, which can no way be, but by possessing
them at first with good things, breeding in them a love to virtue, and a hatred
of vice; that so when the temptations come, they may be armed against them.
This surely is above all things the duty of Parents to look after, and the
neglect of it is a horrible cruelty; We justly look upon those Parents, as most
unnatural wretches, that take away the life of their child; but alas! that is
mercy and tenderness, compared to this of neglecting his education, for by that
he ruins his Soul, makes him miserable eternally; and God knows multitudes of
such cruel Parents there are in the world, that thus give up their children to
be possessed by the Devil, for want of an early acquainting them with the ways
of God; nay, indeed how few there are that do conscionably perform this duty,
is too apparent by the strange rudeness and ignorance that is generally among
youth: the children of those who call themselves Christians, being frequently
as ignorant of God and Christ as the meerest Heathens. But whoever they are,
that thus neglect this great duty, let them know that it is not only a fearful
misery they bring upon their poor children, but also a horrible guilt upon
themselves. For as God says to the careless watchmen, Ezekiel. 3. 18. That if any
soul perish by his negligence, that soul shall be required at his hands; so
surely will it fare with all Parents, who have this office of watchmen
entrusted to them by God over their own children. A second part of education is
the bringing them up to some employment, busying them in some honest exercise,
whereby they may avoid that great snare of the Devil, Idleness, and also be
taught some useful Art or Trade, whereby when they come to age, they may become
profitable to the Commonwealth, and able to get an honest living to themselves.

20. To this great duty of Educating of Children, there is required as means,
first, Encouragement; secondly, Correction: Encouragement, Means toward the
education of children.
is first to be tried, we should endeavor to make children in love with duty,
by offering them rewards and invitations, and when ever they do well take
notice of it, and encourage them to go on. It is an ill course some parents
hold, who think they must never appear to their children but with a face of
sowreness and austerity; this seems to be that, which S. Paul forewarns Parents
of, when he bids fathers not to provoke their children to wrath, Col. 3. 21. To
be as harsh and unkind to them, when they do well, as if they do ill, is the
way to provoke them; and then the Apostle tells us in the same verse, what will
be the issue of it, they will be discouraged, they will have no heart to go on
in any good course, when the Parent affords them no countenance. The second
means is correction, and this becomes seasonable, when the former will do no
good, when all fair means, persuasions, and encouragements prevail not, then
there is a necessity of using sharper; and let that be first tried in words, I
mean not by railing and foul language, but in sober, yet sharp reproof; but if
that fail too, then proceed to blows; and in this case as Solomon says, He
that spares his rod, hates his son, Prove. 13. 24. It Is a cruel fondness, that
to spare a few stripes at present, will adventure him to those sad mischiefs,
which commonly befall the child, that is left to himself. But then this
correction must be given in such a manner, as may be likely to do good; to
which purpose it must first be given timely; the child must not be suffered to
run on in any ill, till it have got a habit, and a stubbornness too. This is a
great error in many Parents, they will let their children alone for diverse
years, to do what they list, permit them to lie, to steal, without ever so much
as rebuking them, nay, perhaps please themselves to see the witty shifts of the
child, and think it matters not what they do while they are little: But alas!
all that while the vice gets root, and that many times so deep a one, that all
they can do afterward, whether by words or blows, can never pluck it up.
Secondly, Correction must be moderate, not exceeding the quality of the fault,
nor the tenderness of the child. Thirdly, it must not be given in rage, if it
be, it will not only be in danger of being immoderate, but it will lose its
effect upon the child, who will think he is corrected, not because he has done
a fault, but because his Parent is angry, and so will rather blame the Parent
then himself, whereas on the contrary care should be taken to make the child
as sensible of the fault, as of the smart, without which he will never be
thoroughly amended.

21. Thirdly, after children are grown up, and The parent to watch over their
souls even when they are grown up
are past the age of education, there are yet other offices for the Parent to
perform to them; the Parent is still to Watch over them, in respect of their
souls, to observe how they practice those precepts which are given them in
their education, and accordingly to exhort, encourage, or reprove, as they
find occasion.

22. So also for their outward estate, they To provide for their subsistence.
are to put them into some course of living in the world; if God have blessed the
Parents with wealth, according to what he has, he must distribute to his
children, remembering that since he was the instrument of bringing them into the
world, he is according to his ability to provide for their comfortably living
in it, they are therefore to be looked on as very unnatural parents, who, so
they may have enough to spend in their own riots, and excess care not what
becomes of their children, never think of providing for them. Another fault is
usual among Parents in this business; they defer all the provisions for them,
till themselves be dead, heap up perhaps great matters for them against that
time, but in the mean time afford them not such a competency, as may enable
them to live in the world. There are several mischiefs come from this: First,
it lessens the child's affection to his parent, nay, sometimes it proceeds so
far, as to make him wish his death, which though it be such a fault, as no
temptation can excuse in a child, yet it is also a great fault in a Parent, to
give that temptation. Secondly, it puts the child upon shifts and tricks; many
times dishonest ones, to supply his necessities; this is, I doubt not a common
effect of it, the hardness of Parents has often put men upon very unlawful
courses, which when they are once acquainted with, perhaps they never leave,
though the first occasion cease; and therefore Parents ought to beware how they
run them upon those hazards. Besides the Parents loses that contentment, which
he might have in seeing his children live prosperously and comfortably, which
none but an arrant Earth Worm would exchange for the vain imaginary pleasure of
having money in his chest. But in this business of providing for children,
there is yet another thing to be heeded, and that is, that the Parent get that
wealth honestly, which he makes their portion; else it is very far from being a
provision, there is such a curse goes along with an ill-gotten estate, that he
that leaves such a one to his child, does but cheat and deceive him, makes him
believe he has left him wealth, but has withal put such a canker in the bowels
of it, that is sure to eat it out. This is so common an observation, that I
need say nothing to confirm the truth of it; would God it were as generally
laid to heart, as it seems to be generally taken notice of: Then surely Parents
would not account it a reasonable motive to unjust dealing, that they may
thereby provide for their children, for this is not a way of providing for
them; nay, it is the way to spoil them of whatever they have lawfully gathered
for them, the least mite of unlawful gain being of the nature of leaven, which
sowres the whole lump, bringing down curses upon all a man possesses. Let all
Parents therefore satisfy themselves with such provisions for their children
as God shall enable them honestly to make, assuring themselves how little
soever it be, it is a better portion then the greatest wealth unjustly gotten,
according to that of Solomon, Prove. 16. 8. Better is a little with
righteousness, then great revenues without right.

23. A fourth thing the Parent owes to the To give them good example.
child is Good Example, he is not only to set him rules of virtue, and
godliness; but he must himself give him a pattern in his own practice, we see
the force of example is infinitely beyond that of precept, especially where the
person is one, to whom we bear a reverence, or with whom we have a continual
conversation; both which usually meet in a Parent. It is therefore a most
necessary care in all Parents to behave themselves so before their children
that their example may be a means of winning them to virtue; But alas! this age
affords little of this care, nay, so far it is from it, that there are none more
frequently the instruments of corrupting children, then their own Parents. And
indeed how can it be otherwise, while men give themselves liberty to all
wickedness, it is not to be hoped, but that the children which observe it, will
imitate it; the child that sees his father drunk, will sure think, he may be
so too, as well as his father. So he that hears him swear, will do the like,
and so for all other vices, and if any Parent that is thus wicked himself,
should happen to have so much more care of his childs Soul, then his own; as
to forbid him the things which himself practices, or correct him for the doing
them; it is certain the child will account this a great injustice in his father,
to punish him for that which himself freely does and so he is never likely to
be wrought upon by it. This consideration lays a most strict tie upon all
Parents, to live Christianly, for otherwise they do not only hazard their own
Souls, but those of their children also, and as it were purchase an estate of
inheritance in Hell.

24. A fifth duty of Parents is blessing their children; the way of doing that
is double, first, To bless them.
by their prayer; they are by daily and earnest prayers to commend them to Gods
protection and blessing, both for their spiritual and temporal estate; and
secondly by their piety they are to be such persons themselves as that a
blessing may descend from them upon their posterity. This is often promised in
Scriptures to godly men, that their seed shall be blessed. Thus in the second
commandment, God promises to show mercy to the thousand generation of them that
love him and keep his commandments. And it is very observable in the Jews, that
though they were a stiff-necked generation, and had very grievously provoked
God, yet the godliness of their forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, did
many times move God to save them from destruction; on the other side, we see
that even good men have fared the worse for the in^quities of their fathers,
Thus when Josiah had destroyed idolatry, restored Gods service, and done good
beyond all the Kings that were before him, yet there was an old arrear of
Manasseh his grand father, which all this piety of his would not blot out, but
he resolves to cast Judah also out of his sight, as you may read at large, 2
Kings 23. If therefore Parents have any bowels, any kindness toward their
children, any real desire of their prosperity, let them take care by their own
godly life to entail a blessing upon them.

25. Sixthly, Parents must take heed, that To give no unreasonable commands.
they use their power over their children with equity, and moderation, not to
oppress them with Unreasonable Commands, only to exercise their own authority,
but in all things of weight to consider the real good of their children, and to
press them to nothing, which may not consist with that. This is a rule whereof
Parents may often have use, but in none greater then in the business of
marrying their children, wherein many that otherwise are good Parents, have
been to blame, when out of an eagerness of bestowing them wealthily, they force
them to marry utterly against their own inclinations, which is a great tyranny,
and that which frequently betrays them to a multitude of mischiefs, such as
all the wealth in the world cannot repair. There are two things which Parents
ought especially to consider in the matching their children; the first, how
they may live Christianly, and to that purpose to choose a virtuous and pious
person, to link them with; the second is, how they may live cheerfully and
comfortably in this world; and to that end though a competency of estate may be
necessary to be regarded, yet surely abundance is no way requisite, and
therefore that should not be too vehemently sought after; that which much more
tends to the happiness of that state, is the mutual kindness, and liking of the
parties, without which marriage is of all other the most uncomfortable
condition, and therefore no parent ought to thrust a child into it. I have now
done with the first sort of Relation, that of a Parent.

PARTITION XV. Of Duty to our Brethren, and Relations. Husband, wife, Friends,
Masters, Servants.
. 1. THe second sort of Relation is that of a Brother; now brotherhood may be
Dues to Brethren.
two fold, either natural, or spiritual the natural may in the largest extent
contain under it all mankind, all that partake of the same nature; but I shall
not consider it so in this place, having already mentioned those gegeneral
duties, which belong to all as such. I now speak of that natural brotherhood,
that is between those that are the children of the same immediate Parent; and
the duty of these Natural.
is to have united hearts, and affections: This nature points out to them, they
partaking in a more especial manner, of each others substance, and therefore
ought to have the greatest tenderness and kindness, each to other; thus we see
Abraham make it an argument, why there should be no contention between him and
Lot, because they were brethren: Genesis 13. 8. And though by brethren there is
meant only cousins, yet that helps the more strongly to conclude, that this
nearer relation is in reason to be a greater bar to strise, as also that this
kindness is in some degree to be extended to all that have any neerness of
blood to us.

2. This kindness and Love between Brethren and Sisters ought to be very firmly
grounded The necessity of Love among Brethren.
in their hearts, if it be not, they will be of all others in most danger of
disagreeing; for the continual conversation that is among them, whilst they are
at home in the fathers house, will be apt to minister some occasion of jar.
Besides the equality, that is, among them in respect of birth, often makes them
inclinable to envy each other, when one is in any respect advanced above the
other. Thus we see Joseph's brethren envyed him, because he had most of his
fathers love, and Rachel envyed her sister Leah: because she was fruitful;
therefore for the preventing of such temptations, let all who have brethren and
sisters, possess their mind with a great and real kindness to them, look on
them as parts of themselves, and then they will never think fit either to
quarrel with them, or to envy them any advantage, any more then one part of
the body does another of the same body, but will strive to advance and help
forward the good of each other.

3. The second kind of Brotherhood is spiritual; Spiritual brotherhood,
that contains all those who profess the same Faith with us: the Church in our
Baptism becomes a Mother to each baptized person; and then surely they that
have the relation of children to her, must have also the relation of brethren
to each other; and to this sort of brethren also we owe a great deal of
tenderness and affection; the spiritual bond of Religion should, of all others,
the most closely unite our hearts. This is the Brotherhood which S. Peter
exhorts us to love, 1 Peter 2. 17. And to it we are in an especial manner bound
to do all good offices, Do good, says the Apostle, to all, but especially to
them that are of the household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10. Our compassions are to be
most melting toward them of all others, in all their needs; Christ tells us,
that whosoever gives but a cup of cold water to any in the name of a Disciple,
shall not lose his reward, Mat. 10. 42. From whence we may assure our selves
that this peculiar love to Christians as Christians, is very acceptable in his
sight.

4. Several duties there are required of us to these brethren; one principal,
is the holding Communion with them, and that first in Doctrine; we are
constantly to continue in the belief and profession of all those necessary Our
duty to hold communion with these brethren.
truths, by which we may be marked out as followers, and Disciples of Christ;
this is that faith; which S. Jude speaks of, which was once delivered to the
Saints, Jude 3. by keeping whereof we continue still united to this spiritual
brotherhood, in respect of profession, which we must constantly do, what storms
and persecutions soever attend it, according to the exhortation of the Apostle,
Heb. 10. 22. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering.
Secondly, we are also, as opportunity serves, to communicate with them in all
holy offices; we must be diligent in frequenting the assemblies of the Saints,
which is as it were the badge of our profession, and therefore he that
willingly withdraws himself from these, gives ground to suspect, he will be apt
to renounce the other also. But these parts of communion we find strictly
maintained by the first Christians, Acts 2. 42. They continued steadfastly in
the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers:
they continued, and that steadfastly, they were not frighted from it by any
persecutions, though that were a time wherein they were tried with the sharpest
sufferings; which may teach us, that it is not the danger, that attends this
duty, can acquit us of it.

5. Secondly, we are to bear with the Infirmities To bear with their
infirmities.
of our Christian brethren, according to the advice of S. Paul, Romans 15. 1.
We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak. If one that holds
all necessary Christian truths, happen yet to be in some error, we are not for
this either to forsake his communion, or despise his person. This S. Paul
reaches us in the case of that weak brother, who by error made a causless
scruple about meats, Romans 14. Where he bids the stronger Christians, that is,
those who being better instructed, discerned him to be in an error, yet to
receive him nevertheless, and not to despise him; as on the other side, he bids
that weak one not to judge the stronger; the lesser differences in opinion must
be born with on both sides, and must not in the least abate our brotherly
charity toward each other.

6. Thirdly, we are to endeavor the restoring To restore them after falls.
of any fallen brother, that is, to bring him to repentance, after he has
fallen into any sin. Thus St. Paul commands the Galatians, that they should
restore him that was overtaken in a fault, considering themselves least they
also were tempted. We are not to look on him as a castaway to give him over as
utterly desperate, neither are we to triumph over him, in respect of our own
innocence, like the proud Pharisee, over the poor Publican, Luke 18. 11. but we
are meekly to endeavor his recovery, remembering that our own frailty is such,
that we are not secure from the like falls.

7. Fourthly, We are to have a Sympathy, To sympathize with them.
and fellow feeling with these brethren, to be nearly touched with whatsoever
befalls them, either as they are considered in society, or in single persons.
In society first, and so they make up a Church, and that either the universal,
which is made up of all Believers throughout the world, or any particular
Church, which is made up of all the Believers in that particular Nation, and
whatever happens to either of these, either the whole Church in general, or any
such single part of it, especially that whereof our selves are members, we are
to be much affected and moved with it, to rejoice in all the prosperities, and
to mourn and bewail all the breaches and desolations thereof, and daily and
earnestly to pray with David, Psalm. 51. 18. O be favorable and gracious unto
Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem; and that especially when we see her in
distress, and persecution. Whosoever is not thus touched with the condition of
the Church, is not to be looked on, as a living member of it; for as in the
natural body every member is concerned in the prosperity of the whole, so
certainly it is here: it was the observation of the Psalmist, that Gods servants
think upon the stones of Sion, and pity to see her in the dust, Psalm. 102. 14.
and surely all his servants are still of the same temper, cannot look on the
ruins and desolations of the Church, without the greatest sorrow, and
lamentation. Secondly, we are to have this fellow feeling with our brethren,
considered as single persons; We are to account our selves concerned in every
particular Christian, so as to partake with him in all his occasions either of
joy or sorrow. Thus the Apostle exhorts, Romans 12. 14. Rejoice with them that
rejoice, weep with them that weep: And again, 1 Cor. 12. under the similitude
of the natural body he urges this duty, Whether one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it, or one member be honored, all the members rejoice with
it. All these several effects of love, we owe to these spiritual brethren. And
this love is that, which Christ has made the badge of his Disciples, John 13.
35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another; so that if we mean not to cast off discipleship to Christ, we must not
forsake this love of the brethren.

8. The third relation is that between Husband The wife owes to the husband
obedience.
and Wife. This is yet much nearer then either of the former, as appears by
that Text, Ephesians. 5. 31. A man shall leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his
Wife, and they two shall be one flesh. Several duties there are oweing from one
of these persons to the other: and first for the Wife, she owes obedience. This
is commanded by the Apostle, Col. 3. 18. Wives submit your selves to your own
Husbands, as it is fit in the Lord. They are to render obedience to their
Husbands in the Lord, that is in all lawful commands, for otherwise it is here,
as in the case of all other superiors, God must be obeyed rather then man, and
the wife must not upon her husbands command do any thing which is forbidden by
God. But in all things, which do not cross some command of Gods, this precept
is of force, and will serve to condemn the peevish stubbornness of many wives,
who resist the lawful commands of their husbands, only because they are
impatient of this duty of subjection, which God himself requires of them. But
it may be here asked, what if the husband command something, which though it be
not unlawful, is yet very inconvenient, and imprudent, must the wife submit to
such a command? To this I answer, that it will be no disobedience in her, but
duty, calmly and mildly to show him the inconveniences thereof, and to persuade
him to retract that command; but in case she cannot win him to it by fair
entreaties, she must neither try sharp language, nor yet finally refuse to
obey, nothing but the unlawfulness of the command being sufficient warrant for
that.

9. Secondly, The wife owes Fidelity to the Fide^ty.
husband, and that of two sorts; first, that of the bed, she must keep her self
pure and chaste from all strange embraces, and therefore must not so much as
give an ear to any that would allure her, but with the greatest abhorrence
reject all motions of that sort, and never give any man that has once made such
a motion to her, the least opportunity to make a second. Secondly, She owes him
likewise Fidelity in the managing those worldly affairs he commits to her, she
must order them so, as may be most to her husbands advantage, and not by
deceiving and cozening of him employ his goods to such uses as he allows not
of.

10. Thirdly, She owes him Love, and together Love.
with that all friendliness and kindness of conversation; she is to endeavor
to bring him as much assistance, and comfort of life, as is possible, that so
she may answer that special end of the woman's creation, the being a help to her
husband, Genesis 2. 13. and this in all conditions, whether health, or sickness,
wealth, or poverty, whatsoever estate God by his providence shall cast him
into, she must be as much of comfort and support to him, as she can. To this
all sullenness, and harshness, all brawling, and unquietness is directly
contrary, for that makes the wife the burden, and plague of the man, instead of
a help and comfort: And sure if it be a fault to behave ones self so to any
person, as has already been showed, how great must it be to do so to him, to
whom the greatest kindness and affection is owing?

11. Nor let such wives think that any faults, The faults of the husband
acquits not from these duties.
or provocations of the husband can justify their frowardness; for they will
not, either in respect of religion or discretion. Not in religion, for where
God has absolutely commanded a duty to be paid, it is not any unworthiness of
the person can excuse from it; nor in Discretion; for the worse a husband is,
the more need there is for the wife to carry her self with that gentleness and
sweetness, that may be most likely to win him. This is the advice S. Peter gave
the wives of his time, 1 Peter 3. 1. Likewise ye wives be in subiect^on to your
own husbands, that if any obey not the Word, they may without the word be won
by the conversation of the wives. It seems the good behavior of the wives was
thought a powerful means to win men from Heathenism to Christianity; and sure
it might now a days have some good effects, if women would have but the
patience to try it: At the least, 'twould have this, that it would keep some
tolerable quiet in Families, whereas on the other side the ill fruits of the
wives unquietness are so notorious, that there are few neighbourhoods, but can
give some instance of it. How many men are there, that to avoid the noise of a
froward wise, have fallen to company keeping, and by that to drunkenness,
poverty, and a multitude of mischiefs? Let all wives therefore beware of
administering that temptation. But whenever there happens any thing, which in
kindness to her husband, she is to admonish him of, let it be with that
sofeness, and mildness, that it may appear it is love, and not anger, that makes
her speak.

12. There are also on the Husbands part The Husband owes ^o the Wife love.
several duties. There is first Love, which Saint Paul requires, to be very
tender and compassionate toward the wife, as appears by the sim^litudes he
uses in that matter, Ephesians. 5. The one that of the love a man bears to his
natural body, No man, says he, Verse 27. ever hated his own flesh, but
nourishes it, and cherishes it. The other love is that Christ bears to his
Church, which is far greater, verse 26. both which he sets as paterns for this
love of Husbands toward their Wives. This utterly forbids all harshness and
roughness to them; Men are to use them as parts of themselves, to love them as
their own bodies, and therefore to do nothing that may be hurtful, and grievous
to them, no more then they would cut, and gash their own flesh. Let those
husbands that tyrannize over their wives, that scarce use them like humane
creatures, consider, whether that be to love them, as their own bodies.

13. A second duty of the Husband, is Faithfulness Faithfulness.
to the bed. This is by God as well required of the husband, as the wife, and
though the world do seem to look on the breach of this duty, with less
abhorrence in the husband, yet sure before that Just Judge, the offense, will
appear no less on the man's side, then the woman's. This is certain, it is in both
a breach of the vow, made to each other, at their Marriage, and so besides the
uncleanness, a downright perjury, and those differences in the case, which
seem to cast the scale, are rather in respect of civil and worldly
consideration, then merely of the sin.

14. A third duty of the Husband is to maintain and provide for the Wife. He is
to Maintenance.
let her partake with him in those outward good things, wherewith God has
blessed him, and neither by niggardliness debar her of what is fit for her, nor
yet by unthriftiness so waste his goods, that he shall become unable to support
her. This is certainly the duty of the husband, who being, as has been said,
to account his wife as a part of his own body, must have the very same care to
sustain her, that he has for himself. Yet this is not so to be understood, as
to excuse the wife from her part of labor and industry, when that is
requisite, it being unreasonable the husband should toil to maintain the wife
in idleness.

15. Fourthly, The husband is to instruct the Instruction.
wife, in the things which concern her eternal welfare, if she be ignorant of
them. Thus St. Paul bids the wives learn of their husbands at home, 1 Cor. 14.
36. which supposes, that the husband is to teach her. Indeed it belongs to
every Master of a Family to endeavor that all under his charge be taught all
necessary things of this kind, and then sure more especially his wife, who is
so much nearer to him, then all the rest. This should make men careful to get
knowledge themselves, that so they may be able to perform this duty they owe to
others.

16. Lastly, Husbands and Wives, are mutually Husbands and Wives mutually to
pray for and ^ssist each ^ther in all good.
to pray each for other, to beg all blessings from God both spiritual and
temporal, and to endeavor all they can to do all good to one another,
especially all good to each others Souls, by stirring up to the performance of
duty, and dissuading and drawing back from all sin, and by being like true
yoke-fellowes, helpful and assistant to each other in the doing of all sorts of
good, both to their own Family, and all others within their reach. This is of
all other the truest and most valuable love. Nay, indeed how can it be said
they do love at all, who can contentedly let each other run on in a course that
will bring them to eternal misery? And if the love of husbands and wives were
thus grounded in Virtue and Religion, 'twould make their lives a kind of
Heaven on earth, 'twould prevent all those contentions, and brawlings, so
common among them, which are the great plagues of Families, and a lesser Hell,
in passage to the greater; and truly where it is not thus founded, there is
little comfort to be expected in marriage.

17. It should therefore be the care of every The virtue of the person the
chief consideration in Marriage.
one that means to enter upon that state, to consider advisedly before hand,
and to choose such a person with whom they may have this spiritual friendship,
that is such a one, as truly fears God. There are many false ends of Marriage
looked upon in the world: some marry for Wealth, others for Beauty, and
generally they are only worldly respects, that are at all considered; but
certainly he that would Marry as he ought, should contrive to make his Marriage
useful to those better ends, of serving God, and saving his own Soul; at least
he must be sure it be no hindrance to them, and to that purpose the virtue of
the person chosen is more conducing then all the wealth in the world, though I
deny not, but that a competency of that may likewise be considered.

18. But above all things, let all take heed, that they make not such
marriages, as may Unlawful Marriages.
not only be ill in their effects, but are actual sins at the time; such are
the marriages of those that were formerly promised to some other, in which case
it is sure they rightly belong to those, to whom they past the first promise,
and then for any other to marry them, during the life of that person, is to
take the husband or wife of that other, which is direct adultery, as S. Paul
tells us, Romans 7. 3. The like unlawfulness there is also in the marriage of
those, who are within those degrees of kindred forbidden by God, the
particulars whereof are set down in the 18. and 20. of Lev. and whoever marries
any that is within any of those degrees of neerness, either to himself, or to
his deceased wife, which is as bad, commits that great sin of Incest, and so
long as he continues to live with such his unlawful wife, remains in that
fearful guilt. This wariness in the choice of the person to be married, would
prevent many sad effects, which we daily see follow such rash or unlawful
matches; it were well therefore if people would look on marriage, as our Church
advises, as a thing not to be undertaken lightly, unadvisedly, or wantonly, to
satisfy men's carnal lusts and appetites, but reverently, discreetly,
advisedly, soberly, and in the fear of God; and in so doing no doubt a blessing
would follow, which otherwise there is little ground to expect. I have now done
with this Relation between Husband and Wife.

19. The next is that between Friends; and Friendship.
this Relation if it be rightly founded, it is of great neerness and
usefulness, but there is none more generally mistaken in the world; men usually
call them their friends, with whom they have an intimacy, and frequency of
conversation, though that intimacy be indeed nothing but an agreement and
combination in sin. The Drunkard thinks him his friend that will keep him
company, the Deceitful person, him that will aid him in his cheats, the Proud
man him that will flatter him: And so generally in all vices, they are looked
on as friends, that advance and further us in them. But God knows this is far
from friendship; such a friend as this the Devil himself is in the highest
degree, who is never backward in such offices. The true friendship is that of a
direct contrary making; it is a concurrence and agreement in virtue, not in
vice: in short, a true friend loves his friend so, that he is very zealous of
his good; and certainly he that is really so, will never be the instrument of
bringing him to the greatest evil. The general duty of a Friend then must be
resolved to be the industrious Its duties.
pursuit of his friends real advantages, in which there are several particulas
contained.

20. As first, faithfulness in all trusts committed Faithfulness.
to him by his friend, whether that of goods or secrets; he that betrays the
trust of a friend in either, is by all men looked upon with abhorrence, it being
one of the highest falsnesses and treacheries, and for such treacherous wounds
the Wise man tells us, Every friend will depart, Eccles. 22. 22.

21. Secondly, it is the duty of a Friend to Assistance.
be assisting to his friend in all his outward needs; to counsel him, when he
wants advice; to cheer him, when he needs comfort; to give him, when he wants
relief; and to endeavor his rescue out of any trouble or danger. An admirable
example we have of this friendship in Jonathan to David, he loved him as his
own soul; and we see he not only contrives for his safety when he was in
danger, but runs hazards himself to rescue and deliver his friend, draws his
fathers anger upon him, to turn it from David, as you may read at large, 1 Samuel
30.

22. The third and highest duty of a friend Admonition.
is to be aiding and assisting to the soul of his friend, to endeavor to
advance that in piety and virtue, by all means within his power, by
exhortations and encouragements to all virtue by earnest and vehement
disswasions from all sin, and not only thus in general, but by applying to his
particular wants, especially by plain and friendly reproofs, where he knows or
reasonably believes there is any fault committed. This is of all others the
most peculiar duty of a friend, it being indeed that which none else is
qualified for. Such an unwillingness there is in most men to hear of their
faults, that those that undertake that work, had need have a great
prepossession of their hearts, to make them patient of it: Nay, it is so
generally acknowledged to be the proper work of a friend, that if he omit it,
he betrays the offender into security, his not reproving will be apt to make
the other think he does nothing worthy of reproof, and so he tacitly acts that
basest part of a flatterer, sooths and cherishes him in his sin; when yet
farther it is considered how great need all men have at some time or other, of
being admonished, 'twill appear a most unfriendly, yea cruel thing to omit it;
we have that natural partiality to our selves, that we cannot so readily
discern our own miscariages, as we do other men's, and therefore it is very
necessary they should sometimes be showed us by those, who see them more
clearly; and the doing this at the first may prevent the multiplying of more:
whereas if we be suffered to go unreproved, it often comes to such a habit that
reproves will do no good. And then how shall that person be able to answer it
either to God or himself, that has by his silence betrayed his friend to this
greatest mischief. It Is the expression of God himself speaking of a friend, thy
friend which is as thine own soul, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. And sure we should in this
respect account our friends as our own souls, by having the same jealous
tenderness and watchfulness over their souls, which we ought to have of our
own. It will therefore be very fit for all that have entered any strict
friendship, to make this one special article in the agreement, that they shall
mutually admonish and reprove each other; by which means it will become such an
avowed part of their friendship, that it can never be mistaken by the reproved
party for censoriousness or unkindness.

23. Fourthly, To these several parts of kindness must be added that of Prayer,
we must not Prayer.
only assist our friends, our selves, in what we can, but we must call in the
Almighty aid to them, recommending them earnestly to God for all his blessings,
both temporal and spiritual.

24. Lastly, We must be Constant in our Constancy.
Friendships, and not out of a Lightness of humor grow weary of a friend, only
because we have had him long. This is great injustice to him, who if he have
behaved himself well, ought the more to be valued, by how much the longer he
has continued to do so: And it is great folly in our selves, for it is the
casting away the greatest treasure of humane life, for such certainly is a
tried friend. The wisest of men gives warning of it, Prove. 27. 16. Thine own
friend and thy fathers friend forsake not. Nay farther it is not every light
offense of a friend, that should make thee renounce his friendship, there must
be some allowance made to the infirmities of men, and if thou have occasion to
pardon him somewhat to day, perhaps thou may give him opportunity to requite
thee to morrow; therefore nothing but unfaithfulness, or incorrigible vice
should break this band.

25. The last relation is that between Masters and Servants, both which owe
duty to each other: That of the Servant is first obedience Servants owe to
their Masters obedience.
to all lawful commands; this is expressly required by the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 6.
Servants obey in all things your Masters, etc. And this obedience must not be a
grumbling and unwilling one, but ready and cheerful, as he there proceeds to
exhort, ver. 7. with good will doing service; and to help them herein, they are
to consider that it is to the Lord, and not unto men; God has commanded
servants thus to obey their Masters; and therefore the obedience they pay is to
God, which may well make them do it cheerfully, how harsh, or unworthy soever
the Master be, especially if what the Apostle farther urges, ver. 8. be
considered that there is a reward to be expected from God for it.

26. The second duty of the Servant is faithfulness, and that may be of two
sorts; one as Fidelity.
opposed to eye-service, the other to purloyning or defrauding. The first part
of faithfulness is the doing of all true service to his Master, not only when
his eye is over him, and he expects punishment for the omission, but at all
times, even when his Master is not likely to discern his failing, and that
servant that does not make conscience of this, is far from being a faithful
servant; this eye service being by the Apostle set opposite to that singleness
of heart, which he requires of servants, Ephesians. 6. 5. The second sort of
faithfulness consists in the honest managery of all things entrusted to him by
his Master, the not wasting his goods (as the un ust Steward was accused to
have done, Luke 16.) whether by careless embezelling of them, or by converting
any of them to his own use without the allowance of his Master. This latter is
that purloyning of which the Apostle warns servants, Tit. 2. 10. And is indeed
no better then arrant theft; of this kind are all those ways, that the servant
has of gaining to himself by the loss and damage of his Master, as the being
bribed to make ill bargains for him, and many the like: Nay, indeed this sort
of unfaithfulness is worse then common theft, by how much there is a greater
trust reposed, the betraying whereof adds to the crime. As for the other sort
of unfaithfulness, that of wasting, though without gain to themselves, it
differs not much in effect from this, the Master may lose as much by the one as
by the other, and then what odds is it to him, whether he be robbed by the
covetousness or negligence of his servant, and it is still the same breach of
trust with the former, for every Master is supposed to entrust his affairs as
well to the care as the honesty of his servant: for 'twould be little advantage
to the Master to be secured that his servant would not himself cheat him,
whilst in the mean time he would by his carelessness give opportunity to others
to do it; therefore he that does not carefully look to his Masters profit,
deceives his trust, as well as he that unjustly provides for his own.

27. A third duty of a servant is patience and meekness under the reproofs of
his Master, not answering again, as the Apostle exhorts, Submission to rebuke.
Tit. 2. 9. That is, not making such surly and rude replies, as may increase
the Masters displeasure: A thing too frequent among servants, even in the
justest reprehensions, whereas S. Peter directs them patiently to suffer even
the most undeserved correction, even when they do well and suffer for it, 1
Pet. 2. 20. But the patient suffering of rebuke is not all that is required of
servants in this matter, they must also mend the fault they are rebuked for,
and not think they have done enough, when they have (though never so dutifully)
given the Master the hearing.

28. A fourth duty of a servant is diligence; Diligence.
he must constantly attend to all those things, which are the duties of his
place, and not give himself to idleness, and sloth, nor yet to company keeping,
gaming, or any other disorderly course, which may take him off from his Masters
business. All these are necessary duties of a servant, which they are carefully
and conscionably to perform, not so much to escape the Masters anger as Gods,
who will certainly call every one of them to an account, how they have behaved
themselves toward their earthly Masters.

29. Now on the other side, there are some things also owing from the Masters
to their Masters owe to their Servants Justice.
servants: As first the Master is bound to be just to them, in performing those
conditions, on which they were hired, such are commonly the giving them food
and wages, and that Master that with holds these, is an oppressor.

30. Secondly, The Master is to admonish and Admonition.
reprove the servant in case of fault, and that not only in faults against
them; wherein few Masters are backward, but also and more especially in faults
against God, whereat every Master ought to be more troubled then at those which
tend only to his own loss, or inconvenience; the dishonor of God and the
hazard of the meanest man's soul, being infinitely more worthy our disquiet,
then any thing of the other kind can be. And therefore when Masters are
presently on sire for any little negligence or fault of a servant toward
themselves, and yet can without trouble see them run into the greatest sins
against God, it is a sign they consider their own concernments too much, and
Gods glory and their servants souls too little. This is too commonly the temper
of Masters, they are generally careless how their servants behave themselves
toward God, how disordered and profane their families are, and therefore never
bestow any exhortation, or admonition, to persuade them to virtue, or draw them
from vice; such Masters forget that they must one day give an account how they
have governed their families. It is certainly the duty of every Ruler to
endeavor to advance piety and godliness among all those that are under his
charge, and that as well in this lesser dominion of a family, as in the greater
of a Realm or Nation. Of this David was so careful, that we see he professes,
Psalm. 101 7. That no deceitful person should dwell in his house, that he that
told lies should not tarry in his sight; so much he thought himself bound to
provide that his family might be a kind of Church, an Assembly of godly upright
persons: And if all Masters would endeavor to have theirs so, they would
beside the eternal reward of it hereafter, find a present benefit by it, their
worldly business would thrive much the better; for if their servants were
brought to make conscience of their ways, they would then not dare either to
be negligent or false.

31. But as it is the duty of Masters to admonish and reprove their servants,
so they must also look to do it in a due manner, that is so, as may be most
likely to do good, not in passion and rage, which can never work the servant to
any thing but the despising or hating him; but with such sober and grave
speeches, as may convince him of his fault, and may also assure him, that it is
a kind desire of his amendment (and not a willingness to wreck his own rage)
which makes the Master thus to rebuke him.

32. A third duty of the Master is to set good example of honesty and godliness
to his servants, Good example.
without which it is not all the exhortations, or reproofs he can use, will ever
do good; or else he pulls down more with his example, then it is possible for
him to build with the other, and it is madness for a drunken, or profane Master
to expect a sober and godly family.

33. Fourthly, the Master is to provide that Means of Instruction.
his servants may not want means of being instructed in their duty, as also
that they may daily have constant times of worshipping God, publicly by having
prayers in the family; but of this I have spoken before under the head of
Prayer, and therefore shall here say no more of it.

34. Fifthly, The Master in all affairs of his Moderation in Command
own, is to give reasonable and moderate commands, not laying greater burdens
on his servants then they are able to bear, particularly not requiring so much
work, that they shall have no time to bestow on their souls, as on the other
side he is not to permit them to live so idly as may make them either useless
to him, or may betray themselves to any ill.

35. Sixthly, The Master is to give his servants Encouragement in well doing.
encouragement in well doing, by using them with that bounty and kindness which
their faithfulness and diligence and piety deserves: and finally in all his
dealing with them, he is to remember that himself has, as the Apostle says,
Ephesians. 6 9. A Master in heaven, to whom he must give an account of the usage of
his meanest servant on earth. Thus have I briefly run through those several
Relations, to which we owe particular Duty, and so have done with that first
branch of Duty to our Neighbors; that of Justice.

PARTITION XVI. Other Branches of our Duty to our Neighbor. Of Charity to men's
Souls, Bodies, Goods, etc.
THE second branch of Duty to our Charity.
Neighbors is Charity, or Love. This is the great Gospel duty so often
enjoined us by Christ, the New Commandment as himself calls it, John 13 34.
That ye love one another, and this is again repeated twice in one Chapter, John
15. 12. 17. and the first Epistle of S. John is almost wholly spent in the
persuasion to this one duty, by which we may see it is no matter of
indifference, but most strictly required of all that profess Christ. Indeed
himself has given it as the badg and livery of his Disciples, John 13. 35. By
this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another.

This Charity may be considered two ways; In the Affections.
first, in respect of the Affections; secondly, of the Actions. Charity in the
affections is a sincere kindness, which disposes us to wish all good to others,
and that in all their capacities, in the same manner that justice obliged us to
wish no hurt to any man, in respect either of his Soul, his Body, his Goods, or
his Credit, so this first part of Charity binds us to wish all good to them in
all these.

And first, for the Soul. If we have any the least spark of Charity, we cannot
but wish To men's Souls.
all good to men's Souls; Those precious things which Christ thought worth the
ransoming with his own blood, may surely well challenge our kindness, and good
wishes; and therefore if we do not thus love one another, we are far from
obeying that Command of loving, as he has loved; for 'twas the Souls of men
which he loved so tenderly, and both did and suffered so much for. Of this love
of his to Souls there are two great and special effects: the first, the
purifying them here by his grace, the second, the making them everlastingly
happy in his glory; and both these we are so far to copy out in our kindness,
as to be earnestly desirous that all men should arive to that purity, and
holinese here, which may make them capable of eternal happiness hereafter. It
were to be hoped, that none that himself carried a Soul about him, could be so
cruel to that of another man's, as not sincerely to wish this, did not
experience show us there are some persons, whose malice is so divelish, as to
reach even to the direct contrary; the wishing not only the sin, but the
damnation of others. Thus may you have some, who in any injury, or oppression
they suffer, make it their only comfort, that their enemies will damn
themselves by it; when alas! that should to a Christian be much more terrible,
then any suffering they could bring upon him. He that is of this temper, is a
disciple of Satan's, not of Christ, it being directly contrary to the whole
scope of that grand Christian precept, of loving our neighbors as our selves.
For it is sure, no man that believes there is such a thing as damnation, wishes
it to himself; be he never so fond of the ways that lead to it, yet he wishes
that may not be his journeys end; and therefore by that rule of Charity should
as much dread it for his Neighbor.

Secondly, We are to wish all good to the To their Bodies, Goods and Credit.
Bodies of men, all health and welfare, we are generally tender enough of our
own bodies, dread the least pain or ill, that can befall them: Now Charity, by
virtue of the forementioned precept, extends this tenderness to all others, and
whatever we apprehend as grievous to our selves, we must be unwilling should
befall another. The like is to be said of the other two, goods and credit, that
as we wish our own thriving and reputation, so we should likewise that of
others, or else we can never be said to love our neighbor as our selves.

This Charity of the affections, if it be sincere, Effects of this Charity
will certainly have these several effects, which are so inseparable from it,
that they are often in Scripture accounted as parts of the duty, and so most
strictly required of us; First, it will keep the mind in a peaceable and meek
temper toward others, so far from seeking occasions of contentions, that no
provocation shall draw us to it; for where we have kindness we shall be unapt
to quarrel, it being one of the special qualities of Charity, that it is not
easily provoked, 1 Cor. 13. 5. And therefore whoever is unpeaceble, shows his
heart is destitute of this Charity. Secondly, it will breed compassion toward
all the miseries of others, every mis-hap that befalls, where we wish well, is
a kind of defeat and disaster to our selves, and therefore if we wish well to
all, we shall be thus concerned in the calamities of all, have a real grief,
and sorrow, to see any in misery, and that according to the proportion of the
suffering. Thirdly, it will give us joy in the prosperities of others: Solomon
observes, Prove. 13. 19. That the desire accomplished is sweet to the Soul; and
then whoever has this real desire of his neighbors welfare, his desire is
accomplished in their prosperity, and therefore he cannot but have contentment
and satisfaction in it. Both these are together commanded by St. Paul, Romans 12.
12. Rejoice with them that rejoice, weep with them that weep. Fourthly, it will
excite and stir up our prayers for others: We are of our selves impotent,
feeble creatures, unable to bestow blessings, where we most wish them,
therefore if we do indeed desire the good of others, we must seek it on their
behalf, from him, whence every good and perfect gift comes, Jam. 1. 17. This
is so necessary a part of Charity, that without it our kindness is but an
unsignificant thing, a kind of empty complement. For how can he be believed to
wish well in earnest, who will not thus put life and efficacy into his wishes
by forming them into prayers which will otherwise be vain and fruitless. The
Apostle thought not fit to leave men to their bare wishes, but exhorts that
supplications, prayers and giving of thanks be made for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
which precept all that have this true charity of the heart, will readily
conform to. These severals are so naturally the fruits of this Charity that it
is a deceit for any man to persuade himself he has it, who cannot produce
these fruits to evidence it by.

But there is yet a farther excellency of It casts ou^ Envy.
this grace, it guards the mind, and secures it from several great and
dangerous vices; as first from Envy; This is by the Apostle taught us to be
the property of Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 4. Charity envieth not; And indeed common
reason may confirm this to us, for Envy is a sorrow at the prosperity of
another, and therefore must needs be directly contrary to that desire of it,
which we showed before was the effect of love; so that if love bear sway in the
heart, 'twill certainly chase out Envy. How vainly then do those pretend to
this virtue, that are still grudging, and repining at every good hap of others.

Secondly, It keeps down Pride and Haughtiness. Pride.
This is also taught us by the Apostle in the forementioned place, Charity
vaunteth not it self, is not pusfed up; and accordingly we find, that where
this virtue of love is commanded, there humility is joined with it. Thus it is,
Col. 3. 12, Put on therefore bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of mind,
and Romans 12. 10. Be kindly affectioned one toward another with brotherly
love in honor preserring one another, where you see how close an attendant
humility is of love. Indeed it naturally flows from it, for love always sets
a price and value upon the thing beloved, makes us esteem and prize it; thus we
too constantly find it in sel^ love, it makes us think highly of our selves,
that we are much more excellent then other men. Now if love thus placed on our
selves, beget pride, let us but divert the course, and turn this love on our
brethren, and it will as surely beget humility, for then we should see and
value those gifts and excellencies of theirs, which now our pride, or our
hatred makes us to overlook and neglect, and not think it reasonable either to
despise them, or vaunt and magnify our selves upon such a comparison; we
should certainly find cause to put the Apostles exhortation in practice, Phil.
2. 4. That we should esteem others better then our selves. Whoever therefore is
of so haughty a temper, as to vilisie and disdain others, may conclude, he has
not this charity rooted in his heart.

Thirdly, It casts out censoriousness and rash judging Charity, as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. ensoriousss.
13. 5. Thinks no evil, is not apt to entertain ill conceits of others, but
on the contrary as it follows, ver. 7. Believes all things, hops all
things; that is, it is forward to believe and hope the best of all men; and
surely our own experience tells us the same, for where we love we are usually
unapt to discern faults, be they never so gross (witness the great blindness we
generally have toward our own) and therefore shall certainly not be likely to
Create them, where they are not, or to aggravate them beyond their true size
and degree. And then to what shall we impute those unmerciful censures and rash
judgments of others, so frequent among men, but to the want of this Charity.

Fourthly, It casts out Dissembling and feigned Dissembling.
kindness; where this true and real love is, that false and counterfeit one
flies from before it, and this is the love we are commanded to have, such as is
without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9. Indeed where this is rooted in the heart,
there can be no possible use of dissimulation: because this is in truth all
that the false one would seem to be, and so is as far beyond it as Nature is
beyond Art, nay indeed as a divine virtue is beyond a foul sin; for such is
that hypocritical kindness, and yet it is to be feared that does too generally
usurp the place of this real charity, the effects of it are too visible among
us, there being nothing more common then to see men make large professions to
those who as soon as their backs are turned they either deride or mischief.

Fifthly, It casts out all mercinariness, and self-seeking, it is of so noble
and generous a temper, that it despises all projectings for gain or advantage,
Love seeks not her own, Self-seeking.
1 Cor. 13. 5. And therefore that huckstering kind of love so much used in the
world, which places it self only there, where it may fetch in benefit is very
far from this charity.

Lastly, It turns out of the heart all malice and desire of Revenge, which is
so utterly contrary Revenge.
to it, that it is impossible they should both dwell in the same breast; it is
the property of love to bear all things, 1 Cor. 13. 7. To endure the greatest
injuries, without thought of making any other return to them then prayers and
blessings, and therefore the malicious revengeful person, is of all others the
greatest stranger to this Charity.

It Is true, if this virtue were to be exercised but toward some sort of
persons, it might consist This charity io be extended even to enemies.
with malice to others, it being possible for a man that bitterly hates one to
love another; but we are to take notice that this Charity must not be so
confined, but must extend and stretch it self to all men in the world,
particularly to Enemies, or else it is not that divine charity commended to us
by Christ. The loving of friends and benefactors is so low a pitch that the
very Publicans and sinners, the worst of men were able to attain to it, Matthew.
5. 46. And therefore it is not counted rewardable in a Disciple of Christ; No,
he expects we should soar higher, and therefore has set us this more spiritual
and excellent precept of loving of enemies, Matthew. 5. 44. I say unto you, love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despitefully
use you, and persecute you; and whosoever does not thus, will never be owned by
him for a Disciple. We are therefore to conclude, that all which has been said
concerning this Charity of the Affections, must be understood to belong as well
to our spitefullest enemy, as our most obliging friend. But because this is a
duty to which the froward nature of man is apt to object much, 'twill not be
amiss to insist a little on some considerations, which may enforce it on us.

And first consider what has been already Motives thereunto. Command of Christ.
touched on, that it is the Command of Christ, both in the Text above mentioned,
and multitudes of others, there being scarce any precept so often repeated in
the New Testament, as this of loving and forgiving of our enemies. Thus Ephesians.
4. 32. Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another; And
again, Col. 3. 13. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any
man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. So
also, 1 Peter 3. 9. Not rendering evil for evil, nor railing for railing, but
contrariwise Blessing. A whole Volume of Texts might be brought to this
purpose, but these are certainly enough to convince any man, that this is
strictly required of us by Christ, and indeed I think, there are few that ever
heard of the Gospel, but know it is so. The more prodigiously strange is it,
that men that call themselves Christians, should give no degree of obedience to
it, nay, not only so, but even publicly avow, and profess the contrary, as we
daily see they do, it being ordinary to have men resolve, and declare that they
will not forgive such, or such a man, and no consideration of Christ's command
can at all move them from their purpose. Certainly these men understand not
what is meant by the very word Christian, which signifies a servant, and
Disciple of Christ, and this Charity is the very badg of the one, the lesson of
the other: and therefore it is the greatest absurdity, and contradiction, to
profess themselves Christians, and yet at the same time to resist this so
express Command of that Christ, whom they own as their Master. If I be a
Master, says God, where is my fear? Mal. 1. 6. Obedience and reverence are so
much the duties of servants, that no man is thought to look on him as a Master,
to whom he pays them not. Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things
that I say? says Christ, Luke 6. 46. The whole world is divided into two great
Families, Christ's and Satan's, and the obedience each man pays, signifies to
which of these Masters he belongs, if he obey Christ, to Christ; if Satan, to
Satan. Now this sin of malice, and revenge is so much the dictate of that
wicked spirit, that there is nothing can be a more direct obeying of him, it is
the taking his livery on our backs, the proclamation whose servants we are;
What ridiculous impudence is it then, for men that have thus entered themselves
of Satan's Family, to pretend to be the Servants of Christ? Let such know
assuredly, that they shall not be owned by him, but at the great day of account,
be turned over to their proper Master, to receive their wages, in fire and
brimstone.

A second consideration is the example of Example of God.
God: this is an argument Christ himself thought fit to use, to impress this
duty on us as you may see Luke 6. 35. 36. Where after having given the Command
of Loving Enemies, he encourages to the practice of it, by telling, that it is
that which will make us the Children of the Highest (that is, 'twill give us a
likeness and resemblance to him; as children have to their Parents) for he is
kind to the unthankful and the evil; And to the same purpose, you may read
Mat. 5. 45. He makes his sin to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends
rain on the just and on the unjust; And sure this is a most forcible
consideration to excite us to this duty. God we know, is the fountain of
perfection, and the being like to him, is the sum of all we can wish for, and
though it was Lucifers fall, his ambition to be like the most high, yet had the
likeness he affected been only that of Holiness and goodness, he might still
have been an Angel of light; This desire of imitating our Heavenly Father is
the especial mark of a child of his. Now this kindness and goodness to enemies
is most eminently remarkable in God, and that not only in respect of the
temporal mercies, which he indifferently bestows on all, his sun and rain on
the unjust, as in the text forementioned, but chiefly in his spiritual Mercies;
We are all by our wicked works Col. 1. 21. Enemies to him, and the mischief of
that enmity would have fallen wholly upon our selves, God had no motive besides
that of his pity to us, to wish a reconciliation, yet so far was he from
returning our enmity, when he might have revenged himself to our eternal ruin,
that he designs and contrives how he may bring us to be at peace with him.
This is a huge degree of mercy and kindness, but the means he used for
effecting this, is yet far beyond it; He sent his own Son from Heaven, to work
it, and that not only by persuasions, but sufferings also; So much did he prize
us miserable crea^ures, that he thought us not too dear bought with the blood
of his Son. The like example of mercy and patience we have in Christ both
laying down his life for us Enemies, and also in that meek manner of doing it,
which we find excellently set forth by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 22, 23, 24. and
commended to our imitation. Now surely when all this is considered, we may well
make S. John's inference, Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one
another, 1 John 4. 11. How shameful a thing is it for us to retain displeasures
against our brethren, when God thus lays by his toward us, and that when we
have so highly provoked him?

This directs to a third consideration, the comparing our sins against God,
with the offenses The disproportion between our of^ences against God, and men's
against us.
of our brethren against us, which we no sooner shall come to do, but there
will appear a vast difference between them, and that in several respects; For
first there is the Majesty of the person, against whom we sin, which
exceedingly increases the guilt, whereas between man and man, there cannot be
so great a distance, for though some men are by God advanced to such eminency
of dignity as may make an injury offered to them the greater, yet still they
are but men of the same nature with us, whereas he is God blessed for ever;
Secondly, there is his soveraignity and power, which is original in God, for we
are his creatures, we have received our whole being from him, and therefore are
in the deepest manner bound to perfect obedience, whereas all the sovereignty
that one man can possibly have over another, is but imparted to them by God,
and for the most part there is none of this neither in the case, quarrels being
most usual among equals. Thirdly, there is his infinite bounty and goodness to
us, all that ever we enjoy, whether in relation to this life or a better, being
wholly his free gift, and so there is the foulest ingratitude added to our
other crimes; in which respect also it is impossible for one man to offend
against an other in such a degree, for though one may be (and too many are)
guilty of unthankfulness toward men, yet because the greatest benefits that
man can bestow, are infinitely short of those which God does, the ingratitude
cannot be near so great as toward God it is. Lastly, there is the greatness
and multitude of our sins against God, which do infinitely exceed all that the
most injurious man can do against us, for we all sin much oftener and more
heinously against him then any man, be he never so malicious, can find
opportunities of injuring his brethren. This inequality and disproportion our
Savior intimates in the parable, Mat. 18. where our offenses against God are
noted by the ten thousand talents, whereas our brethrens against us are
described by the hundred pence; a talent hugely out-weighs a penny, and ten
thousand outnumbers a hundred, yet so and much more does the weight and number
of our sins exceed all the offenses of others against us: Much more might be
said to show the vast inequality between the faults which God forgives us, and
those we can possibly have to forgive our brethren: But this I suppose may
suffice to silence all the objections of cruel and revengefull persons, against
this kindness to enemies. They are apt to look upon it as an absurd and
unreasonable thing, but since God himself acts it in so much a higher degree,
who can without blasphemy say it is unreasonable? If this, or any other
spiritual duty appear so to us, we may learn the reason from the Apostle, 1
Cor. 2. 14. The carnal man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him; it is the carnality and fleshliness of our
hearts, that makes it seem so, and therefore in stead of disputing against the
duty, let us purge our hearts of that, and then we shall find that true which
the spiritual Wisdom affirms of her Doctrines, Prove. 8. 9. They are all plain
to him that understands, and right to them that find knowledge.

Nay, this loving of enemies is not only a reasonable, but a pleasant duty, and
that I propose Pleasantness of this Duty.
as a fourth consideration; there is a great deal of sweetness and delight to
be found in it; of this I confess none can so well judge as those that have
practiced it, the nature even of earthly pleasures being such, that it is the
enjoyment only that can make a man truly know them: No man can so describe the
taste of any delicious thing to another, as that by it he shall know the relish
of it, he must first actually taste of it, and sure it is more so in spiritual
pleasures, and therefore he that would fully know the sweetness and
pleasantness of this duty, let him set to the practice and then his own
experience will be the best informer: But in the mean time, how very unjust,
yea, and foolish is it, to pronounce ill of it before trial: for men to say
this is irksome, and intolerable, who neves so much as once offered to try
whether indeed it were so or no? Yet by this very means an ill opinion is
brought up of this most delightful Duty, and passes current among men, whereas
in all justice the testimony of it should be taken only from those who have
tried it, and they would certainly give another account of it.

But though the full knowledge hereof be to be had only by this nearer
acquaintance, yet me thinks even those who look at it but at a distance may
discern some what of amiableness in it, if no other way, yet at least by
comparing it with the uneasiness of its contrary, Malice and Revenge are the
most restless, tormenting passions that can possess the mind of a man, they
keep men in a perpetual study and care how to effect their mischievous
purposes, it disturbs their very sleep, as Solomon observes Prove. 4. 16. They
sleep not except they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away, except
they cause some to fall: Yea, it imbitters all the good things they enjoy, so
that they have no taste or relish of them; a remarkable example of this we have
in Haman, who though he abounded in all the greatness and felicity of the
world, yet the malice he had to a poor despisable man Mordecai, kept him from
tasting contentment in all this, as you may see Esther 5. where after he had
related to his friends all his prosperities, ver. 11. he concludes thus ver.
12. Yet all this avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting
in the kings gate. On the other side, the peaceable spirit, that can quietly
pass by all injuries and affronts, enjoys a continual calm, and is above the
malice of his enemies, for let them do what they can, they cannot rob him of
his quiet, he is firm as a rock, which no storms or winds can move, when the
furious and revengeful man is like a wave, which the least blast tosses and
tumbles from its place. But besides this inward disquiet of revengful men, they
often bring many outward calamities upon themselves, they exasperate their
enemies, and provoke them to do them greater mischiefs, nay oftentimes they
willingly run themselves upon the greatest miseries in pursuit of their
revenge, to which it is ordinary to see men sacrifice Goods, Ease, Credit, Life,
nay soul it self, not caring what they suffer themselves so they may spite
their enemy; so strangely does this wretched humor besot and blind men. On the
contrary, the meek person he often melts his adversary, pacifics his anger; A
soft answer turns away wrath, says Solomon, Prove. 15. 1. And sure there is
nothing can tend more to that end; but if it do happen that his enemy be so
inhumane, that he miss of doing that, yet he is still a gainer by all he can
suffer. For first, he gains an opportunity of exercising that most Christian
grace of charity and forgiveness: and so at once of obeying the command, and
imitating the example of his Savior, which is to a true Christian spirit a
most valuable advantage; and then secondly, he gains an accession and increase
to his reward hereafter. And if it be Objected, that that is not to be reckoned
in to the present pleasure of the duty: I answer that the expectation and
belief of it is, and that alone is a delight infinitely more ravishing then the
present enjoyment of all sensual pleasure can be.

The fourth consideration is, the Danger of ^f we for^ive not ^od will ^ot
forgive ^s.
not performing this Duty; of which I might reckon up diverse, but I shall
insist only on that great one, which contains in it all the rest, and that is
the forfeiting of our own pardons from God, the having our sins against him
kept still on his score, and not forgiven. This is a consideration, that me
thinks should affright us into good nature; if it do not, our malice is greater
to our selves then to our enemies. For alas! what hurt is it possible for thee
to do to another, which can bear any comparison with that thou do thy self,
in losing the pardon of thy sins? which is so unspeakable a mischief, that the
Devil himself with all his malice cannot wish a greater, it is all he aims at,
first, that we may sin, and then that those sins may never be pardoned, for
then he knows he has us sure enough, Hell, and damnation being certainly the
portion of every unpardoned sinner, besides all other effects of Gods wrath in
this life; consider this, and then tell me what thou have got by the highest
revenge thou ever actedst upon another. It Is a Divelish phrase in the mouth of
men, that revenge is sweet: but is it possible there can be (even to the most
distemperate palate) any such sweetness in it, as may recompense that
everlasting bitterness that attends it? It Is certain, no man in his wits can
upon sober judging, imagine there is. But alas! we give not our selves time to
weigh things, but suffer our selves to be hurryed away with the heat of an
angry humor, never considering how dear we must pay for it: like the silly
Be, that in anger leaves at once her sting and her life behind her, the sting
may perhaps give some short pain to the flesh it sticks in, but yet there is
none but discerns the Be has the worst of it, that pays her life for so poor a
revenge; so it is in the greatest acts of our malice, we may perhaps leave our
stings in others, put them to some present trouble, but that compared with the
hurt redounds to our selves by it, is no more then that inconsiderable pain is
to death; Nay not so much, because the mischiefs, that we bring upon our selves
are eternal, to which no finite thing can bear any proportion. Remember then,
whenever thou art contriving and plotting a revenge, that thou quite
mistakest the mark; thou think to hit thy enemy, and alas! thou woundest thy
self to death. And let no man speak peace to himself, or think that these are
va^n terrors, and that he may obtain pardon from God, though he give none to
his brethren. For he that is truth it self has assured us the contrary, Mat. 6.
15. If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive
your trespasses. And least we should forget the necessity of this duty, he has
inserted it into our daily Prayers, where we make it the condition, on which we
beg pardon from God; Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us. What a heavy curse then does every revengful person lay
upon himself, when he says this Prayer? he does in effect beg God not to
forgive him; and it is too sure that part of his prayer will be heard, he shall
be forgiven just as he forgives, that is not at all. This is yet farther set
out to us in the parable of the Lord and the Servant, Matthew. 18. the servant
had obtained of his Lord the forgiveness of a vast debt, ten thousand talents,
yet was so cruel to his fellow servant, as to exact a poor trifling sum of an
hundred pence, upon which his Lord recalls his former forgiveness, and charges
him again with the whole debt, and this Christ applies to our present purpose,
ver. 35. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do unto you, if ye from your
hearts forgive not every man his brother their trespasses. One such act of
uncharitableness is able to forfeit us the pardon God has granted us, and then
all our sins return again upon us, and sink us to utter ruin. I suppose it
needless to heap up more testimonies of Scripture, for the truth of this; these
are so clear, as may surely serve to persuade any man, that acknowledges
Scripture, of the great and fearful danger of this sin of uncharitableness. The
Lord possess all our hearts with such a just sense of it as may make us avoid
it.

The last consideration I shall mention, is that of Gratitude. God has showed
wonderful mercies to us, Christ has suffered heavy things Gratitude ^o God.
to bring us into a capacity of that mercy and pardon from God: And shall we
not then think our selves obliged to some returns of thankfulness? If we will
take the Apostles judgment he tells us, 2 Cor. 5. 15. That since Christ dyed
for us all, it is but reasonable that we should not henceforth live unto our
selves, but unto him that dyed for us. Indeed were every moment of our life
consecrated to his immediate Service, 'twere no more then common gratitude
requires, and far less then such inestimable benefits deserve; what a shameful
unthankfulness is it then to deny him so poor a satisfaction as this, the
forgiving our brethren? Supose a man that were ransomed either from death or
slavery, by the bounty and sufferings of another, should upon his release be
charged by him that so freed him in return of that kindness of his, to forgive
some slight debt, which was owing him by some third person, would you not think
him the unthankfullest wretch in the world, that should refuse this to so great
a benefactor? yet such a wretch and much worse is every revengful person:
Christ has bought us out of eternal slavery, and that not with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, 1 Pet. 1. 8. But with his own^most precious blood,
and has earnestly recommended to us the love of our brethren, and that with
the most moving arguments, drawn from the greatness of his love to us; and if
we shall obstinately refuse him in so just, so moderate a demand, how
unspeakable a vileness is it? and yet this we do downright, if we keep any
malice or grudg to any person whatsoever. Nay, farther this is not barely an
unthankfulness, but there is also joined with it a horrible contempt, and
despising of him. This Peace and unity of brethren was a thing so much prized
and valued by him, that when he was to leave the world, he thought it the most
precious thing he could bequeath, and therefore left it by way of legacy to his
Disciples, Jo. 14. 27. Peace I leave with you; we use to set a great value on
the slightest bequests of our dead friends, to be exceeding careful not to lose
them and therefore if we wilfully bangle away this so precious a Legacy of
Christ, it is a plain sign we want that Love and esteem of him, which we have of
our earthly friends, and that we despise him as well as his Legacy. The great
prevailing of this sin of uncharitableness has made me stand thus long on these
considerations, for the subduing it. God grant they may make such impression on
the Reader, as may be available to that purpose.

I shall add only this one advice, that these or whatsoever other remedies
against this sin must be used timely: It Is oftimes the frustrating of bodily
medicines, the applying them too ^e first ^ng of ^ncour to suppressed
late, and it is much oftener so in spiritual, therefore if it be possible, let
these and the like considerations be so constantly and habitually fixed in thy
heart, that they may frame it to such meekness as may prevent all risings of
rancour or revenge in thee, for it is much better they should serve as armor
to prevent, then as balsome to cure the wound. But if this passion be not yet
so subdued in thee, but that there will be some stirrings of it, yet then be
sure to take it at the very first rise, and let not thy fancy chew, as it were,
upon the injury by often rolling it in thy mind, but remember betime^ the
foregoing considerations, and withal, that this is a time, and season of trial
to thee, wherein thou may show how thou have profited in Christ's School,
there now being an opportunity offered thee either of obeying and pleasing God,
by passing by this offense of thy brother, or else of obeying and pleaseing
Satan, that lover of discord, by nourishing hatred against him. Remember this,
I say, l^otimes, before thou be enflamed, for if this fire be thoroughly
kindled, it will cast such a smoke, as will blind thy reason, and make thee
unfit to judge even in this so very plain case, whet her it be better by
obeying God, to purchase to thy self eternally bliss, or by obeying Satan,
eternal torments. Whereas, if thou put the question to thy self before this
commotion, and disturbance of mind, it is impossible but thy understanding must
pronounce for God; And then unless thy will be so perverse that thou will
deliberately choose death, thou will surely practice according to that sentence
of thy understanding; I shall add no more on this first part of Charity, that
of the Affections,

I proceed now to that of the Actions; Charity in the Actions.
And this endeed is it, whereby the former must be approved, we may pretend
great charity within, but if none break forth in the Actions, we may say of
that Love, as Sa^nt James does of the Faith he speaks of, that it is dead, Jam.
2. 20. It is the loving in deed, that must approve our bearts before God, 1 Jo.
3. 18. Now this love in the Actions may likewise fitly be distributed, as the
former was, in relation to the four distinct capacities of our brethren, their
Souls, their Bodies, their Goods, and Credit.

The Soul I formerly told you may be considered Toward the mind of our
Neighbor.
either in a natural or spiritual sense, and in both of them Charity binds us
to do all the good we can. As the Soul signifies the mind of a man, so we are
to endeavor the comfort and refreshment of our brethren, desire to give them
all true cause of joy, and cheerfulnes, especially when we see any under any
sadness or heaviness, then to bring out all the cordialls we can procure, that
is, to labor by all Christian and fit means to cheer the troubled spirits of
our brethren, to comfort them that are in any heaviness, as the Apostle
speaks, 2. Cor. 1. 4.

But the Soul in the spiritual sense is yet of greater concernment, and the
securing of His Soul.
that is a matter of much greater moment, then the refreshing of the mind only,
in as much as the eternal sorrows and sadnesses of Hell exceed the deepest
sorrows of this life; and therefore though we must not omit the former, yet on
this we are to employ our most zealous charities; Wherein we are not to content
our selves with a bare wishing well to the Souls of our brethren, this alone is
a sluggish sort of kindness, unworthy of those who are to imitate the great
Redeemer of Souls, who did and suffered so much in that purchase: No, we must
add also our endeavor to make them what we wish them, to this purpose, 'twere
very reasonable to propound to our selves in all our conversings with others,
that one great design of doing some good to their souls. If this purpose were
fixed in our minds, we should then discern perhaps many opportunities, which now
we overlook, of doing something toward it. The brutish ignorance of one would
call upon thee to endeavor his instruction; the open sin of another, to
reprehend and admonish him; the faint and weak virtue of another to confirm and
encourage him. Every spiritual want of thy brother may give thee some occasion
of exercising some part of this Charity, or if the circumstances be such, that
upon sober judging, thou think it vain to attempt any thing thy self, as if
either thy meanness, or thy unacquaintedness, or any the like impediment be
like to render thy exhortations fruitless, yet if thou art industrious in thy
Charity, thou may probably find out some other instrument, by whom to do it
more successfully. There cannot be a nobler study then how to benefit men's
Souls, and therefore where the direct means are improper, it is fit we should
whet our wits for attaining of others. Indeed it is a shame, we should not as
industriously contrive for this great spiritual concernment of others, as we
do for every worldly trifling interest of our own; yet in them we are
unwearied, and try one means after another, till we compass our end. But if
after all our serious endeavors, the obstinacy of men do not suffer us, or
themselves rather, to reap any fruit from them, if all our wooings and
intreatings of men to have mercy on their own Souls will not work on them, yet
be sure to continue still to exhort by thy example; Let thy great care and
tenderness of thy own Soul preach to them the value of theirs, and give not
over thy compassions to them, but with the Prophet Jer. 13. 17. Let thy Soul
weep in secret for them; and with the Psalmist, Let rivers of waters run down
thy eyes, because they kept not Gods Law, Psalm. 119. 136. Yea with Christ
himself, weep over them, who will not know the things that belong to their
peace, Luk, 11. 42. And when no importunities with them will work, yet even
then cease not to importune God for them, that he will draw them to himself,
Thus we see Samuel, when he could not diswade the people from that sinful
purpose they were upon, yet he professes notwithstanding, that he will not
cease praying for them; nay, he looked on it as so much a duty, that it would be
sin to him to omit it, God forbid, says he, that I should sin against the Lord
in ceasing to pray for you, 1 Samuel 12. 23. Nor shall we need to fear that our
prayers will be quite lost, for if they prevail not for those for whom we pour
them out, yet however they will return into our own bosoms, Psalm. 35. 13, we
shall be sure not to miss of the reward of that Charity.

In the second place, we are to exercise this Active Charity toward the bodies
of our Charity in respect of the Body.
Neighbors; we are not only to compassionate their pains, and miseries, but
also to do what we can for their ease and relief. The good Samaritan Luke. 10.
had never been proposed as our pattern, had he not as well helped as pitied the
wounded man. It Is not good wishes, no nor good words neither that avail in such
cases, as St. James tells us, If a brother or sister be naked and destitute of
daily food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and
filled, notwithstanding ye give him not those things that are needful for the
body, what does it profit? Jam. 2. 15. 16. No sure, it profits them nothing, in
respect of their bodies, and it will profit thee as little in respect of thy
Soul, it will never be reckoned to thee as a Charity. This releeving of the
bodily wants of our brethren, is a thing so strictly required of us, that we
find it set down Mat. 25. as the especial thing we shall be tried by at the
Last Day, on the omission whereof is grounded that dreadful sentence, ver. 41.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. And if it shall now be asked, what are the particular acts of this kind
which we are to perform? I think we cannot better inform our selves for the
frequent and ordinary ones, then from this Chapter, where are set down these
severals, the giving meat to the hungry, and drink to the thirtty, harboring
the stranger, clothing the naked, and visiting the sick and imprisoned; By
which visiting is meant, not a bare coming to see them, but so coming as to
comfort and relieve them; for otherwise it will be but like the Levite in the
Gospel, Luke 10. who came and looked on the wounded man, but did no more, which
will never be accepted by God. These are common and ordinary exercises of this
charity, for which we cannot want frequent opportunities. But besides these
there may sometimes by Gods especial providence fall into our hands, occasions
of doing other good offices to the bodies of our neighbors; we may sometimes
find a wounded man with the Samaritan, and then it is our duty to do as he did;
we may sometimes find an innocent person condemned to death, as Susanna was,
and then are with Daniel to use all possible endeavor for their deliverances:
This case Solomon seems to refer to, Prove. 24. 11. If thou forbear to deliver
him that is drawn unto death, and them that are ready to be slain, if thou
say behold we knew it not; does not he that pondereth the heart consider? and
he that keeps thy s^^l, does not he know it? shall not be render to every man
according to his deeds; we are not lightly to put off the matter with vain
excuses, but to remember that God, who knows our most secret thoughts, will
severely examine, whether we have willingly omitted the performance of such a
charity: sometimes again (nay God knows, often now a days) we may see a man
that by a course of intemperance is in danger to destroy his health, to shorten
his days, and then it is a due charity not only to the soul, but to the body
also, to endeavor to draw him from it. It is impossible to set down all the
possible acts of this corporal charity, because there may sometimes happen such
opportunities as none can foresee; we are therefore always to carry about us a
serious resolution of doing whatever good of this kind we shall at any time
discern occasion for, and then whenever that occasion is offered, we are to
look on it as a call, as it were from heaven, to put that resolution in
practice. This part of charity seems to be so much implanted in our natures, as
we are men, that we generally account them not only unchristian, but inhumane,
that are void of it, and therefore I hope there will not need much persuasion
to it, since our very nature inclines us; but certainly that very consideration
will serve hugely to increase the guilt of those that are wanting in it. For
since this command is so agreeable even to flesh and blood, our disobedience to
it can proceed from nothing but a stubborness and resistance against God who
gives it.

PARTITION XVII. Of Charity, Alms giving, etc. Of Charity in respect of our
Neighbors Credit, etc. Of Peacemaking. Of going to Law: Of Charity to our
Enemies, etc. Christian Duties both possible and pleasant.
1: THE third way of expressing this Charity is toward the goods or estate of
our neighbor; we are to endeavor his thriving and prosperity in these outward
Charity in respect of the Goods.
good things; and to that end, be willing to assist and farther him in all
honest ways of improveing or preserving them, by any neighbourly and friendly
office. Opportunities of this do many times fall out: A man may sometimes by
his power or persuasion deliver his neighbors goods out of the hands of a
thief, or oppressor; sometimes again by his advice and counsel, he may set him
in a way of thriving, or turn him from some ruinous course; and many other
occasions there may be of Toward the rich.
doing good turns to another, without any loss or damage to our selves, and
then we are to do them, even to our rich neighbors, those that are as wealthy
(perhaps much more so) as our selves; for though Charity do not bind us to give
to those that want it less then our selves, yet whenever we can further their
profit, without lessening our own store, it requires it of us: Nay, if the
damage be but light to us in comparison of the advantage to him, it will become
us rather to hazard that light damage, then lose him that greater advantage.

2. But toward our poor brother, Charity ties us to much more; we are there
only to consider the supplying of his wants, and not Toward the Poor.
to stick at parting with what is our own, to relieve him, but as far as we are
able give freely what is necessary to him. This duty of Almsgiving is perfectly
necessary for the approving our love not only to men, but even to God himself,
as St. John tells us, 1 Jo. 3. 17. Whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his
brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? It Is vain for him to pretend to love either
God or man, who loves his money so much better, that he will see his poor
brother (who is a man, and bears the image of God) suffer all extremities,
rather then part with any thing to relieve him: On the other side, the
performance of this duty is highly acceptable with God, as well as with men.

3. It Is called, Heb. 13. 16. A sacrifice wherewith God is well pleased; and
again, Phil. 4. 18. St. Paul calls their alms to him, a Sacrifice acceptable,
wel-pleasing to God, and the Church has always looked on it as such; and
therefore joined it with the soleumest part of worship, the holy Sacrament. But
because even sacrifices themselves under the Law, were often made unacceptable
by being maimed and blemished, it will here be necessary to enquire what are
the due qualifications of this Sacrifice.

4. Of these there are some that respect the Motives of Alms giving.
motive, some the manner of our giving. The motive may be threefold, respecting
God, our neighbor and our selves. That which respects God is obedience and
thankfulness to him: he has commanded we should give alms, and therefore one
special end of our doing so, must be the obeying that precept of his. And it
is from his bounty alone that we receive all our plenty, and this is the
properest way of expressing our thankfullness for it; for as the Psalmist
says, our goods extend not unto God, Psalm. 16. 2. That tribute which we desire
to pay out of our estates, we cannot pay to his person. It Is the poor, that are
as it were his Proxey and receivers, and therefore what ever we should by way
of thankfullness give back again unto God, our alms is the way of doing it:
Secondly, in respect of our neighbor, the motive must be a true love and
compassion to him, a tender fellow-feeling of his wants, and desire of his
comfort and relief: Thirdly, in respect of our selves, the motive is to be the
hope of that eternal reward promised to this performance. This Christ points
out to us, when he bids us lay up our treasure in heaven, Mat. 6. 20. And to
make us friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that they may receive us into
everlasting habitations, Luke 16. 9. That is by a charitable dispencing of our
temporal goods to the poor, to lay up a stock in heaven to gain a title to
those endless felicities, which God has promised to the charitable. That is
the harvest we must expect of what we sow in these works of mercy, which will
be so rich as would abundantly recompense us, though we should as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 13. 3. Bestow all our goods to feed the poor: But then we must
be sure we make this our sole aim, and not instead of this propose to our
selves the praise of men, as the motive of our charity, for that will rob us of
the other; this is expressly told us by Christ, Mat. 6. They that set their
hearts on the credit, they shall gain with men, must take that as their
portion, ver. 3. verily I say unto you, they have their reward; they chose, it
seems, rather to have men their Pay-masters, then God, and to them they are
turned off, that little airy praise they get from them, is all the reward they
must expect: Ye have no reward of my Father which is in heaven, ver. 1. we have
therefore need to watch our hearts narrowly, that this desire of vain glory
steal not in, and befool us into that miserable exchange of a vain blast of
men's breath for those substantial and eternal joys of heaven.

5. In the second place we must take care of our almsgiving, in respect of the
manner; and in that, first, we must give cheerfully; men usually value a small
thing, that is given cheerfully, Manner of Almsgiving.
and with a good heart, more then a much greater, that is wrung from a man with
grudging and unwillingness; and God is of the same mind, he loves a cheerful
giver, 2 Cor. 9. 7. Which the Apostle makes the reason of Cheerfully.
the foregoing exhortation, of not giving grudgingly, or as of necessity, ver.
6. And sure it is no unreasonable thing, that is herein required of us, there
being no duty that has to humane nature, more of pleasure and delight, unless
it be where coveteousness or cruelty have quite work't out the man, and put a
ravenous beast in his stead. Is it not a most ravishing pleasure to him that
has any bowels, to see the joy that a seasonable alms brings to a poor wretch?
how it revives and puts new spirits in him, that was even sinking? certainly
the most sensual creature alive knows not how to bestow his money on any thing,
that shall bring him in so great a delight, and therefore me thinks it should be
no hard matter to give not only without grudging, but even with a great deal of
alacrity and cheerfulness, it being the fetching in of pleasure to our selves.
The fear of ^mpoverish ^ng our ^lves by it ^ain and ^pious.


6. There is but one objection can be made against this, and that is, that the
danger of impoverishing ones self by what one gives, may take off that
pleasure, and make men either not give at all, or not so cheerfully. To this I
answer: That first were this hazard never so apparent, yet it being the command
of God, that we shall thus give, we are yet to obey cheerfully, and be as well
content to part with our good; in pursuance of this duty, as we are many times
called to do upon some other. In which case Christ tells us, he that forsakes
not all that he has, cannot be his Disciple.

7. But secondly, this is sure a vain supposition: God having particularly
promised, the contrary to the Charicable, that it shall bring blessings on
them, even in these outward things. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he
that waters shall be watered also himself, Prove. 11. 25. He that gives to
the poor shall not lack, Prove. 28. 27. And many the like texts there are, so
that one may truly say, this objection is grounded in direct unbelief. The
short of it is, we dare not trust God for this: giving to the poor is directly
the putting our wealth into his hands. He that giveeth to the poor lends unto
the Lord, Prove. 19. 17. And that too on solemn promise of repayment, as it
follows in that verse, that which he has given will he pay him again. It is
amongst men thought a great disparagment, when we refuse to trust them; it
shows we either think them not sufficient, or not honest: How vile an affront
is it then to God thus to distrust him? nay indeed how horrid blasphemy, to
doubt the security of that, for which he has thus expressly past his word, who
is Lord of all, and therefore cannot be insufficient, and who is the God of
truth, and therefore will not fail to make good his Promise? Let not then that
infidel fear of future want, contract and shut up thy bowels from thy poor
brother; for though he be never likely to pay thee, yet God becomes his Surety,
and enters bond with him, and will most assuredly pay thee with increase.
Therefore it is so far from being damage to thee, thus to give, that it is thy
great advantage: Any man would rather choose to put his money in some sure
hand, where he may both improve, and be certain of it at his need, then to let
it lie unprofitably by him, especially if he be in danger of thieves, or other
accidents, by which he may probably loose it: Now alas! all that we possess is
in minutely danger of losing; innumerable accidents there are, which may in an
instant bring a rich man to beggary; he that doubts this, let him but read the
story of Job, and he will there find an example of it: And therefore what so
prudent course can we take for our wealth, as to put it out of the reach of
those accidents, by thus lending it to God, where we may be sure to find it
ready at our greatest need and that too with improvement and increase; in which
respect it is that the Apostle compares Alms to Seed, 2 Cor. 9. 10. We know it
is the nature of Seed that is sown, to multiply and increase, and so does all
our acts of mercy, they return nor single and naked to us, but bring in their
sheaves with them, a most plenteous and bountiful harvest. God deals not with
our alms, as we too often do with his graces, wrap them up in a napkin, so that
they shall never bring in any advantage to us, but makes us most rich returns:
and therefore we have all reason most cheerfully, yea, joyfully to set to this
duty, which we have such invitations to, as well in respect of our own
interests, as our neighbors needs.

8. Secondly, We must give seasonably: it is Give seasonably.
true indeed there are some so poor, that an Alms can never come unseasonably,
because they always want, yet even to them there may be some special seasons
of doing it, to their greater advantage; for sometimes an Alms may not only
deliver a poor man from some present extremity, but by the right timeing of it,
may set him in some way of a more comfortable subsistence afterward. And for
the most, I presume it is a good Rule, to dispense what we intend to any, as
soon as may be, for delays are hurtful oftentimes both to them and ourselves;
first, as to them, it is sure, the longer we delay, the longer they groan under
the present want, and after we have designed them a relief, it is in some
degree a cruelty to defer bestowing of it, for so long we prolong their
sufferings; you will think him a hard hearted Physician, that having a certain
cure for a man in pain, should when he might presently apply it make
unnecessary delays, and so keep the poor man still in torture: and the same it
is here; we want of the due compassion, if we can be content our poor brother
should have one hour of unnecessary suffering, when we have present opportunity
of relieving him, or if he be not in such an extremity of want, yet whatever we
intend him for his greater comfort, he loses so much of it, as the time of the
delay amounts to: Secondly, in respect of our selves; it is ill to defer, for
thereby we give advantage to the temptations either of Satan or our own
covetous humor, to dissuade us from it. Thus it fares too often with many
Christian duties; for want of a speedy execution, our purposes cool, and never
come to act; so many resolve they will repent, but because they set not
immediately upon it, one delay succeeds another, and keeps them from ever doing
it at all; and so it is very apt to fall out in this case, especially with men,
who are of a covetous temper, and therefore they of all others should not trust
themselves thus to delay.

9. Thirdly, We should take care to give prudently, that is to give most, where
it is most Prudently.
needed, and in such a manner, as may do the receiver most good: Charities do
often miscarry for want of this care, for if we give at all adventures to all
that seem to want, we may sometimes give more to those, whose sloth and lewdness
is the cause of their want then to those who best deserve it, and so both
encourage the one in their idleness, and disable our selves from giving to the
other. Yet I doubt not such may be the present wants even of the most unworthy,
that we are to relieve them, but where no such pressing need is, we shall do
best to choose out the fitter objects of charity, such are those who either are
not able to labor, or else have a greater charge then their labor can
maintain, and to those our alms should be given also in such manner as may be
most likely to do them good the manner of which may differ according to the
circumstances of their condition; it may to some be best perhaps, to give them
by little and little, to others the giving it all at once may tend more to
their benefit; and sometimes a seasonable loan may do as well as a gift, and
that may be in the power sometimes of those who are able to give but little:
But when we thus lend on charity, we must lend freely without Use, and also
with a purpose, that if he should prove unable to pay, we will forgive so much
of the principal as his needs require, and our abilities will permit. They want
much of this charity, who clap up poor debtors in prison, when they know they
have nothing to answer the debt, which is a great cruelty to make another
miserable, when nothing is gained to our selves by it.

10. Fourthly, We should give liberally, we must not be strait handed in our
alms, and give by such pitiful scantlings, as will bring almost no relief to
the receiver, for that is a kind of mockery; it is as if one should pretend to
feed one that is almost famisht by giving him a crumb of bread, such Doles as
that would be most ridiculous, yet I fear it is too near the proportion of some
men's alms; such men are below those Disciples we read of, who knew only the
Baptism of John, for it is to be observed, that John Baptist, who was but the
forerunner of Christ, makes it a special part of his Doctrine, that he that
has two coats should impart to him that has none, Lu^. 3. 11. He says not,
he that has some great Wardrobe, but even he that has but two coats must part
with one of them; from whence we may gather that whatsoever is above (not our
vanity but) our need should thus be disposed of, when our brethrens necessity
requires it. But if we look into the first time of the Gospel, we shall find
Christianity far exceeded this proportion of John's, the converts assigned not a
part only, but frankly gave all to the use of the Brethren, Acts 4. and though
that being upon an extraordinary occasion, will be no measure for our constant
practice yet it may show us how prime and fundamental a part of Christianity,
this of Charity is, that at the very first founding of the Church, such vast
degrees of it were practiced; and if we farther consider what precepts of love
are given us in the Gospel, even to the laying down our lives for the brethren,
1 Jo. 3. 16. We cannot imagine our goods are in Gods account so much more
precious then our lives, that he would command us to be prodigal of the one,
and yet allow us to be sparing of the other.

11. A multitude of Arguments might be brought to recommend this bounty to all
that profess Christ; I shall mention only two, which I find used by St. Paul
to the Corinthians on this occasion. The first is the example of Christ, 2 Cor.
8. 9. For ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who though he was rich,
yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich.
Christ emptyed himself of all that glory and greatness, he enjoyed in Heaven
with his Father, and submitted himself to a life of much meaness and poverty,
only to enrich us. And therefore for shame, let us not grudge to empty our
Coffers, to lessen somewhat of our heaps, to relieve his poor members. The
second is the expectation of reward, which will be more or less, according to
the degrees of our Alms, 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly, and he that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully. We think him
a very improvident husbandman, that to save a little seed at present, sowes so
thin, as to spoil his crop; and the same folly 'twill be in us, if by the
sparingness of our Alms, we make our selves a lank harvest hereafter, lose
either all, or a great part of those rewards which God has provided for the
liberal Alms-Giver. What is the proportion which may be called a liberal
giving, I shall not undertake to set down, there being degrees even in
liberality, one may give liberally, and yet another give more liberally then
he; besides, liberality is to be measured, not so much by what is given as by
the ability of the giver; A man of a mean estate may give less then one of a
great, and yet be the more liberal person, because that little may be more out
of his, then the greater is out of the others. Thus we see Christ pronounces
the poor widow to have given more to the Treasury, then all the rich men, Luke.
21. 3. not that her two mites were more then their rich gifts, but that it was
more for her, she having left nothing behind, whereas they gave out of their
abundance what they might easily spare. Every man must herein judge for himself;
we see the Apostle, though he earnestly press the Corinthians to bounty, yet
prescr^bes not to them how much they shall give, but leaves that to their own
breasts, 2 Cor. 9. 7. Every man according as he purposes in his heart, so let
him give. But let us still remember, that the more we give (provided we do not
thereby fail in the support of those, that most immediately depend on us) the
more acceptable it will be to God, and the more rewardable by him. And to
secure the performance of the duty of Almsgiving (what ever the proportion be)
we may do very well to follow the advice St. Paul gives the Corinthians in this
matter, 1 Cor. 16. 2. Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay
by him in store as God has prospered him; If men would do thus, lay by
somewhat weekly in store for this work of Charity, it were the surest way not
to be unprovided of somewhat to give, when an occasion offered it self, and by
giving so by little and little, the expense would become less sensible, and so
be a means to prevent those grudgings, and repinings, which are apt to attend
men in greater disbursements; And sure this were in other respects also a very
proper course, for when a tradesman casts up his weekly account, and sees what
his gains have been, it is of all others the most seasonable time to offer this
tribute to God out of what he has by his blessing gained; If any will say they
cannot so well weekly reckon their gains, as by longer spaces of time, I shall
not contend with them for that precise time, let it be done monthly, or
quarterly, so it be done: But that somewhat should still be laid by in bank for
these uses rather then left loose to our sudden Charities is sure very
expedient, and I doubt not, whoever will make trial of it, will upon experience
acknowledge it to be so.

12. The fourth exercise of our Charity is toward the credit of our neighbor:
and of Charity in respect of the Credit.
this we may have many occasions; sometimes toward the innocent, and sometimes
also toward the guilty. If one whom we know to be an innocent person, be
slandered, and traduced, Charity binds us to do what we may for the declaring
his innocence, and delivering him from that false imputation, and that not only
by witnessing when we are called to it, but by a voluntary offering our
testimony on his behalf, or if the accusation be not before a Court of Justice,
and so there be no place for that our more solemn testimony, but that it be
only a slander tossed from one to another, yet even there we are to do what we
can to clear him, by taking all occasions publicly to declare what we know of
his innocence. But even to the guilty there is some Charity of this kind to be
performed, sometimes by concealing the fault, if it be such that no other part
of Charity to others make it necessary to discover, or be it not so notorious,
as that it will be sure to betray it self: The wounds of Reputation are of all
others the most incurable, and therefore it may well become Christian Charity
to prevent them, even where they have been deserved; and perhaps such a
tenderness in hiding the fault may sooner bring the offender to Repentance, if
it be seconded (as it ought to be) with all earnestness of private admonition:
But if the fault be such, that it be not to be concealed, yet still there may
be place for this Charity, in extenuating, and lessening it, as far as the
circumstances will bear; As if it were done suddenly, and rashly, Charity will
allow some abatement of the Censure, which would belong to a designed, and
deliberate act; and so proportionably in other circumstances. But the most
frequent exercises of this Charity happen toward those, of whose either
innocence or guilt we have no knowledge, but are by some doubtful actions
brought under suspicion: And here we must remember, that it is the property of
love, not to think evil, to judge the best; and therefore we are both to
abstain from uncharitable conclusions of them our selves, and as much as lies
in us, to keep others from them also, and so endeavor to preserve the credit
of our neighbor, which is oftentimes as much shaken by unjust suspicions, as it
would be by the truest accusation. To these cases, I suppose belongs that
precept of Christ, Mat. 7. 1. Judge not; and when we consider, how that is
backed in the following words, That ye be not judged, we shall have cause to
believe it no such light matter, as the world seems to account it; Our merciful
judging of others will be paid home to us, in the strict, and severe Judgment
of God.

13. I have now gone through this Active Charity, as it relates to the four
several capacities of our brethren, many of the particulars The acts of Charity
in some respects acts of Justice also.
whereof were before briefly mentioned, when we spoke of Justice. If any think
it improper, that the same acts should be made part of Justice, and Charity
too, I shall desire them to consider, that Charity being by Christ's command
become a debt to our brethren, all the parts of it may in that respect be
ranked under the head of Justice, since it is sure paying of debts is a part of
that: Yet because in our common use we do distinguish between the offices of
Justice and Charity, I have chose to enlarge on them in particular referenc to
Charity. But I desire it may still be remembered, that whatsoever is under
precept, is so much a due from us, that we sin not only against Charity, but
Justice too, if we neglect it; Which deserves to be considered, the more to
stir up our care to the performance, and the rather, because there seems to be
a common error in this point; Men look upon their acts of mercy, as things
purely voluntary, that they have no obligation to; and the effect of it is
this, that they are apt to think very highly of themselves, when they have
performed any, though never so mean, but never blame themselves, though they
omit all: which is a very dangerous, but withal a very natural fruit of the
former persuasion. If there be any Charities wherein Justice is not concerned,
they are those which for the height and degrees of them are not made matter of
strict duty, that is, are not in those degrees commanded by God, and even after
these 'twill be very reasonable for us to labor; but that cannot be done
without taking the lower and necessary degrees in our way; and therefore let
our first care be for them.

14. To help us wherein there will be no better means, then to keep before our
eyes The great rule of Charity.
that grand rule of Loving our Neighbors as our selves; This the Apostle makes
the sum of our Whole duty to our Neighbors, Romans 13. 9. let this therefore
be the standard, whereby to measure all thy actions, which relate to others;
When ever any necessity of thy Neighbors presents it self to thee, ask thy
self, whether if thou were in the like case, thy love to thy self would not
make thee industrious for relief, and then resolve thy love to thy Neighbor
must have the same effect for him. This is that Royal Law, as St. James calls
it, Jam. 2. 8. which all that profess themselves subjects to Christ, must be
ruled by; and whosoever is so will not fail of performing all Charities to
others, because it is sure he would upon the like occasions have all such
performed to himself. There is none, but wishes to have his good name defended,
his poverty relieved, his bodily sufferings succored; Only it may be said,
that in the spiritual wants, there are some so careless of themselves, that
they wish no supply, they desire no reproofs, no instructions, nay, are angry
when they are given them; it may therefore seem that such men are not by virtue
of this rule tied to those sorts of Charities. To this I answer, that the love
of our selves, which is here set as the measure of that to our Neighbor, is to
be understood to be that reasonable love, which men ought to have, and
therefore though a man fail of that due love he owes himself, yet his Neighbor
has not thereby forfeited his right, he has still a claim to such a degree of
our love, as is answerable to that, which in right we should bear to our
selves, and such I am sure is this care of our spiritual estate, and therefore
it is not our despising our own Souls, that will absolve us from Charity to
other men's, yet I shall not much press this duty in such men, it being neither
likely that they will be persuaded to it, or do any good by it, their ill
example will overwhelm all their good exhortations, and make them unfruitful.

15. There is yet one act of Charity behind, which does not properly fall under
any one Peace making.
of the former heads, and yet may relate to them all, and that is, the Making
peace, and amity among others; By doing whereof we may much benefit both the
Souls, Bodies, Goods, and Credit of our brethren; for all these are in danger
by strife and contention. The reconciling of enemies is a most blessed work,
and brings a blessing on the actors: We have Christ's word for it, Blessed are
the Peacemakers, Mat. 5. 9. and therefore we may be encouraged diligently to
lay hold of all opportunities of doing this office of Charity, to use all our
Art, and endeavor to take up all grudges and quarrels we discern among others;
Neither must we only labor to restore peace where it is lost, but to preserve
it where it is: First, generally, by striving to beget in the heart of all we
converse with a true value of that most precious Jewel, Peace; Secondly,
particularly, by a timely prevention of those jarres, and unkindnesses, we see
likely to fall out. It may many times be in the power of a discreet friend or
neighbor, to cure those mistakes, and misapprehensions, which are the first
beginnings of quarrels and contentions; and it will be both more easy and more
profitable, thus to prevent, then pacify strifes. It Is sure it is more easy, for
when a quarrel is once broken out, it is like a violent flame, which cannot so
soon be quenched, as it might have been, whilst it was but a smothering fire.
And then it is also more profitable, for it prevents many sins, which in the
progress of an open contention, are almost sure to be committed. Solomon says,
In the multitude of words there wants not sin, Prove. 10. 19. which cannot
more truly be said of any sorts of words, then those that pass in anger, and
then though the quarrel be afterward composed, yet those sins will still
remain on their account; and therefore it is a great Charity to prevent them.

16. But to fit a man for this so excellent an Office of Peace Making, It Is
necessary that he be first remarkably peaceable himself; for He that undertake
it must be peaceable himself.
with what face can thou persuade others to that which thou will not perform
thy self? or how can thou expect thy persuasions should work? 'twill be a
ready reply in every man's mouth, Thou Hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of
thine own eye, Matthew. 7. 5. and therefore be sure thou qualify thy self for the
work. There is one point of Peaceableness which seems to be little regarded
among men, and that is in the case of Legal trespasses; Men think it nothing to
go to Law about Of going to Law.
every petty trifle, and as long as they have but Law on their side, never
think they are to blame: but sure had we that true Peaceableness of spirit
which we ought, we should be unwilling for such slight matters to trouble and
disquiet our Neighbors. Not that all going to Law is utterly unchristian, but
such kind of suits especially, as are upon contentiousness, and stoutness of
humor, to defend such an inconsiderable right, as the parting with will do us
little or no harm, or which is yet worse, to avenge such a trespass. And even
in greater matters, he that shall part with somewhat of his Right for love of
Peace, does surely the most Christianly, and most agreeably to the advice of
the Apostle, Cor. 6. 7. rather to take wrong, and suffer our selves to be
defrauded. But if the damage be so unsupportable, that it is necessary for us
to go to Law, yet even then we must take care of preserving Peace; first, by
carrying still a friendly, and Christian temper toward the party, not
suffering our hearts to be at all estranged from him; secondly, by being
willing to yield to any reasonable terms of agreement, whenever they shall be
offered; and truly if we carry not this temper of mind in our suits, I see not
how they can be reconcilable with that peaceableness so strictly required of
all Christians. Let those consider this who make it their pleasure themselves
to disquiet their Neighbor, or their trade to stir up others to do it. This
tender regard of Peace both in ourselves, and others, is absolutely necessary
to be entertained of all those, who own themselves to be the servants of him,
whose title it is to be the Prince of Peace, Isai. 9. 6.

17. All that remains to be touched on concerning This charity of the actions
must reach to enemies.
this Charity of the Actions, is the extent of it, which must be as large as
the former of the affections, even to the taking in not only strangers, and
those of no relation to us, but even of our bitterest enemies. I have already
spoken so much of the Obligation we are under to forgive them, that I shall not
hear say any thing of that, but that being supposed a duty, 'twill sure then
appear no unreasonable thing to proceed one step further, by doing them good
turns; for when we have once forgiven them, we can then no longer account them
enemies, and so 'twill be no hard matter even to flesh and blood to do all
kind things to them. And indeed this is the way, by which we must try the
sincerity of our forgiveness: It Is easy to say, I forgive such a man, but if
when an opportunity of doing him good is offered, thou declinest it, it is
apparent there yet lurks the old malice in thy heart; Where there is a thorough
forgiveness, there will be as great a readiness to benefit an enemy as a
friend: nay perhaps in some respects a greater, a true charitable person
looking upon it as an especial prize, when he has an opportunity of evidencing
the truth of his reconciliation, and obeying the precept of his Savior, by
doing good to them that hate him, Matthew. 5. 44. Let us therefore resolve that
all actions of kindness are to be performed to our enemies, for which we have
not only the command, but also the example of Christ, who had not only some
inward relentings toward us his obstinate, and most provoking enemies, but
showed it in acts, and those no cheap, or easy ones, but such as cost him his
dearest blood. And surely we can never pretend to be either obeyers of his
command, or followers of his example, if we grudge to testify our loves to our
enemies by those so much cheaper ways of feeding them in hunger, and the like,
recommended to us by the Apostle, Romans 12. 20. But if we could perform these
acts of kindness to enemies in such manner as might draw them from their
enmity, and win them to Peace, the Charity would be doubled: And this we
should aim at, for that we see the Apostle sets as the end of the forementioned
acts of feeding, etc. that we may heap coals of fire on their heads, not coals
to burn, but to melt them into all love and tenderness toward us; and this
were indeed the most complete way of imitating Christ's example, who in all he
did and suffered for us, designed the reconciling of us to himself.

18. I have now showed you the several parts of our duty to our Neighbor,
toward Self-love an hindrance to this Charity.
the performance whereof I know nothing more necessary, then the turning out of
our hearts that self love which so often possesses them, and that so wholly,
that it leaves no room for Charity, nay, nor justice neither to our Neighbor.
By this self-love I mean not that true love of our selves, which is the love
and care of our Souls (for that would certainly help, not hinder us in this
duty) but I mean that immoderate love of our own worldly interests, and
advantages, which is apparently the root of all, both injustice and
uncharitableness toward others. We find this sin of self-love set by the
Apostle in the head of a whole troop of sins, 2 Timothy 3. 2. as if it were some
principal officer in Satan's camp, and certainly, not without reason, for it
never goes without an accursed train of many other sins, which like the Dragons
tail Rev. 12. 4. sweeps away all care of duty to others. We are by it made so
vehement, and intent upon the pleasing our selves, that we have no regard to
any body else, contrary to the direction of S. Paul, Romans 15. 2. Which is not
to please our selves, but every man to please his Neighbor for his good to
edification; which he backs with the example of Christ, verse 3. For even Christ
pleased not himself: If therefore we have any sincere desire to have this
virtue of charity rooted in our hearts, we must be careful to weed out this sin
of self-love, for it is impossible they can prosper together.

19. But when we have removed this hindrance, we must remember that this, as al
other Prayer ^ means to procure it
graces proceeds not from our selves, it is the gift of God, and therefore we
must earnestly pray to him to work it in us, to send his holy Spirit, which
once appeared in the form of a dove, a meek and gall-less creature, to frame
our hearts to the same temper, and enable us rightly to perform this duty.

20. I have now past through those several branches I at first proposed, and
showed you what is our duty to God, our selves, and our Christian duties both
possible and pleasant.
neighbor: Of which I may say as it is, Luke 10. 28. This do and thou shall
live. And surely it is no impossible task to perform this in such a measure, as
God will graciously accept, that is in Sincerity, though not in perfection, for
God is not that austere master, Luk 19. 20. That reaps where he has not sowed,
he requires nothing of us, which he is not ready by his grace to enable us to
perform; if we be not wanting to our selves, either in asking it by prayer, or
in using it by diligence. And as it is not impossible, so neither is it such a
sad melancholy task, as men are apt to think it. It Is a special policy of
Satan's, to do as the spies did, Number. 23. 28. bring up an ill report upon this
good land, this state of Christian life, thereby to discourage us from entering
into it, to fright us, with I know not what Giants we shall meet with; but let
us not thus be cheated, let us but take the courage to try, and we shall indeed
find it a Canaan, a land flowing with milk and honey: God is not in this
respect to his people a wilderness, a land of darkness, Jer. 2. 31. His service
does not bereave men of any true joy, but helps thou to ^^ great deal: Christ's
yoke is an easy, nay a pleasant yoke, his burden a light, yea a gracious
burden. There is in the practice of Christian duties a great deal of present
pleasure, and if we feel it not, it is because of the resistance our vicious
and sinful customs make, which by the contention raises an uneasiness. But then
first that is to be charged only to our selves, for having got those ill
customs, and thereby made that hard to us, which in it self is most pleasant,
the duties are not to be accused for it. And then secondly, even there the
pleasure of subduing those ill habits, overcoming those corrupt customs is
such, as hugely outweigheth all the trouble of the combat.

21. But it will perhaps be said, that some parts of piety are of such a
nature, as will be Even when they expose us to outward sufferings.
very apt to expose us to persecutions, and sufferings in the world, and that
those are not joyous, but grievous; I answer, that even in those there is
matter of joy: we see the Apostles thought it so, they rejoiced that they were
counted worthy to suffer for Christ's name, Acts 4. 41. and S. Peter tells us,
that if any suffer as a Christian, he is to glorify God for it, 1 Pet. 4. 16.
There is such a force and virtue in the testimony of a good Conscience, as is
able to change the greatest suffering into the greatest triumph, and that
testimony we can never have more clear, and lively, then when we suffer for
righteousness sake; so that you see Christianity is very amiable even in its
saddest dress, the inward comforts of it do far surpass all the outward
tribulations that attend it, and that even in the instant, while we are in the
state of warfare upon earth. But then if we look forward to the crown of our
victories, those eternal rewards in heaven, we can never think those tasks sad,
though we had nothing at present to sweeten them, that have such recompenses
await them at the end, were our labors never so heavy, we could have no cause
to faint under them: Let us therefore when ever we meet with any
discouragements in our course, fix our eye on this rich prize, and then run
with patience the race which is set before us, Heb. 12. 2. Follow the Captain
of our salvation through the greatest sufferings, yea even through the same red
sea of blood which he has waded, whenever our obedience to him shall require
it; for though our fidelity to him should bring us to death it self, we are
sure to be no losers by it, for to such he has promised a Crown of life, the
very expectation whereof is able to keep a Christian more cheerful in his
fetters and dungeon, then a worldling can be in the midst of his greatest
prosperities.

22. All that remains for me farther to add, is earnestly to entreat and
beseech the Reader, that without delay, he puts himself The danger of delaying
our turning to God.
into this so pleasant and gainful a course, by setting sincerely to the
practice of all those things, which either by this Book, or by any other means
he discerns to be his duty, and the further he has formerly gone out of his
way, the more haste it concerns him to make to get into it, and to use the more
diligence in walking in it. He that has a long journey to go, and finds he
has lost a great part of his day in a wrong way, will not need much entreaty,
either to turn into the right, or to quicken his pace in it. And this is the
case of all those that have lived in any course of sin, they are in a wrong
road, which will never bring them to the place they aim at; Nay, which will
certainly bring them to the place they most fear and abhor; much of their day
is spent, how much will be left to finish their journey in, none knows,
perhaps the next hour, the next minute the night of death may overtake them;
what a madness is it then for them to defer one moment to turn out of that path
which leads to certain destruction, and to put themselves in that, which will
bring them to bliss and glory? Yet so are men bewitched, and enchanted with the
deceitfulness of sin, that no entreaty, no persuasion can prevail with them, to
make this so reasonable so necessary a change, not but that they acknowledge it
needful to be done, but they are unwilling to do it yet, they would enjoy all
the pleasures of sin as long as they live, and then they hope at their death,
or some little time before it, to do all the business of their Souls; But,
alas! Heaven is too high to be thus jumpt into, the way to it is a long and
leasurely ascent, which requires time to walk. The hazards of such deferring
are more largely spoken of, in the Discourse of Repentance, I shall not here
repeat them, but desire the Reader seriously to lay them to heart, and then
surely he will think it seasonable counsel that is given by the wise man,
Eccles. 5. 7. Make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to
day.

FINIS.
PRIVATE DEVOTIONS For several OCCASIONS. ORDINARY and EXTRAORDINARY.

LONDON, Printed for T. Garthwait, at the little North Door of S. Paul's Church,
1660.

CHRISTIAN READER,
I Have, for the help of thy Devotions, set down some FORMS of PRIVATE PRAYER,
upon several occasions: If it be thought an om^ssion that there are none for
Families, I must answer for my self, that it was not from any opinion that God
is not as well to be worshipped in the Family as the Closet; but because the
Providence of God and the Church has already furnished thee for that purpose,
infinitely beyond what my utmost care could do. I mean the PUBLIC LITURGY, or
COMMON PRAYER, which for all public addresses to God (and such are Family
prayers) are so excellent and useful, that we may say of it as David did of
Goliah's sword, 1 Samuel 21. 9. There is none like it.

DIRECTIONS for the MORNING.
As soon as ever thou awakest in the morning, lift up thy heart to God in this
or the like short Prayer. LORD, As thou have awaked my Body from sleep, so by
thy grace awaken my Soul from sin, and make me so to walk before thee this day
and all the rest of my life, that when the last trumpet shall awake me out of
my grave, I may rise to the life immortal, through Jesus Christ.



WHen thou have thus begun, suffer not (without some urgent necessity) any
worldly thoughts to fill thy mind, till thou have also paid thy more solemn
Devotions to Almighty God, and therefore during the time thou art dressing thy
self (which should be no longer then common decency requires) exercise thy mind
in some spiritual thoughts: as for example, consider to what Temptations thy
business or company that day are most like to lay thee open, and arm thy self
with Resolutions against them; or again, consider what Occasions of doing
service to God, or good to thy neighbor are that day most likely to present
themselves, and resolve to embrace them; and also contrive how thou may
improve them to the uttermost. But especially it will be sit for thee to
Examine whether there have any sin escaped thee since thy last nights
examination. If after these considerations any further leisure remain, thou
may profitably employ it in meditating on the general Resurrection (whereof
our rising from our beds is a Representation) and of that dreadful Judgment
which shall follow it, and then think with thy self in what preparation thou
art for it, and resolve to husband ca^^fully every minute of thy time toward
the fitting th^e for that great account. As soon as thou art ready retire to
some private place, and there offer up to God thy Morning Sacrifice of Praise
and Prayer.

PRAYERS for the MORNING.
At thy first kneeling down, say, O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity, three
Persons and one God, have mercy upon me a miserable sinner.

LORD, I know not what to pray for as I ought, O let thy Spirit help my
infirmities, and enable me to offer up a spiritual Sacrifice acceptable to thee
by Jesus Christ.



A THANKSGIVING.
O Gracious Lord, whose mercies endure for eever, I thy unworthy servant who
have so deeply tasted of them, desire to render thee the tribute of my humblest
praises for them: In thee, O Lord, I live, and move and have my being, thou
first made me to be, and then that I might not be miserable but happy, thou
sendest thy Son out of thy bos^me to redeem me from the power of my sins by his
Grace, and from the punishment of them by his Blood, and by both to bring me to
his glory. Thou have by thy mercy caused me to be born within thy peculiar
fold, the Christian Church, where I was early consecrated to thee in Baptism,
and have been partaker of all those spiritual helps which might aid me to
perform that Vow I there made to thee; and when by my own wilfulness or
negligence I have failed to do it, yet thou in thy manifold mercies have not
forsaken me, but have graciously invited me to repentance, afforded me all
means both outward and inward for it, and with much patience have attended and
not cut me off in the acts of those many damning sins I have committed, as I
have most justly deserved. It is, O Lord, thy restraining grace alone by which
I have been kept back from any the greatest sins, and it is thy inciting and
assisting grace alone, by which I have been enabled to do any the least good,
therefore not unto me, not unto me, but unto thy name be the praises. For these
and all other thy spiritual blessings, my soul does magnify the Lord, and all
that is within me praise his holy Name. I likewise praise thee for those many
outward blessings I enjoy, as health, friends, food and raiment, the comforts
as well as the necessaries of this life, for those continual protections of thy
hand, by which I and mine are kept from dangers, and those gracious
deliverances thou have often afforded out of such as have befallen me; and for
that mercy of thine whereby thou have sweetened and all^yed those troubles thou
have not seen sit wholly to remove: for thy particular preservation of me this
night, and all other thy goodness toward me; Lord, grant that I may render
thee not only the fruit of my lips, but the obedience of my life, that so these
blessings here may be an earnest of those richer blessings thou have prepared
for those that love thee, and that for his sake whom thou have made the Author
of Eternal Salvation to all that obey him, even Jesus Christ.

A CONFESSION.
O Righteous Lord, who hate iniquity, I thy sinful creature cast my self at
thy feet, acknowledging that I most justly deserve to be utterly abhorred and
forsaken by thee, for I have drunk iniquity like water, gone on in a continued
course of sin and rebellion against thee, daily committing those things thou
forbiddest, and leaving undone those things thou command; mine heart, which
should be an habitation for thy spirit, is become a cage of unclean birds, of
foul and disordered affections; and out of this abundance of the heart my mouth
speaks, my hands act, so that in thought, word, and deed I continually
transgress against thee. [Here mention the greatest of thy sins] Nay, O Lord, I
have despised that goodness of thine which should lead me to Repentance,
hardening my heart against all those means thou have used for my amendment. And
now, Lord, what can I expect from thee but judgment and fiery indignation, that
is indeed the due reward of my sins? But, O Lord, there is mercy with thee that
thou may est be feared, O fit me for that mercy by giving me a deep and hearty
Repentance, and then according to thy goodness let thy anger and thy wrath be
turned away from me; look upon me in thy Son, my blessed Savior, and for the
merit of his sufferings pardon all my sins: And, Lord, I beseech thee by the
power of thy grace so to renew and purify my heart, that I may become a new
creature, utterly forsaking every evil way, and living in constant, sincere,
universal obedience to thee all the rest of my days, that behaving my self as a
good and faithful servant, I may by thy mercy at the last be received into the
joy of my Lord: Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake.

A PRAYER for GRACE.
O Most gracious God, from whom every good and perfect gift comes, I wretched
creature that am not able of my self so much as to think a good thought,
beseech thee to work in me both to will and do according to thy good pleasure;
inlighten ^^, (...) that I may know thee, and let me not be barren or
unfruitful in that knowledge; Lord, work in my heart a true faith a purifying
hope, and an unfeigned love toward thee, give me a full trust on thee, zeal
for thee, reverence of all things that relate to thee; make me fearful to
offend thee, thankful for thy mercies, humble under thy corrections, devout in
thy service, sorrowful for my sins; and grant that in all things I may behave
my self so as befits a creature to his Creator, a servant to his Lord; enable
me likewise to perform that duty I owe to my self, give me that meekness,
humility, and contentedness whereby I may always possess my soul in patience
and thankfulness; make me diligent in all my duties, watchful against all
temptations, perfectly pure and temperate, and so moderate in my most lawful
enjoyments that they never become a snare to me; make me also, O Lord, to be so
affected toward my neighbor, that I never transgress that royal Law of thine,
of loving him as my self; grant me exactly to perform all parts of justice,
yielding to all whatsoever by any kind of right becomes their due; and give me
such bowels of mercy and compassion that I may never fail to do all acts of
charity to all men, whether friends or enemies, according to thy command and
example. Finally, I beseech thee, O Lord, to sanctify me throughout, that my
whole spirit and soul and body may be preserved blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be all honor and
glory for ever.

Amen.
INTERCESSION.
OBlessed Lord, whose mercy is over all thy works, I beseech thee to have mercy
upon all men, and grant that the precious ransom which was paid by thy Son for
all, may be effectual to the saving of all. Give thy inlightning grace to
those that are in darkness, and thy converting grace to those that are in sin;
look with thy tenderest compassions upon the Universal Church, O be favorable
and gracious unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem, unite all those that
profess thy Name to thee, by Purity, and Holiness, and to each other by
Brotherly love. Have mercy on this desolate Church, and sinful Nation, thou
have moved the Land and divided it, heal the sores thereof for it shakes, make
us so truly to repent of those sins, which have provoked thy Judgments, that
thou also may turn, and repent, and leave a blessing behind thee. Bless
those whom thou have appointed our Governors, whether in Church or State, so
rule their hearts, and strengthen their hands, that they may neither want will
nor power to punish wickedness and vice, and to maintain Gods true Religion and
Virtue. Have pity, O Lord, on all that are in affliction; be a Father to the
fatherless, and plead the cause of the widow, comfort the feeble minded,
support the weak, heal the sick, relieve the needy, defend the oppressed, and
administer to every one according to their several necessities; let thy
blessings rest upon all that are near and dear to me, and grant them whatsoever
thou see necessary either to their bodies or their Souls. [Here name thy
nearest Relations] Reward all those that have done me good, and pardon all
those that have done, or wished me evil, and work in them and me all that good
which may make us acceptable in thy sight, through Jesus Christ.

For PRESERVATION.
OMerciful God, by whose bounty alone it is, that I have this day added to my
life, I beseech thee so to guide me in it by thy grace, that I may do nothing
which may dishonor thee, or wound my own soul, but that I may deligently apply
my self to do all such good works, as thou have prepared for me to walk in; and
Lord I beseech thee, give thy Angels charge over me, to keep me in all my
ways, that no evil happen unto me, nor any plague come nigh my dwelling, but
that I and mine may be safe under thy gracious protection, through Jesus Christ.

O Lord, pardon the wanderings and coldness of these petitions, and d^al with
me, not according either to my prayers or deserts, but according to my needs,
and thine own rich mercies in Jesus Christ, in whose blessed Name and Words, I
conclude these my imperfect Prayers; saying, Our Father, etc.

DIRECTIONS for NIGHT.
AT NIGHT, when it draws toward the time of rest, bethink thy self, how thou
have passed the day, examine thine own heart, what sin either of Thought, Word,
or Deed thou have committed, what opportunity of doing good thou have omitted,
and what soever thou sindest to accuse thy self of, confess humbly and
penitently to God, renew thy purposes, and resolutions of amendment, and beg
his pardon in Christ, and this not slightly, and only as of course, but with
all devout earnestness, and heartiness, as thou would do, if thou were sure
thy death were as near approaching, as thy sleep, which for ought thou know
may be so indeed, and therefore thou should no more venture to sleep
unreconciled to God, then thou would dare to die so. In the next place,
consider what special and extraordinary mercies thou have that day received, as
if thou have had any great deliverance, either in thy inward man, from some
dangerous temptations, or in thy outward, from any great and apparent danger,
and offer to God thy hearty and devout praise for the same; or if nothing
extraordinary have so happened, and thou have been kept even from the approach
of danger, thou have not the less, but the greater cause to magnify God, who
has by his protection so guarded thee, that not so much as the fear of evil
has assaulted thee. And therefore omit not to pay him the tribute of humble
thankfulness, as well for his usual and daily preservations, as his more
extraordinary deliverances. And above all, endeavor still by the
considerations of his mercies to have thy heart the more closely knit to him,
remembering that every favor received from him is a new engagement upon thee,
to love and obey him.

PRAYERS for NIGHT.
O Holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God, have mercy
upon me a miserable sinner.

Lord I know not what to pray for as I ought, O let thy Spirit help my
infirmities, and enable me to offer up a spiritual Sacrifice acceptable unto
thee by Jesus Christ.

A CONFESSION.
O MOST Holy Lord God, who art of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, how shall
I abominable wretch dare to appear before thee, who am nothing but pollution? I
am defiled in my very nature, having a backwardness to all good, and a
readiness to all evil; but I have defiled my self yet much worse by my own
actual sins and wicked customs; I have transgrest my duty to thee, my
neighbor, and my self, and that both in thought, in word, in deed, by doing
those things which thou have expressly forbidden, and by neglecting to do those
things thou have commanded me. And this not only through ignorance and frailty,
but knowingly, and wilfully, against the motions of thy Spirit, and the checks
of my own conscience to the contrary. And to make all these out of measure
sinful, I have gone on in a daily course of repeating these provocations
against thee, notwithstanding all thy calls to, and my own purposes and vows of
amendment; yea, this very day I have not ceased to add new sins to all my
former guilts. [Here name the Particulars.] And now, O Lord, what shall I say,
or how shall I open my mouth, seeing I have done these things? I know that the
wages of these sins is death; but O thou who willest not the death of a sinner,
have mercy upon me; work in me, I beseech thee, a sincere contrition, and a
perfect hatred of my sins, and let me not daily confess, and yet as daily renew
them, but grant; O Lord, that from this instant I may give a bill of Divorce to
all my most beloved lusts, and then be thou pleased to marry me to thy self in
truth, in righteousness and holiness. And for all my past sins, O Lord, receive
a reconciliation; accept of that ransom thy blessed Son has paid for me, and
for his sake whom thou have set forth as a propitiation* pardon all my
offenses, and receive me to thy favor. And when thou have thus spoken peace to
my soul, Lord keep me that I turn not any more to folly, but so establish me
with thy grace, that no temptation of the world, the Devil or my own flesh may
ever draw me to offend thee, that being made free from sin, and becoming a
servant unto God, I may have my fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A THANKSGIVING.
O Thou Father of Mercies, who art kind even to the unthankful, I acknowledge
my self to have abundantly experimented that gracious property of thine, for
notwithstanding my daily provocations against thee, thou still heapest mercy
and loving kindness upon me. All my contempts and despisings of thy spiritual
favors have not yet made thee withdraw them, but in the riches of thy goodness
and long suffering thou still continuest to me the offers of grace and life in
thy Son. And all my abuses of thy temporal blessings thou have not punished
with an utter deprivation of them, but art still pleased to afford me a liberal
portion of them. The sins of this day thou have not repayed as justly thou
might, by sweeping me away with a swift destruction, but have spared and
preserved me according to the greatness of thy mercy. [Here mention the
particular mercies of that day.] What shall I render unto the Lord for all
these benefits he has done unto me? Lord, let this goodness of thine lead me
to repentance, and grant that I may not only offer thee thanks and praise, but
may also order my conversation aright, that so I may at the last see the
salvation of God, through Jesus Christ.

Here use the Prayer for Grace and that of Intercession appointed for the
Morning.

For PRESERVATION.
OBlessed Lord, the Keeper of Israel, that neither slumbrest nor sleep, be
pleased in thy mercy to watch over me this night, keep me by thy grace from all
works of darkness, and defend me by thy power from all dangers, grant me
moderate and refreshing sleep, such as may fit me for the duties of the day
following. And, Lord, make me ever mindful of that time when I shall lie down
in the dust; and because I know neither the day nor the hour of my Masters
coming, grant me grace that I may be always ready, that I may never live in
such a state as I shall fear to die in, but that whether I live, I may live
unto the Lord; or whether I die, I may die unto the Lord, so that living and
dying I may be thine, through Jesus Christ.

Use the same concluding prayer as in the Morning.

As thou art putting off thy clothes, think with thy self that the time
approaches that thou must put off thy body also, and then thy Soul must appear
naked before Gods judgment Seat, and therefore thou had need be careful to
make it so clean and pure by repentance and holiness, that he who will not look
on iniquity may graciously behold and accept it.

Let thy Bed put thee in mind of thy Grave, and when thou lie down, say, O
Blessed Savior, who by thy precious death and burial did take away the sting
of death and power of the grave, grant me the joyful fruits of that thy
victory, and be thou to me in life and death advantage.

I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only that
make me dwell in safety.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed it, O Lord, thou
God of truth.



IN the ANCIENT CHURCH there were besides morning and night four other times
every day which were called HOURS OF PRAYER, and the zeal of those first
Christians was such as made them constantly observed. It would be thought too
great a strictness now in this lukewarm age to enjoin the like frequency, yet I
cannot but mention the example, and say, that for those who are not by very
necessary business prevented, it will be but reasonable to imitate it, and make
up in public and private those FOUR TIMES of PRAYER, besides the OFFICES
already set down for MORNING and NIGHT: and that none may be to seek how to
exercise their devotions at these times, I have added diverse COLLECTS for
several Graces, whereof every man may use at each such time of prayer so many
as his zeal and leisure shall point out to him, adding, if he please, one of
the confessions appointed for morning or night, and never omitting the LORDS
PRAYER.

But if any mars state of life be really so busy as will not allow him time
for so long and solemn devotions, yet certainly there is no man so overlayed
with business, but that he may sinde leisure oftentimes in a day to say the
LORDS PRAYER alone, and therefore let him use that if he cannot more. But
because it is the Character of a Christian, Phil. 3. 20. That he has his
conversation in heaven, it is very fit that besides these set times of Prayer,
he should diverse times in a day by short and sudden EJACULATIONS dart up his
soul thither. And for this sort of devotion no man can want leisure, for it may
be performed in the midst of business; the Artisicer at his work, the
Husbandman at his Plough may practice it. Now as he cannot want time, so that
he may not want matter for it, I have thought it not unuseful out of that rich
storehouse, the BOOK of PSALMS, to furnish him with some texts, which may very
fitly be used for this purpose, which being learned by heart will always be
ready at hand to employ his devotion; and the matter of them being various,
some for Pardon of sin; some for Grace, some for the light of Gods countenance,
some for the Church, some for Thanksgiving, etc. every man may fit himself
according to the present need and temper of his soul. I have given these not as
a full collection, but only as a taste, by which the Readers appetite may be
raised to search after more in that Book, and other parts of holy Scripture.

COLLECTS for several GRACES.
For FAITH.
O Blessed Lord, whom without Faith it is impossible to please, let thy spirit
I beseech thee work in me such a Faith as may be acceptable in thy ^ight, even
such as works by love, O let me not rest in a dead ineffectual Faith, but
grant that it may be such as may show it self by my works, that it may be that
victorious Faith which may enable me to overcome the world, and conform me to
the Image of that Christ, on whom I believe, that so at the last I may receive
the end of my Faith, even the salvation of my soul, by the same Jesus Christ.

For HOPE.
O Lord, who art the hope of all the ends of the earth, let me never be
destitute of a well grounded hope, nor yet possessed with a vain presumption,
suffer me not to think thou will either be reconciled to my sins, or reject my
repentance, but give me, I beseech thee, such a hope as may be answerable to
the only ground of hope, thy promises, and such as may both encourage and
enable me to purify my self from all filthiness, both of flesh and Spirit,
that so it may indeed become to me an anchor of the soul both sure and
steadfast, entering even within the vail, whither the forerunner is for me
entered, even Jesus Christ my High Priest and blessed Redeemer.

For THE LOVE of GOD.
O Holy and gracious Lord, who art infinitely excellent in thy self, and
infinitely bounti^ul and compassionate toward me, I beseech thee suffer not my
heart to be so hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, as to resist such
charms of love, but let them make deep and lasting impressions on my soul.
Lord, thou art pleased to require my heart, and thou only have right to it. O
let me not be so sacrilegiously unjust as to alienate any part of it, but
enable me to render it up whole and entire to thee. But, O my God, thou see
it is already usurped, the world with its vanities has seized it, and like a
strong man armed keeps possession, O thou who art stronger come upon him, and
take this unworthy heart of mine as thine own spoil, refine it with that
purifying fire of thy love, that it may be a fit habitation for thy Spirit:
Lord, if thou see it fit, be pleased to let me taste of those joys, those
ravishments of thy love, wherewith thy Saints have been so transported. But if
in this I know not what I ask, if I may not choose my place in thy Kingdom, yet
O Lord, deny me not to drink of thy cup, let me have such a sincerity and
degree of love, as may make me endure any thing for thy sake, such a perfect
love as may cast out all fear and all sloth too, that nothing may seem to me
too grievous to suffer, or too difficult to do in obedience to thee, that so
expressing my love by keeping thy Commandments, I may by thy mercy at last
obtain that Crown of life, which thou have promised to those that love thee,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For SINCERITY.
O Holy Lord, who requirest truth in the inward parts, I humbly beseech thee to
purge me from all hypocrisy and unsincerity. The heart O Lord, is deceitful
above all things, and my heart is deceitful above all hearts, O thou who
searchest the heart and reins, try me, and seek the ground of my heart, and
suffer not any accursed thing to lurk within me, but purify me even with fire,
so thou consume my dross. O Lord, I cannot deceive thee, but I may most easily
deceive my self, I beseech thee let me not rest in any such deceit, but bring
me to a sight and hatred of my most hidden corruptions, that I may not cherish
any darling lust, but make an utter destruction of every Amalekite; O suffer me
not to speak peace to my self, when there is no peace, but grant I may judge of
my self, as thou judge of me, that I may never be at peace with my self, till
I am at perfect peace with thee, and by purity of heart be qualified to see
thee in thy Kingdom, through Jesus Christ.

For DEVOTION in PRAYER.
O Gracious Lord God, who not only permittest, but invitest us miserable and
needy creatures, to present our petitions to thee, grant I beseech thee, that
the frequency of my prayer may be some what proportionable to those continual
needs I have of thy mercy: Lord, I confess, it is the greatest honor and
greatest advantage, thus to be allowed access to thee, yet so sottish and
stupid is my profane heart, that it shuns or frustrates the opportunities of
it. My Soul, O Lord, is possessed with a spirit of infirmity, it is bowed
together, and can in no wise lift up it self to thee. O be thou pleased to cure
this sad, this miserable disease, to inspirit and inliven this earthy drosly
heart, that it may freely mount toward thee, that I may set a true value on
this most valuable privilege, and take delight in approaching to thee, and
that my approaches may be with a reverence, some way answerable to that awful
Majesty I come before, with an importunity and earnestness, answerable to those
pressing wants I have to be supplied, and with such a fixedness and attention
of mind, as no wandering thoughts may interrupt; that I may no more incur the
guilt of drawing near to thee with my lips, when my heart is far from thee, or
have my prayers turned into sin, but may so ask that I may receive, seek that I
may find, knock that it may be opened unto me: that from praying to thee here,
I may be translated to the praising thee eternally in thy glory, through the
merits and intercession of Jesus Christ.

For HUMILITY.
O Thou High and Lofty one, that inhabitest Eternity, yet art pleased to dwell
with the humble spirit, pour into my heart I beseech thee, that excellent grace
of Humility, which may utterly work out all those vain conceits I have of my
self; Lord convince me powerfully of my own wretchedness, make me to see that I
am miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, and not only dust, but sin, that
so in all thy dispensations toward me, I may lay my hand upon my mouth, and
heartily acknowledge that I am less then the least of thy mercies, and greater
then the greatest of thy judgments. And O Lord, grant me not only to walk
humbly with my God, but even with men also, that I may not only submit my self
to thy rebukes, but even to those of my fellow Christians, and with weekness
receive and obey their admonitions. And make me so to behave my self toward
all, that I never do any thing through strife or vain glory; and to that end
grant, that in low liness of mind I may esteem every other man better then my
self, and be wiling that others should esteem them so also; that I neither
nourish any high opinion of my self, nor covet one among others, but that
despising the vain praise of men, I may seek that praise which comes from thee
only. That so in stead of those mean servile Arts I have used to recommend me
to the esteem of men, I may now employ all my industry and care to approve my
self to thee, who resistest the proud, and give grace to the humble: grant
this, O Lord, for his sake, who humbled himself unto the death of the Cross,
Jesus Christ.

For the FEAR of GOD.
O Glorious Majesty, who only art high, and to be feared, possess my soul with
a Holy awe and reverence of thee, that I may give thee the honor due unto thy
Name, and may bear such a respect to all things which relate to thee, that I
may never profane any Holy thing, or sacrilegiously invade what thou have set
apart to thy self. And, O Lord, since thou art a God that wilt not clear the
guilty, let the dread of thy justice make me tremble to provoke thee in any
thing, O let me not so misplace my fear, as to be afraid of a man that shall
die, and of the Son of man, who shall be made as grass, and forget the Lord my
Maker; but replenish my Soul with that fear of the Lord, which is the beginning
of wisdom, which may be as a bridle to all my brutish appetites, and keep me in
a constant conformity to thy Holy will. Hear me, O Lord, I beseech thee, and
put this fear in my heart, that I may not depart from thee, but may with fear
and trembling work out my own Salvation, through Jesus Christ.

For TRUST on GOD.
O Almighty Lord, who never failest them that must on thee, give me grace. I
beseech thee, in all my difficulties and distresses, to have recourse to thee,
to rest and depend on thee; thou shall keep him, O Lord, in perfect peace,
whose mind is staid on thee, O let me always rest on this firm P^llar, and
never exchange it for the broken ^eeds of worldly succors, suffer not my heart
to be overcharged with the cares of this life, taking thought what I shall eat,
or drink or wherewithal I shall be clothed, but grant, that having by honest
labor and industry done my part, I may cheerfully commit my self to thy
providence, casting all my care upon thee, and being careful for nothing, but
to be of the number of those whom thou ownest and carest for, even such as keep
thy Testimonies and think upon thy Commandments to do them. That seeking first
thy Kingdom and the righteousness thereof, all these outward things may be
added unto me, in such a measure as thy wisdom knows best for me; grant this O
Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake.

For THANKFULNESS.
O Most Gracious and Bountiful Lord, who fillest all things living with good,
and expectest no other return, but praise and thanksgiving, let me O Lord,
never defraud thee of that so easy tribute, but let my heart be ever filled
with the sense, and my mouth with the acknowledgement of thy mercies. It is a
joyful and a pleasant thing to be thankful, O suffer me not I beseech thee, to
loose my part in that Divine pleasure, but grant that as I daily receive
blessings from thee, so I may daily from an affectionate and devout heart offer
up thanks to thee, and grant that not only my lips, but my life may show forth
thy praise, by consecrating my self to thy service, and walking in Holiness and
Righteousness before thee all the days of my life, through Jesus Christ my Lord
and blessed Savior.

For CONTRITION.
O Holy Lord, who art a merciful embracer of true penitents, but yet a
consuming fire toward obstinate sinners, how shall I approach thee, who have
so many provoking sins to inflame thy wrath, and so little sincere repentance
to incline thy mercy! O be thou pleased to soften and melt this hard obdurate
heart of mine, that I may heartily bewail the iniquities of my life, strike
this rock, O Lord, that the waters may flow out, even floods of tears, to wash
my polluted conscience; my drowzy Soul has too long slept securely in sin,
Lord awake it though it be with thunder, and let me rather ^^^^ thy terrors
then not feel my sin. Thou sentest thy blessed Son to heal the broken hearted,
but Lord, what will that avail me if my heart be whole. O break it that it may
be capable of his healing virtue; and grant, I beseech thee, that having once
tasted the bitterness of sin, I may fly from it, as from the face of a
Serpent, and bring forth fruits of repentance in amendment of life, to the
praise and glory of thy grace in Jesus Christ our blessed Redeemer.

For MEEKNES.
O Blessed Jesu, who wast led as a sheep to the slaughter, let, I beseech thee,
that admirable example of Meekness quench in me all sparks of anger and
revenge, and work in me such a gentleness and calmness of Spirit as no
provocations may ever be able to disturb. Lord, grant I may be so far from
offering the least injury, that I may never return the greatest any otherwise
then with prayers and kindness, that I who have so many talents to be forgiven
by thee may never exact pence of my brethren, but that putting on bowels of
mercy, meekness, long-suffering, thy peace may rule in my heart and make it an
acceptable habitation to thee, who art the Prince of peace, to whom with the
Father and holy Spirit be all honor and glory for ever.

For CHASTITY.
O Holy and Immaculate Jesus, whose first descent was into the Virgins womb,
and who do still love to inhabit only in pure and virgin hearts, I beseech
thee send thy Spirit of purity to cleanse me from all filthiness both of flesh
and spirit; my body, O Lord, is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, O let me never
pollute that Temple with any uncleanness. And because out of the heart proceed
the things that defile the man, Lord grant me to keep my heart with all
diligence, that no impure or foul thoughts be harbored there, but enable me, I
beseech thee, to keep both body and soul pure and undefiled, that so I may
glorify thee here both in my body and spirit, and be glorified in both with
thee hereafter.

For TEMPERANCE.
O Gracious Lord, who have in thy bounty to mankind afforded us the use of thy
good creatures for our corporal refreshment, grant that I may always use this
liberty with thankfulness and moderation; O let me never be so enslaved to that
brutish pleasure of taste, that my Table become a snare to me, but give me, I
beseech thee, a perfect abhorrence of all degrees of excess, and let me eat and
drink only for those ends, and according to those measures which thou have
assigned me for health and not for luxury. And, Lord, grant that my pursuits
may be not after the meat that perishes, but after that which endures to
everlasting life, that hungring and thirsting after righteousness I may be
filled with thy grace here, and thy glory hereafter, through Jesus Christ.

For CONTENTEDNES.
O Merciful God, thy wisdom is infinite to choose, and thy love forward to
dispense good things to us, O let me always fully and entirely resign my self
to thy disposals, have no desires of mine own, but a perfect satisfaction in
thy choices for me, that so in whatsoever estate I am, I may be therein
content. Lord grant I may never look with murmuring on my own condition, nor
with envy on other men's. And to that end, I beseech thee, purge my heart of all
covetous affections, O let me never yield up any corner of my Soul to Mammon,
but give me such a contempt of these fading riches, that whether they increase
or decrease I may never set my heart upon them, but that all my care may be to
be rich toward God, to lay up my treasure in heaven, that I may so set my
affections on things above, that when Christ who is my life shall appear, I may
also appear with him in glory. Grant this, O Lord, for the merits of the same
Jesus Christ.

For DILIGENCE.
O Lord, who have in thy wisdom ordained that man should be born to labor,
suffer me not to resist that design of thine by giving my self up to sloth and
idleness; but grant I may so employ my time and all other talents thou have
entrusted me with, that I may not fall under the sentence of the slothful and
wicked servant; Lord, if it be thy will, make me some way useful to others,
that I may not live an unprofitable part of mankind; but however, O Lord, let
me not be useless to my self, but grant I may give all diligence to make my
calling and election sure: My soul is beset with many and vigilant adversaries,
O let me not fold my hands to sleep in the midst of so great dangers, but watch
and pray, that I enter not into temptation, enduring hardness as a good
soldier of Jesus Christ, till at the last from this state of warfare thou
translate me to the state of triumph and bliss in thy Kingdom, through Jesus
Christ.

For JUSTICE.
O Thou King of righteousness, who have Commanded us to keep judgment and do
Justice, be pleased by thy grace to cleanse my heart and hands from all fraud
and injustice, and give me a perfect integrity and uprightness in all my
dealings. O make me ever abhor to use my power to oppress, or my skill to
deceive my brother, and grant I may most strictly observe that sacred rule of
doing as I would be done to, that I may not dishonor my Christian prof^ssion
by an unjust or fraudulent life, but in simplicity and godly sincerity, have my
conversation in this life, never seeking to heap up treasures of wickedness,
but preferring a little with righteousness before great revenues without right.
Lord, make me exactly careful to render to every man what by any sort of
obligation becomes his due, that I may never break the bond of any of those
relations that thou have placed me in, but may so behave my self toward all,
that none may have any evil thing to say of me, that so, if it be possible, I
may have peace with all men, or however I may by keeping innocence and taking
heed to the thing that is right, have peace at the last, even peace with thee,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For CHARITY.
O Merciful Lord, who have made of one blood, and redeemed by one ransom all
Nations of men, let me never harden my bowels against any that partake of the
same nature and redemption with me, but grant me an universal charity toward
all men. Give me, O thou father of compassions, such a tenderness and
meltingness of heart, that I may be deeply affected with all the miseries and
calamities outward or inward of my brethren, and diligently employ all my
abilities for their succor and relief. O let not an unchristian self love
possess my heart, but drive out that accursed spirit, and let thy Spirit of
love enter and dwell there, and make me seek not to please my self, but my
neighbor for his good to edification, even as Christ pleased not himself,
Lord, make me a faithful steward of all those talents thou have committed to me
for the benefit of others, that so when thou shall call me to give an account
of my stewardship, I may do it with joy and not with grief. Grant this merciful
Lord, I beseech thee for Jesus Christ his sake.

For PERSEVERANCE
O Eternal and unchangeable Lord God, who art the same yesterday and to day,
and for ever. Be thou pleased to communicate some small Ray of that excellence,
some degree of that stability to me thy wretched creature who am light and
unconstant, turned about with every blast; my understanding is very deceivable,
O establish it in thy truth, keep it from the snares of seducing spirits, that
I may not be led away with the error of the wicked and fall from my own
stedfastness: my will also, O Lord, is irresolute and wavering, and does not
cleave steadfastly unto God, my goodness is but as the morning cloud, and as the
early dew it passes away. O strengthen and confirm me, and whatever good work
thou have wrought in me, be pleased to accomplish and perform it until the day
of Christ. Lord thou see my weakness, and thou know the number and
strength of those temptations I have to struggle with, O leave me not to my
self, but cover thou my head in the day of battle and in all spiritual combats
make me more then conqueror through him that loved me. O let no terrors or
slatteries either of the world or my own flesh ever draw me from my obedience
to thee, but grant that I may continue steadfast, unmovable, always abounding
in the work of the Lord; and by patient continuance in well doing, seek, and at
last obtain glory, and honor, and Immortality, and eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

A Brief Paraphrase of the LORDS PRAYER To be used as a Prayer.
[Our Father which art in Heaven.]
O LORD, who dwell in the highest heavens, thou art the Author of our being,
thou have also begotten us again unto a lively hope, and carriest toward us
the tenderness and bowels of a compassionate father. O make us to render to
thee the love and obedience of children; and that we may resemble thee our
father in heaven (that place of true delight and purity) give us a holy disdain
of all the deceitful pleasures and foul pollutions of this world, and so raise
up our minds that we may always have our conversation in heaven, from whence we
look for our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ.

[1. Hallowed be thy Name.]
STRIKE such an awe into our hearts, that we may humbly reverence thee in thy
Name, which is great, wonderful and holy, and carry such a sacred respect to
all things that relate to thee and thy worship, as may express our reverence of
thy great Majesty. Let all the people praise thee, O God, let all the people
praise thee.

[2. Thy Kingdom come.]
Establish thy Throne and rule for ever in our souls, and by the power of thy
grace subdue all those rebellious corruptions that exalt themselves against
thee, they are those enemies of thine which would not that thou should reign
over them, O let them be brought forth and slain before thee, and make us such
faithful subjects of this thy Kingdom of Grace, that we may be capable of the
Kingdom of Glory, and then Lord Jesus come quickly.

[3. Thy will be done in earth, etc.]
ENABLE us by thy grace cheerfully to suffer thy will in all thy inflictions,
and readily to perform it in all thy commands, give us of that heavenly zeal to
thy service, wherewith the blessed Angels of thy presence are inspired, that we
may obey thee with the like fervor and alacrity, and that following them in
their obedience, we may be joined with them to sing eternal praises in thy
Kingdom to God, and to the Lamb for ever.

[4. Give us this day our daily bread.]
GIVE us that continual supply of thy grace, which may sustain and nourish our
souls unto eternal life. And be thou pleased also to provide for our bodies all
those things which thou see fit for their support, through this our earthly
pilgrimage, and make us cheerfully to rest on thee for them, first seeking thy
Kingdom and the righteousness thereof, and then not doubting but all these
things shall be added unto us.

[5. Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them, etc.]
HEAL our souls, O Lord, for we have sinned against thee, let thy tender
mercies abound toward us, in the forgiveness of all our offenses; And grant O
Lord, that we may never forfeit this pardon of thine, by denying ours to our
brethren, but give us those bowels of compassion to others which we stand in so
much greater need of from thee, that we may forgive as fully and finally upon
Christ's command, as we desire to be forgiven, for his merits and intercession.

[6. Lead us not into Temptation but deliver, etc.]
O LORD, we have no strength against those multitudes of temptations that daily
assault us, only our eyes are upon thee, O be thou pleased either to restrain
them or assist us, and in thy faithfulness suffer us not to be tempted above
that we are able, but in all our temptations make us a way to escape that we be
not overcome by them, but may when thou shall call us to it, resist even unto
blood, striving against sin, that being faithful unto death, thou may give
us the crown of life.

[For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, etc.]
HEAR us and graciously answer our petitions for thou art the great King over
all the earth, whose Power is infinite, and art able to do for us above all
that we can ask or think, and to whom belongs the Glory of all that good thou
workest in us or for us. Therefore blessing, honor, glory and power be unto
him that sits upon the throne, to our God, for ever and ever,

Amen.
Pious EJACULATIONS Taken out of the Book of PSALMS.
For PARDON of SIN.
HAVE mercy on me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the multitude
of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds.

My misdeeds prevail against me, O be thou merciful unto my sins.

Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

For thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul, O save me for thy mercies sake.

For GRACE.
TEACH me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God.

Teach me thy way, O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth, O knit my heart to
thee, that I may fear thy name.

Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

O let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed.

Incline my heart unto thy I estimonies, and not to covetousness.

Turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way.

I am a stranger upon earth, O hide not thy Commandments from me.

Lord teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom.

For the LIGHT of Gods COUNTENANCE.
LORD, why abhorrest thou my soul, and hidest thy face from me? O hide not thou
thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure.

Thy loving kindness is better then life it self.

Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me.

Comfort the Soul of thy servant, for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.

THANKSGIVING.
I WILL always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall ever be in my mouth.

Thou art my God, and I will thank thee, thou art my God and I will praise thee.

I will sing unto the Lord, as long as I live, I will praise my God whilst I
have my being.

Praised be God which has not cast out my prayer, nor turned his mercy from me.

Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel, which only does wondrous
things.

And blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever, and all the earth shall be
filled with his Majesty,

Amen, Amen.
For DELIVERANCE from TROUBLE.
BE merciful unto me, O Lord, be merciful unto me, for my Soul trusts in
thee, and under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge, until these
calamities be over-past.

Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies, for I fly unto thee to hide me.

O keep my Soul, and deliver me, let me not be confounded, for I have put my
trust in thee.

Mine eyes are ever looking unto the Lord, for he shall pluck my feet out of
the net.

Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in misery.

The sorrorws of my heart are enlarged, O bring thou me out of my troubles.

For the CHURCH.
O BE favorable and gracious unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long? Why is thy wrath so hot
against the sheep of thy pasture?

O think upon thy Congregation, whom thou have purchased and Redeemed of old.

Look upon the Tribe of thine Inheritance, and Mount Sion where thou have dwelt

It is time for thee, Lord. to lay to thy hand, for they have destroyed thy Law.

Arise, O God, and maintain thine own cause.

Deliver Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.

Brief Heads of Self-Examination, especially before the Sacrament, Collected
out of the foregoing Treatise, concerning the breaches of our Duty.
To GOD.
FAITH.
NOT BELIEVING there is a God.

Not believing his Word.

Not believing it practically, so as to live according to our belief.

HOPE.
Despairing of Gods mercy, so as to neglect duty.

Presuming groundlesly on it, whilst we go on in wilful sin.

LOVE.
Not Loving God for his own excellencies.

Not loving him for his goodness to us.

Not laboring to please him.

Not desiring to draw near to him in his Ordinances.

Not longing to enjoy him in Heaven.

FEAR.
Not Fearing God so as to keep from offending him.

Fearing man above him by committing sin, to shun some outward suffering.

TRUST.
Not trusting on God in dangers and disiresses.

Using unlawful means to bring us out of them.

Not depending on God for supply of our wants.

Immoderate care for outward things.

Neglecting to labor, and expecting God should support us in our idleness.

Not looking up to God for a blessing on our honest endeavors.

HUMILITY.
Not having a high esteem of God.

Not submitting obediently to act his will.

Not patiently suffering it, but murmuring at his corrections.

Not amending by them.

Not being thankful to him.

Not acknowledging his wisdom in choosing for us, but having eager and
impatient desires of our owe.

HONOR.
Not Honoring God by a reverend usage of the things that relate to him.

Behaving our selves irreverently in his house.

Robbing God, by taking things that are consecrated to him.

Profaning Holy times, the Lords Day, and the Feasts and Fasts of the Church.

Neglecting to read the Holy Scriptures, not marking when we do read.

Being careless to get knowledge of our duty, choosing rather to continue
ignorant, then put our selves to the pains or shame of learning.

Placing Religion in hearing of Sermons, without practicing them.

Breaking our Vow made at Baptism.

By resorting to Witches, and Conjurers; i. e. to the Devil.

By loving the pomps and vanities of the world, and followlowing its sinful
customs.

By fulfilling the lusts of the flesh.

Profaning the Lords Supper.

By coming to it ignorantly, without examination, contrition, and purposes of
new life.

By behaving our selves irreverently at it, without devotion, and spiritual
affection.

By neglecting to keep the promises made at it.

Profaning Gods Name, by blasphemous thoughts, or discourse.

Giving others occasion to blaspheme him, by our vile wicked lives.

Taking unlawful OATHS.

Perjury.

Swearing in ordinary communication.

WORSHIP.
Not worshipping God.

Omitting prayers, public or private, and being glad of a pretense to do so

Asking unlawful things, or to unlawful ends.

Not purifying our hearts from sin before we pray.

Not praying with Faith and Humility.

Coldness and deadness in prayer.

Wandering thoughts in it.

Irreverent gestures of body in prayer.

REPENTANCE.
Neglecting the duty of Repentance.

Not calling our selves to daily account for our sins.

Not assigning any set or solemn times, for humiliation; and confession, or too
seldom.

Not deeply considering our sins, to beget contrition for them.

Not acting revenges on our selves, by fasting, and other acts of Mortification.

IDOLATRY.
Outward Idolatry in worshipping of creatures.

Inward Idolatry, in placing our love, and other affections more on creatures,
then the Creator.

To our SELVES.
HUMILITY.
BEing puffed up with high conceits of our selves.

In respect of natural parts, as beauty, wit, etc.

Of worldly riches and honors.

Of Grace.

Greedily seeking the praise of men.

Directing Christian Actions, as prayer, alms, etc. to that end.

Committing sins to avoid reproach from wicked men.

MEEKNES.
Disturbing our minds with Anger and peevishness.

CONSIDERATION.
Not carefully Examining what our estate toward God is.

Not trying our selves by the true rule, i. e. our obedience to Gods commands.

Not weighing the lawfulness of our actions before we venture on them.

Not examining our past actions to repent of the ill, to give God the glory of
the good.

CONTENTEDNES.
Uncontentedness in our estates

Greedy desires after honor and riches.

Seeking to gain them by sinful means.

Envying the condition of other men.

DILIGENCE WATCHFULNES
Being negligent in observing and resisting temptations.

Not improving Gods gifts, outward or inward, to his honor.

Abusing our natural parts, as wit, memory, strength, etc. to sin.

Neglecting or resisting the motions of Gods Spirit.

CHASTITY.
Uncleanness, adultery, fornication, unnatural lusts, etc.

Uncleanness of the eye and hand.

Filthy and obscene talking.

Impure sancies and desires.

Heightning of lust by pampering the body.

Not laboring to subdue it by fasting or other severities.

TEMPERANCE.
Eating too much.

Making pleasure, not health the end of eating.

Being too curious or costly in meats.

Drunkenness.

Drinking more then is useful to our bodies though not to drunkenness.

Wasting the time or estate in good fellowship

Abusing our streng^h of brain to the making others drunk.

Immoderate sleeping.

Idleness and negligence in our callings.

Using unlawful Recreations.

Being too vehement upon lawful ones.

Spending too much time at them.

Being drawn by them to anger or covetousness.

Being proud of apparel.

Striving to go beyond our rank.

Bestowing too much time, care or cost about it.

Abstaining from such excesses not out of conscience but covetousness.

Pinching our bodies to fill our purses.

To our NEIGHBOR.
NEGATIVE JUSTICE.
BEing Injurious to our Neighbor.

Delighting causlesly to grieve his mind.

Ensnaring his soul in sin, by command, counsel, enticement or example.

Affrighting him from godliness by our scoffing at it.

Not seeking to bring those to repentance whom we have led into sin.

MURDER.
Murder, open or secret.

Drawing men to intemperance or other vices, which may bring diseases or death.

Stirring men up to quarrelling and fighting.

Maiming or hurting the body of our neighbor.

Fierceness and rage against him.

ADULTERY.
Coveting our Neighbors wife.

Actually defiling her.

MALICE.
Spoiling the goods of others upon spite and malice.

COVETOUSNES.
Coveting to gain them to our selves.

OPPRESSION.
Oppressing by violence and force or color of Law.

THEFT.
Not paying what we borrow.

Not paying what we have voluntarily promised.

Keeping back the wages of the servant and hireling.

DECEIT.
Unfaithfulness in trusts, whether to the living or dead.

Using arts of deceit in buying and selling.

Exacting upon the necessities of our neighbors.

FALSE WITNESS.
Blasting the credit of our neighbor.

By false witness.

By railing.

By whispering.

Encouraging others in their slanders.

Being forward to believe ill reports of our neighbor.

Causeless suspicions.

Rash judging of him.

Despising him for his infirmities.

Inviting others to do so by scoffing and d^riding him.

Bearing any malice in the heart.

Secret wishing of death or any kind of hurt to our neighbor.

Rejoicing when any evil befalls him.

Nelecting to make what satisfaction we can for any sort of injury done to our
neighbor.

POSITIVE JUSTICE. HUMILITY. LYING.
Churlish and proud behavior to others.

Froward and peevish conversation.

Bitter and reproachful language.

Cursing.

Not paying the respect due to the qualities or gifts of others

Proudly overlooking them.

Seeking to lessen others esteem of them.

Not employing our abilities, whether of mind or estate, in administering to
those whose wants require it.

GRATITUDE.
Unthankfulness to our Benefactors.

Especially those that admonish us.

Not amending upon their reproof.

Being angry at them for it.

Not reverencing our Civil Parent, the lawful Magistrate.

Judging and speaking evil of him.

Grudging his just tributes.

Sowing sedition among the people.

Refusing to obey his lawful commands.

Rising up against him, or taking part with them that do.

Despising our Spiritual Fathers.

Not loving them for their works sake.

Not obeying those commands of God they deliver to us.

Seeking to withhold from them their just maintenance.

Forsaking our lawful Pastors to follow factious teachers.

PARENTS.
Stubbern and irreverent behavior to our natural Parents.

Despising and publishing their infirmities.

Not loving them, nor endeavoring to bring them joy and comfort.

Contemning their counsels.

Murmuring at their Government.

Coveting their estates, though by their death.

Not ministering to them in their wants of all sorts.

Neglecting to pray for Gods blessing on these several sorts of Parents.

Want of natural affection to children.

Mothers refusing to Nurse them without a just impediment.

Not bringing them timely to Baptism.

Not early instructing them in the ways of God.

Suffering them for want of timely correction to get customs of sin.

Setting them evil examples.

Discouraging them by harsh and cruel usage.

Not providing for their subsistence according to our ability.

Consuming their portions in our own riot.

Reserving all till our death, and letting them want in the mean time.

Not seeking to entail a blessing on them by our Christian lives.

Not heartily praying for them

Want of affection to our natural brethren.

Envyings and heart-burnings toward them.

DUTY to BRETHREN.
Not loving our spiritual brethren, i. e our fellow Christians.

Having no fellow feeling of their sufferings.

Causelessly for saking their communion in holy duties.

Not taking deeply to heart the desolations of the Church.

MARRIAGE.
Marrying within the degrees for bidden.

Marrying for undue ends, as covetousness, lust, etc.

Unkind, froward, and unquiet behavior toward the husband or wife.

Unfaithfulness to the bed.

Not bearing with the infirmities of each other.

Not endeavoring to advance one another good, spiritual, or temporal.

The wife resisting the lawful command of her husband.

Her striving for rule and dominion over him.

Not praying for each other.

FRIENDSHIP.
Unfaithfulness to a Friend.

Betraying his secrets.

Denying him assistance in his needs.

Neglecting lovingly to admonish him.

Flat^ering him in his faults.

Forsaking his friendship upon slight or no cause.

Making leagues in sin in stead of virtuous friendship.

SERVANTS.
Servants disobeying the lawful commands of their Masters.

Purloining their goods.

Carelessly wasting them.

Murmuring at their rebukes.

Idleness.

Eye service.

MASTERS.
Masters using servants tyrannically and cruelly.

Being too remiss, and suffering them to neglect their duty.

Having no care of their souls.

Not providing them means of instruction in Religion.

Not admonishing them when they commit sins.

Not allowing them time and opportunity for prayer, and the worship of God.

CHARITY.
Want of bowels and Charity to our neighbors.

Not heartily desiring their good spiritual or temporal.

Not loving and forgiving enemies.

Taking actual revenges upon them.

Falseness: professing kindness and acting none.

Not laboring to do all the good we can to the soul of our neighbor.

Not assisting him to our power in his bodily distresses.

Not defending his good name when we know or believe him slandered.

Denying him any neighbourly office to preserve or advance his estate.

Not defending him from oppression, when we have power.

Not relieving him in his poverty.

Not giving liberally, or chear^ully.

GOING to LAW.
Not loving PEACE.

Going to Law upon slight occasions.

Bearing inward enmity to those we sue.

Not laboring to make peace among others.

The use of this Catalogue of sins is this: Upon days of Humiliation,
especially before the Sacrament, read them consideringly over, and at every
particular ask thine own heart, Am I guilty of this ^ And whatsoever by such
Examination thou find thy self faulty in, Confess particularly, and humbly
to God, with all the heightning circumstances, which may any way increase their
guilt, and make serious Resolutions against every such Sin, for the future;
after which thou ^^ayest use this Form following.

O LORD, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, for my iniquities
are increased over my head, and my trespass is grown up even unto Heaven. I
have wrought all these great provocations, and that in the most provoking
manner, they have not been only single but repeated acts of sin: for, O Lord,
of all this black Catalogue which I have now brought forth before thee, how few
are there which I have not often committed, nay, which are not become even
habitual and customary to me? And to this frequency, I have added both a
greediness, and obstinacy in sinning, turning into my course as the Horse
rusheth into the battle, doing evil with both hands, earnestly, yea, hating to
be reformed, and casting thy words behind me, quenching thy Spirit within me,
which testified against me, to turn me from my evil ways, and frustrating all
those outward means whether of judgment or mercy, which thou have used to draw
me to thy self. Nay, O Lord, even my repentances may be numbered amongst my
greatest sins, they have sometimes been feigned and hypocritical, always so
sl^ght and ineffectual, that they have brought forth no fruit in amendment of
life, but I have still returned with the dog to his vomit, and the sow to the
mire again, and have added the breach of resolutions and vows, to all my former
guilts. Thus, O Lord, I am become out of measure sinful, and since I have thus
chosen death, I am most worthy to take part in it, even in the second death,
the lake of fire and brimstone. This, this, O Lord, is in justice to be the
po^tion of my cup, to me belongs nothing but shame and confusion of face
eternally. But to thee, O Lord God, belongs mercy and forgiveness, though I
have rebelled against thee, O remember not my sins and offenses, but according
to thy mercy think thou upon me O Lord for thy goodness. Thou sentest thy Son
to seek and to save that which was lost, behold, O Lord, I have gone astray
like a sheep that is lost, O seek thy servant; and bring me back to the
Shepherd and Bishop of my Soul; let thy Spirit work in me a hearty sense and
detestation of all my abominations, that true contrition of heart, which thou
have promised not to despise. And then be thou pleased to look on me, to take
away all iniquity, and receive me graciously, and for his sake who has done
nothing amiss, be reconciled to me, who have done nothing well; wash away the
guilt of my sins in his blood, and subdue the power of them by his grace, and
grant, O Lord, that I may from this hour bid a final adieu to all ungodliness,
and worldly lusts, that I may never once more cast a look toward Sodom, or long
after the fleshpots of Egypt, but consecrate my self entirely to thee, to serve
thee in Righteousness and true Holiness, reckoning my self to be dead indeed
unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord and blessed Savior.

This PENITENTIAL PSALM may also fitly be used.

PSALM 51.
HAVE mercy upon me O God, after thy great goodness, according to the multitude
of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

For I acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou
might be justified in thy saying, and clcer when thou art judged.

Behold I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mo^her conceived me.

But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts, and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

Thou shall purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean, thou shall wash me, and
I shall be whiter then snow.

Thou shall make me hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.

Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy free Spirit.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

Deliver me from blood guiltines^ O God, thou that art the God of my health,
and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

Thou shall open my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show thy praise.

For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee, but thou delightest
not in burnt offering

The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit, a broken and contrite heart, O God,
shall thou not despise.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the Sacrifice of righteousness, with the burnt
offerings and oblations, then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine altar.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end.

Amen.
PRAYERS BEFORE the Receiving of the blessed SACRAMENT.
OMost merciful God, who have in thy great goodness prepared this spiritual
feast for sick and famished Souls, make my desires and gaspings after it,
answerable to my needs of it. I have with the prodigal wasted that portion of
grace thou bestowedst upon me, and therefore do infinitely want a supply out of
this treasury: But, O Lord, how shall such a wretch as I dare to approach this
holy Table? I am a dog, how shall I presume to take the childrens bread? Or how
shall this spiritual Manna, this food of Angels be given to one who has chosen
to feed on husks with swine, nay to one who has already so often trampled
these precious things under foot, either carelessly neglecting, or unworthily
receiving these holy mysteries? O Lord, my horrible guiltiness makes me tremble
to come, and yet makes me not dare to keep away, for where, O Lord, shall my
polluted soul be washed if not in this fountain which thou have opened for sin
and for uncleanness? Hither therefore I come, and thou have promised that him
that comes to thee thou will in no wise cast out: This is, O Lord, the blood
of the New Testament, grant me so to receive it, that it may be to me for
remission of Sins. And though I have so often and so wretchedly broken my part
of that Covenant, whereof this Sacrament is a seal, yet be thou graciously
pleased to make good thine, to be merciful to my unrighteousness, and to
remember my sins and my iniquities no more; and not only so, but to put thy
laws into my heart, and to write them in my mind, and by the power of thy grace
dispose my soul to such a sincere and constant obedience, that I may never
again provoke thee; Lord, grant that in these holy mysteries I may not only
commemorate, but effectually receive my blessed Savior, and all the benefits
of his Passion: and to that end give me such a preparation of soul as may
qualify me for it, give me a deep sense of my sins and unworthiness, that
being weary and heavy laden, I may be capable of his refreshings, and by being
suppled in my own tears, I may be the fitter to be washed in his blood, raise
up my dull and earthly mind from grovelling here below, and inspire it with a
holy zeal, that I may with spiritual affection approach this spiritual feast;
and let, O Lord, that infinite love of Christ in dying for so wretched a sinner
inflame my frozen benumbed soul, and kindle in me that sacred fire of love to
him, and that so vehement that no waters may quench, no floods drown it, such
as may burn up all my dross, not leave one unmortified lust in my soul, and
such as may also extend it self to all whom thou have given me command and
example to love, even enemies as well as friends. Finally, O Lord, I beseech
thee to cloth me in the wedding garment, and make me though of my self a most
unworthy, yet by thy mercy an acceptable guest at this holy Table, that I may
not eat and drink my own condemnation, but may have my pardon sealed, my
weakness repaired, my corruptions subdued, and my soul so inseparably united to
thee that no temptations may ever be able to dissolve the union, but that being
begun here in grace it may be consummated in glory. Grant this, O Lord, for thy
dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ.

ANOTHER.
O Blessed Jesus, who once offeredst up thy self for me upon the Cross, and now
offerest thy self to me in the Sacrament, let not I beseech thee, my
impenitence and unworthiness frustrate these so inestimable mercies to me, but
qualify me by thy grace to receive the full benefit of them. O Lord, I have
abundant need of thee, but am so clogged with guilt, so holden with the cords of
my sins, that I am not able to move toward thee, O loose me from this band,
wherewith Satan and my own lusts have bound me, and draw me that I may run
after thee. Lord, thou see daily how eagerly I pursue the paths that lead to
death, but when thou invitest me to life and glory, I turn my back and forsake
my own mercy. How often has this feast been prepared, and I have with
frivolous excuses absented my self, or if I have come, it has been rather to
defy then to adore thee. I have brought such troops of thy professed enemies,
unrepented sins along with me, as if I came not to commemorate, but renew thy
passion, crucifying thee afresh, and putting thee to open shame: and now of
what punishment shall I be thought worthy, who have thus trampled under foot
the Son of God, and counted the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing! Yet O
merciful Jesu, this blood is my only refuge, O let this make my atonement or I
perish eternally? Wherefore did thou shed it, but to save sinners? Neither
can the merit of it be overwhelmed either by the greatness or number of sins. I
am a sinner, a great one, O let me find its saving efficacy. Be merciful unto
me, O God, be merciful to me for my soul trusts in thee, and in the clefts of
thy wounds shall be my refuge until thy fathers indignation be overpast. O
thou, who have as my high Priest, sacrificed for me, intercede for me also, and
plead thy meritorious sufferings on my behalf, and suffer not, O my Redeemer,
the price of thy blood to be utterly lost: And grant, O Lord, that as the sins
I have to be forgiven are many, so I may love much. Lord, thou see what
faint, what cold affections I have toward thee, O warm and enliven them: and
as in this Sacrament that transcendant love of thine in dying for me is shed
forth, so I beseech thee let it convey such grace into me as may enable me to
make some returns of love: O let this divine fire descend from heaven into my
^oul, and let my sins be the burnt offering for it to consume, that there may
not any corrupt affection, any accursed thing be sheltered in my heart, that I
may never again defile that place, which thou have chosen for thy Temple. Thou
dyedst, O dear Jesu, to redeem me from all iniquity, O let me not again sell my
self to work wickedness, but grant that I may approach thee at this time with
most sincere and fixed resolutions of an entire reformation, and let me receive
such grace and strength from thee, as may enable me faithfully to perform them:
Lord, there are many old habituated diseases my soul groans under. [Here
mention thy most prevailing corruptions.] And though I lie never so long at the
Pool of Bethesda, come never so often to thy Table, yet unless thou be pleased
to put forth thy healing virtue, they will still remain uncured. O thou blessed
Physician of souls, heal me, and grant I may now so touch thee that every one
of these loathsome issues may immediately stanch, that these sicknesses may not
be unto death, but unto the glory of thy mercy in Pardoning, to the glory of
thy grace in Purifying so polluted a wretch. O Christ hear me, and grant I may
now approach thee with such humility and contrition, love and devotion, that
thou may vouch safe to come unto me, and abide with me; communicating to me
thy self, and all the merits of thy Passion. And then, O Lord, let no
accusations of Satan or my own conscience amaze or distract me, but having
peace with thee, let me also have peace in my self, that this Wine may make
glad, this Bread of life may strengthen my heart, and enable me cheerfully to
run the way of thy Commandments. Grant this merciful Savior for thine own
bowels and compassions sake.

EJACULATIONS to be used at the LORDS TABLE.
LORD, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof.

I have sinned: What shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?

[Here recollect some of thy greatest sins.]

If thou, Lord, should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may
abide it?

But with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous Redemption.

Behold, O Lord, thy beloved Son in whom thou art well pleased.

Hearken to the cry of his blood which speaks better things then that of Abel.

By his Agony and bloody Sweat, by his Cross and Passion, good Lord deliver me.

O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, grant me thy Peace.

O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon me.

Immediately before Receiving.
THOU have said, That he that eats thy flesh and drinks thy blood has
eternal life.

Behold the servant of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word.

At the Receiving of the Bread.
BY thy Crucified body deliver me from this body of death.

At the receiving of the Cup.
O LET this blood of thine purge my conscience from dead works to serve the
living God.

Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean. O touch me, and say, I will, be
thou clean.

After Receiving.
WHAT shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto me?

I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.

Therefore blessing, honor, glory and power be to him that sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen.

I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous judgments.

O hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

A Thanksgiving after the Receiving of the Sacrament.
O Thou fountain of all goodness, from whom every good and perfect gift comes,
and to whom all honor and glory should be returned, I desire with all the most
fervent and inflamed affections of a grateful heart, to bless and praise thee
for those inestimable mercies thou have vouchsafed me: Lord, what is man that
thou should so regard him as to send thy beloved Son to suffer such bitter
things for him? But, Lord, what am I the worst of men, that I should have any
part in this atonement, who have so often despised him and his sufferings? O the
height and depth of this mercy of thine, that art pleased to admit me to the
renewing of that Covenant with thee which I have so often and so perversely
broken; that I who am not worthy of that daily bread which sustains the body,
should be made partaker of this bread of life which nourishes the soul, and
that the God of all purity should vouchsafe to unite himself to so polluted a
wretch: O my God, suffer me no more, I b^seech thee, to turn thy grace into
wantonness, to make thy mercy an occasion of security, but let this unspeakable
love of thine constrain me to obedience, that since my blessed Lord has died
for me, I may no longer live unto my self but to him: O Lord, I know there is
no concord between Christ and Belial, therefore since he has now been pleased
to enter my heart, O let me never permit any lust to chase him thence, but let
him that has so dearly bought me still keep possession of me, and let nothing
ever take me out of his hand. To this end be thou graciously pleased to watch
over me, and defend me from all assaults of my spiritual enemies, but
especially deliver me from my self, from the treachery of my own heart, which
is too willing to yield it self a prey. And where thou see I am either by
nature or custom most weak, there do thou, I beseech thee, magnify thy power
in my preservation. [Here mention thy most dangerous temptations] And Lord let
my Saviors sufferings for my sins, and the Vows I have now made against them
never depart from my mind, but let the remembrance of the one enable me to
perform the other, that I may never make truce with those lusts which nailed
his hands, pierced his side, and made his soul heavy to the death. But that
having now anew listed my self under his banner, I may fight manfully, and
follow the Captain of my Salvation, even through a sea of blood. Lord, lift up
my hands that hang down, and my feeble knees, that I faint not in this warfare;
O be thou my strength who am not able of my self to struggle with the slightest
temptations. How often have I turned my back in the day of battle? How many of
these Sacramental vows have I violated? And, Lord, I have still the same
unconstant deceitful heart to betray me to the breach of this. O thou who art
Yea and Amen, in whom there is no shadow of change, communicate to me, I
beseech thee, such a stability of mind, that I may no more thus start aside
like a broken bow, but that having my heart whole with thee I may continue
steadfast in thy Covenant; that not one good purpose which thy Spirit has
raised in me this day may vanish, as so many have formerly done, but that they
may bring forth fruit unto life eternal. Grant this, O merciful father, through
the merits and mediation of my Cru^ified Savior.

A Prayer of Intercession to be used either before or after the receiving of
the Sacrament.
O MOST gracious Lord, who so tenderly lovedst mankind as to give thy dear Son
out of thy Bosom to be a propitiation for the sins of the whole word, grant
that the effect of this Redemption may be as universal as the design of it,
that it may be to the salvation of all. O let no person by impenitence and
wilful sin forfeit his part in it, but by the power of thy grace bring all,
even the most obstinate sinners to repentance. Inlighten all that sit in
darkness, all Jews, Turks, Infidels and Heretics, take from them all
blindness, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word, and so fetch them home,
blessed Lord, unto thy fold, that they may be saved among the number of the
true Israelites. And for all those upon whom the Name of thy Son is called,
grant, O Lord, that their conversations may be such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, that his Name be no longer blasphemed among the Heathens through us. O
Blessed Lord, how long shall Christendom continue the vilest part of the world,
a sink of all those abominable pollutions, which even Barbarians detest? O let
not our Profession and our Practice be always at so wide a distance. Let not
the Disciples of the holy and Immaculate Jesus be of all others the most
profane and impure. Let not the subjects of the Prince of Peace be of all
others the most contentious and bloody, but make us Christians in deed as well
as in name, that we may walk worthy of that Holy vocation wherewith we are
called, and may all with one mind and one mouth glorify thee the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Have mercy on this languishing Church, look down from heaven
the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory, where is thy zeal and thy
strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward us? Are they
restrained? Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever,
but though our backslidings are many, and we have grievously rebelled, yet
according to all thy goodness let thy anger and thy fury be turned away, and
cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary which is desolate, for the Lords
sake; and so separate between us and our sins, that they may no longer separate
between us and our God. Save and defend all Christian Kings, Princes and
Governors, especially those to whom we owe subjection, plead thou their cause.
O Lord, against those that strive with them, and fight thou against those that
fight against them, and so guide and assist them in the discharge of that
office whereunto thou have appointed them, that under them we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Bless them that wait at thine
Altar, open thou their lips that their mouth may show forth thy praise, O let
not the lights of the world be put under bushels, but place them in their
Candlesticks, that they may give light to all that are in the house. Let not
Jerohoams Priests profane thy Service, but let the seed of Aaron still minister
before thee. And O thou Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, succor and
relieve all that are in affliction, deliver the outcast and poor, help them to
right that suffer wrong, let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before
thee, and according to the greatness of thy power, preserve thou those that are
appointed to die; grant ease to those that are in pain, supplies to those that
suffer want, give to all presumptuous sinners a sense of their sins, and to all
despairing, a sight of thy mercies, and do thou, O Lord, for every one
abundantly above what they can ask or think. Forgive my enemies, persecutors,
and slanderers, and turn their hearts. Power down thy blessings on all my
friends, and benefactors, all who have commended themselves to my Prayer. [Here
thou may name particular persons.] And grant, O merciful Father, that
through this blood of the Cross, we may all be presented pure and unblameable,
and unreproveable in thy sight; that so we may be admitted into that place of
purity, where no unclean thing can enter, there to sing eternal praises to
Father, Son, and holy Ghost for ever.

A Prayer in times of common Persecution.
O BLESSED Savior, who have made the Cross the badge of thy Disciples, enable
me, I beseech thee, willingly and cheerfully to embrace it; thou see, O Lord,
I am fallen into days, wherein he that departs from evil makes himself a
Prey, O make me so readily to expose all my outward concernments, when my
obedience to thee requires it, that what falls as a Prey to men, may by thee
be accepted as a Sacrifice to God: Lord preserve me so by thy grace that I
never suffer as an evil doer, and then, O Lord, if it be my lot to suffer as a
Christian, let me not be ashamed, but rejoice that I am counted worthy to
suffer for thy Name: O thou who for my sake enduredst the cross, and despisedst
the shame, let the example of that love and patience prevail against all the
tremblings of my corrupt heart, that no terrors may ever be able to shake my
constancy, but that how long soever thou shall permit the rod of the wicked to
lie on my back, I may never put my hand unto wickedness: Lord, thou know
whereof I am made, thou remembrest that I am but flesh, and flesh, O Lord,
shrinks at the approach of any thing grievous. It is thy Spirit, thy Spirit
alone, that can uphold me, O stablish me with thy free Spirit, that I be not
weary and faint in my mind. And by how much the greater thou discernest my
weakness, so much the more do thou show forth thy power in me, and make me, O
Lord, in all temptations steadfastly to look to thee, the author and finisher of
my faith, that so I may run the race, which is set before me, and resist even
unto blood, striving against sin: O dear Jesus, hear me, and though Satan
desire to have me, that he may winnow me as wheat, yet do thou O blessed
Mediator, pray for me that my faith fail not, but that though it be tried with
fire, it may be found unto praise, and glory, and honor at thy appearing. And,
O Lord, I beseech thee grant that I may preserve not only constancy toward
God, but charity also toward men, even those whom thou shall permit to be the
instruments of my sufferings, Lord, let me not fail to imitate that admirable
meekness of thine, in loving and praying for my greatest persecutors; and do
thou, O Lord, overcome all their evil with thy infinite goodness, turn their
hearts, and draw them powerfully to thy self, and at last receive both me and
mine enemies into those mansions of peace and rest, where thou reignest with
the Father, and the Holy Ghost, one God, for ever.

A Prayer in time of affliction.
O JUST and holy Lord, who with rebukes do chasten man for sin, I desire
unseignedly to humble my self under thy mighty hand, which now lies heavy upon
me, I heartily acknowledge, O Lord, that all I do, all I can suffer, is but the
due reward of my deeds, and therefore in thy severest inflictions I must still
say, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments. But, O Lord, I
beseech thee in judgment remember mercy, and though my sins have enforced thee
to strike, yet consider my weakness, and let not thy stripes be more heavy, or
more lasting then thou see profitable for my soul; correct me but with the
chastisement of a father, not with the wounds of an enemy, and though thou take
not off thy rod, yet take away thine anger: Lord, do not abhor my soul, nor
cast thy servant away in displeasure, but pardon my sins, I beseech thee; and
if yet in thy fatherly wisdom, thou see fit to prolong thy corrections, thy
blessed will be done, I cast my self O Lord, at thy feet, do with me what thou
please. Try me as silver is tried, so thou bring me out purified. And Lord
make even my flesh also to subscribe to this resignation, that there may be
nothing in me, that may rebel against thy hand, but that having perfectly
suppressed all repining thoughts, I may cheerfully drink of this cup. And how
bitter soever thou shall please to make it, Lord, let it prove medicinal, and
cure all the diseases of my soul, that it may bring forth in me the peaceable
fruit of righteousness. That so these light afflictions which are but for a
moment, may work for me a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
through Jesus Christ.

A Thanks giving for Deliverance.
O BLESSED Lord, who art gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great
kindness, and repentest thee of the evil, I thankfully acknowledge before thee
that thou have not dealt with me after my sins, nor rewarded me according to my
iniquities. My rebellions, O Lord, deserve to be scourged with Scorpions, and
thou have corrected them only with a gentle and fatherly Rod; neither have thou
suffered me to lie long under that, but have given me a timely and a grcaious
issue out of my late distresses. O Lord, I will be glad and rejoice in thy
mercy, for thou have considered my trouble, and have known my soul in
adversity. Thou have smitten, and thou have healed me, O let these various
methods of thine have their proper effects upon my soul, that I who have felt
the smart of thy chastisements may stand in awe and not sin, and that I who
have likewise felt the sweet refreshings of thy mercy may have my heart
ravished with it, and knit to thee in the firmest bands of love, and that by
both I may be preserved in a constant entire obedience to thee all my days,
through Jesus Christ.

Directions for the time of Sickness.
WHEN thou find thy self visited with Sickness thou art immediately to
remember that it is God which, with rebukes does chasten man for sin. And
therefore let thy first care be to find out what it is that provokes him to
smite thee, and to that purpose Examine thine own heart, search diligently what
guilts lie there, confess them humbly and penitently to God, and for the
greater security renew thy Repentance for all the old sins of thy former life,
beg most earnestly and importunately his mercy and pardon in Christ Jesus, and
put on sincere and zealous resolutions of forsaking every evil way for the rest
of that time which God shall spare thee. And that thy own heart deceive thee
not in this so weighty a business, it will be wisdom to send for some godly
Divine, not only to assist thee with his prayers but with his counsel also. And
to that purpose open thy heart so freely to him that he may be able to judge
whether thy Repentance be such as may give thee confidence to appear before
Gods dreadful Tribunal, and that if it be not, he may help thee what he can
toward the making it so. And when thou have thus provided for thy better part,
thy Soul, then consider thy Body also, and as the Wise man says, Ecclu^. 38.
12. Give place to the Physician, for the Lord has created him: Use such means
as may be most likely to recover thy health, but always remember that the
success of them must come from God; and beware of Asa's sin, who sought to the
Physicians, and not to the Lord, 2 Chro. 6. 12. Dispose also betimes of thy
temporal affairs, by making thy Will, and setting all things in such order as
thou meanest finally to leave them in, and defer it not till thy sickness grow
more violent, for then perhaps thou shall not have such use of thy Reason as
may fit thee for it, or if thou have, it will be then much more seasonable to
employ thy thoughts on higher things, on the world thou art going to, rather
then that thou art about to leave; we cannot carry the things of this world
with us when we go hence, and it is not fit we should carry the thoughts of
them. Therefore let those be early dispatched that they may not disturb thee at
last.

A Prayer for a sick Person.
O MERCIFUL and Righteous Lord, the God of health and of sickness, of life, and
of death, I most unfeignedly acknowledge that my great abuse of those many days
of strength and welfare, which thou have afforded me, has most justly deserved
thy present visitation. I desire, O Lord, humbly to accept of this punishment
of mine iniquity, and to bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him. And, O thou merciful Father, who designest not the ruin
but the amendment of those whom thou scourgest, I beseech thee by thy grace so
to sanctify this correction of thine to me, that this sickness of my body may
be a means of health to my soul, make me diligent to search my heart, and do
thou O Lord, enable me to discover every accursed thing, how closely soever
concealed there, that by the removal thereof, I may make way for the removal of
this punishment. Heal my soul, O Lord, which has sinned against thee, and then
if it be thy blessed will, heal my body also, restore the voice of joy and
health unto my dwelling, that I may live to praise thee, and to bring forth
fruits of repentance. But if in thy wisdom thou have otherwise disposed, if
thou have determined that this sickness shall be unto death, I beseech thee to
fit and prepare me for it, give me that sincere and earnest repentance, to
which thou have promised mercy and pardon; wean my heart from the world, and
all its fading vanities, and make me to gasp and pant after those more
excellent and durable joys which are at thy right hand for ever. Lord, lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon me, and in all the pains of my body,
in all the agonies of my spirit, let thy comforts refresh my soul, and enable
me patiently to wait till my change come. And grant, O Lord, that when my
earthly house of this Tabernacle is dissolved I may have a building of God, an
house not made with hands eternal in the heavens. And that for his sake who by
his precious blood has purchased it for me, even Jesus Christ.

A THANKSGIVING for RECOVERY.
O GRACIOUS Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, in whose hand my time
is, I praise and magnify thee that thou have in love to my soul delivered it
from the pit of corruption, and restored me to health again; it is thou alone,
O Lord, that have preserved my life from destruction, thou have chastned and
corrected me, but thou have not given me over unto death; O let this life which
thou have thus graciously spared be wholly consecrated to thee. Behold, O Lord,
I am by thy mercy made whole, O make me strictly careful to sin no more least a
worse thing come unto me. Lord, let not this reprieve thou have now given me,
make me secure, as thinking that my Lord delayeth his coming, but grant me I
beseech thee to make a right use of this long suffering of thine, and so to
employ every minute of that time thou shall allow me, that when thou shall
appear I may have confidence and not be ashamed before thee at thy coming.
Lord, I have found by this approach toward death, how dreadful a thing it is
to be taken unprepared. O let it be a perpetual admonition to me to watch for
my Masters Coming. And when the pleasures of sin shall present themselves to
entice me, O make me to remember how bitter they will be at the last. O Lord
hear me, and as thou have in much mercy afforded me time, so grant me also
grace to work out my own salvation, to provide oil in my lamp, that when the
Bridegroom comes I may go in with him to the marriage. Grant this I beseech
thee for thy dear Sons sake.

A Prayer at the approach of Death.
O ETERNAL and everliving God, who first breathedst into man the breath of
life, and when thou take away that breath he dies and is turned again to his
dust, look with compassion on me thy poor creature who am now drawing near the
gates of death, and which is infinitely more terrible, the bar of Judgment.
Lord my own heart condemns me, and thou art infinitely greater then my heart,
and know all things. The sins I know and remember, fill me with horror; but
there are also multitudes of others, which I either observed not at the time,
or have since carelessly forgot, which are all present to thee. Thou set my
misdeeds before thee, and my secret sins in the light of thy countenance; and
to what a mountainous heap must the minutely provocations of so many years
arise? How shall one so ungodly stand in thy Judgment, or such a sinner in the
Congregation of the Righteous? And to add yet more to my terror, my very
repentance I fear will not abide the trial; my frequent relapses heretofore
have sufficiently witnessed the unsincerity of my past resolutions. And then, O
Lord, what can secure me that my present dislikes of my sins are not rather the
effects of my amazing danger then of any real change? And, O Lord, I know thou
art not mocked, nor wilt accept of any thing that is not perfectly sincere. O
Lord, when I consider this, fearfulness and trembling comes upon me, and an
horrible dread overwhelmeth me, my flesh trembles for fear of thee, and my
heart is wounded within me. But, O Lord, one deep calls upon another, the
depth of my misery upon the depth of thy mercy; Lord, save now or I perish
eternally. O thou who willest not that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance, bring me, I beseech thee, though thus late, to a sincere
Repentance, such as thou will accept, who triest the heart. Create in me, O
God, a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me: Lord, one day is with
thee as a thousand years, O let thy mighty Spirit work in me now in this my
last day, whatsoever thou see wanting to fit me for thy mercy and
acceptance. Give me a perfect and entire hatred of my sins, and enable me to
present thee with that sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart, which thou
have promised not to despise; that by this I may be made capable of that
atonement which thy dear Son has by the more excellent oblation of himself
made for all repenting sinners. He is the propitiation for our sins, he was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was on him, O heal me by his stripes, and let the cry
of his blood drown the clamor of my sins. I am indeed a child of wrath, but
he is the Son of thy love, for his sake spare me, O Lord, spare thy creature
whom he has redeemed with his most precious blood, and be not angry with me
for ever. In his wounds O Lord, I take Sanctuary, O let not thy vengeance
pursue me to this city of refuge: my Soul hangs upon him, O let me not perish
with a Jesus, with a Savior in my arms. But by his Agony and bloody Sweat, by
his Cross and Passion, by all that he did and suffered for sinners, good Lord
deliver me; deliver me, I beseech thee, from the wages of my sins, thy wrath
and everlasting damnation, in this time of my tribulation, in the hour of
death, and in the day of Judgment. Hear me, O Lord, hear me, and do not now
repay my former neglects of thy calls, by refusing to answer me in this time of
my greatest need. Lord, there is but a step between me and death, O let not my
sun go down upon thy wrath, but seal my pard on before I go hence and be no
more seen. Thy loving kindness is better then the life it self, O let me have
that in exchange, and I shall most gladly lay down this mortal life. Lord thou
know all my desire, and my groaning is not hid from thee; deal thou with me,
O Lord, according to thy Name, for sweet is thy mercy; take away the sting of
death, the guilt of my sins, and then though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death I will fear no evil, I will lay me down in peace, and Lord when
I awake up, let me be satisfied with thy presence in thy glory. Grant this
merciful God for his sake who is both the Redeemer and Mediator of sinners,
even Jesus Christ.

PSALMS.
PUT me not to rebuke, O Lord, in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

There is no health in my flesh because of thy displeasure, neither is there
any rest in my bones by reason of my sins.

For my wickednesses are gone over my head, and are a sore burden too heavy for
me to bear.

My wounds stink and are corrupt through my foolishness.

Therefore is my spirit vexed within me, and my heart within me is desolate.

My sins have taken such hold upon me that I am not able to look up, yea, they
are more in number then the hairs of my head, and my heart has failed me.

But thou, O Lord God, art full of compassion and mercy, long-suffering,
plenteous in goodness and truth.

Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in misery.

If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may
abide it?

O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, but according to thy mercy
think thou upon me for thy goodness.

Look upon my adversity and misery, and forgive me all my sin.

Hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble, O haste thee and hear
me.

Out of the deep do I call unto thee, Lord hear my voice.

Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my Soul, O save me for thy mercies sake.

O go not from me, for trouble is hard at hand, and there is none to help.

I stretch forth my hands unto thee, my Soul gaspeth unto thee, as a thirsty
land

Draw nigh unto my soul and save it, O deliver me, because of my enemies.

For my Soul is full of trouble, and my life draws nigh unto hell.

Save me from the Lions mouth, hear me from among the horns of the Unicorns.

O set me up upon the rock that is higher then I, for thou art my hope, and a
strong Tower for me against the enemy.

Why art thou so heavy, O my Soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me?

Put thy trust in God for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his
countenance.

The Lord shall make good his loving kindness toward me, yea, thy mercy, O
Lord, endures for ever, despise not then the work of thine own hands.

O GOD, thou art my God, early will I seek thee. My Soul thirsts for thee, my
flesh also longs after thee, in a barren and dry land where no water is.

Like as the heart desires the water brooks, so longs my Soul after thee O
God.

My Soul is a thirst for God, even for the living God, when shall I come to
appear before the presence of God?

How amiable are thy dwellings, O Lord of Hosts?

My Soul has a desire and longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord, my
flesh and my heart rejoice in the living God.

O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away and be at rest.

O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me, and bring me unto
thy Holy Hill, and to thy dwelling.

For one day in thy Courts is better then a thousand:

I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the
tents of wickedness.

I should utterly have fainted, but that I believed verily to see the goodness
of the Lord in the land of the living.

Thou art my helper and my redeemer, O Lord, make no long tarrying.

EJACULATIONS.
O LORD, of whom may I seek for succor but of thee, who for my sins art justly
displeased? Yet O Lord God most Holy, O Lord most Mighty, O Holy and most
Merciful Savior, deliver me not into the bitter pains of eternal death.

Thou know, Lord, the secrets of my heart, shut not up thy merciful eyes to
my prayer, but hear me, O Lord Most Holy, O God most Mighty, O Holy and
Merciful Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer me not at my last hour
for any pains of death to fall from thee.

Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am not worthy to be
called thy child, yet O Lord do not thou cast off the bowels and compassions of
a Father, but even as a father pittieth his own children, so be thou merciful
unto me.

Lord, the prince of this world comes, O let him have nothing in me, but as he
accuses, do thou absolve; he lays many and grievous things to my charge, which
he can too well prove, I have nothing to say for my self do thou answer for me,
O Lord my God.

O Lord I am clothed with filthy garments, and Satan stands at my right hand
to resist me, O be thou pleased to rebuke him, and pluck me as a brand out of
the fire, cause mine iniquities to pass from me, and cloth me with the
righteousness of thy Son.

Behold, O God, the Devil is coming toward me, having great wrath, because he
knows that he has but a short time, O save and deliver me lest he devour my
soul like a Lion, and tear it in pieces while there is none to help.

O My God, I know that no unclean thing can enter into thy Kingdom, and I am
nothing but pollution, my very righteousnesses are as filthy rags, O wash me
and make me white in the blood of the Lamb, that so I may be fit to stand
before thy Throne.

Lord, the snares of death compass me round about, O let not the pains of hell
also take hold upon me, but though I find trouble and heaviness, yet O Lord I
beseech thee deliver my soul.

O dear Jesus, who have bought me with the precious price of thine own blood;
challenge now thy purchase, and let not all the malice of Hell pluck me out of
thy hand.

O blessed high Priest, who art able to save them to the utmost, who come unto
God by thee, save me I beseech thee, who have no hope, but on thy merits and
intercession,

O God I confess I have defaced that Image of thine, thou did imprint upon my
Soul, yet O thou faithful Creator, have pity on thy creature.

O Jesu, I have by my many and grievous sins crucified thee afresh, yet thou
who prayedst for thy persecutors, intercede for me also, and suffer not, O my
Redeemer, my soul (the price of thy blood) to perish.

O Spirit of grace, I have by my horrid impieties done despite to thee, yet, O
Blessed Comforter, though I have often grieved thee, be thou pleased to succor
and relieve me, and say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

Mine eyes look unto thee, O Lord, in thee is my trust, O cast not out my soul.

O Lord in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded.

O Blessed Lord, who scourgest every Son whom thou receivest, let me not be
weary of thy correction, but give me such a perfect subjection to thee the
Father of Spirits, that this chastisement may be for my profit, that I may
thereby be partaker of thy holiness.

O thou Captain of my Salvation, who were made perfect by sufferings, sanctify
to me all the pains of body, all the terrors of mind, which thou shall permit
to fall upon me.

Lord, my sins have deserved eternal torments make me cheerfully and thankfully
to bear my present pains, chasten me as thou please here, that I may not be
condemned with the world.

Lord, the waters are come in even unto my soul, O let thy Spirit move upon
these waters, and make them like the pool of Bethesda, that they may cure
whatsoever spiritual disease thou discernest in me.

O Christ, who first sufferedst many and grievous things, and then enteredst
into thy glory, make me so to suffer with thee, that I may also be glorified
with thee.

O dear Jesus, who humblest thy self to the death of the Cross for me, let that
death of thine sweeten the bitterness of mine.

When thou had overcome the sharpness of death, thou did open the Kingdom
of heaven to all believers.

I believe that thou shall come to be my Judge.

I pray thee therefore help thy servant whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious blood.

Make me to be numbered with thy Saints in glory everlasting.

Thou art the resurrection and the life, he that believes in thee, though he
were dead, yet shall he live: Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief.

My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.

I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far better: Lord, I
g^oan earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with that house from heaven.

I desire to put off this my tabernacle, O be pleased to receive me into
everlasting habitations.

Bring my soul out of prison, that I may give thanks unto thy name.

Lord, I am here to wrestle not only with flesh and blood, but with
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickedness, O take me from these tents
of Kedar, into the heavenly Jerusalem, where Satan shall be utterly trodden
under my feet.

I cannot here attend one minute to thy service, without distraction, O take me
up ^o stand before thy Throne, where I shall serve thee day and night.

I am here in heaviness through many tribulations, O receive me into that place
of rest, where all tears shall be wiped from my eyes, where there shall be no
more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain.

I am here in a state of banishment, and absence from the Lord, O take me where
I shall for ever behold thy face, and follow the Lamb whither soever he goes.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness.

OBlessed Jesu, who have loved me, and washed me from my sins in thine own
blood, receive my soul.

Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord thou God
of truth, Come Lord Jesu, come quickly.

PRAYERS for their use who Mourn in secret for the PUBLIC CALAMITIES, etc.
Psalm 74. O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long: why is thy wrath
so hot against the sheep of thy pasture? etc. Psalm. 79. O God, the Heathen are
come into thine inheritance: thy holy temple have they defiled, and made
Jerusalem an heap of stones, etc. Psalm. 80. Hear, O thou shepherd of Israel,
thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep: show thy self also, thou that sit
upon the Cherubims, etc.
A Prayer to be used in these times of Calamity.
O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs, I desire humbly to confess before
thee, both on my own behalf, and that of this Nation, that these many years of
calamity we have groaned under, are but the just, (yea mild) returns of those
many more years of our provocations against thee, and that thy present which is
but the due punishment of thy abused mercy. O Lord, thou have formerly abounded
to us in blessings above all people of the earth. Thy candle shined upon our
heads, and we delighted our selves in thy great goodness, peace was within our
walls, and plenteousness within our palaces, there was no decay, no leading
into captivity and no complaining in our streets: but we turned this grace into
wantonness, we abused our peace to security, our plenty to riot and Luxury, and
made those good things which should have endeared our hearts to thee, the
occasions of estranging them from thee; Nay, O Lord, thou gave us yet more
precious mercies, thou were pleased thy self to pitch thy Tabernacle with us,
to establish a pure and glorious Church among us, and give us thy word to be a
lamp unto our feet, and a light unto our paths; but O Lord, we have made no
other use of that light, then to conduct us to the chambers of death, we have
dealt proudly, and not hearkened to thy comandments, and by rebelling against
the light, have purchased to our selves so much the heavier portion in the
outer darkness. And now, O Lord, had the overflowings of thy vengeance been
answerable to that of our sin, we had long since been swept away with a swift
destruction, and there had been none of us alive at this day to implore thy
mercy. But thou art a gracious God, slow to anger, and have proceeded with us
with much patience and longsuffering, thou have sent thy judgments to awake us
to repentance, and have also allowed us space for it: But alas we have
perverted this mercy of thine beyond all the former, we return not to him that
smites us, neither do we seek the Lord, we are slidden back by a perpetual
backfliding, no man repents him of his wickedness, or ^aith what have I done?
It Is true indeed we fear the rod (we dread every suffering, so that we are
ready to buy it off with the foulest sin) but we fear not him that has
appointed it, but by a wretched obstinacy harden our necks against thee, and
refuse to return. And now, O God, what balm is there in Gilead that can cure
us; who when thou would heal us, will not be healed, we know thou have
pronounced that there is no peace to the wicked, and how shall we then pray for
peace, that still retain our wickedness? This this, O Lord, is our sorest
disease, O Give us Medicines to heal this sickness, heal our souls, and then we
know thou can soon heal our land. Lord, thou have long spoken by thy word to
our ears, by thy judgments even to all our senses, but unless thou speak by thy
Spirit to our hearts, all other calls will still be uneffectual. O send out
this voice, and that a mighty voice, such as may awake us out of this Lethargy:
thou that did call Lazarus out of the grave, O be pleased to call us who are
dead, yea, putrified in trespasses and sins, and make us to awake to
righteousness. And though, O Lord, our frequent resistances even of those
inward calls, have justly provoked thee to give us up to the lusts of our own
heart; yet, O thou boundless ocean of mercy, who art good not only beyond what
we can deserve, but what we can wish, do not withdraw the influence of thy
grace, and take not thy holy spirit from us. Thou were found of those that
sought thee not, O let that act of mercy be repeated to us who are so
desperately, yet so insensibly sick, that we cannot so much as look after the
Physician, and by how much our case is the more dangerous, so much the more
sovereign remedies do thou apply; Lord help us, and consider not so much our
unworthiness of thy aid, as our irremediable ruin if we want it; save Lord, or
we perish eternally. To this end dispense to us in our temporal interest what
thou see may best secure our spiritual; if a greater degree of outward misery
will tend to the curing our inward, Lord, spare not thy rod, but strike yet
more sharply; cast out this devil, though with never so much foaming and
tearing. But if thou see that some return of mercy may be most likely to melt
us, O be pleased so far to condescend to our wretchedness as to afford us that,
and whether by thy sharper or thy gentler methods, bring us home to thy self.
And then, O Lord, we know thy hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, when
thou have delivered us from our sins, thou can and wilt deliver us from our
troubles, O show us thy mercy and grant us thy salvation, that being redeemed
both in our bodies and spirits, we may glorify thee in both, in a cheerful
obedience, and praise the Name of our God, that has dealt wonderfully with us,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Prayer for This Church.
O Thou great God of recompenses, who turnest a fruitful land into barrenness
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein; thou have most justly executed
that fatal sentence on this Church, which having once been the perfection of
beauty, the joy of the whole earth, is now become a scorn and derision to all
that are round about her. O Lord, what could have been done to thy vineyard
that thou have not done in it, and since it has brought forth nothing but
wild grapes, it is perfectly just with thee to take away the hedge thereof,
and let it be eaten up. But O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us,
yet do thou it for thy Names sake, for our backslidings are many, we have
sinned against thee. O the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in time of
trouble, why should thou be as a stranger in the land, as a wayfaring man
that turns aside to tarry for a night? Why should thou be as a man
astonished, as a mighty man that cannot save? Yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst
of us, and we are called by thy Name, leave us not; deprive us of what outward
enjoyment thou please, take from us the opportunities of our luxury and it
may be a mercy, but O take not from us the means of our reformation, for that
is the most direful expression of thy wrath. And though we have hated the light
because our deeds were evil, yet, O Lord, do not by withdrawing it condemn us
to walk on still in darkness, but let it continue to shine till it have guided
our feet into the way of peace. O Lord, arise, stir up thy strength and come
and help us, and deliver not the soul of thy Turtle Dove (this disconsolate
Church) unto the multitude of the enemy, but help her, O God, and that right
early. But if, O Lord, our rebellions have so provoked thee, that the Ark must
wander in the wilderness till all this murmuring generation be consumed, yet
let not that perish with us, but bring it at last into a Canaan, and let our
more innocent posterity see that which in thy just judgment thou denrest to
us. In the mean time let us not cease to bewail that desolation our sins have
wrought, to think upon the stones of Ston, and pity to see her in the dust, nor
ever be ashamed or afraid to own her in her lowest and most persecuted
condition, but esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures
of Egypt, and so approve our constancy to this our afflicted Mother, that her
blessed Lord and Head may own us with mercy when he shall come in the glory of
thee his father with the holy Angels. Grant this merciful Lord, for the same
Jesus Christ his sake.

A Prayer for the Peace of the Church.
LORD Jesus Christ, which of thine Almightiness made all creatures both
visible and invisible, which of thy godly wisdom governest and set all
things in most goodly order, which of thine unspeakable goodness keep,
defendest and furtherest all thing, which of thy deep mercy restorest the
decayed, renewest the fallen, raisest the dead; vouchsafe, we pray thee at
last, to cast down thy countenance upon thy well beloved Spouse the Church, but
let it be that amiable and merciful countenance wherewith thou pacifiest all
things in heaven, in earth, and whatsoever is above heaven and under the earth:
vouchsafe to cast upon us those tender and pitiful eyes with which thou did
once behold Peter that great Shepherd of thy Church, and forthwith he remembered
himself and repented; with which eyes thou once did view the scattered
multitude and were moved with compassion, that for lack of a good Shepherd they
wandered as sheep dispersed and strayed a sunder. Thou see (O good Shepherd)
what sundry sorts of Wolves have broken into thy sheep cotes: so that if it
were possible the very perfect persons should be brought into error: thou see
with what winds, with what waves, with what storms thy silly ship is tosl d,
thy ship wherein thy little flock is in peril to be drowned. And what is now
left but that it utterly sink and we all perish? Of this tempest and storm we
may thank our own wickedness and sinful living, we discern it well and confess
it, we discern thy righteousness, and we bewail our unrighteousness: but we
appeal to thy Mercy, which surmounteth all thy works; we have now suffered much
punishment, being scourged with so many wars, consumed with such losses of
goods, shaken with so many floods, and yet appears there no where any Haven or
Port unto us, being thus tired and forlorn among so strange evils, but still
every day more grievous punishments, and more seem to hang over our heads. We
complain not of thy sharpness, most tender Savior, but we discern here also
thy mercy, forasmuch as much grievouser plagues we have deserved. But O most
merciful Jesus, we beseech thee that thou will not consider nor weigh what is
due for our deservings, but rather what becomes thy mercy, without which
neither the Angels in heaven can stand sure before thee, much less we silly
vessels of clay. Have mercy on us, O Redeemer, which art easy to be entreated,
not that we be worthy of thy mercy, but give thou this glory unto thine own
Name. Suffer not those which either have not known thee or do envy thy glory,
continually to triumph over us, and say, Where is their God, where is their
Redeemer, where is their Savior, where is their Bridegroom that they thus
boast on? These opprobrious words redound unto thee. O Lord, while by our evils
men weigh and esteem thy goodness, they think we be forsaken whom they see not
amended. Once when thou sleptst in the ship, and a tempest suddenly arising
threatened death to all in the Ship, thou awokest at the outcry of a few
Disciples and straightway at thine Almighty word the waters couched, the winds
fell, the storm was suddenly turned into a great calm; the dumb waters knew
their makers voice. Now in this far greater tempest, wherein not a few men's
bodies be in danger, but innumerable souls: we beseech thee at the cry of thy
holy Church, which is in danger of drowning, that thou will awake. So many
thousands of men do cry, Lord save us, we perish, the tempest is past man's
power; it is thy word that must do the deed, Lord Jesu, Only say thou with a
word of thy mouth, Cease, O tempest, and forthwith shall the desired calm
appear. Thou would have spared so many thousands of most wicked men, if in
the City of Sodom had been found but ten good men. Now here be so ^any
thousands of men which love the glory of thy Name, which sigh for the beauty of
thy house, and will thou not at these men's prayers let go thine anger, and
remember thine accustomed and old mercies? Shall thou not with thy heavenly
policy turn our folly into thy glory? Shall thou not turn the wicked men's evils
into thy Churches good? For thy mercy is wont then most of all to succor, when
the thing is with us past remedy, and neither the might nor wisdom of men can
help it. Thou alone bring things that be never so out of order into order
again, which art the only Author and maintainer of peace. Thou framedst that
old confusion wherein without order, without fashion confusedly lay the
discordant seeds of things, and with a wonderful order the things that of
nature fought together thou did ally and knit in a perpetual band. But how
much greater confusion is this, where is no charity, no fidelity no bonds of
love, no reverence neither of Laws nor yet of Rulers, no agreement of opinions,
but as it were in a misordered quire, every man sings a contrary note. Among
the heavenly Planets is no dissension, the Elements keep their place, every one
do the office whereunto they be appointed: And will thou suffer thy Spouse, for
whose sake all things were made, thus by continual discords to perish? Shall
thou suffer the wicked Spirits, which be authors and workers of discord, to
bear such a swing in thy Kingedome unchecked? Shall thou suffer the strong
Captain of mischief, whom thou once overthrewest, again to invade thy tents,
and to spoil thy Soldiers? When thou were here a man conversant among men, at
thy voice fled the Devils. Send forth, we beseech thee, O Lord, thy Spirit,
which may drive away out of the breasts of all them that profess thy Name, the
wicked Spirits, masters of riot, of covetousness, of vainglory, of carnal
lust, of mischief and discord. Create in us, O our God and King, a clean heart,
and renew thy holy Spirit in our breasts, pluck not from us thy holy Ghost.
Render unto us the joy of thy saving health, and with thy principal Spirit,
strengthen thy Spouse and the Heardmen thereof. By this Spirit thou
reconciledst the earthly to the heavenly: by this thou did frame and reduce
so many tongues, so many nations, so many sundry sorts of men into one body of
a Church, which body by the same Spirit is knit to thee their Head. This Spirit
if thou will vouchsafe to renew in all men's hearts, then shall all these
foreign miseries cease or if they cease not, they shall turn to the profit and
avail of them which love thee. Stay this confusion, set in order this horrible
Chaos (O Lord Jesus) let thy Spirit stretch out it self upon these waters of
evil wavering opinions. And because thy Spirit, which according to thy Prophets
saying, contains all things, has also the science of speaking; make that
like as unto all them which be of thy house, is one Light, one Baptism, one
God, one Hope, one Spirit; so they may also have one voice, one note, one song,
professing one Catholic truth. When thou did mount up to heaven
triumphantly, thou threwest out from above thy precious things, thou gave
gifts amongst men, thou dealtest sundry rewards of thy Spirit. Renew again from
above thy old bountifulness, give that thing to thy Church, now fainting and
growing downward, that thou gave unto her shooting up, at her first
beginning. Give unto Princes and Rulers the grace so to stand in awe of thee,
that they so may guide the Commonweal, as they should shortly render account
unto thee that art the King of Kings. Give wisdom to be always assistant unto
them, that whatsoever is best to be done, they may espy it in their minds, and
pursue the same in their doings. Give to the Bishops the gift of prophecy, that
they may declare and interpret holy Scripture, not of their own brain, but of
thine inspiring. Give them the threefold charity which thou once demandest of
Peter, what time thou did betake unto him the charge of thy sheep. Give to
the Priests the love of soberness, and of chastity. Give to thy people a good
will to follow thy Commandments, and a readiness to obey such persons as thou
have appointed over them. So shall it come to pass; if through thy gift thy
Princes shall command that thou requirest, if thy Pastors and Herdmen shall
teach the same, and thy people obey them both, that the old dignity and
tranquillity of the Church shall return again with a goodly order unto the glory
of thy Name. Thou sparedst the Ninivites appointed to be destroyed as soon as
they converted to repentance; and will thou despise thy house falling down at
thy feet, which in stead of sackcloth has sighs, and in stead of ashes tears?
Thou promisedst forgiveness to such as turn unto thee, but this self thing is
thy gift, a man to turn with his whole heart unto thee, to the in^ent all our
goodness should redound unto thy glory. Thou art the maker, repair the work
that thou have fashioned. Thou art the Redeemer, save that thou have bought.
Thou art the Savior, suffer not them to perish which do hang on thee. Thou art
the Lord and owner, challenge thy possession. Thou art the Head, help thy
members. Thou art the King, give us a reverence of thy Laws. Thou art the
Prince of peace, breath upon us brotherly love. Thou art the God, have pity on
thy humble beseechers; be thou according to Paul's saying, all things in all
men, to the intent the whole Quire of thy Church with agreeing minds and
consonant voices for mercy obtained at thy hands, may give thanks to the
Father, ^on and Holy Ghost, which after the most perfect example of concord be
distinguished in property of Persons, and one in nature, to whom be praise and
glory Eternally.

Amen.
FINIS.
A TABLE of the CONTENTS of the several CHAPTERS or PARTITIONS in this Book.
Which according to this Division, by Reading one of these Chapters every Lords
Day, the whole may be Read over Thrice in the year.
PARTITION 1. OF the Duty of Man, by the light of Nature, by the light of
Scripture: Of Faith, Sunday I.
the Promises, of Hope, of Love, Fear, Trusting in God. page 1. PARTITION 2. Of
Humility, of Submission to Gods Will, in respect of Obedience, of Patience, in
all sorts Sunday II.
of Sufferings; and of Honor due to God in several ways, in his House,
Possessions, his Day, Word, Sacraments, etc. page 34. PARTITION 3. Of the Lords
Supper, of Preparation before Receiving, of Duties to be done at the Receiving,
Sunday III.
and afterward, etc. page 67. PARTITION 4. Honor due to Gods Name; of sinning
against it; Blasphemy, Swearing, Assertory Oaths, Sunday IV.
Promissory Oaths, Unlawful Oaths, of Perjury, of Vain Oaths, and the Sin of
them, etc. page 98. PARTITION 5. Of Worship due to Gods Name. Of Prayer and its
several parts. Of Public Prayers in Sunday V.
the Church, in the Family: of Private Prayer: of Repentance, etc. of Fasting.
page 109 PARTITION 6. Of Duties to our selves. Of Sobriety, Humility; the great
sin of Pride, the Danger, the Folly of this Sin. Of Vainglory, the Danger,
Sunday VI.
Folly, Me^ns to prevent it. Of Meekness, the Means to obtain it, etc. page
136. PARTITION 7. Of Contentedness, and the Contraries to it, Murmuring,
Ambi^ion, Covetousness, Envy; Helps to Contentedness. Of Duties which Sunday
VII.
concern our Bodies. Of Chastity, Helps to it. Temperance, Rules of Temperance
in Eating, etc. page 158. PARTITION 8. Of Temperance in Drinking, False Ends of
Drinking, viz. Good fellowship. Putting away Cares, Passing away time,
preventing reproach, ^unday VIII.
Bargaining, etc. page 177. PARTITION 9. Temperance in Sleep; The Rule of it,
etc. Of Recreation, of Apparel, and of the ends for ^unday IX.
which clothing should be used. page 197. PARTITION 10. Of DUTIES to our
NEIGHBORS. Of Justice, Negative, and Positive. Of the Sin of ^unday X.
Murder. Of the Hainousness of it, the Punishments of it, and the Strange
Discoveries thereof; of Maiming, Wounds and stripes, page 206 PARTITION 11. Of
Justice, about the Possessions of our Neighbor; against Injuring him as
concerning Sunday XI.
his Wife, his Goods, of Malice, Covetousness, Oppression, Theft: of Paying
Debts, etc. page 226. PARTITION 12. Of Theft; Stealing the Goods of our
Neighbor. Of Deceit in Trust, in Traffic. Of Sunday XII.
Restitution, and the Necessity thereof, etc. page 238. PARTITION 13. Of False
Reports, False Witness, Slanders, Whisperings. Of Despising and Scoffing for
Infirmities, Calamities, Sins, etc. Of Positive Sunday XIII.
Justice, Speaking the Truth. Of Lying. Of Humility and Pride. Of Envy,
Detraction. Of Gratitude, etc. page 251. PARTITION 14. Of Duty to Parents.
Magistrates, Pastors, etc. Of the Duty of Parents to Children, etc. Reverence,
Love, Obedience, especially in their Sunday XIV.
Marriage, Ministering to their wants, of the Duty of Parents to their Children.
page 278. PARTITION 15. Of Duty to our Brethren and Relations; Husband, Wife,
Friends, Masters, Servants, Sunday XV.
etc. page 305. PARTITION 16. Other Branches of our Duty to our Neighbor. Of
Charity to Men's Souls, Bodies, Goods, Credit, Sunday XVI.
etc. page 329. PARTITION 17. Of Charity, Almsgiving, etc. Of Charity in
respect of our Neighbors Credit, Of Peacemaking. Of going to Law: Of Charity
to our Sunday XVII.
Enemies, etc. Christian Duties both Possible and pleasant. page 358.
A TABLE of the PRAYERS.
PRayers for Morning. page 3. Prayers for Night. 11. Collects for several
Graces. 17. A Paraphrase on the Lords Prayer. 31. Pious Ejaculations out of the
Book of Psalms. 34. Brief heads of Examination before the Sacrament. 37.
Prayers before the Sacrament. 50. Ejaculations at the Lords Table, etc. 55.
Prayers after the Sacrament. 56. Prayers for the Sick. 65. Ejaculations for the
Sick. 74. Prayers in times of Public Calamities. 79. A Prayer for this Church.
82. A Prayer for the Peace of the Church. 84.
Books Printed and Sold by T. Garthwait at the little North door of St. Paul's.
B. Chapels Methodus Concionandi. 12o. -- Notes upon 103. Psalm, being a
Praxis upon that Method. 8o. A Commentary on the 5 Books of Moses or Pent^^euch
by J. Trap. 4o. Remains of Mr. Geo Herbert late Orator of the University of
Cambridge. Reliquiae Wo^tonianae, A Collection of the incomparable pieces of
that great Master of Language and Art. Sr. Henry Wotton Knight Provost of Eton,
etc. 12o. The Works of that profound Divine Dr. The. Jackson Pres. of Corp.
Chr. Coll. Oxon. in folio in 3 Volumns. Dr. Cosins Scholastical History of the
Canon of the Scripture. 4o. Dr. Waltons Introduction to the Oriental Languages
in 12o. The Conversion of Rigep Dandulo, a Turk, to the Christian Faith, by Mr.
Gunning. 8o. The Rationale on the Book of Common Prayer, of the Church of
England, wherein is proved that that Service is Agreeable to the Primitive
Usages, and so, not Novel; that it is a Reasonable Service, and so, not
Superstitious, by Mr. A. Sparrow. 12o. Mr. Joseph Mead his Dissertationum
Triga. 4o. Dr. Dees Actions and Conferences with Spirits, etc Set out by Dr.
Casau^^n, against Athiest^ and Enthusiasts, in folio.
School Books.
Mr. W^^kers Treatise of English Particles. 8o. Mr. Busbies Horat. Castigat.
Juvenal. P^rsius.

In usum Schola Westmonaster.

Books newly Published.
Mary Magdalens Tears wipt off; or the voice of Peace to an unquiet Conscience
Wherein are resolved sundry Cases of Conscience incident to a Deserted
Condition: first writ to a Lady of Quality. in 8.

Dr. Stewards excellent Serion at Paris, of Hez^ki^hs Reformation, justifying
the Church of England against the Papists, and being a full Answer to Mr.
Baxters imputation of Cassandrian Poptry, and the Grotian Religion. in 12o.


